* 0106994
* Elementary Science Notebooks:  Impact on Classroom Practice and Student Achievement in Science and Literacy
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Jerome Pine, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 07/31/2005
* USD 1,652,277.00

This study is a three year effort to examine what students learn in two
different kinds of elementary science classrooms: traditional expository, text-
oriented instruction compared with hands-on, inquiry-oriented instruction. The
latter describes an approach to learning in which students acquire knowledge and
understanding of scientific ideas as well as first hand experiential
understanding of how scientists study the natural world. The emphasis is on
learning by doing and discussing, and the priority is on scientific thinking
skills and conceptual understanding. In a second phase, the study examines the
teaching associated with high- and low-achieving classrooms for each of the two
instructional conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Millions of dollars have gone
into supporting hands-on inquiry science reforms over the past several decades.
These large-scale efforts, particularly important for less affluent students
across the country, are vulnerable however, for they are viewed by some as too
expensive or too demanding of teachers. Furthermore, there is little evidence of
the relative merits of the two approaches. The nationwide emphasis on
accountability, with an intense focus on literacy and math and a bias towards
easily tested factual knowledge, pressures schools away from hands-on inquiry
science. This study will contribute substantially to our knowledge base on the
relationship between elemetary science instruction and student learning, with
important implications for practitioners, policy makers and the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study compares 5th grade students' learning in
two instructional conditions, with 20 classes in each condition matched for key
characteristics. In addition, the study explores connections between student
performance and instruction, utilizing data from teacher surveys, interviews,
assignments, and classroom observations. Student achievement is assessed with an
array of measures, including standardized tests of language arts and math;
standardized science knowledge items and a performance task from NAEP or TIMSS;
other short science performance tasks; and extended science investigation tasks
developed and validated for this research. The study will address long-term,
important outcomes such as those called for in Project 2061: deep conceptual
understanding, persistence at difficult problems, retention of important
knowledge over time, and transfer of investigation strategies to challenging
novel situations.&lt;br/&gt;