* 0106221
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Evolution of Competitive Settlement Strategies in Fijian Prehistory
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2002
* Terry Hunt, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2002
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Terry Hunt, Ms. Julie Field will collect data
for&lt;br/&gt;her doctoral dissertation. She will initiate new archaeological
research in&lt;br/&gt;the Sigatoka Valley, located in the southwestern corner of
the island of&lt;br/&gt;Viti Levu, Fiji. This research will investigate the
evolution of competitive&lt;br/&gt;settlement strategies between related and
non-related social groups in&lt;br/&gt;Fijian prehistory. Ms. Field's previous
analyses of aerial photographs from&lt;br/&gt;the Sigatoka Valley have
documented the location and character of over 700&lt;br/&gt;archaeological
features, including fortifications, agricultural features,&lt;br/&gt;and
unfortified settlements. Despite the quantity and richness of
the&lt;br/&gt;archaeological record, no chronology exists for the establishment
of the&lt;br/&gt;fortifications, or the arrival of the various patrilineal
descent groups&lt;br/&gt;documented at the contact period. Ms. Field's doctoral
dissertation&lt;br/&gt;research will examine the development of fortifications
in the valley, and&lt;br/&gt;also trace the relationship between the environment
and the frequency of&lt;br/&gt;conflict, as evinced by the occurrence of
fortifications on lands&lt;br/&gt;traditionally held by patrilineal descent
groups, known as mataqali and&lt;br/&gt;yavusa. Her research will incorporate an
archaeological excavation and&lt;br/&gt;collection strategy, focusing on a
sample of 15 sites from a variety of&lt;br/&gt;environmental zones. The
acquisition of datable materials from such&lt;br/&gt;features as walls, ditches,
and remote mountain outposts will allow for the&lt;br/&gt;first chronology of
fortifications in this part of Fiji. Ms. Field will&lt;br/&gt;also couple the
information gleaned from archaeological research to an&lt;br/&gt;environmental
model generated within the framework of a geographic&lt;br/&gt;information
system (GIS). Comparison of these data, as well as the&lt;br/&gt;distribution of
land-holdings and hierarchical social relations that are&lt;br/&gt;known to
exist between the patrilineal descent groups of the valley, will&lt;br/&gt;have
the potential to indicate group fission, movement, and the
various&lt;br/&gt;competitive stances that existed in prehistory. Archaeologists
are&lt;br/&gt;interested in the development of conflict and warfare, and the
examination&lt;br/&gt;of fortifications is a very direct method for the study of
this phenomenon&lt;br/&gt;during the prehistoric period. NSF support will allow
Ms. Field to conduct&lt;br/&gt;excavations in Fiji, and also provide for the
dating of archaeological&lt;br/&gt;materials. This research is important because
it will yield data of&lt;br/&gt;interest to both regional and international
scholars, and it explores a&lt;br/&gt;topic that is of great interest to the
discipline of anthropology. It will&lt;br/&gt;also support and assist in
training a promising young scientist.&lt;br/&gt;