* 0106926
* ROLE:  An Infrastructure for Research on Online Teacher Communities of Practice
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2001,01/31/2003
* Mark Schlager, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 01/31/2003
* USD 249,983.00

Researchers, practitioners, and policy-makers are converging on the view that
online&lt;br/&gt;communities of practice (CoPs) in the teaching profession can
be powerful catalysts for&lt;br/&gt;improving teaching and facilitating systemic
reform. Although the promise of online CoPs is compelling and theoretically
sound, the reality of online teacher communities has been less promising. The
reason, we believe, is that research into the marriage of TPD pedagogy and
online technology is missing a necessary third component-the infrastructure for
online CoP (as distinct from particular online TPD strategies). Research cannot
continue to treat community as a side effect of a TPD intervention or the
inevitable outcome of a Web portal or electronic network. We must study online
CoP as a valid component of the education system in its own right or risk
continuing the same pattern of a few irreproducible successes and many redundant
failures as practitioners and providers struggle to keep pace with emerging
technologies and the rapidly changing Web landscape. To move beyond the CoP
promise toward measurable benefits for SMET teacher professional development on
a national scale, we must conduct the research&lt;br/&gt;needed to better
understand the social and organizational structures of online CoPs as an
integral component of the teaching profession. To embark on this research
agenda, we must also break out of the constraints that popular "distance
learning" technologies place on the research by designing and building
technological infrastructures that reflect and augment the social and
organizational structures of a CoP.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will apply what we
and others are learning about online education CoPs and
their&lt;br/&gt;applications to design and prototype a new technical
infrastructure for supporting and studying online CoPs. We will adopt a
participatory, scenario-based design approach to develop our prototype
infrastructure. Our project brings together a design team representing
researchers (SRI and Virginia Tech), teacher educators (Pepperdine University),
technology developers (WebCT, PBS), regional education support providers (New
England Aquarium, AEL, Inc.), national TPD organizations (PBS TeacherLine), and
our core constituency, TAPPED IN members. The team will also include experts in
Web-based systems development and graphical user interface design. The basic
design will be modular to enable us to plug in new capabilities as they emerge.
The prototype infrastructure will serve as a platform for online CoP research
and further development by many different organizations over the next several
years. We will also document the design process, artifacts, and commentary on a
public Web site and solicit input from the research and practitioner communities
to widely disseminate knowledge of online CoP design issues and generate design
guidelines that will inform technology research and development aimed at
supporting online education communities. &lt;br/&gt;