* 0106463
* The Timing and Nature of Volcanological Processes as Captured by Bimodal Composition Eruptions
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2005
* Kenna Rubin, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2005
* USD 207,500.00

Rubin&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0106463&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One critical yet still
incompletely resolved volcanic parameter is the time period involved in crustal
processes leading to both magmatic evolution and eruption. These likely vary
greatly amongst magmatic systems of differing style, tectonic setting and
composition. There are a number of ways to potentially get at the time scales of
crustal magmatic process. This proposal suggests a novel approach based upon
U-series disequilibrium age contrasts between primitive and evolved magmas that
erupted simultaneously. Evidence for such " bimodal" composition eruptions has
become commonplace in the volcanological literature. The magmas involved may
have formed through a variety of processes and over a range of time scales,
which is an important aspect of this investigation. Three inter-related issues
are: (a) petrological: mechanism of formation of evolved magmas; (b)
volcanological: eruption triggering of relatively cool, viscous, chemically
evolved magmas (dacite and rhyolite); and c) time scales: how long do these
processes take in different settings. &lt;br/&gt;This study would examine both
magmatic evolution and one of several proposed mechanisms for initiating silicic
eruptions (i.e. the basalt injection trigger) using bimodal composition
eruptions. Such eruptions provide a unique snapshot of processes in complex and
evolving magmatic systems because the two end members magmas were erupted
simultaneously and therefore are closely-related in space and time. Three
working hypotheses would be tested regarding time scales and processes captured
in 4 historical (or geologically very recent) bimodal-composition eruptions that
are believed to represent various scenarios for petrological evolution and the
role of mafic magma in causing or aiding in eruption of chemically evolved
magmas. The eruptions to be studies are: 1875 Askja; 1724 Krafla; 1902 Santa
Maria; and 1943-1952 Paricutin. Although there are numerous others examples
(e.g., historical or recent eruptions of Vesuvius, Hekla, Popocatepetl, Colima,
Novarupta, Mt. St. Helens, Nevado del Ruiz, Montserrat, Pinatubo), the eruptions
proposed here were picked because they have been previously well-studied
volcanologically and petrologically, have excellent temporal control on the
eruptions themselves, have something close to compositional end members
physically separable from pumices or lavas, and have available sample types
suited for dating with U-series disequilibrium by internal mineral isochrons.
Eruption deposits will be examined volcanologically, and samples will be
examined petrographically and geochemically to arrive at as complete a picture
as possible for the volcanic/magmatic processes involved. Time permitting a 5th
eruption (the circa 1305 Mt Tarawera "Kaharoa" eruption in New Zealand) would
also be examined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;