* 0106925
* Timescales of Geochemical and Isotopic Transport in Natural Waters
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Everett Shock, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/2005
* USD 340,000.00

0106925 Criss

A new model of solute and isotopic transport in natural waters is being refined
and tested. This model can quantiy the timescales of transport without ad hoc
assumptions, about ixing groundwater and surface water components. Based on
diffusion theory, storm events are treated as "delta functions" that induce a
complex series of geochemical and physical responses. The transport equations
are readily transformed into linear versions whose intercepts accurately
retrodict the timing of the storm events, and whose slopes reveal the time
constants for transport of each creochemical constituent. The basic concept is
to study the natural system with perturbations provided by natural processes.
Information gained onthe geochemical and isotopic response of surface streams
and springs to storm events would determine the timescales of complex natural
responses. Data colllected in the first stage of this project show that
different parameters (ionic concentraions, total dissolved organic compounds,
nutrients, sediment, oxygen isotopes, etc.) have in a qualitatively similar
manner, explicable by the model, but that the timescales vary greatly among the
parameters that collectively define the response of the natural system. Rigorous
tests of this model will be conducted with geochemical and isotopic data
collected from several sites within an unimpounded river basin (the Meramec
Basin, eastem Missouri). This endeavor will be facilitated by an autosampler
installed a karst spring at Washington University's Tyson Research Center, and a
new autosampler nearby on the Meramec River. These programmable devices will
allow intensive sampling to resolve timescales accurately, and will permit
detailed comparisons of simultaneous groundwater and riverine responses to
precipitation events. Key questions concerning the sources, the reactions
(solubility, ion exchange, adsorption, biological uptake, etc.), the migration
paths, and the timescales of pollutant and pathogen transport through surface
and near-surface environments will be explored. The new approach appears to be
applicable to diverse geochemical, physical, and isotopic constituents. It has
the unique potential to resolve the complexity of natural systems using natural
events.