* 0106836
* Scattered-Wave Imaging Algorithms for Regional and Local Arrays
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2004
* Justin Revenaugh, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2004
* USD 50,060.00

Abstract for proposal EAR0106836 (PH #36x)

Title: Scattered-wave imaging algorithms for regional and local arrays

PI's: J. Revenaugh, UC Santa Cruz

The scattering of elastic waves by heterogeneities in the Earth is an obvious
and dominant source of waveform complexity at high frequencies, producing slowly
decaying trains of energy that are visible in records for several minutes
following primary (geometrical) arrivals. Studies attempting to characterize the
nature of scattering traditionally have treated it either as a regionally
stationary statistical process, or have restricted attention to the coherent
portion of the scattered wavefield produced by crustal layering. Both approaches
have yielded valuable results and will continue to do so, but each makes
restrictive assumptions about the nature of scattering that ultimately limit
their utility. We have developed an alternative approach, utilizing a variant of
an algorithm developed by the oil industry to image scattering structures in the
crust and upper mantle using regional array (aperture of order 100 km)
recordings of teleseismic earthquakes. The method has been applied to data from
the Southern California Seismic Network and the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory
array. The results from both arrays reveal an intriguing and potentially very
important geographic correlation of the strength of scattering with the density
of background and aftershock earthquakes. More importantly, these results
provide an all-important "proof of concept"that it is possible to extract
reliable structural information at scale-lengths less than average station
separation.

In our proposal, we document a work plan to improve upon the imaging paradigm
employed by our current method (referred to as Kirchhoff coda migration, or KCM)
through better treatment of the physics of elastic scattering, more accurate
wavefield summation, the incorporation of three-component recordings, and a
regularized inversion. In so doing, we will continue to honor the usual
exigencies of regional and local array recordings of earthquakes: irregular
instrument deployment, data dropouts, extended source signatures (waveform
complexities due to the earthquake rupture process and near-source structure),
station-site effects and limited illumination back azimuths. Our goal is the
production of "canned" algorithms of broad-spread application to the imaging of
crustal and uppermost mantle scattering structures by both the PASSCAL community
and to users of permanent dense local and regional array data. We will apply the
algorithms to data in hand from Southern California and the island of Hawaii.

