* 0106666
* Global Analyses of Body Wave Travel Times and Amplitudes:  Whole-Mantle Tomography and Simulations of 3-D Wave Propagation
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2003
* Jeroen Tromp, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Kaye Shedlock
* 06/30/2003
* USD 156,003.00

&lt;br/&gt;Abstract for proposal EAR0106666 (PH #
53x)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Global Analyses of Body Wave Travel Times and
Amplitudes: Whole-mantle Tomography and Simulations of 3-D Wave
Propagation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI's: Jeroen Tromp and Jeroen E. Ritsema, Cal
Tech&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seismic tomographic models are beneficial to
researchers from a wide variety of disciplines in the Earth Sciences. They
provide images of the structure of oceanic and continental lithosphere, and play
a central role in constraining the planform of convection in the
mantle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To improve these models, we will construct new
tomographic models in which we will take advantage of the extensive seismic data
set that we have compiled in the past several years. It includes unique data
types, such as higher-mode Rayleigh wave phase-velocity measurements and travel
times of converted body-wave phases (e.g., SP, SKP), which have not been fully
exploited in tomography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a parallel research effort, we
apply the new Spectral Element Method of Komatitsch and Tromp [1999] to study
the effects of 3-D mantle structure on long-period body-wave propagation.
Specifically, we will test the applicability of ray theory to wave propagation
in `low-degree' seismic models, whether small-scale structure in the deep
mantle, such as plumes, produce characteristic, observable travel-time or
waveform variations, and whether the large-scale pattern of long-period body-
wave amplitude anomalies can be explained by large-scale variation of seismic
velocity in the mantle. These analyses provide insight into the quality of
present-day tomographic models and help us design the next generation of
tomographic inversions when fully 3-D forward theories can be
incorporated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;