* 0106763
* Collaborative Proposal:  An Integrated Study Of The Controls On Reactivity Of Natural Organic Matter In Porous Media
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Patricia Maurice, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/2005
* USD 182,000.00

0106763 Maurice

The work to develop molecular-scale understanding of the interactions of natural
organic matter (NOM) with mineral surfaces would quantify how the preferential
adsorption of higher molecular-weight and more aromatic NOM components to
mineral surfaces (sorptive fractionation) affects both the transformation of
terrestrial organic carbon and the transport of pollutants through porous media.
The molecular-scale adsorption studies would pursue understanding of NOM
adsorption mechanisms characterizing NOM molecular weight distributions in soil
pore waters and shallow ground waters to determine whether the lognormal
distribution model also holds in subsurface environments. They would quantify
how sorptive fractionation of NOM affects the binding and mobility of trace
metals and NOM photochemical reactivity. The three broad objectives are: (1) To
expand molecular-scale studies aimed at developing a more quantitative and
mechanistic understanding of NOM adsorption and fractionation processes; (2) To
determine the effect of sorptive fractionation on NOM reactivity with respect to
trace-metal binding and mobility with respect to photoreactions; (3) To continue
to integrate laboratory and field studies, with the ultimate long-term goal of
better understanding adsorption/fractionation phenomena as they actually occur
in the field. The proposed research has broad significance within the hydrologic
sciences, because NOM is ubiquitous and helps to control mineral soil aggregate
stability, and photochemical reactions. As to practical applications, little is
known about watershed processes controlling the nature of NOM in water supplies.
The drinking water industry must address the problem of disinfectant, with
chlorine or ozone and both reactivities depend in large part on NOM aromaticity.