* 0106241
* Melt Extraction From the Lowermost Crust:  An Experimental Test of a Natural Setting
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2006
* Tracy Rushmer, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2006
* USD 162,765.00

Rushmer&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0106241 &lt;br/&gt;Experimental studies on melt generation
and extraction in crustal rock types are now providing testable models with
which to more fully examine natural settings. The problem is that few field
sites have the exposure necessary to study potential mechanisms of melt
segregation via fracture and subsequent transport mechanisms. The Early
Cretaceous granulite belt of Fiordland, New Zealand, however, is an exception.
It is a deeply eroded continuous belt which exposes all levels of the crust,
truly lowermost crustal rocks, in addition to middle and upper crust. Field
observations of exposed lowermost crust have documented the presence of
extensive leucosome-lined fracture networks which appear to have also been used
for melt transport. Testing this scenario experimentally will provide an
excellent opportunity to integrate these field observations with experimental
data. We are therefore conducting an experimental investigation involving phase
equilibria, static rock core and deformation studies on the source dioritic
rocks to accomplish the following tasks: 1) test the hypothesis that partial
melting in this hydrous-phase rich bulk composition produced the observed
fractures lined with leucosome material; 2) determine melt compositions and
melt-water contents produced by partial melting of diorite under granulite
facies conditions to be used as tracers for melt transport; 3) determine
strength behavior of the diorite during partial melting at high pressure; and 4)
use the above experimental results to constrain petrologic and structural models
of the evolution of the lowermost crust as exposed in the Fiordland granulite
belt. Experimental determination of partial melt compositions and possible
segregation mechanisms will be combined with field relationships, geochemical
and petrologic studies to constrain sources and transport paths for partial
melts observed in these locales in the Fiordland lower crustal section. The
results of these combined studies have significant potential impact for
furthering our understanding of melt-related processes in the lowermost crust
and the role of melt during orogenic evolution. This three-year project provides
direct support for three Masters students. Three undergraduates will participate
in the project in the summers as part of their senior
theses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;