* 0106827
* Collaborative Research: Patterns of Serial Fault Rupture in Taiwan
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2001,01/31/2003
* Kerry Sieh, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kaye Shedlock
* 01/31/2003
* USD 73,725.00

Abstract for proposals EAR0107114 and EAR0106827 (PH
#39x)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Collaborative Research: Patterns of Serial
Fault Rupture in Taiwan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI's: Charles M. Rubin, Central
Washington Univ (EAR0107114) and Kerry Sieh, CalTech
(EAR0106827)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT OF PROPOSED
WORK&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the sequential rupture of faults is one
of the fundamental goals in earthquake science. Simply stated, the question is:
How do ruptures repeat on a fault and on systems of faults? Although this
question is at the heart of both practical and academic aspects of our science,
it remains largely unanswered, mostly because data are difficult to obtain.
Three of the most important issues are 1) How regular are intervals between
fault ruptures? 2) How repeatable is the pattern of slip on a fault? 3) How does
geologic structure influence fault rupture? These are questions we propose to
begin to tackle through paleoseismic and neotectonic studies in Taiwan.
&lt;br/&gt;During our first year, our reconnaissance work would focus on
paleoseismic investigations along the 1999 rupture of the Chelungpu fault and on
preparation of a neotectonic and earthquake source map of all of Taiwan. The
record of prehistoric seismicity along the Chelungpu at one site we hope to
begin to test a few plausible hypotheses, ranging from unpatterned or random
recurrence to highly clustered behavior. If successful, our work will justify
continued work on understanding of earthquake faults and provide constraints on
theoretical models of fault interaction. Our neotectonic earthquake source map
will provide the context for future studies of fault behavior
there.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;