* 0106880
* Computational Methods for Equilibrium Problems with Micro-Level Data
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Steven Gabriel, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2005
* USD 239,131.00

The objective of this work is to examine systems with micro-level data for which
an equilibrium of some sort is to be reached. One important example is the Gas
Systems Analysis Model (GSAM), a modular, reservoir-based model of the North
American natural gas system developed for the U. S. Department of Energy. In its
current form, GSAM is a large-scale nonlinear program that computes estimates of
market equilibrium prices, quantities, flows, and other values based on the
notion of maximizing total surplus less transportation costs. Unlike the
classical approach in which supply curves are known in closed form, GSAM builds
supply curves from the "bottom up" using a data base of over 17,000 natural gas
reservoirs taking into account both the interregional as well as intertemporal
interdependence of these curves. While this "bottom up" feature provides a good
deal of realism, it renders the equilibrium computations much more difficult due
to the lack of closed form supply curves. The proposed work has two main
objectives. First, analyze the GSAM market equilibrium problem more generally by
noting the functional relationships between seasonal market prices (Lagrange
multipliers) and demand for gas, storage activity levels, investment decisions,
etc. using the variational inequality problem (VIP) and nonlinear
complementarity problem (NCP) formats. The second main task is to develop
efficient methods to reach a solution to GSAM-type problems exploiting the
particular problem structure. Iterative methods from optimization and equation
solving is used to develop appropriate algorithms for this
task.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to recent advances in information technology, it
is now possible to model the activities of individual agents in rather
complicated systems. Examples of applications in scientific and engineering
settings using micro-level data abound. While simulations of these systems can
be rather elaborate using for example, complicated "if-then" type rules,
determining equilibrium behavior of the system in a rigorous manner can be
challenging. Part of the difficulty is due to a lack of closed form expressions
for describing the system. The proposed work will examine one such system in its
general form and develop both a theory for equilibrium as well as efficient
mathematical algorithms to compute such a solution. The anticipated impact of
this work is to greatly advance the state of the art in solving large-scale
equilibrium problems that use micro-level data for modeling the economic
behavior of individual agents. This is significant since many similar systems
are now modeled that contain no closed form expressions for key elements but for
which an equilibrium solution is desirable.