* 0106695
* Coseismic and Postseismic Deformation from the 1999 Chi-Chi, Taiwan Earthquake
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2001,12/31/2003
* Paul Segall, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2003
* USD 210,769.00

Segall &lt;br/&gt;0106695 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Mw = 7.5, September 21, 1999
Chi-Chi, Taiwan earthquake occurred in the center of a dense GPS network
operated by the Taiwanese. Coseismic displacements were measured at 128
stations, with magnitudes of up to 12 meters. A remarkable set of transient
postseismic deformation signals were also recorded. Several continuously
recording GPS stations measured transient signals with amplitudes of more than
10 cm in both the vertical and horizontal components. The dense spatial coverage
and extraordinary signal to noise ratio make the coseismic and postseismic
deformation fields of the Chichi earthquake arguably the best ever recorded.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary analysis of the coseismic displacements
demonstrate that the earthquake was caused by an east-dipping thrust, consistent
with field and seismological observations. However, the GPS data can not be fit
with slip on a single fault surface. The surface rupture undergoes a 90 degree
bend at its northern end, with a ~15 km long east-west trending break.
Aftershock focal mechanisms suggest strike slip motion on this E-W striking
branch. The GPS data, however, are best fit with a curved dipping fault with
oblique slip on both the N-S trending and E-W trending segments. The preferred
model explains 98% of the variance in the data. The residuals, however, are far
too large, and spatially coherent to be explained by measurement error. The
Chelungpu fault, is part of a fold thrust system, which emplaced older and
stiffer rocks over sediments and the corresponding spatial variations in elastic
properties may bias the modeling. The investigators and their Taiwanese
collaborators propose an exhaustive analysis of the coseismic deformation
accounting for vertical and lateral variations in elastic properties, non-planar
fault geometry, spatial variations in slip, and possibly effects of irregular
surface topography. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As exciting as the coseismic
displacements are, the postseismic deformations are even more significant.
Accelerated post earthquake deformation has been known for decades, however the
physics of the phenomenon are poorly understood. Afterslip, viscous flow of the
lower crust and upper mantle, and poroelastic relaxation have all been proposed
to explain transient postseismic deformation. Theoretical studies abound; the
problem has been a lack of defining data sets. The data from the Chichi
earthquake is of such high signal to noise ratio that we hope to finally answer
these long standing problems. Specifically, the investigators propose an
intensive modeling effort to compare predictions from viscoelastic, poroelastic,
and afterslip models to the data. Preliminary results suggest that afterslip
provides a reasonable fit to the data from the first 100 days after the
mainshock, although much more analysis is needed. Inversion of the GPS data will
reveal the spatiotemporal evolution of postseismic slip.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These results will have important implications for the
tectonics of collision zones. Numerous models of fold thrust belts show faults
merging into a master decollement beneath Taiwan. By determining the geometry of
the Chelungpu fault at seismogenic and subseismogenic depths the investigators
will provide important insights into the structure of this classic collisional
orogen. The investigators plan to develop models that both fit interseismic
geodetic data and yield geologically reasonable displacements when integrated
over multiple earthquake cycles. The proposed research will support tow Ph.D
projects in an extensive collaboration with Taiwanese colleagues at the
Institute of Earth Sciences, Academica Sinica Taiwan.&lt;br/&gt;