* 0106981
* Fe-Mg Interdiffusion in Olivine and Magnesiow√ºstite Under Hydrous Conditions: Implications for Mantle Processes
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* David Kohlstedt, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2005
* USD 222,700.00

Kohlstedt&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0106981&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support is requested to
complete our experimental investigation designed to quantify the dependence of
the kinetics of Fe-Mg interdiffusion in olivine and magnesiowustite on
water/hydroxyl concentration is proposed. For many nominally anhydrous minerals,
a small amount of 'water' significantly enhances many, if not all, diffusion-
dependent properties including creep rate, dislocation recovery kinetics,
electrical conductivity and ionic diffusion. In most cases, however, these
observations are only qualitative. Does the presence of water enhance
diffusivity or rate of creep ... yes or no? We have just recently determined a
quantitative relationship between diffusivity and water/hydroxyl content (water
fugacity) for olivine; none exists for magnesiowustite. To utilize observations
determined from laboratory experiments to develop models of the geochemical
evolution and geodynamical behavior of the mantle, it is critical to quantify
the dependence of kinetic properties on water content.&lt;br/&gt; Therefore, a
laboratory study is proposed to extend our investigation of the dependence of
Fe-Mg interdiffusivity on water concentration in olivine and to include
magnesiowustite. High-temperature, high-pressure diffusion experiments are being
carried out on single crystals at controlled water fugacities at pressures in
the range 0.05 to 15 GPa. Rutherford backscattering spectroscopy (RBS) and
electron probe microanalysis (EPMA) are employed to measure the resulting
diffusion profiles. Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) analyses are used to
determine the hydroxyl concentration. In addition, transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) and x-ray diffraction analyses are employed to check for the
presence of humite-like layers. For olivine, experiments are needed to determine
the dependence of diffusivity on temperature and pressure as well as to verify
our initial measurement of the dependence of diffusivity on water fugacity. For
magnesiowustite, all of these experiments are needed.&lt;br/&gt; An important
goal of our experiments is to determine quantitative relationships between
cation (Fe-Mg) diffusivity and water/hydroxyl concentration for two important
mantle minerals under well-defined thermochemical conditions. The proposed
research is designed to use these results in the context of point defect
thermodynamics to gain a fundamental understanding of the mechanism(s) by which
water influences transport properties such as ionic diffusion and electrical
conductivity. The resulting theoretical framework is essential for reliably
extrapolating laboratory results to mantle environments and for utilizing
experimental observations to develop models of the dynamic behavior of the
Earth's interior.&lt;br/&gt;