* 0106222
* Visual and Interactive Issues in the Design of Web Surveys
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2004
* Roger Tourangeau, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 09/30/2004
* USD 366,794.00

The rapid growth of the Internet as a vehicle for surveys raises important
questions about this new method for data collection. Web surveys are the latest
in a series of methods in which computers administer questions directly to
respondents. Like many of the earlier methods, Web surveys present questions
visually and offer some capability for interacting with respondents. This
project encompasses a series of experiments that examine the implications of the
visual and interactive character of Web surveys. One set of experiments examines
how respondents interpret visual cues in Web questionnaires. These studies test
the general proposition that incidental visual features of the questions (e.g.,
the spacing of response options) can give rise to unintended inferences about
their meaning. The studies examine specific hypotheses about the heuristics
respondents use in interpreting visual features of questions. These hypotheses
state that respondents expect response categories to proceed in a logical
progression from left to right; that they expect spatially isolated options also
to differ conceptually from the other options; and that they assume that items
that look alike must somehow be conceptually related. Two additional experiments
examine the effects of including images to supplement the text of a question.
Images are necessarily concrete, and one experiment tests whether this leads
respondents to interpret the question more narrowly than they otherwise would
have. Another experiment tests whether items depicted in an image may serve as
standards of comparison for respondents' judgments. The final series of studies
examines when respondents take advantage of interactive features of a
questionnaire. These experiments test three general hypotheses: Respondents are
more likely to utilize information available to them interactively when 1) the
information is easy to obtain, 2) it is clearly helpful, and 3) they are highly
motivated to seek help.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collectively, the results are
likely to lead to practical guidelines for the design of Web surveys. For
example, the initial experiments should help settle some important practical
questions-Does it matter whether the response categories are arrayed vertically
or horizontally? Does the spacing of the response options affect the answers?
Does the use of color in response scales influence the distribution of answers?
The final experiments could yield better methods for getting respondents to take
advantage of features that might improve their answers. This research is
supported by the Methodology, Measurement, and Statistics Program and a
consortium of federal statistical agencies under the Research on Survey and
Statistical Methodology Funding Opportunity.