* 0106120
* Anharmonicity and Phase Transitions of Mantle Phases Using Simultaneous High Pressure-High Temperature Raman Spectroscopy in the Laser Heated Diamond Cell
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2001,03/31/2002
* Anastasia Chopelas, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 03/31/2002
* USD 199,930.00

Chopelas&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0106120&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Measurement of vibrational
modes at simultaneous high pressures and temperatures offers many important
opportunities to expand the state of the art in Raman spectroscopy in
geophysics. First, phase boundaries can be quickly determined in situ. Second,
new unquenchable phases can be easily detected, with probable structures or
space groups identified based on spectral patterns. Third, these experiments
directly measure the intrinsic anharmonicity, a value required for extrapolating
important parameters such as thermal expansivity from 1 atm to deep earth
conditions or calculating densities of a material in P-T space using the Mie-
Gruneisen equation of state. Earth temperature, compositional, and dynamical
models generally rely on extrapolation of these properties of candidate minerals
to deep Earth conditions.&lt;br/&gt;Our current capabilities include a nearly
identical experimental arrangement as those in Mainz: Raman double monochromator
with CCD camera and photomultiplier tube, diamond cells, and excitation laser.
Preliminary data from the Mainz laboratory using a CO2 laser for heating show
that this method is feasible. A CO2 laser is requested in this proposal. We
propose to extend the current Raman spectroscopic capabilities in our laboratory
at UNLV to simultaneous high temperatures and pressures using CO2 laser heating
in the diamond anvil cell. &lt;br/&gt;Once the laboratory is upgraded, the study
will first focus on the two geophysically important minerals forsterite and
magnesium silicate perovskite, both important mantle phases. Prior Raman studies
of these at either elevated temperatures or elevated pressures are available for
comparison. First results will focus on providing direct constraints on the Mie
Gruneisen equation of state and on thermal expansivity at mantle conditions
using a Maxwell relation.&lt;br/&gt;