* 0106534
* Steep-dip seismic imaging at the SAFOD (San Andreas Fault Observatory at Depth) site
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2001,11/30/2005
* John Hole, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard E. Johnson
* 11/30/2005
* USD 497,118.00

0106534&lt;br/&gt;Hole&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SAFOD, the San Andreas Fault
Observatory at Depth, intends to drill through the San Andreas fault to study
internal fault properties that control earthquakes. Parkfield, in central
California, was chosen as the drill site because it is the best characterized
seismically active segment of the fault. Interesting observations include high
electrical conductivity, low seismic velocity, high Poisson's ratio, and seismic
anisotropy within the fault zone. However, other than a thin low velocity zone
identified by fault-zone guided waves, the earthquake data only constrain
seismic velocity structure on the scale of 2 km and larger. Earthquakes are well
located in a relative sense, but have up to 1 km of absolute error and do not
line up with the active surface fault trace. Better site characterization can
improve the drilling plan and its ability to accurately target a specific patch
of repeating earthquakes on the fault.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
perform a high resolution, 2-D seismic profile of the SAFOD site with the
specific aim of imaging steeply dipping structures in and near the fault at
depth. Previous work by the Principal Investigator produced the first-ever
migrated image of seismic reflections from the near-vertical San Andreas fault,
allowing direct imaging of the fault trace at a depth of about 1 km. This
project aims to repeat this success beyond the 4 km depth at which drilling will
penetrate the fault. The Principal Investigator plans a 50-km combined seismic
reflection and refraction line across the San Andreas fault at the drill site.
Very dense shot and receiver spacings and very long recording offsets will allow
the survey to obtain detailed seismic velocity structure at a resolution of ~0.5
km horizontally and ~0.25 km vertically down to about 5 km depth. These images
will better constrain the location of the fault trace and fault zone at depth,
its relation to anomalous fault-zone properties, and the overall structure of
surrounding geologic units and related
faults.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;