* 0106700
* Explosive Volcanism:  Understanding Pauses and Abrupt Shifts in Intensity During the1912 Novarupta Eruption
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Bruce Houghton, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2005
* USD 223,888.00

Houghton&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0106700&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pauses and/or abrupt shifts
in eruptive intensity are a fundamental yet little studied part of many large
explosive eruptions. Stable Plinian plumes may pause or fluctuate in intensity
by several orders of magnitude on times scales of hours. The causes of such
shifts remain poorly understood, at a time when our models for steady state
eruptive processes become increasingly elegant and sophisticated. The quality of
hazard advice and eruption 'forecasts' would be significantly improved if such
changes could be explained and even anticipated. This study focuses on the
origin of such 'unsteadiness' in a powerful sustained explosive eruption, for
both breaks in eruptive activity of several hours duration and abrupt but short-
lived changes in style/intensity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The eruption of Novarupta
in 1912 event was the world's largest 20th century eruption and is widely cited
as an excellent example of a historical large sustained eruption. Sustained
Plinian/ignimbrite eruption at Novarupta stopped briefly and abruptly 16 and 45
hours after commencement of the eruption before finally giving way after 60
hours to effusion of lava domes (Hildreth and Fierstein 2000). Caldera collapse
during the 1912 eruption occurred not at vent, but 10 km distant, thus
preserving the very near-vent products of the eruption to within 100m of vent,
and medial eruption products have a 'chemical stratigraphy' that enables
correlation of coeval products of highly varying character between widely spaced
localities. This permits us to address this fundamental problem of abrupt
changes in eruption dynamics from a very well constrained perspective and for
one of the five largest eruptions recorded in the last 1000 years.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Goals of the proposed study are to assess the relative
influences played by: a) the rates and timing of growth and collapse of gas
bubbles, degassing and syneruptive microlite crystallization; b) vent roughness
and stability; and c) changes in the pre-eruptive state of the magma, including
pre-eruptive volatile concentrations, in altering the dynamics of the 1912
eruption. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our starting hypothesis is that the close of
each episode of explosive volcanism at Novarupta was caused by 'ascent-driven'
changes in the physical state of the volumetrically dominant dacitic magma
whereas short-lived fluctuations in eruption intensity were the products of
plume instability generated by irregularity and roughness of the vent walls and
limited vent wall collapse. The effects of changing flow behavior in the
conduit, as the magma rheology responds to decreases in the concentrations of
dissolved volatiles, and increases in the abundances of bubbles and crystals,
will be inferred from image analysis of the vesicle and crystal populations in
carefully selected pumice samples from either side of the breaks in Plinian
deposit and abrupt fluctuations in eruptive intensity. External environmental
factors, (vent wall roughness and instability, vent migration and widening) will
be studied by mapping changes in the nature and abundance of wall rock lithic
clasts. &lt;br/&gt;