* 0106062
* Direct Imaging of Crust and Upper Mantle Structure with Broadband Seismic Arrays
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2001,12/31/2004
* Gary Pavlis, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2004
* USD 115,349.00

Abstract for proposal EAR0106062 (PH # 34x)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Direct
Imaging of Crust and Upper Mantle Structure with Broadband Seismic
Arrays&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI's: Gary L. Pavlis, Indiana University,
Bloomington &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; We have developed a new technology for direct
imaging of P to S converted phases. It builds on imaging concepts used in the
oil and gas industry to directly image backscattered (reflected) seismic waves,
but we utilize forward scattered P to S conversions produced by distant
earthquakes instead of backscattered waves generated by artificial sources. This
allows us to directly manipulate raw recordings of distant earthquakes to
produce an image of P to S scattering potential underneath a seismic array. The
mathematical model used is a form of inverse scattering appropriate for this
type of wave interaction. Applications of the technique to date have revealed
the presence of previously unseen dipping boundaries that coincide with ancient
suture zones within the continents. Existing applications of the technique have
been limited to 2D slices. The proposed project would extend the capabilities of
this technique to produce 3D images of P to S conversion structure beneath
broadband arrays. The technique will be applied to data from the recently
completed array experiment in the Tien Shan of central Asia to address
fundamental issues about the relation of mantle and crustal processes in
continent-continent collision zones. We also propose to apply this approach to
new, dense broadband array data available in southern California. This may
provide new insights on the nature of flow in the upper mantle connected with
the San Andreas fault system. &lt;br/&gt;