* 0106883
* Paleobiology and Taphonomy of Lower Cambrian Burgess Shale-Type Deposits of Nevada and Greenland
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2004
* Loren Babcock, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 06/30/2004
* USD 150,000.00

ABSTRACT

PALEOBIOLOGY AND TAPHONOMY OF LOWER CAMBRIAN BURGESS SHALE-TYPE DEPOSITS OF
NEVADA AND GREENLAND

Loren E. Babcock EAR-0106883

This study involves the paleobiology and taphonomy (postmortem history) of two
Early Cambrian Burgess Shale-type biotas from western Nevada and North
Greenland. The biotas, both from the Laurentian (North America-Greenland)
paleocontinent, represent two of the oldest known assemblages of exceptionally
preserved animals in the world. These assemblages overlap in part the time of
the Cambrian adaptive radiation of multicellular animals. They provide important
"windows" into the evolutionary history of the Early Cambrian, and they should
provide information about the conditions under which exceptional preservation
occurred. The primary purposes of this work are: 1, to collect and document the
biota of the new Nevada site and continue documentation of the biota of the
Greenland site; 2, to document and interpret information about the taphonomy of
the Nevada and Greenland sites; 3, to describe and interpret trace fossils
associated with the body fossils; 4, to describe and interpret the stratigraphic
and sedimentologic context of exceptional preservation in the Nevada and
Greenland sites; and 5, to determine the biogeographic affinities of
nonmineralized organisms present in the Early Cambrian biotas. Completion of
this work will provide important information about biologic diversity on the
North America-Greenland paleocontinent prior to the terminal Early Cambrian
extinction. This, in turn, is expected to provide a strong basis for
biogeographic comparison with Early Cambrian biotas of Gondwanan areas, and a
basis for comparison with biotas from the Middle Cambrian of Laurentia.

