* 0106875
* Volcanic Cloud/Atmosphere Interactions:  The First Week
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2004
* William Rose, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 05/31/2004
* USD 287,172.00

Rose&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0106875&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Volcanic eruptions produce
complex clouds of gas, ash and aerosol mixtures which can be observed in the
Earth's atmosphere for minutes to years. Their dynamics, and the chemistry and
physics of their evolution, are poorly known yet form the basis for our
understanding and mitigation of aircraft hazards, local to regional health
effects from fallout, and the potential for global climatic impact. Because the
combination of volcanologic, geographic, and atmospheric settings is largely
unique for each event, a process-oriented study combining observations,
modeling, and laboratory efforts, is warranted.&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal, we
plan to integrate remote sensing studies of several key examples of volcanic
clouds from activity of the past 10 years. We combine numerical models of
volcanic eruptions that include microphysical processes, ground-based
observations of fallout materials, direct sampling of the clouds, meteorological
data and lab-based studies of ash/ice particles. Emphasis is placed on the
evolution of volcanic clouds during a period lasting hours to about one week.
&lt;br/&gt;The direct results of our efforts are expected to clarify issues
related to the mechanisms of fallout and hazards of fine ash, the conversion of
SO2 to sulfate, and the role of ice in various reactions and processes. The
results are important in understanding a wide range of local and global scale
environmental effects of eruptions, ranging from livestock poisoning to
respiratory disease to hypercanes to climate change to mass extinctions. They
are also significant to the mitigation of hazards to aircraft. We focus on four
eruptions, all for which we have amassed considerable observational data and
experience, and which span a range of volcanic and atmospheric environments: (1)
The February 26, 2000 Hekla fissure eruption, which represents an ash-poor
example and which fortuitously has important validation information associated
with it; (2) The December 26, 1997 eruption at Soufriere Hills Volcano,
Montserrat, which is marked by significant interaction with the ocean; (3) The
three 1992 subplinian Spurr eruptions which have unusually extensive and
complete observational constraints; and (4) The climactic June 15, 1991 Pinatubo
event, the largest well-documented eruption of the past century.&lt;br/&gt;