* 0106388
* Deciphering the Complex History of Fluid Flow in Lower Carboniferous Carbonate Rocks, Irish Midlands:  Geochemistry of Multiple Dolomitizing and Ore-Forming Events
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Jay Gregg, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/2005
* USD 95,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deciphering the Complex History of Fluid Flow in
Lower Carboniferous Carbonate Rocks, Irish Midlands: Geochemistry of Multiple
Dolomitizing and Ore-Forming Events&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Kevin L. Shelton &amp;
Jay M. Gregg&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0106388&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The Irish Midlands
comprise a natural laboratory in which to study the physical, thermal and
geochemical effects of fluid flow on dolomitization and zinc-lead ore deposition
in an extensional/compressional tectonic setting. Our research addresses the
relationships among sedimentary facies, early diagenesis and hydrothermal
dolomitization, and their relationship to localized and regional fluid flow
throughout Lower Carboniferous carbonate rocks in Ireland. &lt;br/&gt; Specific
questions to be addressed are applicable to the Irish Midlands, as well as to
similar extensional/compressional basinal settings worldwide: What are the
sources of various multiple fluids and the extents of their flow systems?; What
is the relative timing of each fluid system?; What are the critical fluid-fluid
and fluid-rock interactions along flow paths that led to hydrothermal
dolomitization and/or ore deposition?; What is the relative importance of
regional-scale fluid flow through aquifers versus localized fracture-controlled
flow for the development of mineral deposits? &lt;br/&gt; Our study will address
these questions through combined application of carbonate petrology and a number
of geochemical tools, including C, O and Sr isotopes, fluid inclusion
microthermometry, and fluid inclusion halogen and trace element geochemistry,
including new laser ablation-ICP-MS techniques. &lt;br/&gt; The impact of this
study is profound and timely. Modelers are now expanding the capability of
reactive flow hydrogeologic-geochemical models to simulate groundwater
chemistry, patterns of rock alteration and ore mineralization in fractured rock.
Geochemical data from our studies of chemical interactions of basinal fluids
along stratigraphic and faulted pathways will provide an excellent basis for
constraining theoretical models of deep fluid flow that are being developed for
the Irish Midlands.&lt;br/&gt;