* 0106667
* Rates of Thermal and Structural Processes in an Oblique Orogen
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2005
* Donna Whitney, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 05/31/2005
* USD 209,735.00

0106667&lt;br/&gt;Whitney&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Crustal thickening and exhumation
in highly oblique (wrench) tectonic settings typify large regions of the
Himalayas, Alps, North American Cordillera, and other mountain systems, but the
thermal and structural effects of oblique motion on mid- to deep crustal levels
of orogens are poorly known. Simple thermal models predict that oblique zones
will experience prolonged heating and delayed unroofing relative to more head-on
convergent zones. Unresolved questions related to this model and its application
to orogens include: What are the rates and styles of thermal and structural
processes during oblique deformation at different crustal levels? How does the
style and timing of deformation change from the mid- to upper crust in zones of
oblique deformation?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Anatolian segment of the Alpine-
Himalayan orogen contains both obliquely deformed and head-on deformed zones
that record the interplay between crustal deformation and metamorphism. In
central Anatolia, mid-crustal rocks were unroofed by extension during
transpression and transtension in a broad zone of shearing, with the upper
crustal lid preserved in an adjacent sedimentary basin. The Nigde core complex
in central Anatolia provides a window into the mid-crust of a highly oblique
orogenic system and permits reconstruction of the tectonic and thermal history
of the upper 20 km of continental crust during oblique motion.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of the overall study of the thermal and structural
evolution of oblique orogens, ideas about wrench tectonic zones are tested using
the following methods:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Fieldwork to determine the
distribution of rock types and structures in the context of metamorphic facies,
and to collect samples for kinematic and isotopic
analyses;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Structural and kinematic studies to reconstruct
the deformation history of different levels of the mid- to upper
crust;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; High-temperature geochronology (U-Pb) and
thermochronology (40Ar-39Ar; fission track) to determine the timing of peak
metamorphism and cooling histories of various crustal levels. These data are
used to determine the duration of metamorphism, timing of magmatic, metamorphic,
and tectonic events, and to infer exhumation rates/mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;