* 0106349
* Short Term Variation in Mass Flux During Basaltic Eruptions
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Luke Flynn, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2005
* USD 148,850.00

Harris and Flynn&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0106349&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mass flux rates have
been shown to vary over day-to-month long periods during effusive basaltic
eruptions. These variations provide insights into eruption mechanisms, revealing
whether or not the chamber was pressurized. Little data exist, however, to
determine how mass fluxes vary over time scales of seconds to hours. Such data
would provide insight into the variability of supply during an eruption. Over
recent years unpublished data have been gathered indicating that erupted mass
fluxes may vary between high and low levels over minute-long periods. If such
short term cyclicity exists, then this finding will provide unique insights into
the stability of supply to persistent basaltic eruptions over minute to hour
long periods. The objective of this research is thus to search for and examine
short term mass flux variations during ongoing basaltic eruptions defining, for
the first time, any cyclicity in the short term mass flux that may exist. This
will provide us insights into the supply mechanism during persistent effusive
eruptions, answering the prime question: is supply steady or surging? This in
turn will allow us to apply conduit convection models that explain the relevant
supply mode.&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these objectives, two volcanoes characterized
by contrasting styles of persistent activity have been selected for analysis:
Kilauea (Hawai'i) and Villarrica (Chile). While activity at Kilauea is dominated
by the emplacement of tube-fed lava flows, Villarrica hosts a persistently
active lava lake. At both of these volcanoes, preliminary data indicate that
magma supply to the eruption site may cycle between high and low levels, with
each cycle lasting minutes to hours. At each volcano data sets capable of
revealing short term mass flux variation will be collected. At Kilauea, thermal
measurements will be made every 1-2 seconds at skylights along the active master
tube and at incandescent vents over the eruption site. At Villarrica, during two
field campaigns, thermal data will be collected simultaneously with gas flux and
seismic data. Results will be correlated and analyzed for evidence of cyclic
supply to Villarrica's lava lake. At both targets, satellite thermal data
collected on a daily basis will be used to construct longer mass flux time
series allowing the persistence of any cyclic behavior to be examined. These
data sets of multiple geophysical measurements will allow conduit convection and
degassing models to be fitted to each system. &lt;br/&gt;This research will
advance our scientific understanding of persistently erupting systems by
extending knowledge of how volcanic eruptions evolve over short time periods. We
will also assess the validity of popular gas-based conduit convection models
that predict and explain such short term variation in terms of variable volatile
content and/or convective overturn. We will use these data to support
educational/outreach projects in 3 ways. (1) We will make the data available on
the Internet for public access. (2) We will use these data to support University
of Hawai'i courses for teachers, allowing them to develop exciting high school
lesson plans using real-time data. (3) Through the support of Hawai'i Space
Grant Consortium undergraduate students will benefit by using the data to
support their work.&lt;br/&gt;