* 0106580
* Collaborative Research: Experimental and Theoretical Investigation of Compaction and Dilation Bands
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2004
* Teng-fong Wong, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2004
* USD 130,000.00

Issen/Wong &lt;br/&gt;0106932/0106580 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Compaction bands, a
recently identified type of localized deformation, form in high porosity
sandstone, perpendicular to the direction of maximum compressive stress. They
occur for stress states associated with the transition from brittle faulting to
distributed cataclastic flow, where microstructural observations show damage
partitioned between at least two damage mechanisms: axial microcracks that may
grow and coalesce to form a shear fault, and pores that collapse while grains
are crushed. Theoretical predictions from recent reassessments of the
bifurcation approach to strain localization do not correlate well with the
scarce existing experimental data. This proposal suggests that an inadequate
constitutive model causes the discrepancy. Thus, a two-yield surface
constitutive model, representing both damage mechanisms, will be used with
experimentally derived constraints for the important material parameters to
enable further theoretical analyses regarding the onset of localization.
Experimental and theoretical results will be synthesized to extrapolate a model
to predict failure modes and localization development in crustal settings for
different stress states and loading paths. Recent theoretical works have also
highlighted two potentially important, but previously neglected failure modes:
"dilation bands" and "dilating shear bands". A lack of data has hampered the
mechanical analysis of analogous structures that structural geologists refer to
as "hybrid shear fractures" or "transitional tensile fractures." Theoretical
work predicts formation of these bands in low porosity rocks under overall
compressive loading. Thus, the proposed work also includes experimental and
theoretical investigation of dilation band formation using low porosity rock in
triaxial extension tests. &lt;br/&gt;