* 0106709
* ROLE:  Knowledge of Algebra for Teaching
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Daniel Chazan, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2004
* USD 601,894.00

We propose to undertake work on two components of this project, which was
originally proposed as having three major components. We have redesigned this
effort as a 24-month project primarily aimed at framework development and
initial work on assessment tools; the attached budget would adequately support
this work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our original proposal included two research
questions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Question 1. What knowledge of algebra for
teaching (mathematical knowledge, beliefs, dispositions and conceptions of
mathematics) do secondary school teachers of algebra draw upon to support their
instruction?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Question 2. How do preservice teachers'
experiences in mathematics and in teacher education foster the development of
knowledge of algebra for teaching?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For this scaled-back
version of the project we will address only the first research question. We had
identified the several subquestions related to this; they are included below. We
will meet as a project team to refine and narrow this list, and expect to focus
on some subset of these:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. How is teachers' knowledge of
algebra organized and chunked, and how does this relate to their
teaching?&lt;br/&gt;2. How do teachers articulate what algebra is about? How do
they describe the "big ideas" that structure the courses they teach? Can they
compare and contrast the approach they take with others? How does this relate to
their teaching?&lt;br/&gt;3. What kind of knowledge do teachers draw upon in
responding to students' ideas? &lt;br/&gt;4. How do more general mathematical
types of knowledge (reasoning, representing, problem solving) relate to
knowledge of algebra for teaching?&lt;br/&gt;5. What knowledge do teachers use
in keeping their sights on longer-term mathematical goals or "big ideas" while
also responding to student conceptions and interests?&lt;br/&gt;6. What
resources and strategies do teachers draw on for deepening their knowledge of
algebra for teaching?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the 24 months of this project we
will undertake the development of a framework for "knowledge of algebra for
teaching" by doing the following:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Synthesizing
literature, including: theoretical analyses of school algebra, research about
the teaching and learning of algebra, research about knowledge used in teaching,
investigations of how algebra teachers are using
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Examining algebra curriculum materials and
teachers' manuals, and analyses of those materials&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3.
Interviewing developers of contemporary secondary school algebra
materials&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4. Examining teaching through existing
videotapes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;5. Gathering data from inservice classrooms
selected to span a range of curricular approaches, to support the framework
development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, we will begin the development
and piloting of an assessment tool to assess and describe teachers' knowledge of
algebra for teaching. Resources will not be available for full scale item
development, piloting, and analysis. Rather we will design prototype tasks,
probably in a relatively narrow content band within algebra, and conduct limited
piloting efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The products of this work will be an
analytic and empirically-derived framework describing algebra knowledge for
teaching, and a set of prototype tasks that can be used as a basis for more
extended task design in a subsequent project. In addition, we will use the
framework as a basis for analysis of the algebra teaching in our teacher sample,
and expect to produce a paper about teachers' knowledge of algebra for teaching
as it relates to their classroom practice in a variety of curricular
orientations.&lt;br/&gt;