* 0106054
* Biogeochemical Weathering Controls on Soil Formation and Landscape Development
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2005
* Jillian Banfield, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 06/30/2005
* USD 261,285.00

Abstract

Biogeochemical weathering controls on soil formation and landscape development.

The soil production rate is defined as the rate at which bedrock, in this study
chemically weathered granodiorite, converts to a mobile layer (soil, defined by
loss of granitic texture). Previous studies have established the form of the
inverse relationship between soil production rates and soil thickness. However,
these studies have not compared erosion to solute losses during landscape
lowering, or incorporated detailed consideration of the biogeochemical
weathering processes that must precede, and generally follow, soil formation. In
this project, conservation of mass equations will be solved using geochemical
tracer results and existing cosmogenic dating information to determine long-term
mass transfers due to erosion and solute loss during landscape development on
the Bemboka Granodiorite in SE Australia. Variation in solute versus erosional
fluxes with soil thickness and landscape position will be evaluated, and
possible relationships between the solute loss rates (prior to soil formation),
soil thickness, and microbial processes in the weathered granite will be
examined. The analysis will also yield values for long-term erosion and solute
losses for most elements per unit area of land surface per unit time. This
investigation extends prior geomorphological approaches to incorporate
biogeochemical as well as biophysical weathering contributions to soil formation
and landscape evolution. Broader impacts of the research will stem from new
insights into factors controlling rates of soil formation, improved
understanding of the processes by which landscapes respond to perturbation, and
the quantification of long-term sediment and solute fluxes to the oceans.

