* 0106689
* Collaborative Research: Tests of Post-Seismic Deformation Models with Absolute Gravity and GPS Measurements in Alaska
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2002
* Mark Zumberge, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2002
* USD 43,826.00

Zumberge 0106689 &lt;br/&gt;Freymueller 0106829 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is a test of hypotheses regarding viscoelastic response, aseismic creep,
and combinations of both processes following great earthquakes. The
collaborative effort, which will take place in Alaska, will make co-located
absolute gravity observations (performed by scientists at the University of
California, San Diego) and GPS observations (undertaken by scientists at the
University of Alaska). Different models of postseismic viscoelastic relaxation
predict observable gravity changes over 1000 km length scales, with a complex
spatial pattern. To date, the viscosity profile is best determined by
postglacial rebound studies. Gravity and GPS measurements offer the opportunity
to obtain viscosity profile estimates for the Alaskan plate boundary. The area
is especially interesting, as the viscosity of subduction zone materials may be
very different from that beneath the centers of continental and oceanic plates.
Aseismic creep is predicted to produce deformation of a more limited and
markedly different spatial character than that of viscoelastic relaxation.
Determining the contribution of aseismic creep in postseismic deformation is
important in estimating recurrence intervals for great earthquakes.
&lt;br/&gt;This project will recover and re-measure previously established
absolute gravity stations in Fairbanks and Palmer, Alaska. The two stations are
near the minimum and maximum predicted gravity change in the far-field for
proposed viscosity models. The measurements are also co-located with existing
continuous GPS stations. Comparisons with prior data will be used to test the
method, and to provide the basis for model testing.