* 0106789
* Mercury Isotope Investigations of Pre-and Post-Industrial Atmospheric Deposition
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2001,03/31/2003
* A. Leroy Odom, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 03/31/2003
* USD 82,991.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reports from widely separated areas of the Earth
have revealed a hemispherical, if not global, accumulation of mercury in the
environment. While it is clear that atmospheric deposition plays a major role,
and that perhaps as much as half of the annual release of mercury into the
atmosphere is anthropogenic in origin, important details of the mercury cycle
and fluxes are uncertain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are six naturally occurring
isotopes of mercury. Certain physical, chemical and biochemical processes
produce slight separations (fractionation) of these isotopes. As a consequence,
the isotopic composition of environmental mercury can potentially provide key
constraints to models of mercury cycling and fluxes. Since the degree of isotope
fractionation during a process like condensation of atmospheric mercury is
temperature dependent, the isotopic composition of mercury recorded in well-
dated material such as peat cores might also provide information on
paleoclimate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent developments make it possible to make
very precise measurement of mercury isotope ratios and these measurements have
revealed differences in the isotopic composition of mercury ores and
industrially processed mercury. This project is designed to test the feasibility
of applying mercury isotope systematics to environmental mercury and to develop
routine techniques (by improving existing techniques) for high-precision,
isotope-ratio measurements at environmental levels. In order to be able to
demonstrate the feasibility, a peat core that archives a well-studied record of
atmospheric mercury deposition is selected as sample material.&lt;br/&gt;