* 0106144
* The Santa Rosa - Calico Volcanic Field: A Case Study of Magmatic Processes Associated with the Yellowstone Hotspot and Lithospheric Extension
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2001,12/31/2005
* William Hart, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2005
* USD 131,646.00

Hart 0106144

This project is an integrated field, geochronologic, geochemical, and petrologic
investigation of circa 17 to13 Ma volcanism associated with the initial late
Cenozoic manifestations of the Yellowstone-Newberry hotspot system and with
lithospheric extension in the Nevada - Oregon border region. The area under
investigation, the Santa Rosa-Calico volcanic field, lies within the
northwestern projection of a major late Miocene continental rift regime and is
located between two other Oregon Plateau volcanic fields that typically are
identified with the emergence of the Yellowstone-Newberry hotspot system. The
field and analytical strategy is designed to provide a comprehensive view of the
Santa Rosa-Calico volcanic field. Techniques to be employed include GPS/GIS
assisted field mapping; air photo and satellite remote sensing interpretations;
petrographic, chemical and isotopic characterization of eruptive products and
petrogenetic processes; and absolute eruptive history assessment via Ar-Ar age
determinations. Using the Santa Rosa-Calico volcanic field as a case study this
research will test and provide new constraints on hypotheses for [1] the origin
of intermediate magmas in extensional settings, [2] the role of basaltic
magmatism in the formation and evolution of evolved magmas, [3] the role of
crustal melting and open system differentiation processes in the evolution of
compositionally diverse magmatic suites, and [4] the role that pre- and syn-
magmatic extension plays in controlling the location, eruptive style(s), and
compositional diversity of multi-vent volcanic fields.