* 0106538
* Refinement of Measurement of Crystal-Mush Compaction in the Palisades Sill, New Jersey
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2001,08/31/2003
* Anthony Philpotts, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 08/31/2003
* USD 90,317.00

Philpotts/Gray &lt;br/&gt;EAR-0106538&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The goal of this
research is to determine directly the amount of compaction that occurred during
the solidification of the Palisades Sill, New Jersey, one of the simplest and
best studied intrusive igneous bodies. Previous studies revealed that a possible
explanation for the chemical variation through this sill involved compaction of
crystal mush with upward expulsion of the residual liquid. The evidence,
however, is entirely chemical and open to other interpretations. Recent studies
of a thick flood-basalt flow have shown that plagioclase crystals link together
to form a three-dimensional network of chains early in the crystallization of
the magma. If compaction of crystal mush occurs during solidification, the
network of plagioclase crystals is deformed, and its degree of anisotropy is a
direct measure of the amount of compaction. In the case of the thick lava flow,
the compaction amounts independently determined from the anisotropy of the
plagioclase network and from the chemical variation through the flow agree
remarkably well. Initial measurements of the fabric of rocks in the Palisades
Sill document that they are indeed anisotropic and that the compaction inferred
from the chemical evidence did occur. Three new, independent methods have been
developed for measuring the anisotropy of a rock's fabric. The methods involve
measuring various aspects of the plagioclase network in oriented thin sections.
One is based on the average intercept length between plagioclase chains along
mutually perpendicular traverses; another considers links in the chains as
vectors whose distribution can be analyzed for anisotropy; and the third
determines the average moment ellipse that can be fitted to the interstitial
patches between the chains. Each of the methods is amenable to a thorough
statistical analysis of the standard errors for the degree of compaction and
orientation estimates. These techniques will be used on sets of three mutually
perpendicular thin sections cut from a series of oriented samples through the
sill. These measurements will allow us to determine, for each sample, the 3-D
ellipsoid of the anisotropy of the rock1s fabric, from which will be calculated
the amount and direction of compaction. Differences between the three
independent methods of measuring compaction can be used to shed light on the
mechanism of the compaction process and its relation to layering in the sill.
The anisotropism of magnetic susceptibility, which has commonly been used as an
indirect measure of the anisotropy of a rock1s fabric, will be measured in each
sample to determine how it relates to the anisotropy of the plagioclase-chain
network. The direct measurement of compaction in a crystal mush is of
importance, because of the insight it will provide into the chemical and
physical processes involved in the differentiation of magma bodies and in the
extraction of magma from partly melted mantle sources.&lt;br/&gt;