* 0106696
* Oxygen and Hydrogen Isotope Studies of Igneous Rocks and Associated Hydrothermal Alteration
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Hugh Taylor, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2005
* USD 105,317.00

Taylor&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0106696&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We are attempting to show that
equilibrium iron-isotope fractionations among simple iron-bearing complexes and
Fe metal can be accurately calculated using a combination of force-field
modeling together with available measurements of vibrational frequencies from
infrared and Raman spectroscopy. This is important because of its pertinence in
interpreting the exciting new results by other workers of high-precision iron
isotope measurements on natural materials and between species in aqueous
solution and those bound to ion-exchange resins. We are also finishing up an
oxygen and radiogenic isotope study of granitic plutons in Nevada and Utah for
which preliminary results have shown a systematic involvement of different
source rocks during each of three stages of magmatism in the Jurassic,
Cretaceous, and Cenozoic. A third goal is to complete our understanding of the
remarkable oxygen isotope patterns in phenocrysts and groundmass found in the
upper parts of welded ash-flow tuffs, exemplified in our studies of the Bishop
Tuff (Holt and Taylor, 1998), where we showed that the low-18O zones exhibited a
one-to-one correspondence with mapped fossil fumarolic structures exposed in the
uppermost 70-80 meters of the tuff We are in the process of examining the
exposed upper 15 meters of the 1912 ash-flow sheet in the Valley of Ten Thousand
Smokes (VTTS), Alaska (where the fumaroles are known from direct observation to
have terminated about 15 years after eruption), thereby linking the scientific
observations made on recently active fumaroles in the VTTS with the fossil
fumaroles in the Bishop Tuff.&lt;br/&gt;