* 0106058
* Probing the Quantum Hall State by Electrically Detected ESR and ENDOR in GaAs and Si-MOSFET Heterostructures
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2004
* Clifford Bowers, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 09/30/2004
* USD 270,270.00

This individual investigator award will support a project to elucidate
properties of correlated 2 dimensional electron systems (2DES) in the Quantum
Hall regime. These studies will include: the measurement of the magnetization of
the 2DES, the study of current induced dynamic nuclear polarization, and the
role of spin in metal-insulator transitions in a Si-MOSFET 2DES. The
experimental methods to be employed in the proposed investigations are
electrically detected electron spin resonance and electrically detected
electron-nuclear double resonance. Furthermore, a magnon model for the mechanism
of the electrically detected electron spin resonance in the quantum Hall state
will be developed and compared with the experimental temperature and microwave
power dependence of the signal response. Experiments are to be conducted on high
mobility GaAs/AlGaAs quantum wells fabricated at Sandia National Labs and Si-
MOSFET heterostructure devices. Instrumentation at the National High Magnetic
Field Laboratory and in the P.I.'s laboratory at the University of Florida will
be employed to carry out the proposed investigations. Students involved with
this research will gain skills that will prepare them for future careers in
industry and academia. In addition, they will gain the experience of
collaborating with scientists at national facilities.

A fundamental understanding of the processes associated with the flow of
electrons through composite semiconductor materials is key to the development of
new types of devices with improved performance and novel characteristics. The
"spin" of the electron plays a central role in the conductivity properties of
high performance nanostructured semiconductors at low temperatures and high
magnetic fields. Under these conditions (referred to as the quantum Hall
regime), the flow of electrons is strongly affected by quantum mechanics where
the available states of the electron are restricted to certain energies. This
individual investigator award will support research aimed at probing the spin
degree of freedom by resonance absorption of microwave energy. The spin of the
electron can be "flipped" by this absorption, and as was first shown by the
German Nobel Laureate Klaus von Klitzing, this can be detected as a change in
the conductivity. This project will attempt to explain the mechanism of this
electrically detected spin resonance effect, and to use it to probe the
quantized energy levels in the nanostructured semiconductor. The research could
impact on the development of "quantum computation" devices or new types of "spin
transistors" with improved performance over conventional devices. The
commercialization of these potential applications could have major long-term
economic impact in the technology sector. Thus, representation in this research
area by a US research group is crucial to the National interest. Students
involved with this research will gain skills that will prepare them for future
careers in industry and academia. In addition, they will gain the experience of
collaborating with scientists at national facilities.