* 0106060
* The Geologic Record of Biosphere Dynamics:  A Key to Predicting the Biotic Effects of Future Environmental Change
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2001,09/30/2005
* David Feary, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 09/30/2005
* USD 149,000.00

Understanding the dynamics of biotic response to past environmental change is
an&lt;br/&gt;essential element for predicting the effect on the earth's
biosphere of future&lt;br/&gt;environmental change. Although time-series data in
the geologic record represents the&lt;br/&gt;major source of information
describing the dynamics of this past biotic response,&lt;br/&gt;methodological
and administrative gulfs between biological scientists and
earth&lt;br/&gt;scientists, and among real-time, recent-past, and deep-time
approaches, have hindered&lt;br/&gt;basic research and its application to policy
issues. This study will describe mechanisms&lt;br/&gt;for promoting the
interdisciplinary science at the interface of biology and geology
that&lt;br/&gt;depends on the collection, analysis, and understanding of
biogeologic time-series data.&lt;br/&gt;The study will provide the basis for
informed decision-making in government, industry, and academia, by (1) assessing
the current state of biogeologic analysis relevant to biosphere dynamics; (2)
identifying the most promising directions for collaborative research and the
sharing of methodologies; and (3) describing the programmatic themes and
research and data infrastructures required to accomplish these interdisciplinary
objectives&lt;br/&gt;