* 0106048
* Early Complex Societies in North China: The Chifeng International Collaborative Archaeological Project
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2001,09/30/2007
* Robert Drennan, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2007
* USD 70,446.00

With support from the National Science Foundation Dr. Katheryn M. Linduff and
her colleagues at the University of Pittsburgh, Jilin University, Hebrew
University and the Inner Mongolia Institute of Archaeology will conduct three
more seasons of archaeological fieldwork in the Chifeng region of southeastern
Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region in northeastern China. The region is
strategically positioned between the center of early Chinese dynasties in the
agriculturally productive Yellow River basin and the steppe land to its north
and west where a pastoral nomadic adaptation developed. The region shows a long
sequence of relatively independent development before it was fully incorporated
into the dynastic system. The team seeks to record and clarify what conditions
led to greater social complexity in the region. The principal research activity
is a regional-scale settlement study. The first two field seasons (1999-2000)
have already begun to provide information on the period from c. 6000 B.C.
through c. A.D. 200 that will be necessary to understand the relationships among
sites already investigated through stratigraphic excavation during several
decades of research by Chinese archaeologists. Work in the Chifeng region to
date has covered 550 sq km of a projected 1350 sq km area and aims to broaden
our knowledge beyond the subjects treated in ancient Chinese historical
documents that saw the Central Plain as the primary location and motivator of
change across north Asia. Second, it is focused on a region outside the
heartland of early Chinese states, in which no historical documents were
written, but where excavated mortuary materials suggest the existence of more
complexity than reported in the texts. The research has begun to collect
information necessary to contextualize existing archaeological data and bring it
to bear on reconstructing social, political, cultural, and economic patterns for
the whole region.The team will conduct further stratigraphic excavations in
order to clarify the chronological sequence, conduct instrument mapping and
intensive surface collection of surface remains of several sites with extensive
above ground architectural remains so a to understand their functions better.
Although China has long been recognized as vital to comparative study of the
origins and development of complex society, data from there is absent even from
most recent syntheses and is only recently been systematically collected in this
way. Dr Linduff's project is the one of very few international collaborative
archaeological endeavors in China and the first of its kind in the northern
region. The resulting information will contribute to a broadened understanding
of the variability to be observed in the trajectories of development of early
complex societies in a global comparative context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;