* 0106000
* Numerical Modeling of Strong Heterogeneity in the Deep Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2001,12/31/2004
* Barbara Romanowicz, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2004
* USD 238,525.00

Abstract for proposal EAR0106000 (PH #38x)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Numerical
Modeling of Strong Heterogeneity in the Deep Mantle&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI's:
B. Romanowicz, University of California, Berkeley&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project addresses the issue of how to model teleseismic S waveforms to
accurately account for strong 3D heterogeneity, such as recently found in D",
that cannot be handled using standard approaches, in view of recent developments
in numerical modeling, and with the goal of improving our understanding of deep
mantle dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the last few years, much progress has
been made in the development of numerical methods adapted to spherical geometry
and able to compute waves emanating from a realistic seismic source, reaching,
within reasonable computational time, periods of interest for teleseismic
studies, making no assumptions on the strength of velocity contrasts, and able
to handle interface waves and interface topography. The most promising new
method is the spectral element method. It combines the advantages of the
flexibility of a finite element method with the precision of a pseudo-spectral
method. Nevertheless this method has an excessive numerical cost for realistic
frequencies (i.e. at least 15-25 sec). Further progress has been made recently
by Capdeville (2000), who developed a hybrid method that couples spectral
element computations with a normal mode solution, so that the spectral elements
are used only in the target strongly heterogeneous regions. This allows one to
focus on the target region and extend computations to much higher frequencies
than if spectral elements are used for the whole earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
collaboration with Dr. Capdeville, we will apply this method to waveform
modeling of S-type waves (S, Sdiff, SKS, ScS) interacting with the base of the
mantle and the core-mantle boundary. We will particularly be interested in
modeling waveform distortion due to heterogeneity, such as that observed in
SPdKS, and SVdiff waveforms. In the process, we will also address issues of
crust and uppermost mantle effects on teleseismic body and mantle waves. This
work will involve adapting Capdeville's hybrid method to the specific case of
D", collecting an appropriate global dataset of S waveforms and forward modeling
D" structure to match these waveforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;