* 0106718
* Deuterium-Hydrogen (D/H) Fractionation at High Pressure and High Temperature
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* Youxue Zhang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 07/31/2003
* USD 57,456.00

Zhang&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0106718&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is aimed at
understanding the influence of pressure, temperature and composition on
deuterium-hydrogen (D/H) isotopic fractionation through high-pressure, high
temperature experiments. Isotope fractionation at high pressure is theoretically
interesting and affects both the composition of fluids released from subducted
slabs, and of the residual water that is entrained in high-pressure phases.
Under favorable conditions, these water-containing phases may be sequestered at
great depth in the lower mantle. The isotopic signature of such "recycled" water
will depend in part upon fractionation processes occurring at mantle
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;Although the D/H ratio in the present upper mantle is
known to be on the whole relatively constant, the primordial D/H ratio for the
earth is unknown. Knowledge of high-pressure D/H fractionation factors relevant
to degassing of the earth will help constrain the primitive D/H ratio and the
proportion of ocean water that originated from the mantle .&lt;br/&gt;The D/H
ratios of subduction related basalts are relatively high (e.g. Poreda, 1985;
Dobson and O'Neil, 1987), indicating that their source has a different D/H ratio
to the depleted upper mantle. Although this is attributed in part to the D/H
ratio of subducted water, the D/H ratio of the evolved water may be affected by
fractionation processes as water is released from hydrous minerals at depth. In
the bulk of the mantle, nominally anhydrous minerals are thought to constitute
the major reservoir for water (e.g. Bell and Rossmann, 1992; Kohlstedt et al.,
1996). It has been suggested that the D/H ratio of water in nominally anhydrous
minerals of the upper mantle is fixed by equilibration with hydrous fluids in
the mantle wedge (Bell and Ihinger, 2000). Thus, fractionation of D/H between
hydrous phases (in the slab), fluid (leaving the slab), hydrous magmas (in the
mantle wedge) and nominally anhydrous minerals (the mantle residue) could
explain the D/H systematics of the entire upper mantle. D/H fractionation
factors at pressures greater than a few kilobars have not yet been measured,
however, and cannot be reliably predicted; thus we propose to measure
fractionation experimentally under mantle conditions. In the period of this one-
year pilot project, we will carry out a preliminary investigation of the effects
of pressure and temperature on D/H fractionation between brucite and water at
elevated pressure (3-6 GPa) and temperature (500-700 degrees C). This work will
determine the magnitude of the pressure effect on D/H fractionation. Working in
this simple MgO-H2O system with such a water rich mineral will also allow us to
develop and improve our experimental and analytical technique. The results of
this systematic study will be fundamental to our understanding of isotopic
fractionation at high pressure. In addition, we will begin to investigate the
isotopic fractionation factor between a synthetic basalt melt and H2O vapor
phase to understand the D/H fractionation during mantle degassing. The effect of
dissolved H2O content (hydroxyl to molecular H2O ratio) on the fractionation
factor will also be examined. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;