* 0106965
* Developing Auto Tutor for Computer Literacy and Physics
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Donald Franceschetti, University of Memphis
* Continuing Grant
* Lee Zia
* 07/31/2005
* USD 1,274,075.00

The Tutoring Research Group at the University of Memphis has developed a
computer tutor (called AutoTutor) that simulates the discourse patterns and
pedagogical strategies of unaccomplished human tutors. The typical tutor in a
school system is unaccomplished in the sense that the tutor has had no training
in tutoring strategies and has only introductory-to-intermediate knowledge about
the topic. The development of AutoTutor was funded by an NSF grant (SBR 9720314,
in the Learning and Intelligent Systems program). The discourse patterns and
pedagogical strategies in AutoTutor were based on a previous project that
dissected 100 hours of naturalistic tutoring
sessions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AutoTutor is currently targeted for college
students in introductory computer literacy courses, who learn the fundamentals
of hardware, operating systems, and the Internet. Instead of merely being an
information delivery system, AutoTutor serves as a discourse prosthesis or
collaborative scaffold that assists the student in actively constructing
knowledge. AutoTutor presents questions and problems from a curriculum script,
attempts to comprehend learner contributions that are entered by keyboard,
answers student questions, formulates dialog moves that are sensitive to the
learner's contributions (such as short feedback, pumps, prompts, assertions,
corrections, and hints), and delivers the dialog moves with a talking head. The
talking head displays emotions, produces synthesized speech with discourse-
sensitive intonation, and points to entities on graphical displays. AutoTutor
has seven modules: a curriculum &lt;br/&gt;script, language extraction, speech
act classification, latent semantic analysis (a statistical representation of
domain knowledge), topic selection, dialog management, and a talking head.
Evaluations of AutoTutor have shown that the tutoring system improves learning
with an effect size that is comparable to typical human tutors in school
systems, but not as high as accomplished human tutors and intelligent tutoring
systems. The dialog moves of AutoTutor blend in the discourse context very
smoothly because students cannot distinguish whether a speech act was generated
by AutoTutor or a human tutor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
substantially expand the capabilities of AutoTutor by designing the discourse to
handle more sophisticated tutoring mechanisms. These mechanisms should further
enhance the active construction of knowledge. One enhancement is to get the
student to articulate more knowledge, with more formal, symbolic, and precise
specification; if the student doesn't say it, it is not considered covered by
AutoTutor. Another enhancement is to set up the dialog so that it guides the
user in manipulating a 3-dimensional microworld of a physical system; the
student attempts to simulate a new state in the physical system by manipulating
parameters, inputs, and formulae. The proposed research will develop AutoTutor
in the domains of both computer literacy and Newtonian physics, so we will have
some foundation for evaluating the generality of AutoTutor's mechanisms.
AutoTutor has been designed to be generic, rather than domain-specific; an
authoring tool will be developed that makes it easy for instructors to prepare
new material on new topics. After the new versions of AutoTutor are completed,
we will evaluate its effectiveness on learning gains, conversational smoothness,
and pedagogical quality. During the course of achieving these engineering and
educational objectives, the proposed project will&lt;br/&gt;conduct basic
research in cognitive psychology, discourse processes, computer science,
and&lt;br/&gt;computational linguistics. This research cuts across quadrant 2
(behavioral, cognitive, affective, and social aspects of human learning) and
quadrant 3 (SMET learning in formal and informal educational
settings).&lt;br/&gt;