* 0106681
* River Recovery at Mount Pinatubo, Philippines
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Christopher Newhall, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 07/31/2005
* USD 193,526.00

0106681&lt;br/&gt;Montgomery&lt;br/&gt;Since the 1991 eruption of Mount
Pinatubo, the sediment yields from watersheds draining its slopes have been the
highest ever recorded. In spite of this overwhelming sediment load, rivers
inundated by pyroclastic flow deposits efficiently delivered almost half of the
initial deposits to downslope alluvial/debris fans by 1996. Much of this
transport occurs by lahars and hyperconcentrated flow, but at low to moderate
flow the channels provide end-member examples of channel response to high
sediment supply. A program of field measurements in 1997 and 1998 documented
extremely high bedload transport rates even at low flow due to enhanced mobility
of particles moving over a smooth, fine-grained bed. Measurement of flow
velocities and depths, channel properties, and the size of both mobile and
stable clasts in the Pasig-Potrero and Sacobia Rivers indicates grain-size-
independent dimensionless critical shear stresses of 0.015 to 0.038, and
Manning's n values of 0.017 to 0.024, well below values previously reported for
steep mountain channels. The dramatic bed mobility and selective transport in
these extremely sediment-rich channels indicate that changes in grain size, and
bed roughness can increase transport capacity in response to high sediment
supply. Dimensionless bedload transport rates in the Pasig-Potrero River are
substantially greater than those previously reported for temperate rivers at the
same dimensionless shear stress. &lt;br/&gt;Over the course of three field
seasons, we propose to test a series of hypotheses for river response to changes
in sediment supply using this ongoing natural experiment. Specifically, we will
monitor channel response to the progressive decline in sediment supply to
evaluate the hypotheses that: (i) bed coarsening and armoring is occurring in
response to decreased sediment delivery from hillslopes and valley walls and
will lead to a change in the character of bedload transport from selective
mobility to threshold mobility; (ii) that recovery of an armored, threshold
mobility bed in the Pasig-Potrero River will occur faster than in the Sacobia
River due to differences in watershed recovery and relative transport capacity;
(iii) that the magnitude and rates of changes in the bed surface texture in
rivers draining the flanks of Mount Pinatubo track differences in initial
sediment loading of their watersheds by pyroclastic flow deposits; and (iv) that
pebble cluster formation is a mechanism of channel response to declining
sediment load that, in turn, leads to changes in the style of bed mobility and
bedload transport rates.&lt;br/&gt;