* 0106956
* Measurement and Modeling of Flow and Transport in Macroporous Soils
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,02/28/2002
* M. Van Genuchten, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 02/28/2002
* USD 103,843.00

0106956&lt;br/&gt;Mohanty&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Characterization of
preferential flow and transport through soil macropores and fractures is one of
the biggest challenges in vadose zone hydrology. Several conceptual models have
been developed with different levels of complexity (e.g., equivalent continuum,
dual porosity, and dual permeability approaches) to describe the macropore flow-
transport process. However, no congruent conceptual model with a corroborating
measurement technique is available to precisely describe this process. As
gravity and/or capillary forces dominate the transport processes in the porous
medium near saturation, various factors contribute to the initiation of
macropore flow and its intensity, including pore geometry, distribution, and
continuity. In addition soil energy status, the nature of top and bottom
boundary conditions and textural layering, play important roles. We propose to
quantify the effects of many of these factors on preferential flow and transport
in a series of carefully controlled colunm experiments using novel designs.
Concurrent measurement of soil water content, water potential, and concentration
across distinct "macropore" and "no-macropore" regions, as well as of the volume
and concentration of inflow and outflow with high temporal resolution, are some
of the new features of our proposed study. Artificial macropores with known
geometry, distribution, and initial/boundary conditions will make the data
analysis and interpretation more thorough and meaningful. Several existing or
newly developed conceptual models will be tested with the new data sets,
ultimately leading to the formulation of more realistic preferential flow models
that contain physically-based and measurable parameters. Findings of this
research in ten-ns of different combinations of initial conditions, boundary
conditions, macropore geometry and continuity, and other (controlled) flow and
transport conditions that trigger, sustain, accelerate/decelerate or discontinue
the fast flow-transport phenomenon will be valuable for better understanding and
quantification of hydrologic and environmental processes at different
scales.&lt;br/&gt;