* 0106586
* Xenolith Constraints on Northern Appalachian Lithosphere -A Pilot Study
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* William Minarik, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 07/31/2003
* USD 40,077.00

EAR-0106586&lt;br/&gt;Minarik&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The northwestern Appalachians
in New York, Vermont and Quebec experienced a complex geologic history.
Mesoproterozoic collisional tectonics are recorded in rocks exposed in the
Adirondack Mountains and as erosional windows in the Appalachians of New
England. Subsequent rifting and development of an oceanic basin was followed by
episodic Paleozoic convergence and accretion to the eastern edge of North
America, forming the Appalachian chain. This was followed by Triassic-Jurassic
extension and rifting resulting in the modern North Atlantic basin. Current
knowledge of the lower continental crust and continental lithospheric mantle in
this area is derived primarily from geophysical methods and studies of
tectonically exhumed high pressure units. Upper-crustal and lower-mantle
xenoliths in Cretaceous Monteregian dikes offer a unique glimpse into the
northwestern Appalachian lithosphere. This study aims to determine the thermal,
tectonic and geochemical evolution of rocks represented by these xenoliths.
Petrography and geothermobarometry of the xenoliths will constrain the P-T
history of the assemblages sampled by the dikes. Sm-Nd and Re-Os isotopic
systematics of the crustal and mantle xenoliths will give the age of formation
and of isolation from the convecting upper mantle. These constraints on the
nature of the deep crust and lithospheric mantle will be applied to unravel
questions about the evolution of the lithospheric mantle and lower crust during
Appalachian deformation and accretion. The proposed Sm-Nd and Re-Os isotopic
measurements represent a first for xenoliths from this area.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;