* 0106584
* Synoptic Control of Mesoscale Precipitating Systems in the Pacific Northwest
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Kyle Swanson, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 08/31/2005
* USD 429,870.00

This research will examine the extent to which an adequate representation of
flow features on the synoptic scale allows for the skillful simulation of
mesoscale precipitating systems. The research will emphasize independent
verification and rigorous hypothesis testing within a controlled setting in
order to quantify the significance of the results. The focus of the research is
on the specific problem of landfalling precipitating systems on the West Coast
of United States. The Principal Investigators will explore a broad variety of
landfalling systems that lead to significant rainfall in this region.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary tools of the research will be an advanced
mesoscale numerical model, NCEP and ECMWF reanalysis data sets, and independent
precipitation measurements from all available surface sites in the Pacific coast
states (Washington, Oregon and California). The role of lateral boundary
conditions (LBC) will be explicitly accounted for by the study design and
ongoing evaluation of study results will be used to control for biases that may
be introduced by model physics limitations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Separating
initial and boundary condition errors, LBC errors due to the placement of the
boundaries of the nested grid model, and error by type of synoptic system will
represent a significant advance in understanding of these weather systems. The
results of this study will be of considerable interest to short term weather
forecasting.