* 0106828
* The Long-Term Dynamics and Evolution of Dip-Slip Faults
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2004
* Guanshui Xu, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2004
* USD 131,880.00

Abstract for proposal EAR0106828 (PH #31x)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: The Long-
Term Dynamics and Evolution of Dip-Slip Faults&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI's:
Oglesby, David D., and Xu, Guanshui, University of California,
Riverside&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to investigate the
effects of multiple earthquakes on the dynamics of dip-slip faults. Observations
and models of dip-slip earthquakes have shown that non-vertical faults behave in
ways that are quite different from vertical strike-slip faults. In particular,
these faults display higher motion on the hanging wall, marked changes in the
direction of slip along strike, and greater motion for thrust events than for
otherwise equivalent normal events. This project will help determine if these
and other effects persist over multiple earthquake cycles. Additionally, the
researchers will investigate whether (under reasonable physical assumptions)
dip-slip faults will reach a steady state over time, or if complexity in stress
and slip will grow. Finally, the researchers will analyze the effect that the
long-term evolution of the fault has on near-source ground motion. The project
will use a combination of the finite element and variational boundary integral
methods to model the dynamics of the rupture and slip process, as well as
loading and nucleation during the interseismic period. The results will have
implications for both the basic physics of the earthquake process as well as
seismic hazard. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;