* 0106936
* The Origin of Geographic Diversity in the Bahamian Land Snail Cerion:  The Fossil History of Modern Patterns
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2001,09/30/2007
* Glenn Goodfriend, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 09/30/2007
* USD 250,063.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The origin of geographic diversity in the Bahamian
land snail Cerion: the fossil history of modern
patterns&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Glenn A.Goodfriend, Stephen J. Gould, and M. G.
Harasewych&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0106936&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The land snail Cerion is
noteable for its extreme geographic diversity in shell morphology: very
different forms occur adjacent to each other, with steep character gradients
between them. This study is aimed at revealing the history and possible causes
of the geographic diversity along a stretch of ca. 12 km of the east coast of
Long Island, Bahamas, where 5 distinctive forms occur. Starting with the
geographic patterns of the modern (living) forms, we will follow these patterns
back in time through excavation and analysis of the Holocene fossil record of
the snails present in the eolian sand deposits along the coast. Ca. 20-35 shells
from each of ca. 25-30 sites will be dated by amino acid racemization
(calibrated against a series of radiocarbon ages) and analyzed morphmetrically
to obtain temporal and geographic series. PIs will evaluate several alternative
scenarios concerning the origin of geographic diversity in these
snails:&lt;br/&gt;1. The patterns are relatively stable and old, resulting from
in situ differentiation of geographically continuous populations of snails.
Selection would be the primary cause of geographic diversity.&lt;br/&gt;2.
Geographic patterns are relatively dynamic and result from population dynamic
processes such as dispersal and extirpation. These patterns could have various
origins:&lt;br/&gt;a. Destriuction of Cerion populations across a broad region
by, e.g., a hurricane, opens up a broad region for recolonization by snails
originating from nearly sources or long-distance dispersal; the populations
expand and meet. Broad scale environmental events would be the primary control
of geographic diversity.&lt;br/&gt;b. Cerion populations are typically in a
state of flux, with local extirpations and re-establishment of populations,
sometimes from long-distance dispersal. Stochastic population processes and
smaller scale environmental events (e.g., washover fans from storms) would be
the primary control.&lt;br/&gt;Based on preliminary results, we can expect to
have a detailed record of Cerion back to ca. 5000-6000 yr BP. A parallel study
will look at the relationships of living forms using mDNA sequences. These
studies will contribute to understanding the origin and maintenance of
geographic diversity of organisms.&lt;br/&gt;