* 0106771
* ROLE: Researching the Role of Qualitative Analysis
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Jose Mestre, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* James S. Dietz
* 08/31/2005
* USD 864,375.00

We propose a research project to investigate the impact of qualitative analysis
on undergraduate students' conceptual understanding and problem-solving skills
within the realistic setting of large introductory physics courses. The impact
of qualitive analysis (QA) will be investigated both within a web-based homework
environment and during acttive-learning, in-class formative assessment
activities facilitated by a classroom communication system. The applications of
web-based homework, and classroom communication systems, are proliferating in
large introductory science courses nationwide. Yet, little is known about how to
structure web-based homework, and active-learning in-calss activities in ways
that engage students in qualitive analyses that promote a deeper understanding
of scientific concepts and skilled problem solving. The QA materials that will
be ddeveloped and investigated will engage students in four types of qualitative
analyses performed by skilled problem solvers corresponding roughly to four
stages of expert-like problem solving: conceptual alnalysis, strategic analysis.
quanititative analysis, and meta analysis. We will investigate the effectiveness
of these materials and their impact on: a) students' understanding on concepts
and their ability to analyze and solve problems, b) students' approach to, and
level of success with, web-based homework, and c) students' attitudes as they
relate tot their web-based homework and in-class experience. The proposed
research will utlimately infor the design and implemention of qualitative
analyses in large, techonology-assisted introductory science courses in order to
promote deep conceptual understanding and skilled problem solving in students.