* 0106706
* Towards Scalable Quality of Service Routing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Xin Yuan, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2005
* USD 142,697.00

To support Quality of Service (QoS) in the Next Generation Internet, new
algorithms are needed for many network components, including routing, scheduling
and admission control. QoS routing, which identifies paths that have sufficient
resources to satisfy the QoS requirement of a connection and selects a path for
that connection, is one of the most important components for QoS provision.
Although many QoS routing algorithms have been proposed, a number of theoretical
and practical issues remain to be addressed to achieve efficient QoS routing in
large scale networks, that is, scalable QoS routing. This research will attempt
to address some of these issues. Specifically, we will focus on the following
four areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Networking state aggregation. For a large
network, a common approach to achieve scalable routing is to reduce the size of
global network state by aggregating information according to the hierarchical
structure of the network. This approach has been adopted by the ATM private
network-network interface (PNNI) standard. However, when multiple QoS metrics
are involved, precisely aggregating information of a domain may not be feasible
since it requires memory space that grows exponentially with respect to the size
of the domain. In this research, we will design various topology aggregation
schemes, study the trade-offs of the schemes between the amount of space needed
and the effectiveness in summarizing the domain information, investigate the QoS
routing performance with different topology aggregation schemes, and determine
the topology aggregation schemes that are effective in practice for QoS routing
with multiple QoS metrics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Handling random imprecision of
the global network state information. In large scale networks, maintaining
precise global state information requires link states to be distributed
frequently, which results in large protocol overheads along multiple dimensions
including bandwidth, storage, update processing, and the associated context
switching. To control the protocol overhead, the link state update frequency may
be reduced, which results in the imprecise global state information. The
imprecision caused by the infrequent link state updates is random in the sense
that a router cannot estimate the accurate global network state. Thus, a
practical QoS routing algorithm must be able to perform effective routing using
the imprecise global network state information. In this research, we propose a
novel routing scheme that performs effective routing in the presence of
imprecise global state information. Our scheme is different from the existing
methods in that it combines static and dynamic routing and adapts the routing
schemes based on network status. We will compare our scheme with the existing
methods in terms of routing performance and protocol overheads and identify the
strengths and weaknesses of each method through extensive simulations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interaction between resource reservation and QoS routing.
Most current QoS routing algorithms assume a separate protocol to perform
resource reservation. However, in the future large scale high speed networks, it
is desirable to combine resource reservation with QoS routing. Combing resource
reservation with QoS routing may have negative impacts on the routing
performance, especially for large networks. This research will try to understand
the impact of resource reservation on various QoS routing schemes and develop
techniques to achieve effective routing in the presence of resource reservation
traffic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multi-constrained QoS routing and generic QoS
routing algorithms. Multi-constrained QoS routing finds a path that satisfies
multiple independent QoS constraints. This problem is NP-hard. However,
distributed applications such as the Internet phone and distributed games have
very diverse QoS requirements on delay, cost, delay jitter, loss ratio,
bandwidth, etc. To support such applications, practical multi-constrained QoS
routing algorithms must be developed. Furthermore, due to the complexity of
multi-constrained QoS routing, existing QoS routing algorithms are very
restrictive on the type and the number of QoS constraints, which implies that
different QoS routing algorithms will be needed for different applications. In
the future networks, it is desirable to use a generic QoS routing algorithm that
can efficiently handle different QoS requirements. In this research, we will
study the heuristic algorithms that solve the multi-constrained routing problem
effectively in practice and develop a generic algorithm that performs well
regardless of the number and the types of QoS
requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We plan to evaluate our techniques by
implementing the proposed techniques in Qbone and to validate the techniques
through implementation and experimentation in the real network. We believe that
by developing effective mechanisms to address these four issues, we will be able
to integrate the mechanisms and develop efficient scalable QoS routing schemes
for the future large scale high speed networks.&lt;br/&gt;