* 0106656
* Compressing and Analyzing Microarray Images for Genetic Information Extraction
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2005
* Bin Yu, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 05/31/2005
* USD 340,759.00

Bioinformatics is the application of information technology to study and analyze
biological and genetic data. Functional genomics, the second phase of the Human
Genome Project, assigns function to DNA sequences, and is gearing up rapidly
based on the new microarray technology. Microarray images make possible the
simultaneous expressions of thousands of genes, and hold the keys to
understanding of gene regulation and interaction, genetic pathways for diseases
such as cancer, and finding the subpopulations most responsive to certain drugs.
They are widely used in laboratories of academia and industry alike. The
emergence of the microarray imaging technology puts image processing in an
important position in functional genomics, and calls for interdisciplinary
research between image processing and statistical data analysis. The
investigators will be studying problems at exactly this
interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The amount of data for even one microarray image
is HUGE (&gt;30 MB/scan and two scans/image). The need for compression is
pressing because of the exponential explosion of its use and (despite of the
cheaper disk space) the bottleneck on the conversion cost to tapes, the only
reliable permanent storage. The investigators are addressing this need for
microarray image compression with a progressive or multi-level coded data
structure which is useful for transmission and statistical analysis. A case is
made for lossy compression to obtain aggressive compression ratios such as 15:1
without much loss of statistical information. This research is also
investigating the optimality question of statistical estimation based lossy
compressed data with applications to microarray data. Finally, this research is
using the statistical modeling principle based on data compression: Rissanen's
minimum description length (MDL) principle, for gene clustering and other
biological information extraction.&lt;br/&gt;