* 0106712
* Molybdenum Isotopes in the Geologic Record:   Paleoredox Proxies?
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,12/31/2003
* Ariel Anbar, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 12/31/2003
* USD 97,520.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molybdenum Isotope in the Geologic Record:
Paleoredox Proxies?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to investigate
natural variations in the isotopic composition of the element molybdenum (Mo).
Mo is an element that is sensitive to the presence of oxygen.&lt;br/&gt;As the
abundance of oxygen in the environment varies, so does the chemical behavior
of&lt;br/&gt;Mo. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We have made a preliminary study and
found that Mo that has accumulated from seawater under oxygen-rich conditions is
lighter than Mo that accumulates in sediments under oxygen-absent conditions in
the presence of sulfur. Of the two types of accumulation, it is the Mo that
accumulates under oxygen-absent conditions that is similar to Mo in seawater. We
therefore believe that changes in the relative proportion of light Mo extracted
from the oceans under oxygen-rich conditions will be reflected in the isotopic
composition of Mo in seawater and in sediments deposited under oxygen-absent
conditions. The more of the ocean that is oxygen-rich, the more light Mo will be
extracted from seawater and the heavier the Mo remaining in seawater will
become.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key to this hypothesis is the extraction of
light Mo from seawater under oxygen-rich conditions. It is therefore the purpose
of this project to investigate this process both in the laboratory and in
natural samples in order to understand the mechanisms involved and to quantify
their effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If we are correct, then the isotopic
composition of Mo in sediments deposited under oxygen-absent waters could be
used to track the relative proportions of oxygen-rich and oxygen-absent ocean
water through time. An understanding of the evolution of our present-day oxygen-
rich ocean is one of the keys to understanding the evolution of
the&lt;br/&gt;Earth 's environment, and of life itself, from primordial times to
the present.&lt;br/&gt;