* 0106089
* Distribution and Genesis of Unusual Carbonate Fabrics (Atar Group, Mauritania) - Understanding the Evolution of the Proterozoic Carbonate Factory
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2004
* Julie Bartley, University of West Georgia
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 06/30/2004
* USD 13,000.00

ABSTRACT

DISTRIBUTION AND GENESIS OF UNUSUAL CARBONATE FABRICS (ATAR GROUP, MAURITANIA) -
UNDERSTANDING THE EVOLUTION OF THE PROTEROZOIC CARBONATE FACTORY

JULIE K. BARTLEY EAR-0106089

Recent studies of Archean and Proterozoic rocks indicate broad temporal trends
in carbonate depositional style. Abiotic, macroscopically crystalline carbonate,
for example, is abundant in both subtidal and peritidal environments in the late
Archean and Early Paleoproterozoic. By the late Neoproterozoic seafloor
precipitates are virtually absent, supplanted by micritic carbonate textures,
except where associated with highly evaporitic conditions or Neoproterozoic
glacial deposits. Carbonate textures in the Mesoproterozoic display features
characteristic of both older and younger Proterozoic carbonate successions.
Furthermore, Mesoproterozoic to early Neoproterozoic carbonate platforms record
a diversity of fabrics unknown elsewhere in the geologic record. A
Mesoproterozoic peak in the diversity of stromatolite morphologies suggests a
dynamic interplay among mat growth and decomposition, carbonate precipitation,
and micrite deposition. Similarly, a Mesoproterozoic peak in the abundance of
molar-tooth fabric - an enigmatic carbonate fabric that contains rapidly
lithified carbonate cement juxtaposed with slowly lithified matrix - suggests a
dynamic interface between two contrasting carbonate precipitation regimes.
Together, these lines of evidence serve to underscore a recurrent theme: The
Mesoproterozoic represents an interval that lay at a critical threshold with
respect to the kinetic ease of carbonate nucleation and precipitation. In such a
system, relatively minor modification of the physiochemical environment may have
inhibited or enhanced carbonate precipitation, resulting in marked changes in
the style of carbonate deposition. These inferred environmental changes should
therefore be sedimentologically predictable and their consequences geochemically
testable.

This project aims to systematically examine a wide array of carbonate fabrics
within a single basin and delineate the environmental parameters, observable in
the field, that control carbonate nucleation and growth. In exploring these
relationships it may be possible to explicitly address the complex mechanisms
governing Precambrian carbonate production. The late Mesoproterozoic to earliest
Neoproterozoic Atar Group, Mauritania, is an ideal succession in which to
explore these relationships. Carbonates of the Atar Group contain diverse
stromatolites, deep- and shallow-water precipitates, herringbone carbonate
cement, and numerous horizons of molar-tooth fabric. As the first step in a
multi-faceted approach utilizing field, petrographic, and geochemical datasets,
we will conduct field research in the Atar Group, Mauritania and examine the
field relationships among the observable carbonate fabrics and the facies in
which they occur. This approach provides the most effective method to decipher
the relative roles of individual variables in controlling carbonate deposition
and, in this way, will address fundamental questions regarding the mechanisms
underlying changing carbonate regimes throughout the Precambrian.