* 0106074
* Collaborative Research: Integrated Geophysical and Hydrogeologic Study of a Large Maine Peatland
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Andrew Reeve, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 12/31/2004
* USD 143,347.00

0106074 Reeve

Solute transport controls vegetation and water chemistry gradients in peatlands.
Dispersive mixing and advective transport in peat will be measured in laboratory
column experiments and in a natural gradient tracer test in a peatland to
determine the relative importance of these processes. We will assess the
retardation of solutes by matrix diffusion and the applicability of a dual-
domain model. Electrical geophysical methods, verified through direct
measurements, will be used to track tracer migration.

An extensive geophysical and hydrogeologic characterization of the peatland will
map variability in peat depth across the basin and identify stratigraphy.
Ground-penetrating radar and resistivity/induced polarization imaging will be
employed. Piezometer tests will provide a measure of the spatial variability in
hydraulic conductivity within Caribou Bog, a large peatland in Central Maine.
Correlations between hydrogeologic and geophysical parameters will be assessed
and used to provide constraints on parameters for ground-water flow and mass
transport modeling.

Peat cores will be collected for laboratory tests to measure hydraulic
conductivity, dispersion, effective porosity, specific surface and complex
resistivity. The variability of peat properties with depth will be determined
through laboratory testing. Relationships between peat electrical properties and
hydrogeologic parameters will be evaluated.

An NaBr tracer will be injected into the peatland and monitored for 12 months.
The tracer will be tracked using surface and borehole electrical imaging. The
pixels on the geophysical images will be a substitute for extensive direct water
sampling points, allowing rapid and nearly continuous tracking of solute
distribution.

Geophysical and ground-water chemistry data collected from the tracer test will
be used to calculate the spatial moments of the solute plume through time.
Three-dimensional hydrogeologic and mass transport models will be calibrated to
the geochemical and geophysical data to further evaluate mass transport
parameters. Matrix diffusion, the migration of solutes into hydraulically
isolated pores, will be incorporated into the numerical models to evaluate this
important process.

The project will evaluate: (1) the nature of dispersive mixing, (2) the
correlation of hydrogeologic and geophysical parameters, and (3) the role of
mass transporft in peatlands. Peatlands are a large carbon reservoir and a
significant source of methane gas. Ground-water flow and mass transport are
important in regulating geochemical conditions favorable for methane production
and peat accumulation. The work will add to the understanding of processes that
impact carbon and nutrient dynamics for peatlands. Geophysical monitoring of a
tracer will provide important information on the utility of this non-invasive
method for tracking the movement of solute plumes. This project will demonstrate
the potential benefits of including electrical geophysics in hydrogeologic
assessments and wetland characterization.,