* 0106773
* ROLE:  Biomedical Engineering Thinking and Learning:  The Challenge of Integrating Systems and Analytical Thinking
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Nancy Nersessian, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 07/31/2004
* USD 596,544.00

Biomedical engineering (BME) could be called an exemplar interdiscipline. An
evolving field which applies engineering methods to biomedical problems, BME has
broken down historical disciplinary barriers traditionally existing between the
life sciences and engineering. While BME research activities frequently result
in clinical therapies and medical treatments for the public, the field remains
intimately tied to the engineering disciplines. It comes as no surprise,
therefore, that as a novel field, biomedical engineering learning poses special
challenges. Bioengineers must integrate a broad base of knowledge from several
disciplines including engineering, computer technology, and cell and molecular
biology. They must apply quantitative, analytical methods and representations to
systems understanding. The challenge for cognitive science, if it is to play a
significant role in 21st century science and engineering education, is to
understand the nature of thinking and practice in interdisciplines such as BME,
to investigate the developmental trajectory of expertise building, and to
discover the ways that learning in such communities of practice can best be
supported. To begin this foundational work, we seek NSF funding from the ROLE
Program to conduct an in-depth, proof-of-concept case study of BME research and
pedagogical practices in two related contexts. The study objective is to
discover the salient questions related to BME learning and practice that can
guided future work in other interdisciplines while setting a framework for more
general thinking about the extremely important issue of cognitive development
across disciplinary and epistemological boundaries.

This is a three-year project aimed at both providing a base-line understanding
of the cognitive practices employed within this interdiscipline and developing
Biomedial Education (BME) learning environments enriched through this
understanding of expert practices. The study will use a mixed method approach of
cognitive-historical analysis and observational/interview studies. The study
will examine the development of cognitive practices employed in the creation and
use of representation in the domain of biomedical engineering. The goal is to
investigate how the design and use of representational systems or external forms
of cognitive mediation support the development of this community and advance the
understanding of BME scientists doing work in laboratories. Further, the study
will chronicle and describe the work conducted in two cardiovascular
laboratories associated with the NSF-funded Georgia Tech/Emory Center for Tissue
Engineering (GTEC). The goal is to understand how scientists create
representations in the context of their lab work, their meetings and their
private musings, and how these coordinate between the material substances of
their work and the underlying concepts, structures and processes. The study will
also investigate how students/novices in the labs are apprenticed to the
representational and methodological practices of the BME community. Implications
from this study will be used to make recommendations for the two ERC-based
educational programs, for the undergraduate BME program slated for fall 2001 at
Georgia Tech and for the inaugural Georgia-Tech Emory joint Ph.D. program in
biomedical engineering. These implications will inform the design and refinement
of problems to be used in a year long introductory undergraduate BME course
titled Problems in BME that uses a PBL approach. These problems and findings
from the lab focused activities will be distributed to the cognitive science,
engineering education and BME communities for others to use and build upon.