* 0106194
* On Being Explicit:  Toward a New Pedagogical Synthesis in Science
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Beth Warren, TERC Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 08/31/2005
* USD 1,232,836.00

How do children, especially children who traditionally have been unsuccessful in
science, learn to see the relationships between their own and scientific
accounts of phenomena and to work with these productively in support of
understanding? Would all children benefit academically from close attention to
the relationships between "everyday" and "scientific" meanings and ways of
representing those meanings? What is the nature of these relationships, and how
can they be built upon pedagogically in science? The overarching goal of this
three-year project is to develop an understanding of how all children, as they
develop understanding of scientific ideas, also learn to see "inside" the ways
in which "everyday" and "scientific" accounts represent knowledge about the
physical and biological world. It is motivated by our concern with the
persistent achievement gap in science separating low-income ethnic, racial and
linguistic minority children from more economically privileged students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address our questions, we will engage in a series of
design experiments, to be undertaken in close collaboration with practitioner
researchers in heterogeneous and bilingual classrooms, grades 1-4. These will
entail two main research activities. (1) We will iteratively develop a
pedagogical approach that integrates "progressive" emphases on the centrality of
students' ideas and questions in inquiry-based learning with "post-progressive"
concerns on the importance of explicit teaching about the forms and functions of
language and symbol use in organizing meaning-making in science. This new
pedagogical synthesis will harness the diversity in children's ideas and ways of
talking and knowing as an intellectual resource in science learning and teaching
and make this diversity into an explicit object of discussion and inquiry in the
classroom. In this approach, students and teachers will engage in active inquiry
into the ways in which core ideas in physics (e.g., motion and force) and
biology (e.g., organismal growth and development) are represented in "everyday"
and "scientific" accounts (e.g. spoken and written descriptions, explanations,
theories, arguments; graphs; drawings; models; tables; etc.). The focus of these
inquiries will be on meaning and form as well as perspective and purpose. (2)
Our main conjecture is that through participation in this approach to inquiry
students will develop robust scientific understanding, begin to develop command
over multiple discourses and their uses, and demonstrate high achievement.
Toward this end, we will study what children learn as a result of their
participation in such inquiry practices. We will examine children's learning as
reflected in multiple kinds of performances, including classroom benchmark
discussions, performance assessments, and achievement tests.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;