* 0106867
* Wedge Issues:  Seismic Anisotropy, Structural Geology and Upper-Mantle Dynamics in Subduction Zones
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2004
* Jeffrey Park, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2004
* USD 242,725.00

Park Jeffrey J.&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0106867&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract for proposal
EAR0106867 (PH # 33x)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Wedge Issues: Seismic
Anisotropy, Structural Geology and Upper-Mantle Dynamics in Subduction
Zones&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI's: Jeffrey Park and Vadim Levin, Yale
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plate tectonics is driven largely by the sinking
of oceanic plates at the deep-ocean trenches of subduction zones, the most
common type of convergent boundary between distinct plates. The mantle "wedge"
lies between the overriding and the sinking plates at a subduction zone, a
buried strip of olivine-rich rock typically 100-200-km thick and 100-400-km
wide. The chemistry and dynamics of the mantle wedge determine arc volcanism, a
major "product" of the plate-tectonics heat engine. The mantle wedge also
influences the accretion of continents, which can grow by the successive
accumulation of volcanic arcs. Geologists can track the descending plate in a
subduction zone by the locations of deep-focus earthquakes, but have had less
success tracking the motion of the mantle "wedge." Theoretical models for wedge
flow differ between (1) a 2-D "corner flow" driven by shear-coupling to the
descending plate, (2) a stagnant wedge that is already transforming to a stable
"continental" plate, (3) trench-parallel flow induced by 3-D geometric effects,
such as the rollback of the sinking oceanic plate. This project will detect
sheared rock in the mantle wedge, deformed by its flow, by using seismic
indicators of elastic anisotropy in the sheared rock. These seismic indicators
include shear-wave birefringence, and the partial conversion of P waves
(compressional) to S waves (shear) in seismograms from distant earthquakes.
Preliminary results suggest that strong trench-parallel shear can develop at the
top of the subducting plate, and that changes in rock fabric exist and are
detectable within the mantle wedge itself.&lt;br/&gt;