* 0106900
* Impact of Varied Slab Thermal Structure on Subduction-Related Fluxes and Source Regions of Northern Cascadia Basalt Magmas
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Nathan Green, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2005
* USD 188,566.00

Green&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0106900&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Subduction zone magmas have
geochemical signatures atypical of mantle-derived melts. The source of their
distinctive geochemistry remains controversial, as considerable uncertainty
exists about the nature of processes that transport elements from the subducted
plate to the overlying mantle. A central issue is determining how much of the
characteristic geochemical signature results from transport processes and how
much is due simply to the composition of subducted materials. Another factor is
the intrinsic characteristics of the mantle wedge. Correctly identifying the
importance of these different factors is critical in attempting mass balance of
elements at the subduction zone and hence, in determining the flux of
continental material recycled into the
mantle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Basalts of the northern Cascadia
subduction system share tectonic and geochemical relationships with many
convergent margin volcanic suites, but occur within a geophysically well-
constrained "hot" subduction environment for which it can be shown that (1) the
thermal state of the subducted plate varies along the convergent margin; (2) the
nature of the subduction component added to the mantle wedge and/or the state of
mantle depletion likely changes along strike of the volcanic front; and (3) the
subduction signature of the basaltic lavas probably reflects processes operating
primarily within the forearc region. Because slab melting may occur under 'hot'
subduction conditions, these volcanic rocks provide a unique opportunity to
evaluate the extent and nature of fluid versus slab melt (sediment and/or
basaltic crust) contributions to the chemical budget of arc source regions in
the overlying mantle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will utilize major-
element, trace-element, and isotopic compositions of primitive to near-primitive
basalts to: (1) detail the nature of arc-parallel geochemical variations in the
lavas and implications for melting processes within the mantle wedge; (2)
evaluate the degree of mantle source depletion and heterogeneity prior to
introduction of slab-derived fluxes; (3) quantify subduction fluxes (fluids or
melts) recorded in the basalts along the volcanic front; and, (4) establish the
influence of slab thermal structure on the extent and nature of mantle-slab
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results will provide crucial
information for identifying different factors controlling the nature and origin
of subduction-related fluxes (in particular, sediment melts), and will place
important constraints on proposed relationships between generation of
intermediate-depth earthquakes and metamorphic reactions in the subducted plate
benearth convergent margins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;