* 0106477
* Late Cretaceous Vertebrates from Madagascar: Implications for Gondwanan Biogeography
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,04/30/2005
* David Krause, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 04/30/2005
* USD 280,177.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LATE CRETACEOUS VERTEBRATES FROM
MADAGASCAR:&lt;br/&gt;IMPLICATIONS FOR GONDWANAN
BIOGEOGRAPHY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;David W. Krause, Gregory A. Buckley, Catherine
A. Forster, Raymond R. Rogers, and Scott D.
Sampson&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0106477&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PIs previous NSF-funded
research has established the Mahajanga Basin of NW Madagascar as having some of
the most complete and spectacularly preserved specimens of Late Cretaceous
vertebrates from the southern hemisphere. Their discoveries have quintupled the
previously known species diversity of Late Cretaceous vertebrates from the
island and now include specimens of fishes, frogs, turtles, snakes,
crocodyliforms, dinosaurs, birds, and mammals. More broadly, investigators
involved in the Mahajanga Basin Project have elucidated the anatomy,
paleobiology, and phylogenetic relationships of several vertebrate higher taxa,
documented the Upper Cretaceous stratigraphy and sedimentology of the basin,
provided key insights into the biogeographic origins of both the extinct and
extant vertebrate faunas of the island, and shed significant new light on
Gondwanan plate tectonics during the Mesozoic. Much remains to be done, however,
in the vast expanses of paleontologically and geologically unexplored Cretaceous
rocks of the Mahajanga Basin. It is clear that, even in the primary study area,
the diversity of vertebrates remains inadequately sampled when compared to more
thoroughly studied areas elsewhere in the world. Furthermore, despite the
exquisite quality and completeness of the specimens of some taxa, the vast
majority of species are represented by only fragmentary and isolated specimens.
Finally, the unconsolidated nature of the Upper Cretaceous strata and the high
annual rainfall ensures that the supply of new localities and new specimens is
replenished on an annual basis. With continued work, the PIs are confident that
the Mahajanga Basin vertebrate fauna will become one of the best sampled faunas
of Cretaceous age and one of the primary standards against which other Gondwanan
faunas are compared. The primary goals of the current proposal are to expand
preliminary efforts through additional discoveries of fossil vertebrates in the
still under-sampled primary field area; investigation of new field areas
discovered in 1999; anatomical, functional, and phylogenetic analysis of
specimens already discovered but still unstudied or only partly studied;
additional elucidation of geologic context, including paleoenvironment and
paleoclimate; and testing of biogeographic and plate tectonic hypotheses related
to the breakup of Gondwana. &lt;br/&gt;