* 0106857
* Improvements and New Techniques for Deterministic and Stochastic SIR based Power Control for 3-G Wireless CDMA  Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Zoran Gajic, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2005
* USD 276,968.00

The proposed research is about the use of optimal control theory and modern
numerical linear algebra&lt;br/&gt;techniques to improve existing power control
schemes and to formulate and solve more general and more&lt;br/&gt;realistic
formulations of power control problem in 3-G wireless CDMA networks. The first
two parts of the&lt;br/&gt;proposal deal with the deterministic power control
problem and its variants, and the third part is on&lt;br/&gt;stochastic versions
of the same problem.&lt;br/&gt; In the first part of the proposed research, an
improvement of distributed constrained power control&lt;br/&gt;algorithm (PCPC),
which is presently considered in the literature as the most efficient one, is
suggested&lt;br/&gt;via the use of the acceleration techniques for fixed-point
iterations and via the use Krylov subspace&lt;br/&gt;iterations (presently
considered as the most efficient numerical method for solving systems of
linear&lt;br/&gt;large scale algebraic equations).&lt;br/&gt; The second part of
the proposal considers an optimal fast closed-loop SIR-based power
control&lt;br/&gt;scheme for 3-G wireless CDMA network, based on the recent
research work of the author of this proposal&lt;br/&gt;and his doctoral student.
In addition of being optimal, the scheme obtained theoretically converges in
one&lt;br/&gt;iteration. This scheme follows perfectly channel variations and
assumes that the link gains constantly&lt;br/&gt;change in time. Due to the fact
that the scheme needs a scalar discrete-time estimator (predictor),
it&lt;br/&gt;practically converges in 4-5 iterations. Simulations on a CDMA
system demonstrate the effectiveness of&lt;br/&gt;the optimal power control
algorithm and its superiority over the corresponding IS-95 algorithm and
the&lt;br/&gt;present version of the DCPC algorithm. As a future research topic,
a comparative analysis between the&lt;br/&gt;optimized power control algorithm
and the improved versions of the DCPC algorithm (accelerated
and&lt;br/&gt;Krylov subspace based) to be obtained in the first part of this
proposal, is suggested first. Secondly, since&lt;br/&gt;during optimization, the
weighted sum of the transmission power and the SIR (signal-to-
interference)&lt;br/&gt;error, are jointly optimized, the power control problem
can be put in the framework of Nash dynamic&lt;br/&gt;games. It is suggested to
extend the optimized power control results to capture the conflict
situation&lt;br/&gt;among users in a wireless network, which leads to the
formulation of a Nash dynamic game problem.&lt;br/&gt; The third part of this
proposal deals with the stochastic formulation of the power control problem.
This&lt;br/&gt;is a pretty much new and widely open research problem. The basic
problem formulation extends the&lt;br/&gt;deterministic optimized power control
problem to a stochastic environment, and leads to the linear
power&lt;br/&gt;evolution equation with additive Gaussian white noise. This
problem formulation assumes that either link&lt;br/&gt;gains or background noise
or both are modeled as Gaussian white noise stochastic processes. Its
variant&lt;br/&gt;of colored background noise and colored link gains noise are
also suggested for future research. In&lt;br/&gt;addition, more realistic
situations of state- and control-dependent noise using optimal control
theory&lt;br/&gt;results will be considered. The control variables will be the
ones that regulate the convergence process of&lt;br/&gt;the state variables
(transmission powers and SIR errors) to their optimal values in a noisy
environment.&lt;br/&gt;Note that the state- and control-dependent noise optimal
control problems in discrete-time domain have&lt;br/&gt;been solved recently in
the optimal control literature. In the final stage of this proposal, it is
suggested to&lt;br/&gt;study the power control problem assuming that the link
gains change according to Poisson stochastic&lt;br/&gt;processes.&lt;br/&gt; The
impact of the proposed research will be in the area of improvements of the
capacity of 3-G&lt;br/&gt;wireless CDMA networks, reliability of quality of
service (QoS) and durability of user's battery life. All&lt;br/&gt;these will be
achieved by controlling interference in an optimal manner.