* 0106707
* Microbial Degradation of Refractory Organic Carbon During Rock Weathering
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Katrina Edwards, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2004
* USD 307,860.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbial Degradation of Refractory
Organic Carbon during Rock Weathering&lt;br/&gt;By&lt;br/&gt;K.J. Edwards, T.I.
Eglinton, S.T. Petsch&lt;br/&gt;Department of Marine Chemistry and
Geochemistry&lt;br/&gt;Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution&lt;br/&gt;Woods
Hole, MA 02543&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important component of the carbon cycle
is transfer of organic carbon from ancient sedimentary rocks to the oceans and
atmosphere. Oxidation of ancient sedimentary organic matter during rock
weathering and soil formation consumes O2 and releases CO2, thus providing a
strong control on the composition of Earth's atmosphere over geologic time
scales. This study investigates the role of microbial activity in the
degradation and oxidation of sedimentary organic matter during rock weathering.
We have determined that there are microorganisms living within shallow-
subsurface sedimentary rocks. Compound-specific 14C analysis of cell membrane
lipids was used to establish that in culture, these organisms are assimilating
refractory, rock-derived organic carbon as their carbon source. Future
investigations of this study include:&lt;br/&gt; Compound-specific 13C and 14C
analysis of microbial lipids from environmental samples to determine carbon
pathways in nature environments of rock weathering.&lt;br/&gt; Phylogenetic
analysis of microorganisms in field samples and lab cultures to establish
community structure and comparison with known organisms.&lt;br/&gt; Fluorescent
in-situ hybridizations of microbial cells with iteratively more specific probes
to examine spatial relationships between microorganisms, organic matter and
minerals in weathering environments&lt;br/&gt;Array-detector infrared
spectroscopy to provide microscale description of organic matter composition
within sedimentary rocks and correlations with microbial growth
patterns.&lt;br/&gt;Analysis of abundance and composition of dissolved organic
compounds released through microbial activity compared with sterile controls to
contrast rates of oxidation versus dissolution of ancient sedimentary organic
matter.&lt;br/&gt;From this study will emerge an unprecedented description of
the influence microbial activity has on oxidation of ancient sedimentary organic
matter during rock weathering, with direct applicability towards understanding
of global scale carbon cycling and controls on the composition of Earth's
atmosphere. &lt;br/&gt;