* 0106890
* RUI: Oxygen Isotope Thermometry and Hygrometry in Quartzites
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2004
* William Peck, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 05/31/2004
* USD 64,381.00

Peck&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0106890&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal details
approaches for using the oxygen isotope systematics of metaquartzites to: (1)
retrieve peak (&gt;800 deg C) garnet-quartz fractionations for thermometry and
(2) use water-controlled retrograde diffusion in rutile and other trace phases
as a paleohygrometer. Pure (&gt;90% Qtz) quartzite is the ideal lithology for
this study because it satisfies the 'infinite reservoir' assumption with respect
to modeling oxygen diffusion in accessory minerals. Laser fluorination will
allow high-precision analysis of equilibrium mineral pairs. Samples will be
selected from well-studied localities in the southern Grenville Province with
published constraints on metamorphic conditions (T, P, cooling rates, and
fluids).&lt;br/&gt;The thermometry portion of this project will use the slow
oxygen diffusion rate in garnet (as determined by experimental studies) as a way
to 'see-past' multiple thermal events in polymetamorphic rocks. Garnet commonly
forms below its closure temperature, so it will preserve oxygen isotope ratios
from garnet formation even through subsequent granulite-facies metamorphism.
Quartzite is essentially momomineralic, so closed-system retrogression will not
affect quartz-garnet fractionations because quartz will have no other minerals
with which to exchange during cooling. Samples will be rigorously characterized
with respect to oxygen isotope ratio, and also with BSE, CL, and conventional
microscopy to determine if they have behaved as closed systems. This thermometer
will be extremely useful in high-grade polymetamorphic terrains where more
conventional cation thermometers are not applicable.&lt;br/&gt;Experiments have
shown that oxygen diffusion rates in minerals are a strong function of water
fugacity. The proposed research will use published experiments and measured
oxygen isotope ratios to constrain water fugacities in slowly cooled metamorphic
rocks. Intermineral fractionations and isotopic zoning will be used, in
conjunction with diffusion models, to develop an oxygen isotope hygrometer.
Rutile will be a focus of this study because it behaves in the opposite manner
to other rock-forming minerals with respect to water effects on oxygen diffusion
rates (in rutile water causes slow oxygen diffusion). Thus, when used with other
minerals, rutile provides good leverage for determining the interplay between
water fugacity and oxygen diffusion rate. This oxygen isotope hygrometer will
allow the detection of even chemically unreactive fluids which leave no chemical
signature but can still flux melting and weaken rocks.&lt;br/&gt;The last decade
has seen an explosion of experimental work on oxygen diffusion rates and
equilibrium oxygen isotope fractionation factors, and also the modeling of
oxygen exchange between minerals during cooling. Unfortunately, few studies have
combined these resources with the high precision, small sample sizes, and high
spatial resolution available from laser fluorination to allow genuinely new
information to be extracted from rocks. High-temperature thermometry and
hygrometry are important avenues of timely research which will provide new tools
for understanding deep-crustal processes.&lt;br/&gt;