* 0106359
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Complexity and Paleodynamics of Natural Sand Dune Fields
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Brad Werner, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/2005
* USD 195,303.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;COMPLEXITY AND PALEODYNAMICS OF NATURAL SAND DUNE
FIELDS&lt;br/&gt;Brad Werner&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0106359&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fields
of sand dunes present some of the most intriguing patterns seen on Earth and
other planets, such as Mars. The dunes form when wind transports sand grains,
causing them to pile up into small mounds that eventually evolve into the
graceful shapes that adorn calendars and postage stamps. The characteristics of
the wind, such as its direction and the supply of sand, are imprinted on the
pattern of dunes in such a way that it is possible, just by carefully examining
the dune pattern, to say something about the climatic conditions that lead to
its creation. As winds and sand supply change through time, the pattern of dunes
slowly changes as well in ways that are not yet fully delineated. The
information about climate over the past thousands to tens of thousands of years
stored in the great sand dune fields of Africa, the Middle East, Asia, Australia
and North America might provide critical understanding in predicting the
reaction of regional climates and landscapes to human-induced global climate
change. PIs aim is to develop a methodology for inferring past climate from dune
patterns and to apply it to three natural dune fields. To achieve this goal,
they have developed numerical models that span the range of time periods over
which dunes and dune fields can react to changes in climate: (1) a model for the
overall characteristics of dune fields, including spacing between dunes and
their orientation (thousands of years); (2) a model for the motion of the trace
of the tops of dunes, their crestlines (hundreds of years); and (3) a model for
the changes in shapes of dunes (tens of years). These models will be used to
investigate the development of the Algodones dune field in southeastern
California, the dunes of the Namibian desert in western Namibia, and the dunes
of the deserts of western Mauritania. The interpretations PIs derive regarding
past climate will be tested by attempting to recreate the patterns of these
three dune fields using their climatic inferences in a wind tunnel filled with
sand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;