* 0106122
* High-Resolution Optical Investigations of Layered Materials with Net Polarization
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2006
* Cheng-Cher Huang, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 11/30/2006
* USD 472,950.00

This project is aimed at studying physical properties of various soft condensed
materials such as chiral-smectic liquid-crystal and bent-core compounds that
display a large net electric polarization. In addition to experimentally
determining the molecular azimuthal arrangements in the chiral-smectic variant
phases, studies of physical properties of various new mesophases formed by bent-
core molecules will be emphasized. Employing state-of-the-art optical systems,
numerous important discoveries in these areas are now possible such as the
characterization of mesophases formed by bent-core molecules. These experimental
results will focus on fundamental studies of molecular packing in the various
mesophases and provide theorists important physical parameters for theoretical
modeling. Educational opportunities will be developed to train both
undergraduate and graduate students in designing and constructing cutting-edge
optical systems as well as acquiring, analyzing and understanding high quality
experimental data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The desire for high-speed liquid
crystal displays and a new interest in special materials to be used in optic
fiber networks makes the characterization of exotic liquid crystal phases for
such applications has critically important. Students trained in these areas will
be highly competitive in the job market. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;