* 0106914
* Bayesian Methodology for Disclosure Limitation and Statistical Analysis of Large Government Surveys
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2001,04/30/2005
* Roderick J.A. Little, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 04/30/2005
* USD 355,280.00

Surveys with complex probability sampling designs involving clustering and
stratification are a major source of empirical data for governmental and
scientific use. The standard approach to survey inference is design-based, with
statistical inferences being based on the sampling distribution with population
values treated as fixed. This approach has been a powerful force for the
development of objective statistical analysis of large surveys, with reliable
operating characteristics under weak assumptions about the population. However,
the design-based paradigm is too limited to handle: (i) the increased
availability of data from a variety of sources, such as surveys, censuses and
administrative records; (ii) increasing demands for analyses that go beyond
simple descriptive information such as means and totals for large domains; (iii)
the development and analysis of data masked to preserve confidentiality; and
(iv) the analysis of data subject to unit and item nonresponse. These questions
can be addressed by a model-based Bayesian approach, with models that capture
the relevant features of the population under study and take into account
important features of the sample design, and non-informative priors that limit
subjectivity in the analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bayesian methods are enjoying
a resurgence in statistics, with the development of computational tools that
make them practically feasible. However, the application of Bayesian methods to
sample surveys remains very limited. The goal of this research is to develop
useful, practical Bayesian methods for sample survey inference that have good
design-based properties. The dissemination of public use data files is crucial
to the research community in order to conduct research that forms the basis for
rational policy decisions. This research will develop methods for disseminating
detailed micro-data files that greatly reduce the risk of disclosure of the
identity of respondents to a data intruder. Methods will be based on multiple
imputation of key variables, an approach that allows for valid statistical
inferences using existing software and limits the degree of information loss.
The methods will be tested on large government surveys collected by the National
Center for Health Statistics and other federal agencies. This research also will
develop Bayesian methods for three topics in the statistical analysis of complex
surveys: (i) the analysis of surveys where the sampled units have differential
probabilities of inclusion; (ii) the handling of unit and item nonresponse in
surveys; and (iii) the analysis of samples collected using rotating panel
designs. This research is supported by the Methodology, Measurement, and
Statistics Program and a consortium of federal statistical agencies under the
Research on Survey and Statistical Methodology Funding
Opportunity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;