* 0106737
* Late Ordovician Epeiric Sea Circulation, Environmental Change, and Biotic Turnover: Model and Data Synthesis
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Rudy Slingerland, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2005
* USD 179,992.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Late Ordovician Epeiric Sea Circulation,
Environmental Change, and Biotic Turnover: Model and Data
Synthesis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most difficult problems facing the
earth science community today is identifying the ultimate causes of extinction
and migration in the history of life. In the sedimentary record, biotic change
such as extinction is often linked to evidence of environmental change, however
the processes underlying environmental change are often complex and poorly
understood. Numerical models of physical systems that are tested against the
sedimentary record provide a means by which the ultimate causes for bioevents
can be investigated. We propose to use a numerical model of ocean circulation to
determine the ultimate causes for an extinction event in the Late Ordovician of
North America.&lt;br/&gt;This study has two main components. In the first
component we hypothesize that rapid shifts in environmental conditions linked to
extinction during the Late Ordovician of North America were caused by changes in
bathymetry, paleogeography, and precipitation associated with mountain building.
We will model ocean circulation for two time intervals that span the abrupt
shift in environmental conditions and related extinction event. We will test the
validity of the model results against the distribution of sedimentary indicators
of oceanographic conditions. &lt;br/&gt;In the second component of the study we
will investigate the relative importance of single variables like changes in sea
level, paleogeography, bathymetry, and precipitation in producing rapid
oceanographic shifts in the epeiric seas that may have caused significant
extinction of species. In investigating the ultimate causes of extinction,
modeling has the advantage that single variables can be isolated and their
effects on the system evaluated. We will identify plausible causes of the
extinction event by determining how well the model results match the spatial and
temporal faunal changes. By gaining insight into the causes of rapid
oceanographic changes in these epeiric seas, this study has broad implications
for understanding environmental change and extinction during any time in Earth's
history when epeiric seas were important components of marine ecosystems.
&lt;br/&gt;