* 0106750
* Geochemical and Petrologic Evolution of Chromitites and Other Platinum Group Element-Rich Rocks From Study of the UG2 Layer, Bushvel Complex
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Edmond Mathez, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 07/31/2005
* USD 178,708.00

Mathez&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0106750&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Bushveld Complex and other
large layered intrusions have experienced a long and complex evolution following
crystal accumulation and while the rocks were still partially molten. During
this time the textures, compositions, and in some cases lithologies of the rocks
were modified. In the Bushveld Complex this history bears on the fundamental
geochemistry of the platinum group elements (PGEs) because the PGE-rich layers,
namely the Merensky reef and the UG2 chromitite, exhibit evidence for extensive
post-accumulation modification. The objectives of this proposal are to
understand the dynamic and chemical evolution of the partially molten rocks and
how the PGEs were redistributed during this evolution.&lt;br/&gt;The meter-thick
UG2 chromitite possesses internal stratigraphic variations in texture and PGE
contents. Geochemical profiles for PGEs and other elements will be produced in
carefully mapped underground sections. Data on crystal size, shape, and mode
will be collected to understand how the textural and geochemical variations are
related and when and how they formed. The interstitial silicate minerals will be
analyzed for rare earth elements to deduce the role of interstitial melt in
textural and geochemical modification. Chromite grains contain inclusions of Os-
bearing minerals. Their Os isotopic compositions will be measured and associated
with the textural analysis to establish when and how the inclusions formed.
Mapping in the mine revealed that the UG2 is associated with several complex
rock layers. These will be studied to determine their origins and gain insight
into the emplacement of the UG2 and its possible role as a permeability barrier
to the flow of interstitial melt and fluid.&lt;br/&gt;The Merensky reef is
believed to mark the introduction of new magma into an extant magma chamber. The
complex stratigraphic profiles of Sr isotopic ratios associated with this layer
are inconsistent with simple magma mixing and may have developed later, when the
rocks were partially molten and compacting. A Pb isotopic study featuring
analysis of individual Pb-bearing minerals will be conducted to gain insight
into the geochemical development of the Merensky
reef.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;