* 0106984
* Adaptive and Scalable Quality of Service Provisioning in Multirate Multicast Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Leandros Tassiulas, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2005
* USD 335,847.00

Multicasting has become increasingly important for real-time applications since
it is the inherent mode of&lt;br/&gt;delivery in several of them, e.g.
teleconferencing, audio and video broadcasting, etc. The Internet,
however,&lt;br/&gt;does not provide end-to-end bandwidth or delay guarantees for
unicast or for multicast data. As a result, a&lt;br/&gt;number of multiple scale
encoding schemes for real-time voice and video transmission have been
developed;&lt;br/&gt;these schemes allow adaptation both to the available
bandwidth and to the receiver capabilities by varying&lt;br/&gt;the number of
levels of the information stream and therefore the corresponding bit rates.
Thus, bandwidth&lt;br/&gt;and receiver adaptation of multi-level information
streams, in multicast delivery in particular, is an issue&lt;br/&gt;of prime
importance for the successful, large-scale deployment of those real-time
applications. We propose&lt;br/&gt;to investigate and develop methods for
bandwidth sharing and adaptation in the context of multicast-&lt;br/&gt;based
real-time applications. A set of fairness criteria based on which the
performance of different schemes&lt;br/&gt;can be quantified and compared is
introduced. A methodology for finding bandwidth allocations that
are&lt;br/&gt;optimal or suboptimal with respect to the different criteria is
proposed. Scalability with the network size,&lt;br/&gt;amenability to
distributed implementation in terms of required control information and speed of
convergence&lt;br/&gt;are adopted as prime criteria, in addition to optimality,
in the evaluation of the different algorithms. We&lt;br/&gt;propose an approach
for the design of the algorithms that allows the trade-off between optimality
with&lt;br/&gt;respect to the performance objective and practicality with
respect to the other attributes (i.e. scalability&lt;br/&gt;etc.). A methodology
for network control in multicasting in the case of unknown traffic and/or
network&lt;br/&gt;conditions is proposed as well. It involves explicit back-
pressure based congestion notification feedback and&lt;br/&gt;dynamic per ow
scheduling. Finally we propose a method for the design of congestion control
policies&lt;br/&gt;with the objective of maximizing an aggregate network
utility. A relative comparison between the two&lt;br/&gt;approaches (fairness
based and aggregate utility maximization) is also proposed in order to be able
to select&lt;br/&gt;the most appropriate one in each case.