* 0106187
* Petrochemistry of Kimberlites, Lamproites and Diamonds in India
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2001,05/31/2003
* Stephen Haggerty, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 05/31/2003
* USD 159,998.00

Haggerty&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0106187&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diamonds were first
discovered in India some four millinnia ago. Many of the world's most famous
diamonds (Great Mogul, Orloff, Shah, Darya-i-Noor, Regent, Nizam), as well as
many infamous stones (e.g. Hope, Koh-i-Noor), were recovered from alluvial
deposits on the banks of the Krishna River in the southern state of Andra
Pradesh. The primary sources of these and many other extraordinary diamonds, in
terms of size and clarity, have not been located. In common with the geological
setting of diamond deposits worldwide, diamonds in India are also on cratons and
in mobile belts. The two prominent diamond districts are Majhgawan (known since
the 13th C), which is an operating mine in the Bundelkand Craton (Madhya
Pradesh), and Wajrakarur in the Dharwar Craton of Andra Pradesh. The ages of
intrusions in both districts are Proterozoic, and at about 1.1 Ga are similar in
age to the Premier kimberlite (source of the Cullinan, the largest diamond
diamond ever reported) in South Africa, and the Argyle lamproite (the world's
largest producer, over 40 M cts/yr) in Australia. These two sites, along with
Proterozoic alluvial deposits in central Africa and Brazil, lie along major
lineaments in the reconstructed supercontinent of Rodinia. This is interpreted
to be plume related. With over 50 new intrusives discovered in India over the
past decade, these ancient cratons are an important new laboratory to study the
state of the mantle, and its evolutionary relation the crust (TTG). The diamond
host rocks in India are neither classical kimberlites nor conventional
lamproites and are variously described as having both kimberlitic
(mineralogically), and lamproitic (geochemically) affinities. This is a
significant new challenge in mantle petrochemistry. Many intrusions have
abundant mantle xenoliths, some are intensely eclogitic, and others are
dominantly peridotitic, and both will provide new insights to compositions and
thermal states of subcratonic lithospheric keels. India is well mapped
geophysically and the mantle data base will provide an independent set of
constraints to model the deep mantle. Mantle samples from 32 intrusions will be
studied microscopically and analysed using electron microbeam and x-ray
fluoresence techniques to obtain mineral and bulk rock compositions,
respectively. Diamond morphologies will be examined by stereo- and scanning
electron microscopy, and by Raman and infrared spectroscopy. These data will
provide the first comprehensive study of Proterozoic mantle intrusives in India.
Significant new insights are predicted and important new interpretations are
anticipated, not only in India but in the broader context of diamond deposits in
Rodinia. &lt;br/&gt;