* 0106974
* Platinum Group Element Analysis of Komatiites
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2003
* Munir Humayun, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2003
* USD 141,178.00

Humayun&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0106974&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To better understand the
mantle geochemistry of platinum group elements (PGE) and the information
returned by 186Os-187Os isotopic studies, we propose to determine the PGE
abundances of a global suite of komatiites by a precise isotope dilution ICP-MS
technique. Based on results in this lab, this analytical technique has been
successfully applied for the determination of PGEs in komatiites. Proposed
localities include komatiites from the following greenstone belts: Barberton (S.
Africa); Kamennoozero, Vetreny, Onega (Baltic Shield); Belingwe (S. Africa);
Abitibi (Canada); Kambalda (Australia); and Gorgona (Caribbean). All samples are
available in collections held by us, or will be generously provided from other
geochemical studies, particularly previous Os isotopic studies. These include
both alumina-depleted and alumina-undepleted komatiites, and both chondritic and
suprachondritic initial gamma-187Os-bearing komatiites.&lt;br/&gt;Our
intellectual goals for the proposed study are to: 1. Focus on establishing the
rules of PGE behaviour during the extremely high degrees of partial melting
experienced by komatiites, and establish a framework for future work that would
include picritic lavas and primary basaltic melts; 2. Determine the PGE
composition of Archean crustal materials, which are possible sources of
subducted crust for Phanerozoic flood basalts and OIB lavas; 3. Study the PGE
composition of each komatiite source region, presumably the Archean lower
mantle, for clues to its heterogeneity, with implications for mantle dynamics in
the Archean; and 4. Search for evidence of core-mantle interaction in Archean
plumes, including evidence for secular changes in such outer core derived
signatures.&lt;br/&gt;Successful completion of this project will enable us to
determine whether this approach can be applied to better understand mantle
processes in source regions sampled by picrites and primary basalts, and thereby
extend our framework to include a larger spatiotemporal sampling of the mantle.
This project also supports the continued US visit of Russian geochemist, Igor
Puchtel, the holder and dedicated student of an extensively studied suite of
four komatiite localities in the Baltic Shield previously inaccessible to non-
Russian scientists.&lt;br/&gt;