* 0106620
* Low-Frequency Attenuation in Polycrystalline Silicates and Silicate Partial Melts
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* Reid Cooper, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2003
* USD 87,034.00

Cooper 0106620

The experimental measurement of the low-frequency attenuation behavior of
polycrystalline olivine, of olivine-orthopyroxene and of olivine-based partial
melts is the practical emphasis of this research. Of theoretical focus is a new
hypothesis concerning the physical mechanism(s) and significance of the "high-
temperature background" mechanical absorption, specifically, that this
absorption relates to the diffusion-effected relaxations of grain and solid-
state phase boundaries and particularly of (deformation-induced) subgrain
boundaries. The physical implication, then, is that a small-amplitude,
oscillatory variation in stress, one that is added to a nominally constant
differential stress that is effecting dislocation creep in a material, is
"sampling" the deformation-induced microstructure, specifically the network of
subgrains. If this hypothesis is correct--and discerning this correctness is the
long-range goal of the experimental work--one can envision an effective way to
do attenuation-based "geophysical prospecting" of active tectonic regions, e.g.,
for levels of differential stress and, perhaps, strain, with a calibration based
on laboratory experiments. Experiments in this (one-year) funding period will
emphasize dynamic ("sub-resonant" oscillatory loading) and quasi-static
(constant loading, i.e., creep), high-resolution torsional mechanical responses
of carefully engineered aggregates of (ferromagnesian) olivine and of two-phase
solid olivine-orthopyroxene. These will be studied as functions of (i)
temperature (1150-1350 degC), (ii) frequency (10^[-4]-1 Hz) and (iii) grain size
(5-20 micrometers; fine enough that [a] thermal-expansion-anisotropy effected
grain/phase boundary cracking cannot occur and [b] [for the levels of
differential stress employed] lattice dislocations are not nucleated in the
course of mechanical testing). In addition, benchmarking deformation
experiments, comparing the high-resolution ambient-pressure measurements with
the mechanical response of the same material under a confining pressure of ~300
MPa will be performed.