* 0106978
* Robust Small Area Estimation Based on a Survey Weighted MCMC Solution for the Generalized Linear Mixed Model
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2001,02/28/2003
* Avinash Singh, Research Triangle Institute
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 02/28/2003
* USD 124,823.00

Folsom et al. (1999) developed a survey weighted hierarchical Bayes (SWHB)
estimation methodology for fitting unit-level generalized linear mixed models
and applied it to the National Household Survey on Drug Abuse (NHSDA). The SWHB
solution for the logistic mixed model is robust against model misspecification
because the small area estimates (SAEs) for any large sample areas are close to
their robust design based analogs. It also assures that national aggregates of
the SAEs are design consistent and, therefore, approximately self-calibrated to
the robust design based national estimates. The use of unit level models also
assures internal consistency of SAEs for different levels of aggregation even
when different predictors are used at those levels. However, the Folsom et al.
solution assumed that the survey design could be treated as noninformative after
inclusion of certain covariates; i.e., the superpopulation model was assumed to
hold for the sampled units. In the interest of robustness against model
misspecifications, it is desirable to remove this assumption. The first goal of
this research project is to improve the uncertainty measures of the SWHB
solution by taking full account of the survey design effects. The second project
goal is to improve the robustness properties of the enhanced solution by
assuring exact calibration of the aggregated SAEs to the design consistent
national survey estimate. To achieve these goals an approximate Gaussian
likelihood is assumed for the joint sampling distribution of the input vector of
survey weighted fixed and random effect estimating functions. In this
approximate Gaussian likelihood, a design consistent variance-covariance matrix
for the vector of estimating functions will be used to fully account for survey
design. The second project goal is achieved by employing a 'calibrated' Markov
Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithm with a Metropolitan Hastings step that
exactly benchmarks the SAEs to the robust design based national estimates.
Simulated data with fixed and random predictors that are not included in the
analysis model will be used to compare the robustness of the calibrated and
uncalibrated solutions against model misspecification. Also, the improved SWHB
solution will be contrasted with other solutions on one or more large survey
data sets, e.g., NHSDA, NHIS, BRFSS.

In spite of the wealth of information that is available at the national level,
Federal, State and local agencies concerned with program planning face
difficulties because of the lack of specific information at the local level.
Typically, information is desired for States and for substate planning regions
or counties. In principle, surveys that provide national statistics could be
expanded so that the needed State and sub-state data were collected; however,
government agencies seldom have the economic and infrastructure resources needed
to collect this volume of data via a direct survey approach. Fortunately, new
advances in statistics and increases in computing power offer a viable,
affordable alternative to the prohibitively expensive direct survey approach and
now permit the production of valid and reliable estimates for small areas. The
goal of this project is to promote wider acceptance of model based SAEs for
official statistics by improving the uncertainty measures, by providing
robustness against model misspecification, and by assuring the internal
consistency of SAEs for different aggregation levels. This research is supported
by the Bureau of the Census under the Research on Survey and Statistical
Methodology Funding Opportunity.