* 0106976
* ROLE:  Social Creativity and Meta-Design in Learning Communities
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2006
* Hal Eden, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* James S. Dietz
* 05/31/2006
* USD 1,282,353.00

Whereas much of teaching in our educational culture presumes an omniscient
teacher transmitting knowledge to unknowing learners, most learning that takes
place outside of the classroom is based on breakdowns in the context of real-
world activities leading to reflection and learning. The traditional approach
has some validity for situations in which "basic knowledge" needs to be
communicated, but it is not well suited to the highly situated nature of
lifelong learning and design problem solving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although
creative individuals are often thought of as working in isolation, the role of
interaction and collaboration with other individuals is critical. Much of our
intelligence and creativity results from exploiting the "symmetry of ignorance"
(between different communities) as a source of power. Social creativity
emphasizes that the heart of intelligent human performance is not the individual
human mind but groups of minds in interaction with each other and in interaction
with tools and artifacts. Meta-design characterizes objectives, techniques, and
processes for creating new media and environments that allow users to act as
designers and contribute to and benefit from the creativity of the group.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will: (1) develop a theoretical framework and
systems to support social creativity as a specific form of lifelong learning;
(2) investigate principles of meta-design and how they support social creativity
in the context of learning and working; (3) work with specific communities to
demonstrate the scalability and sustainability of our approach; (4) focus on
specific domains such as the collaborative design of course information
environments; (5) explore the role of social creativity and meta-design in
practice by changing classroom environments and undergraduate education; and (6)
assess how our theoretical attributes of lifelong learning, social creativity,
and meta-design map onto practice and evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of
our approach in realistic settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;