* 0106238
*   Active Deformation of the Central and Northern Dead Sea Fault
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2005
* Robert Reilinger, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* David Fountain
* 06/30/2005
* USD 450,000.00



0106238 Muawia Barazangi

The Dead Sea Fault System (DSFS) is one of the largest continental strike-slip
faults in the world. As the transform plate boundary between the Arabian and
African plates, the DSFS represents a key tectonic feature in the eastern
Mediterranean region. Despite its tectonic significance, the understanding of
the DSFS as an active, seismogenic structure is relatively limited, particularly
along the central and northern sections of the fault in Syria and Lebanon.
Through an interdisciplinary study of DSFS in Syria and Lebanon, the ongoing
research is addressing several important issues including:

(1) Whether or not northern DSFS deformation fully accounts for Arabia-Africa
plate motions and, hence, represents the present-day plate boundary. (2) How
predictions of northward increase in slip rate and fault-normal convergence
(suggested by plate tectonic models) are reflected in DSFS kinematics. (3) The
role of earthquakes in plate boundary deformation along a major continental
transform (the DSFS) including fault segmentation and aseismic strain release.
(4) The relationship of internal deformation of the adjacent Arabian plate to
kinematic variations along the DSFS, and the connection between the DSFS and the
Arabian-Eurasian collision.

In order to bridge the critical gap that typically exists between neotectonic
and geodetic/seismological assessments of strain, results of this neotectonic
and geodetic work are currently integrated with a lengthy, well-documented
historical record of large earthquakes (approximately M > 6.5) spanning at least
the past 2,000 years. Such a lengthy historical record spanning multiple
earthquake cycles is generally unavailable along almost any other major plate
boundary.

To address the issues outlined above, the following is being accomplished:

(1) Regional mapping of the active branches of the DSFS using all available
remote sensing data (including aerial photos and a high-resolution elevation
models produced using InSAR) to determine geometric (and possible seismogenic)
segments. (2) Local studies of key fault segments (detailed mapping, surveying
fault-related landforms, and paleoseismic studies) in order to delimit: long-
term fault slip rates and kinemetrics (103 - 106 years); earthquake histories
and recurrence over many earthquake cycles (Holocene to present), and; past
earthquake sizes and their distribution along fault segments. Historical
earthquake data place further limits on earthquake size and recurrence during
the past ~2,000 years. (3) Tectonic geodesy (primarily GPS) in the far-field and
near-field to determine short-term rates of fault slip and kinematics (several
years), possible aseismic slip vs. strain accumulation, and possible internal
deformation of the northern Arabian plate.

Integrating and modeling neotectonic, geodetic, and historical data for the DSFS
provide new insight on the kinematics and dynamics of DSFS with broader
implications for active strike-slip faults, in general. Furthermore, the results
of this study have significance for regional earthquake hazard assessment in
Syria and Lebanon, as well as neighboring countries, where large, rapidly
expanding populations heighten the need for accurate earthquake hazard
assessments. The collaborative study builds upon past and ongoing joint research
involving Cornell, MIT, IPG Strasbourg, and Syrian and Lebanese institutions.

(4) The relationship of internal deformation of the adjacent Arabian plate to
kinematic variations along the DSFS, and the connection between the DSFS and the
Arabian-Eurasian collision.

In order to bridge the critical gap that typically exists between neotectonic
and geodetic/seismological assessments of strain, results of this neotectonic
and geodetic work are currently integrated with a lengthy, well-documented
historical record of large earthquakes (approximately M > 6.5) spanning at least
the past 2,000 years. Such a lengthy historical record spanning multiple
earthquake cycles is generally unavailable along almost any other major plate
boundary.

To address the issues outlined above, the following is being accomplished:

(1) Regional mapping of the active branches of the DSFS using all available
remote sensing data (including aerial photos and a high-resolution elevation
models produced using InSAR) to determine geometric (and possible seismogenic)
segments. (2) Local studies of key fault segments (detailed mapping, surveying
fault-related landforms, and paleoseismic studies) in order to delimit: long-
term fault slip rates and kinemetrics (103 - 106 years); earthquake histories
and recurrence over many earthquake cycles (Holocene to present), and; past
earthquake sizes and their distribution along fault segments. Historical
earthquake data place further limits on earthquake size and recurrence during
the past ~2,000 years. (3) Tectonic geodesy (primarily GPS) in the far-field and
near-field to determine short-term rates of fault slip and kinematics (several
years), possible aseismic slip vs. strain accumulation, and possible internal
deformation of the northern Arabian plate.

Integrating and modeling neotectonic, geodetic, and historical data for the DSFS
provide new insight on the kinematics and dynamics of DSFS with broader
implications for active strike-slip faults, in general. Furthermore, the results
of this study have significance for regional earthquake hazard assessment in
Syria and Lebanon, as well as neighboring countries, where large, rapidly
expanding populations heighten the need for accurate earthquake hazard
assessments. The collaborative study builds upon past and ongoing joint research
involving Cornell, MIT, IPG Strasbourg, and Syrian and Lebanese institutions.