* 0106200
* Modular Representations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Leonard Scott, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2005
* USD 183,370.00

The modular representation theory of finite groups of Lie&lt;br/&gt;type is a
major, active topic of mathematical research. &lt;br/&gt;The area has both
inspired and been strongly&lt;br/&gt;influenced by developments in other areas,
e.g., &lt;br/&gt;the cohomology of groups and Lie algebras,&lt;br/&gt;quantum
groups, characteristic zero representation theory,&lt;br/&gt;perverse sheaves,
and the theory of finite dimensional algebras.&lt;br/&gt;The project treats both
the&lt;br/&gt;describing and non-describing theories. The &lt;br/&gt;describing
(resp., nondescribing) theory concerns &lt;br/&gt;the modular representations in
which the underlying module &lt;br/&gt;is taken over a field having the same
(resp., different) &lt;br/&gt;characteristic as the defining characteristic of
the group. &lt;br/&gt;In the describing theory, the investigators look for
&lt;br/&gt;an increased role of the relatively&lt;br/&gt;unexplored area of
affine Lie algebra representations in&lt;br/&gt;positive characteristic. In the
non-describing theory,&lt;br/&gt;they plan to attack several important
conjectures &lt;br/&gt;aimed at finding a unified approach valid for all types.
&lt;br/&gt;They also continue to explore possible analogies between the two
theories.&lt;br/&gt;Finally, Parshall continues his recent work on
cohomology&lt;br/&gt;computations, while Scott extends his recent computational
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; In mathematics, a "group" is an abstract embodiment
of symmetry. &lt;br/&gt;In addition to applications to other parts of
mathematics, concrete &lt;br/&gt;realizations of groups can provide powerful
constraints on the behavior of&lt;br/&gt;complicated physical and communications
systems. This project concentrates&lt;br/&gt;on determining the ways in which
the most important abstract finite groups&lt;br/&gt;find concrete
representations as square matrices over finite number systems.&lt;br/&gt;The
groups and representations the investigators study comprise the
most&lt;br/&gt;important basic ingredients for creating a general theory of all
finite&lt;br/&gt;group representations. Over the past century, similar theories
for&lt;br/&gt;continuous groups have played a large role in quantum theory and
the theory&lt;br/&gt;of elementary particles. Their finite analogs have already
proved valuable&lt;br/&gt;in the design of communications and data storage
devices, though this finite&lt;br/&gt;theory remains very incomplete. In the
future, one reasonably expects that&lt;br/&gt;the finite discrete worlds of
computers and communications will become even&lt;br/&gt;more important. The task
of creating a viable general theory of finite group&lt;br/&gt;representations --
as is the investigators' long-term goal -- is, thus, a&lt;br/&gt;central problem
for the future.