* 0106664
* Hinterlands and Cities:  Archaeological Investigations of Economy and Trade in Tsavo, Kenya
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2003
* Sibel Kusimba, Field Museum of Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2003
* USD 150,702.00

Drs. Chapurukha Kusimba and Sibel Kusimba will conduct two field seasons of
archaeological and ethnographic research in the Tsavo region of southeastern
Kenya. They are studying how small-scale but diverse societies participated in
and were impacted by burgeoning trading systems that moved ivory, precious
metals, agricultural foodstuffs, ceramics, textiles, human beings and cultural
knowledge across port cities of the Old World during the period 2000 b.c.e. -
1800 c.e. In Tsavo, hunter-gatherers, farmers, and pastoralists interacted and
traded amongst themselves and with merchants from the Kenyan Coast, where Muslim
urban trading polities developed from 900-1700 c.e. The Tsavo region was an
important source and conduit for African trade goods bound via Coast cities into
Indian Ocean and Mediterranean trade, such as ivory, slaves, rhinoceros horns,
animal skins, and rock crystal. From 1000-1500 AD Tsavo ivory became an
increasingly valuable commodity and form of currency on the world market. The
East African Coastal cities had a diverse and well-defined social hierarchy
composed of a social and religious elite, commoners, foreigners, and slaves. The
elite managed and financed complex and extensive interregional trade networks.
They also sponsored craft specialists including ironworkers, specialized
fishermen, and sailors. They owned the most productive land and leased out the
land to commoners, newcomers, and slaves. They may also have financed and
supported specialized hunters in the hinterland to provide export trade goods
such as ivory. The actions of urban elite were no doubt important in the
involvement of East Africa in global trade. However, the participation of
ordinary people in hinterlands like Tsavo enabled elite accumulation of wealth,
power, and status. Because elite actions have been an almost exclusive focus of
East African archaeology, little is known about the impact of Coastal trade on
Tsavo communities. The project team brings together Western and Kenyan
specialists in archaeology, historical linguistics, geoarchaeology ethnography
and archaeology to conduct a coordinated investigation into the development and
cultural/ecological impact of trade in Tsavo. In three field seasons, the
Kusimba's and colleagues have identified over 200 sites, including an extensive
iron production complex, rockshelter agropastoralist and hunter-gatherer
settlements including preserved dry stonework cattle pens and human sleeping and
food processing areas, open-air sites, and sites of mortuary activity, including
secondary reburial. They hypothesize that Tsavo communities and individuals used
alliances, competition, and intensification to increase their participation in
trade. These strategies may have caused ecological disruption through
overexploitation of the elephant, whose foraging of woody and shrubby vegetation
maintains ecosystem biodiversity and grazing areas for human pastoralists. Their
research will examine the use and ecological effects of these three strategies
through excavations in four areas of Tsavo and subsequent chemical and attribute
analysis of pottery, lithic artifacts, faunal remains, and site architecture and
location. Paleoecological analysis, including palynology and soil chemistry,
will look for evidence of environmental degredation associated with elephant
overexploitation.