* 0107348
* International Research Fellowship Program:  In Vivo Study of Turbulence in the Leakage Jets of Bileaflet Mechanical Heart Valves
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2001,04/30/2003
* Brandon Travis, Travis, Brandon R
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 04/30/2003
* USD 81,850.00

0107348 Travis The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research
abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad. This award will provide twenty-four months of support to Dr. Brandon R.
Travis to do research with Dr. Hans Nygaard at the University of Aarhus in
Denmark on an in vivo study of turbulence in the leakage jets of bileaflet
mechanical heart valves. This project will quantify the velocity field and
turbulence of the leakage of prosthetic heart valves after removing sources of
error due to estimations in chamber geometry, assumptions of constant viscosity,
and failure to remove cyclic variation from calculations of the turbulent
stresses. Bileaflet prostheses will be implanted in the mitral position of 90 kg
pigs. A high resolution ultrasound transducer positioned on the outer wall of
the atrium will be used to measure the turbulent characteristics of the leakage
jets immediately proximal to the valve pivots. These measurements will
accurately quantify the turbulence created by the leakage of prostheses in vivo.
The effects of pivot design, gap width, and exercise on leakage turbulence will
be evaluated in the proposed experiments. Observations from these studies may be
used to focus the efforts of valve designers on specific aspects of valve
geometry, and the protocols developed in the proposed experiments may be used to
predict the clinical success of prototype valve designs. The University of
Aarhus has all the necessary facilities to carry out this work, as well as a
staff experienced in the implantation of heart valve prostheses.