* 0107650
* Evaluation of Coastal Response to Sea-Level Rise from Holocene Stratigraphic Records:  A Step Towards Coastal Forecasting
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* John Anderson, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 06/30/2005
* USD 266,176.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evaluation of Coastal Response to Sea-Level Rise
from Holocene Stratigraphic Records: A Step Towards Coastal
Forecasting&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Antonio Rodriguez and John B.
Anderson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The consensus of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change was that the rate of sea-level rise will increase in the
future as a result of global warming. An increased rate of sea-level rise will
have a number of adverse impacts on world coasts, such as wetlands loss and
accelerated coastal erosion, but the magnitude of these changes remains
unpredictable. Predictions of coastal response to future sea-level rise rates
should be improved by examining the geological record of coastal change during
the Holocene, when sea level was rising at rates similar to future predictions.
The best records of coastal response to rising sea level are found in incised
fluvial valleys. Incised valley fill from three Gulf of Mexico bays,
specifically Mobile Bay, Galveston Bay, and Corpus Christi Bay will be examined
and compared. These bays are located within differing climatic belts, and are
fed by morphologically distinct fluvial systems. Preliminary data from all three
bays has identified an episode of rapid shoreline retreat that occurred during
the Holocene. In Galveston Bay, this event resulted in the estuarine environment
being shifted tens of kilometers landward and the barrier shoreline being
submerged and stranded on the continental shelf as a bank (Heald Bank). The
hypothesis is that variations in the rate of coastal subsidence and river
discharge were not the cause of the observed coastal backstepping events. The
hypothesis will by tested by collecting high-resolution seismic, sediment core
(up to 30 m-long cores), and paleontologic data from each bay to identify
flooding surfaces. Radiocarbon age dates obtained from plant fragments and
articulated mollusks sampled at numerous locations above and below the entire
dip axis of flooding surfaces within each bay will constrain the timing of the
events and the rates of coastal change. Correlation of flooding surfaces between
the bays, together with calculations of sedimentation and compaction rates and
the generation of sea-level curves from basal peat deposits, will aid in
distinguishing variations in climate and subsidence from sea-level events. This
work will help quantify coastal response to forcing mechanisms, and will create
data sets appropriate for testing coastal forecasting models by
hindcasting.&lt;br/&gt;