* 0107687
* Utilization of Existing Structures as Radiation Sources for Telecommunications Base Stations
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2001,10/31/2002
* Stuart Long, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 10/31/2002
* USD 107,204.00

0107687&lt;br/&gt;Williams&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research proposed is an
innovative approach to solving the problem of visually unappealing base-station
antennas. It seeks to examine how parts of existing buildings and structures
might be used as transmitting and receiving antennas for these wireless
applications. The major issues that must be solved to successfully develop
antenna systems that are essentially invisible in a local environment include
understanding&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- how to effectively exite existing
structures&lt;br/&gt;- how to examine their basic radiation
properties&lt;br/&gt;- how to predict their radiated fields&lt;br/&gt;- how to
control their radiation characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In some cases
minor modifications may have to be made to the existing structure, but the
visual impact of such actions would be minimal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Possible
candidates for investigation include flashing and gutters around the tops of
buildings, lightning protection systems, metallic window frames, building
supports, power lines and supports, portions of existing towers and billboards,
metal roofs or cupolas, and portions of the metal structure interior to a
building.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The initial phase of the proposed research
program will address the following tasks:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- the development
of appropriate feeding and matching techniques&lt;br/&gt;- the evaluation of the
radiation properties for the proposed radiation elements&lt;br/&gt;- the
investigation of the use of perturbing materials and modifications of the
structures for current and pattern control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Note, however,
that these tasks are interrelated. Each must be accomplished to insure the
success of the others. Hence, these efforts will be conducted concurrently.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of the successful implementation of such
antenna systems on the world of telecommunications should be most significant.
The final results of the proposed study&lt;br/&gt;should provide essential
information on the feasibility of using existing structures as effective
radiators, as well as providing preliminary tools and procedures for the
design&lt;br/&gt;of these antenna systems.&lt;br/&gt;