* 0107832
* Computational Error Estimation and Adaptive Error Control for Multiscaled Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2005
* Donald Estep, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2005
* USD 182,122.00

Multiscaled physical systems involving processes acting on vastly different
scales arise in a variety of important applications. Analyzing such systems
present overwhelming challenges to mathematical analysis and therefore numerical
simulation has become a centrally important tool. However, multi- scaled
problems also strain the limit of current computational abilities and resources
because of the resolution required to approximate behavior on the small scales
accurately. The principle investigator will attack this problem by means of
computational error estimation and adaptive error control. He will develop
residual-based a posteriori estimates of user-chosen functionals of the solution
given in terms of the computed numerical solution. The proposed approach
accounts for the global effects of stability through a variational analysis and
the dual problem to the original problem. The computational estimates will be
used to guide the discretization resolution in order to efficiently compute
numerical solutions of a desired accuracy. The research in this proposal will
encompass development of computational error estimates, analysis of the
reliability and accuracy of the estimates, implementation of adaptive finite
element codes, and the use of these codes to investigate physical systems. The
underlying applications driving this research will be investigations into the
behavior of a small number of particles suspended in a low-Reynolds number flow
and reaction- diffusion systems arising in shear flow problems, general
relativity, modeling of pattern formation in biological systems, and population
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some physical systems involve processes that act
on vastly different scales. An example is given by the motion of small particles
suspended in a slow flowing fluid, as for example occurs in riverbeds. In this
situation, the interactions of the particles can occur on a very rapid time
scale as they approach each other compared to motion of the fluid. Other multi-
scaled systems include pattern formation in biological systems like stripes on
Zebras, the dynamics of diseases in populations, and problems involving general
relativity. Computer simulations of such systems have become a main tool for
understanding and predicting their behavior. Yet the multi-scaled aspects strain
current computational ability because of the resolution needed to approximate
the behavior on small scales accurately. The principle investigator will attack
this problem by developing computational error estimates to be used to guide the
resolution needed at each point in space and time to obtain simulations of a
desired accuracy. The resolution will be adjusted through a feedback mechanism
as a system evolves. The proposed research encompasses development of techniques
to estimate the error and adjust the resolution of the approximation,
implementation of these techniques into computer programs that will be made
available to the public, and the use of these computer programs to investigate
real physical systems including those mentioned above. &lt;br/&gt;