* 0107751
* Systematics of Guyana and Brazilian Shield Endemic Loricariid Catfishes of the Tribe Ancistrini and Biogeography of the Shield Regions
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Jonathan Armbruster, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 07/31/2005
* USD 252,326.00

With 646 species, the Loricariidae (suckermouth armored catfishes) is one of the
largest families of fishes in the world. Loricariids are distributed throughout
much of South America and part of Central America where they fill significant
ecological roles as algivores, detritivores, and lignivores (wood-eaters).
Particularly speciose among the Loricariidae is the tribe Ancistrini of the
subfamily Hypostominae. Amongst the Ancistrini, the major taxonomic and
systematic problems revolve around a group of genera with ranges centered upon
the Brazilian and Guyana Shields, two areas of ancient mountain ranges. In this
study, the shield endemic groups of the Ancistrini will be examined to determine
what species exist in the shield region and numerous undescribed taxa will be
described. Once this is completed, the relationships of the species will be
determined by various aspects of their morphology (such as bones) in order to
reconstruct the biogeographical history of the shield region. By analyzing
several groups with similar life histories, the way in which the shield regions
have been invaded by fishes can be explored in detail. Particular emphasis will
be placed on the Guyana Shield.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a conservation
standpoint, although much of the Guyana Shield remains sparsely populated, some
rivers have been incredibly impacted by gold and diamond mining. By studying the
Guyana Shield Ancistrini now, we will have a better understanding of the
diversity of fishes in the area before the area becomes irreversibly impacted.
On a recent trip I took to the Potaro River in Guyana, several loricariids that
should have been present were not captured suggesting that the extensive mining
in the area has had a detrimental effect on them. Mining practices may have a
particularly detrimental effect on loricariid catfishes because loricariids feed
on biofilm that may become laced with pollutants from the mining industry and
which may be harmed by the increased turbidity caused by dredging. It is
imperative that studies into the shield fauna be accomplished soon so that we
can have a better understanding of what we need to conserve and how it needs to
be conserved before it is lost. This study will also provide the means to
collect in poorly studied areas of South America. Many undescribed species of
fishes will likely be collected in this study. In addition, tissues of all
species collected will be taken for future genetic analyses and would allow for
future toxicological analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;