* 0107389
* Multiblock numerical methods for multiphase flow and transport in porous media
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Ivan Yotov, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2004
* USD 99,999.00

The main objective of this research is to develop accurate, efficient, and
robust numerical methods for modeling subsurface flow and transport. The
research approach is based on a recently developed multiblock domain
decomposition methodology. The equations hold with their usual meaning on the
subdomains, with physically meaningful boundary conditions imposed on the
interfaces via mortar finite elements. The formulation provides great
flexibility for multiphysics and multinumerics couplings and treatment of
irregular geometries and internal boundaries. It is very suitable for efficient
parallel implementations. This research will study discretization issues -
multiblock schemes for advection dominated problems and multilevel adaptive
techniques, efficient solvers - parallel domain decomposition-Newton-Krylov-
multigrid methods, and modeling issues - multiphysics
couplings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computer modeling of fluid flow and transport in
the subsurface has a major economic impact on environmental and energy
industries. It can provide dependable and cost-effective solutions to global
problems like contaminant groundwater remediation and enhanced oil recovery.
Groundwater supplies are often contaminated by organic, inorganic, and
radioactive sources due to improper disposal. Remediation costs at U.S.
government sites alone range into the hundreds of billions of dollars.
Hydrocarbons contribute almost two-thirds of the nation's energy supply.
Moreover, recoverable reserves are being increased twice as fast by enhanced oil
recovery techniques as by exploration. Current computer simulators are limited
in their ability to incorporate fine scale geological data and to resolve the
physical processes occurring on a wide range of spatial (microns to kilometers)
and temporal (microseconds to thousands of years) scales. The goal of this
research is to develop new and efficient computational methods for modeling
multiphase flow and transport in porous media on multiprocessor computers. These
new methods will allow for more accurate resolution of the underlying multiscale
phenomena and thus improve the dependability of the computer simulators.