* 0107056
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:   Graptolite Macroevolution: Phylogenetic Analysis and Testing Hypotheses of Directional Change
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2006
* Charles Mitchell, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 06/30/2006
* USD 179,450.00

"Collaborative Research. Graptolite Macroevolution: Phylogenetic Analysis and
Testing Hypotheses of Directional Change". Charles E. Mitchell and Daniel
Goldman.

One of the most contentious issues in evolutionary theory is the notion of
progress. Some scientists have argued for a qualified expectation of progress in
the evolution of major groups while others have argued that we should expect
evolutionary histories that are dominantly non-progressive. Efforts to quantify
evolutionary patterns have produced conflicting results. Thus, the question of
whether natural selection leads to long-term progressive trends remains
controversial and frustrating. The central goal of the proposed research is to
determine if there were significant progressive evolutionary trends within a
group of fossils called graptolites. Graptolites are a group of extinct marine
organisms that flourished from approximately 505 to 310 million years ago. The
graptolite fossil record offers an outstanding opportunity to make a rigorous
test of directional evolution for two reasons. First, graptolite evolutionary
patterns have long been used as textbook examples of progressive evolution.
Secondly, the fossil record of graptolites is exceptionally good, and their
temporal and biogeographic distributions have been intensively studied. The work
proposed here is expected to contribute substantially to an increased
understanding of the mechanisms of graptolite evolution and their pathways of
descent. It is also expected that it will lead to improvements in the methods
paleobiologists employ to study evolutionary pattern and process. Both of these
outcomes are likely, it is thought, to positively effect the broader issue of
testing the fossil record for evidence of progress in evolution and the means by
which it might occur.