* 0107767
* Development of Seafloor Sampling and Hydrothermal Detection Tools for Use in Ice-Covered Seas
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2001,01/31/2002
* Peter Michael, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 01/31/2002
* USD 33,200.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;OPP-01-07767&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is being
recommended as a Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) to develop new
sampling and measurement methods and tools that can be deployed under the Arctic
Ocean ice cap for a joint U.S. - German expedition to the Gakkel Ridge in
August/September 2001. The current methods, such as dredging, may not be
successful in ice-covered waters, so the Principal Investigator is proposing to
design, test and build a new rock sampler. He is also proposing to retrofit a
hydrothermal monitor, known as the miniature autonomous plume recorder (MAPR).
The MAPR was developed by the Pacific Marine Environmental Lab to increase
opportunities or collecting hydrothermal plume data along mid-ocean ridge and
volcanic systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is appropriate for
consideration under the SGER program because the rock sampler has not been
developed. Neither the rock sampler nor the retrofitted plume recorder have ever
been tested under ice. Therefore, the instruments meet the SGER criterion,
"preliminary work on untested and novel idea." If one or all of the instruments
perform successfully under ice, then the Arctic program will have several new
and inexpensive sampling
devises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;