* 0107453
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Prehispanic Sociopolitical Organization and Change in the Southern Andes: Complexity and Integration in the Tafi Valley (NW Argentina).
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,02/28/2007
* Robert Drennan, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Donald Grayson
* 02/28/2007
* USD 6,308.00

Under the direction of Dr. Robert Drennan, Mr. Horacio Thames will collect data
for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological research in the
Tafi Valley in the highlands of northwest Argentina. Located in the southern
Andes, the region comprises an area of 180 sq. km. and work to date indicates
habitation during both Formative (200 BC -AD 1000) and Regional Developments (AD
1000 - 1480) Periods. Scanty extant archaeological evidence reflect an
intermediate level society. On the one hand settlement nucleation, public
architecture and agricultural intensification indicate some degree of broad
scale social integration. On the other hand however household and burial data
suggest the absence of social hierarchy. Too clarify the picture, Mr. Thames
will conduct a two stage project. In the first, he will survey the entire valley
and identify and record sites - both architecture and surface scatters. Crews
will systematically walk transects and location will be recorded with geographic
positioning system instruments. Areal extent of finds and their nature will also
be noted. Systematic surface collections - primarily ceramics - will be obtained
to cross date sites and determine activities which occurred at them. Limited
test pits will also be excavated. In the second stage selected sites will be
examined in greater detail. Complete maps will be constructed and more extensive
test excavation carried out.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mr. Thames goal is to
understand the mechanisms employed to establish and maintain the relatively
large scale social units which the Tafi Valley contained. The region presents a
situation which, in terms of standard archaeological theory, is anomalous. While
significant numbers of individuals were integrated into a single social system,
evidence of political hierarchy and control, which one would predict to exist,
is apparently lacking. Mr. Thames wishes first to verify that such, in fact, is
the case and if so to understand the links which bound the society together. He
suggests a heterarchical rather than single hierarchical system and believes
that factors such as exchange of utilitarian goods, exchange for elite products
and well developed ritual and ideological systems, each acting relatively
independently provided the necessary "social glue." Through his mapping and
excavation program it will be possible to reconstruct these systems and
determine how they functioned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is important
for several reasons. It will provide regional data of interest to many
archaeologists. The social system, once understood may be potentially
generalized and applied to analogous situations in many parts of the world. The
project will also assist in training a promising young archaeologist.&lt;br/&gt;