* 0107296
* International Research Fellowship Program:  New Methods of Programming the Self-Assembly of Stacked Porphyrazine Structures
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2003
* Jonathan Nitschke, Nitschke, Jonathan R
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 05/31/2003
* USD 104,220.00

0107296 Nitschke The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research
abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad. This award will provide twenty-four months of support to Dr. Jonathan R.
Nitschke to work with Dr. Jean-Marie Lehn at the Universite Louis Pasteur in
Strasbourg, France on new methods of programming the self-assembly of stacked
porphyrazine structures. This project is being co-funded with NSF's Math and
Physical Sciences Directorate's Office of Multidisciplinary Activities. This
project will involve working on new means of coaxing different porphyrin-like
porphyrazine molecules to assemble into stacked structures. Self-assembly
instructions will be encoded into the molecules themselves, providing new
techniques for use in the field of supramolecular chemistry. These stacked
porphyrazine assemblies are anticipated to have applications in the areas of
solar energy and chemosensing. Dr. Lehn was awarded the Nobel Prize in chemistry
in 1987. He is best known for his investigations of the interplay of non-
covalent forces in abiological systems. A focus of his current research is the
rational design of supramolecular assemblies.