* 0107318
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Spatial and Temporal Patterns of Marine Zooplankton in Korean Waters
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Ginger Rebstock, Rebstock, Ginger A
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 08/31/2004
* USD 26,100.00

0107318 Rebstock

The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will provide six months of support to Dr. Ginger A. Rebstock to work
with Dr. Young Shil Kang at the National Fisheries Research and Development
Institute (NFRDI) in Pusan, Korea.

The objective of this project is to describe spatial and temporal variability in
the zooplankton and hydrography of the seas surrounding the Korean peninsula.
Zooplankton samples have been collected bimonthly since 1965 at 88 stations
around the Korean peninsula by the NFRDI. Zooplankton wet weight, counts of four
important zooplankton taxa, and hydrographic and fisheries data are available in
a computer database. This project will identify modes or patterns of spatial
variability in each variable, using Empirical Orthogonal Functions (EOF). A time
series will be calculated for each important mode to show how the strength of
each mode varies over time. Modes of different variables will be compared to
determine their interrelationships. The data set to be studied is one of the few
multi-decadal marine zooplankton data sets in existence.