* 0107264
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Depth Profile Variability in the Stable Carbon Isotopic Composition of Organic Matter from Australian Soils
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2001,06/30/2003
* Jonathan Wynn, Wynn, Jonathan G
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 06/30/2003
* USD 50,665.00

0107264 Wynn The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research
abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad. This award will provide eighteen months of support to Dr. Jonathan G.
Wynn to work with Dr. Michael I. Bird at the Australian National University's
Research School of Earth Sciences on the depth profile variability in the stable
carbon isotopic composition of organic matter from Australian soils. The project
involves the study of carbon isotopes from modern savanna soil of Australia. It
will provide better constraints on variability in these ecosystems, which can be
used to address issues of global change and paleoecology. Detailed depth-
specific measurements will be taken of stable carbon isotope ratios in organic
matter from diverse soil types of the tropical savanna biome in Australia. This
research will expand the analytical tools which are currently being applied to
studies of paleoenvironmental records derived from carbon isotope measurements
of ancient soils, and contribute to studies of the processes controlling carbon
sequestration and cycling in the terrestrial biosphere. Dr. Bird is currently
active in a wide range of stable carbon isotopic research, which has centered
around the study of natural and anthropogenic influences on the global carbon
cycle. In addition to the high caliber research facilities, Australia has an
environment which provides a wide diversity of savanna ecosystems and soil types
within an accessible region ideal for this study.