* 0107139
* Development of a Standard Biostratigraphic Reference Section for the Silurian Cape Phillips Formation, Canadian Arctic
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2004
* Simon Poulson, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/2004
* USD 100,004.00

ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of a Standard Biostratigraphic
Reference Section for the Silurian Cape Phillips Formation, Canadian
Arctic&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Paula J.
Noble&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0107139&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study proposes to advance
the status of Silurian radiolarian biostratigraphy through the collection and
analysis of radiolarians from well-dated pristine sections of basinal marine
strata in the Cape Phillips Formation, Canadian Arctic. Radiolarian data will be
integrated with other useful biostratigraphic and geochemical datums with the
goals of 1) generating a composite biostratigraphic standard for the Cape
Phillips Basin, and 2) calibrating radiolarian datums that appear to have global
biostratigraphic significance. This study should produce the most comprehensive
and best calibrated data set ever generated for Silurian radiolarians and will
be of fundamental importance in providing better age control for complexly
deformed and poorly dated basinal sequences in orogenic belts around the world.
Radiolarians and graptolites will be collected from at least three sections of
Wenlockian - Ludlovian Strata on Devon and Cornwallis Islands and combined with
six other Llandoverian-Ludlovian sections sampled by the PI and her
collaborator, Dr. A. C. Lenz, during past field seasons. The graptolites are
well studied and serve as the basis for biostratigraphic correlation and age
control. A 1999 pilot study of carbon isotope geochemistry shows that there are
at least two positive excursions that may serve as chemostratigraphic datums
that may be integrated with the paleontologic data. Isotope geochemistry will be
conducted on additional sections to further determine the reliability and extent
of these chemostratigraphic datums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;