* 0107750
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Early and Middle Formative Floodplain Settlement, Subsistence, and Household Adaptations at San Lorenzo, Veracruz, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2001,04/30/2003
* David Grove, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2003
* USD 9,488.00

Under the direction of Dr. David Grove, Mr. Anthony Vega will collect data for
his doctoral dissertation. Combining both archaeological fieldwork and
laboratory analysis he will examine a series of small mound sites located near
the major Olmec center of San Lorenzo in southeastern Veracruz, Mexico. The
Olmec civilization is the earliest in Mesoamerica and although considerable
attention has been focused on impressive centers such as San Lorenzo, relatively
little is known either about the surrounding hinterland or the processes
responsible for this development. In preliminary work, Mr. Vega located and
conducted test excavations into a series of small mounds which dot the
floodplain around San Lorenzo. The results suggest that these were housemounds,
perhaps occupied by single family groups and, based on comparisons with people
who inhabit the region today, it is quite likely that these early Olmec pursued
a mixed subsistence strategy which incorporated significant amounts of fish,
shrimp and other floodplain items into an agricultural diet. While many
researchers focus on the relationship between agriculture and the emergence of
complex society Mr. Vega, among others, believes that the situation in fact may
be more complex and that control over a wider variety of resources played an
important role in this process.

Mr. Vega will conduct stratigraphic excavation to develop a detailed
chronological sequence. He will also completely expose living surfaces within
several mounds to gain insight into subsistence practices and social
organization. Comparison across mounds will permit him to determine whether
social stratification - a hallmark of complex societies - existed. More limited
testing between mounds may, hopefully, provide information on agricultural
practices. By placing Olmec development in a chronological context it will also
be possible to address the contested issue of whether Olmec culture developed
from a local base or traces its roots to other regions within Middle America.

This research is important for several reasons. It will shed light on
alternative routes which may lead to the emergence of civilization and provide
insight into one of the earliest Middle American complex societies. It will
provide data of interest to many archaeologists and contribute to training a
promising young scientist.