* 0107609
* A-Posteriori-Error-Estimates-Based Numerical Methods for Shallow Water and Hamilton-Jacobi Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Bernardo Cockburn, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2004
* USD 156,607.00

This project is devoted to devising and studying, theoretically as well as
computationally, efficient methods for numerically solving problems in which
convection plays a significant role. A wide range of situations falls into this
category and, although what we propose to develop can be easily applied to most
of them, we are going to focus our efforts into two of them. The first, modeled
by the shallow water equations, is the study of hurricane forecasting and of
environmental studies in ports, and the second, modeled by the Hamilton-Jacobi
equations, is the study of terrain navigation (computation of minimum time
transit paths) of robotic vehicles and material etching in integrated circuit
fabrication. The main focus of the project is the devising of the so-called a
posteriori error estimates that are the basis for mathematically sound hp-
adaptive algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We consider the problem of how to
efficiently obtain highly accurate computer simulations of several physical
phenomena of practical interest, namely, hurricane forecasting in the Gulf of
Mexico and environmental studies in ports, and the computation of minimum time
transit paths of robotic vehicles and material etching in integrated circuit
fabrication. Since the exact solution of these complex problems is not known, in
order to guarantee a given accuracy of the simulation, special techniques have
to be suitably devised in order to assess its quality. Moreover, these
techniques can be employed to automatically let the computer know when and where
to increase or decrease the computational effort to obtain the simulation; in
this way, the efficiency of its computation can be significantly enhanced.
&lt;br/&gt;