* 0107314
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Power, Conflict and Collective Decision-Making: Water Resource Management and Watershed Committees in Brazil
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2001,03/31/2005
* Rebecca Abers, Abers, Rebecca N
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 03/31/2005
* USD 96,050.00

0107314 Abers The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research
abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad. This award will provide twenty-four months of support to Dr. Rebecca N.
Abers to work with Dr. Luiz Pedone, at the University of Brasilia in Brazil on
collective decision-making regarding water resource management and watershed
committees in Brazil. The PI will use case studies and a general examination of
water policy reform to explore questions related to institutional change and
collective action in studying the role of participatory watershed committees in
resolving conflicts over water use in Brazil. The study will examine the
evolution of watershed committees in Brazil to date, focusing on some of the
more consolidated experiences, in the effort to understand the extent to which
this kind of decision-making forum can resolve conflicts related to water use
and to develop a methodology for long term analysis. This project is linked to a
larger collaborative effort, the "Watermark Project", headed by Dr. Margaret
Keck of Johns Hopkins University. The Watermark Project brings together scholars
in Brazil, the U.S., and Great Britain in the effort to carry out a comparative
analysis of basin-level water management institutions. Dr. Pedone is the chair
of the Political Science Department and a founder of the Public Policy Research
Center. He has extensive experience studying Brazilian public-policy and
institutional change. ***