* 0107187
* Particle Simulations in Fluid Dynamics and Molecular Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2001,02/28/2006
* Robert Krasny, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 02/28/2006
* USD 239,500.00

Krasny&lt;br/&gt;0107187&lt;br/&gt; The investigator develops new computer
algorithms for&lt;br/&gt;particle simulations in fluid dynamics and molecular
dynamics,&lt;br/&gt;and he employs the algorithms to study important
application&lt;br/&gt;problems. The main technical tool is a new adaptive
treecode&lt;br/&gt;algorithm for solving the N-body problem in the context
of&lt;br/&gt;long-range particle interactions. In this algorithm, the
particle&lt;br/&gt;forces or velocities are evaluated using Taylor approximation
in&lt;br/&gt;Cartesian coordinates, and the necessary Taylor coefficients
are&lt;br/&gt;computed by a recurrence relation. The adaptive features
include&lt;br/&gt;a divide-and-conquer evaluation strategy, nonuniform
rectangular&lt;br/&gt;clusters, variable order approximation, and a run-time
choice&lt;br/&gt;between Taylor approximation and direct summation.
The&lt;br/&gt;investigator develops an optimal strategy for choosing
the&lt;br/&gt;parameters in the code, in order to maximize the accuracy
and&lt;br/&gt;efficiency of the algorithm. The application problems to
be&lt;br/&gt;studied in fluid dynamics include the onset of chaotic
dynamics&lt;br/&gt;in vortex cores, high precision computation of vortex
sheet&lt;br/&gt;roll-up and spiral formation in the Kelvin-Helmholtz problem,
and&lt;br/&gt;breakdown and transition in vortex rings. An important
component&lt;br/&gt;of the work is to compare regularized particle simulations
with&lt;br/&gt;experiments and with genuine viscous flows computed by
finite&lt;br/&gt;difference schemes. The application problems to be studied
in&lt;br/&gt;molecular dynamics involve potential energy and force
field&lt;br/&gt;evaluation for electrostatic interactions.&lt;br/&gt; The
results of this research affect several areas of&lt;br/&gt;strategic national
interest, including civil and military&lt;br/&gt;aviation and biotechnology. One
outstanding problem in aviation&lt;br/&gt;is the simulation of the trailing
vortex wake that forms behind&lt;br/&gt;an aircraft on takeoff and landing. The
vortex wake is a serious&lt;br/&gt;hazard to other aircraft, especially in
crowded airports. It&lt;br/&gt;imposes a minimum time and distance between
takeoffs and landings&lt;br/&gt;on a given runway, and it is a source of wind
shear, which has&lt;br/&gt;been implicated in accidents. The project sheds light
on the&lt;br/&gt;structure and dynamics of vortex cores, and this
helps&lt;br/&gt;aeronautical engineers in designing vortex wake
remediation&lt;br/&gt;systems. In the area of biotechnology, one far-reaching
problem&lt;br/&gt;is to simulate protein folding in a physically accurate way.
This&lt;br/&gt;is in fact the next step required to make use of the
data&lt;br/&gt;collected in the human genome project. The project contributes
by&lt;br/&gt;enhancing the computer algorithms that are used by biochemists
to&lt;br/&gt;study protein folding. In the area of education and
human&lt;br/&gt;resources, the investigator directs an applied honors
calculus&lt;br/&gt;course for freshman science and engineering students,
develops a&lt;br/&gt;new graduate course on scientific computing, and mentors
the&lt;br/&gt;professional development of undergraduate and graduate
students&lt;br/&gt;and postdocs.&lt;br/&gt;