* 0107078
* Experimental Deformation of Dolomite and Mechanisms of Flow in the Calcium-Magnesium Carbonate System
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2004
* Andreas Kronenberg, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 05/31/2004
* USD 145,430.00

0107078&lt;br/&gt;Newman&lt;br/&gt;Carbonates are common lithologic units in
mountain belts, and their deformation plays an important role in the development
of large-scale structures. Field and experimental studies show that fracture
strengths of carbonates at near-surface conditions are comparable to those of
siliciclastic rocks; however, flow strengths of carbonates deformed at depth are
relatively low and penetrative strains are localized within them. Deformed
limestones and marbles made up primarily of calcite exhibit abundant evidence of
internal strain by mechanical twinning, microcracking, solution transfer,
dislocation glide, dislocation creep, and diffusional creep. Evidence of
recovery and dynamic recrystallization at elevated temperatures is ubiquitous.
These processes also occur in experimentally deformed calcite, carried out at
known temperatures, pressures and strain rates. The measured mechanical
properties from these experiments provide constraints on the environmental
conditions required for deformation, and the rheologies needed to model the
tectonics and structural development of continental
collisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbonate units made up primarily of dolomite
(CaMg(CO3)2) have significantly different mechanical properties from those made
up of calcite (CaCO3). Field and experimental observations of dolomite and
calcite indicate that the strength of dolomite exceeds that of calcite
significantly, yet dolomites deformed at high temperatures also exhibit evidence
of twinning, dislocation creep, and dynamic recrystallization. Most experimental
studies of dolomite deformation bear on fracture properties and only a few,
exceptional studies, have been done that provide flow strengths and mechanisms
of penetrative deformation. Early high temperature experiments on dolomites
provide information on crystal plastic deformation mechanisms, but systematic
measurements of flow strengths that can be used to determine the high
temperature rheology of this carbonate are lacking. This research addresses the
high temperature deformation of dolomite through controlled deformation
experiments; the objectives include determining the flow law for dolomite,
determining the deformation processes associated with this rheology, and
evaluating the conditions required for its deformation in orogenic belts.
Experiments are being conducted on natural fine-grained dolomite and hot pressed
synthetic dolomite in triaxial compression at confining pressure of 400 MPa,
temperatures of 400 degree to 900 degree, strain rates of 10-4 to 10-7 s-1.
Optical microscopy, SEM, and TEM are being used to characterize microstructures
and document deformation mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the
tectonic and structural problems this research addresses, the comparison of the
mechanical properties of rhombohedral carbonates of differing composition
addresses fundamental questions involving the mineral physics and chemistry of
deformation. The high strength of dolomite relative to that of calcite raises a
number of interesting questions, including: (1) How does substitution of one
cation, Mg, for another, Ca, affect the deformation process?; (2) How do bond
strengths affect the strengths and thermal activation barriers to deformation
processes?; (3) How does cation ordering affect deformation?; (4) How do
microstructures associated with order/disorder and lamellar compositional
variations affect deformation and strength?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Comparison of
results for specimens made up of the magnesium end-member carbonate, magnesite
(MgCO3), as well as a few samples of end-member calcite, deformed at comparable
conditions to those of the dolomite experiments, may elucidate how deformation
depends on crystal chemistry and structure. This research compares the strengths
of these three carbonates at a common set of conditions, the deformation
mechanisms that are activated in each, and the activation energies that
presumably tell us about the rate-controlling processes.&lt;br/&gt;