* 0107780
* Perturbation and Recovery of an Old-field Food Web
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Oswald Schmitz, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 06/30/2005
* USD 218,708.00

A central goal in ecology is to develop a set of sound scientific principles
that help to explain the effects of natural or human-induced disturbances on
biodiversity and the functioning of natural ecosystems. This endeavor is
motivated from a desire to: (1) forecast the fate of ecosystems, and the
biodiversity contained within them, especially when native species are lost or
exotic species invade as a consequence of the disturbances, and (2) restore the
natural function of those systems through sound management. The proposed
research aims to help develop the scientific principles needed to conduct sound
environmental management by studying how top-predator species in New England
meadow ecosystems control the diversity of plant species within those meadows
and how disturbances alter that control. Past research on this system has
revealed that, within a summer season, top predators such as spiders are
important because they control the amount of damage that leaf-chewing herbivores
such as grasshoppers and beetles inflict on plant species. It is unknown how
environmental disturbances alter the ability of top-predators to control the
herbivore damage. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will cause
disturbances to the ecosystem by experimentally excluding spider predators from
2 m x 2m field plots for periods of 1 to 4 years. Subsequently, we will monitor
how plant damage by herbivores and plant species composition of the field plots
change as a consequence of short- and long-term predator exclusion. As part of
this experiment, we will also reintroduce spider predators to plots after they
have been excluded for 1 to 3 years. The aim is to determine whether the system
can be restored to its original plant species composition and functioning
following fixed periods of disturbance. Currently, ecologists believe that
altering the presence of top predators in natural ecosystems should have lasting
consequences for ecosystem function. Few studies, however, have evaluated the
long-term responses of ecosystems when top-predators are removed and later
reintroduced. The proposed work will offer key insight into the long-term
consequences of disturbing the natural integrity of ecosystems on ecosystem
function. &lt;br/&gt;