* 0107507
* Mechanisms of Visual Excitation and Adaptation
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2001,09/30/2006
* Alan Fein, University of Connecticut Health Center
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Paul Malchow
* 09/30/2006
* USD 315,204.00

The research described in this proposal is aimed at discovering how animals are
able to see their surroundings. In order to see it is necessary for the eye to
convert light into an electrical signal that can then be processed by the brain.
The eye contains specialized cells, called photoreceptors, which convert light
into an electrical signal by producing a special chemical called IP3 inside
these special photoreceptor cells. IP3 can be thought of as a signal or a
messenger inside of the photoreceptor cell. The photoreceptor cell also contains
receivers that can respond to the IP3, and these receivers are called IP3
receptors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The eye is able to respond to light during a
dark night as well as a bright sunny day. In order for this to occur the
photoreceptor is able to decrease and increase the ability of the IP3 receptor
to receive the signal from IP3. The research described in this proposal is aimed
at understanding how the photoreceptor cell adjusts the ability of the IP3
receptor to respond to the signal from IP3.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The information
gained from this research will help us better understand how an eye is able to
effectively respond to light over a very wide range of light intensities. This
understanding is expected to help in the design of systems for artificial
vision, which can be used to aid both man and machine. &lt;br/&gt;