* 0107168
* Multicomponent Drying of Semicrystalline Polymer Films
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2001,03/31/2005
* Surya Mallapragada, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 03/31/2005
* USD 238,753.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CTS-0107168&lt;br/&gt;S. K. Mallapragada, Iowa State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal represents a tri-national
collaborative effort between the principal&lt;br/&gt;investigator Dr. Surya
Mallapragada at Iowa State University (USA), Dr. Sacide Alsoy at&lt;br/&gt;Izmir
Institute of Technology (Turkey) and Dr. Joseph Miltz at Technion (Israel),
devoted to&lt;br/&gt;investigating the multicomponent drying mechanism of
semicrystalline polymer packaging&lt;br/&gt;materials. This collaborative effort
was initiated during the US-Israel-Turkey tripartite
workshop&lt;br/&gt;sponsored by the National Science Foundation and held in
Haifa, Israel in March 1999. Solvent removal is a key processing step in the
production of a plethora of products such as packaging materials, adhesive
tapes, photographic films and various functional coatings, many of which are
made from semicrystalline polymers. The aim of this collaborative project is to
investigate the mechanism of multicomponent solvent removal and the changes in
the degree of crystallinity and the microstructure of semicrystalline polymers
during drying. This, in turn, has a strong effect on the final properties of the
polymer for various applications such as packaging. One of the important
packaging materials used is cellulose acetate (CA) which will be the model
system. A two pronged approach involving experimental investigations and
mathematical modeling will be used to deal with the problem of multicomponent
drying of semicrystalline polymers in the context of food packaging applications
to enable optimization of drying conditions and dryer designs. The specific
research objectives are to: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Develop a multicomponent
model for solvent removal from semicrystalline polymer films.&lt;br/&gt;2.
Experimentally investigate the solvent induced crystallization kinetics of CA
films and&lt;br/&gt;their effect on the drying kinetics. Use these to
investigate the drying mechanism of CA films&lt;br/&gt;and validate the
model.&lt;br/&gt;3. Investigate the influence of drying conditions of CA films
on their characteristics as&lt;br/&gt;packaging materials. Evaluate the
permeability of the films to gases and their mechanical&lt;br/&gt;properties as
a function of drying conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work also represents
the first model developed to predict non-isothermal multi-component drying
kinetics of semicrystalline polymers. The model will be applicable to any
polymer-solvent system by using suitable parameter values. The synergy between
molecular understanding and application-based experimentation proposed in this
work will enable accurate predictions of industrial drying processes.&lt;br/&gt;