* 0107783
* 5th Mississippi State Conference on Differential Equations &amp; Computational Simulations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2002
* Bharat Soni, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2002
* USD 15,000.00

NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0107783&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical Sciences: Fifth
Mississippi State Conference on Differential Equations &amp; Computational
Simulations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0107783
Shivaji&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports U.S. participants (invited
speakers, young researchers, and graduate students) in the Fifth Mississippi
State Conference on Differential Equations &amp; Computational Simulations on
May 18-19, 2001. The objective of the conference is to provide a forum where
mathematicians, scientists, and engineers from academia and industry can
exchange ideas concerning theoretical, applied, and computational developments
in differential equations and associated simulations. The conference is the
fifth in a series of biennial meetings on the subject.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;With the rapid development of high performance computing and
communication, and robust and efficient mathematical/numerical algorithms,
computational simulation has emerged as an essential tool for engineering
analysis and design environment. This has fundamentally&lt;br/&gt;changed the
way underlying principles of science and engineering are applied to
research,&lt;br/&gt;design, and development. These computational simulations
involve (i) a system of differential&lt;br/&gt;equations representative of the
physical phenomena (mathematical model); (ii) a numerical&lt;br/&gt;method to
simulate the mathematical model; and (iii) an efficient
sequential/parallel/distributed&lt;br/&gt;computing environment. Successful
simulations require interdisciplinary collaboration between various scientific
and engineering fields. This conference is an opportunity for workers in these
fields to discuss important recent results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;