* 0107607
* An Aerosol Climatology for Western Europe
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Helen Power, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Gregory H. Chu
* 08/31/2004
* USD 84,999.00

Dust particles suspended in the atmosphere, known as aerosols, affect the
earth's climate in two ways. They absorb and scatter solar radiation, and they
affect the physical properties of clouds. Aerosols are thought to have a net
cooling effect and thus they may mask the potential warming effects of
anthropogenic increases in greenhouse gases. Despite their importance, aerosol-
climate interactions represent a large source of uncertainty in understanding
the climate system. A key reason for this uncertainty is that aerosols
demonstrate high variability, both spatially and temporally, yet the extent of
their variability has not been fully investigated. Constraints associated with
conventional approaches to measuring total column aerosol-including the
requirements for clear skies and costly equipment-have contributed to a paucity
of aerosol data. Although the majority of anthropogenic aerosols (i.e.
pollution) are emitted in the Northern Hemisphere, there are very few reliable
long-term records of total column aerosol in the northern half of the globe.
This research will employ a radiation-based model, together with satellite and
climate data, to evaluate seasonal, interannual, and spatial variability of
aerosols in Western Europe, regardless of cloud cover. A key product will be a
more complete documentation of the amount and variability of aerosols than is
currently available. Time series and spatial analyses will also be used to
investigate the degree to which pollution may be augmenting the background
aerosol load, and will permit detection of possible volcanic influences on the
aerosol signal.

The results of this research will help explain climate change and variability in
Western Europe reported by other investigators, and will also help elucidate the
relative roles of aerosols and greenhouse gases in the climate system. This will
permit improvements in how aerosols are represented in regional and global
climate models. This research will therefore enhance our understanding of
climate and climate change, and will help policy makers prepare informed climate
change policies.