* 0107946
* Seasonal and Interannual Variability of the Alaska Coastal Current:  Long-term, Three-dimensional Observations using a Telemetering, Autonomous Vehicle
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2001,01/31/2008
* Craig Lee, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 01/31/2008
* USD 1,030,558.00

The focus of this five-year program is to assess the seasonal and interannual
physical and biological variability of the Alaska Coastal Current (ACC).
Specifically the PIs will investigate the seasonal and interannual variability
in ACC freshwater content and transport, the ACC's role in governing spring-time
mixed layer evolution over the shelf, processes controlling temporal and spatial
variability in the spring bloom, and processes that may produce onshore nutrient
flux. These processes are inherently three-dimensional and exhibit a wide range
of temporal scales. To address these sampling requirements, this program will
exploit the capabilities of a new, autonomous, telemetering vehicle (Seaglider)
to make continuous, high-resolution sections of the ACC. Seaglider measures
temperature, conductivity, pressure, chlorophyll fluorescence, dissolved oxygen
and volume scattering function, profiles from the surface to within 10 m, of the
bottom and provides 2 km horizontal resolution. The vehicle will operate year-
round, repeating a sampling pattern designed to provide five sections across the
ACC every twenty days. The sampling strategy was designed to augment existing
GLOBEC Long Term Observation Program components. The temporal and spatial
resolution provided by Seaglider surveys will resolve processes such as
springtime restratification and phytoplankton blooms, while the multi-year
extent of these observations will explore the system's response to long
timescale perturbations in forcing.