* 0107119
* Collaborative Research:Processing Magma and Constructing Plutons in the Upper Crust:Insights on Magma Chambers from Top-to-Bottom Views of Plutons and Associated Volcanic Sequences
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2001,01/31/2006
* Jonathan Miller, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 01/31/2006
* USD 92,464.00

Miller&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0107119&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how magma is
processed on its journey from source to final rocky resting place is vital for
understanding crustal evolution, the mechanics of magma ascent and emplacement
and their relation to tectonics, and eruptive processes. Storage in upper
crustal magma chambers has been, and still is, central to most views of this
journey. However, concepts of the magma chamber, the processes that occur within
it, and its relationship to plutons that are ultimately constructed have been
intensely reevaluated in recent years. Many widely held views (e.g. that magma
chambers are mostly crystal-poor bodies of magma throughout most of their
"lifespan") have been called into question. We propose to investigate the
evolution of exceptionally exposed plutons and probable equivalent volcanic
sequences in the Eldorado Mountains and Highland Range, Nevada, and to test
hypotheses about the mechanical and chemical processing of magma as it enters,
resides in, and is extracted from magma chambers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing
data that include general mapping and a sizable data set of 40Ar/39Ar ages and
whole-rock elemental and isotopic analyses provide a sound initial basis for
this study. We will add to the existing data base, but our main emphasis will be
on a combination of updated traditional and new methods (very detailed mapping
of internal pluton structures; detailed petrography using compositional imaging
to emphasize zoning, reaction textures, and accessory mineral features; crystal
size distribution analysis; in situ Pb and Sr isotope analysis of feldspars; ion
probe dating of zircon). This methodology will clarify the evolution of these
magma chambers, including their filling and replenishment; disruption and
rearrangement by internal and external processes such as convection, mass
wasting, roof collapse, and eruption; and, ultimately, pluton construction. It
will also permit us to evaluate the filtering effect of magma chambers by
comparing input magmas, outputs (erupted magmas), and retained materials
(plutons), and to constrain eruptive triggers and controls of eruptive
styles.&lt;br/&gt;