* 0107308
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Development and Application of Novel Asymmetric Hydrogenation Catalysts
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2003
* William Drury, Drury, William J
* Fellowship Award
* John Tsapogas
* 09/30/2003
* USD 69,105.00

07308 Drury

The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This
award will support a twenty-four month postdoctoral research fellowship by Dr.
William J. Drury III to work with Dr. Dr. Andreas Pfaltz at the University of
Basel in Switzerland.

The overall goal of this project is the development and application of new
homogenous, asymmetric transition metal catalysts. The design of the proposed
metal ligands is based upon an attempt to convert well-known, highly active,
achiral catalysts into new chiral catalysts. The complexes will be tested in
familiar arenas for both asymmetric induction, as well as catalytic efficiency.
Once this has been assessed, the complexes will be used to develop new
methodology. I have identified two classes of compounds for which no asymmetric
route exists. The use of the rationally designed catalysts in asymmetric
hydrogenation gives rapid entry into these compounds that include highly
pharmacologically active 1-phenyl-2-aminopropane derivatives.

Dr. Pfaltz is a world leader in the field of asymmetric catalysis. The
University, as well as Dr. Pfaltz have close contacts with international
corporations such as Novartis and Fluka, centered in Basel.