* 0107923
* Conference:13th International Congress on Nitrogen Fixation held July 2-7, 2001in Hamilton, Ontario Canada
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Gary Stacey, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 08/31/2002
* USD 7,000.00

The purpose of the 13th International Congress on Nitrogen Fixation (to be held
July 2-7, 2001 in Hamilton, Ontario) is to bring together scientists from
throughout the world to discuss current research needs and fundamental research
findings related to all aspects of biological nitrogen fixation. Subject areas
to be discussed include: genetics of microsymbiont and host plant, ecology
(competition, chemotaxis, survival, etc.), agricultural implications of
biological nitrogen fixation, chemistry of nitrogenase and metal complexes,
international programs, physiology of nitrogen fixing microorganisms, regulation
of nitrogen fixing genes, genome structure of nitrogen fixing microorganisms,
physiology of nitrogen fixing symbiotic partners, etc. The objectives of the
meeting are: 1:To identify factors that limit nitrogen fixation and design
research approaches that will help overcome these limitations. 2:To review the
status of current research efforts relating to biological nitrogen fixation.
3:To foster collaborative research efforts on common subjects. 4:To characterize
the genomic structure of nitrogen-fixing species. 5:To provide a convenient
arena for graduate student and postdoctoral participation in meetings. 6:To
identify research goals for the first decade of the 21st century. And 7:To
identify and discuss recent advances in the chemistry of nitrogen fixation and
the potential for these discoveries for practical use. Funds are requested to
partially support the participation of US scientists, postdoctoral associates
and graduate students in the Congress. Scientists designated as plenary speakers
and workshop leaders were selected based upon several criteria; including
evidence of current, high quality research, evidence of success as an effective
communicator, broad knowledge related to the subject matter, and geographical
distribution. Postdoctoral and graduate student participants will be chosen
based on need and evidence that they will present a poster presentation at the
meeting. A meeting proceedings will be published that will contain review,
original research contributions and poster abstracts for all presentations. The
organizers, along with other members of the local organizing committee, will
edit the proceedings for publication.