* 0107080
* Shear-Wave Splitting in Central Europe to Test Mantle-Upwelling Anisotropy Model
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2004
* Goetz Bokelmann, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2004
* USD 125,087.00

Abstract for proposal EAR0107080 (PH #20x)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Shear-
wave splitting in central Europe to test mantle-upwelling anisotropy
model&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI's: Simon L. Klemperer, Goetz Bokelmann, and Norman
Sleep, Stanford University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are a number of unresolved
yet fundamental questions about the nature of mantle upwellings or "plumes".
Specifically, can we distinguish the plume model, i.e., material upwelling from
parts of the deeper mantle, from alternative models as a source for mantle
hotspots? To help answer these questions, we will make measurements of shear-
wave splitting for seismic waves that travel through the upper mantle. These
measurements can illuminate the geometry of flow-related mantle deformation,
since such deformation leads to seismic anisotropy--the cause of shear-wave
splitting. We will then compare our data to those predicted by several different
models of plume/lithosphere interaction. In particular, the "parabolic
asthenospheric flow" model, which is consistent with measurements from around
Hawaii and Yellowstone, will be critically tested by our data. Although these
data may address regional problems such as whether there is a relation between
Eifel magmatism and extension in the Rhine Graben, they more fundamentally have
the ability to detect the existence of plumes, answering an outstanding question
in the geosciences. &lt;br/&gt;