* 0107943
* Remote Sensing, Ancient Footpaths, and Regional Integration in the Arenal Area, Costa Rica
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Payson Sheets, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2004
* USD 105,173.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Payson Sheets and his colleagues
will conduct two field seasons of archaeological research in the Arenal area of
northwestern Costa Rica. His project extensively utilizes remote sensing
imagery, image processing, and data analysis is assisted by Dr. Tom Sever and
his colleagues at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville. Sheets and
Sever have discovered that they can detect something that was previously not
believed to be possible: small footpaths created by people walking from their
ancient villages to a cemetery on the continental divide, and from the cemetery
to a spring and to sources of stone used for tomb construction. Satellite
technology has recently progressed to a level that it should provide imagery
that can detect the continuation of these footpaths to a village or villages
that was using the cemetery. Excavations of linear anomalies will provide data
to verify or negate anomalies as footpaths. Previous research by Dr. Sheets has
found evidence of extensive post-interment ritual and feasting in the cemetery,
that date to about 1200 years ago. If the rituals and feasting were conducted by
only one village, then they functioned to reinforce community or
lineage/household solidarity. However, if more than one village was conducting
feasting, then the rituals could have functioned as a regional integrative
mechanism. If the latter is true, with communities on both sides of the
continental divide participating, then this could explain the extraordinary
cultural resilience of eastern villages to massive explosive eruptions of Arenal
volcano. Previous research by Sheets and colleagues has documented ten great
explosive eruptions of Arenal volcano over the past 4000 years, and discovered a
cultural resilience during reoccupation greater than any other ancient Latin
American culture studied to date. &lt;br/&gt;The research team includes natural
scientists and social scientists from the US and Costa Rica. Publications will
first appear in Spanish in Vinculos, the anthropological journal from the Costa
Rican Museo Nacional, prior to publications appearing in English in US journals.
A bilingual website will present all relevant imagery, trenching profiles and
photography, artifacts, and literature for scholars and interested others.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;