* 0107419
* Collaborative Research: High Order Numerical Schemes for Multi-Dimensional Systems of Conservation Laws and for Simulations of Multi-Phase Fluids
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2004
* Xu-Dong Liu, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2004
* USD 129,065.00

The main theme of the proposed project is the construction of high order
accurate numerical schemes for solving multi-dimensional hyperbolic systems of
conservation laws, and in particular the construction of numerical schemes for
simulations of multi-phase fluid flows. This includes numerical methods for
compressible flow, incompressible flow and heat transfer. Recently, the PI's
introduced a boundary condition capturing method for variable coefficient
Poisson equation in the presence of interfaces. The method is implemented using
a standard finite difference discretization on a Cartesian grid making it simple
to apply in several spatial dimensions. Furthermore, the resulting linear system
is symmetric positive definite allowing for straightforward application of
standard "black box" solvers, for example, multi-grid methods. Most importantly,
this new method does not suffer from the numerical smearing. Using this method,
the PI's extended the Ghost Fluid Method to treat two-phase incompressible
flows, in particular those consisting of water and air. The numerical
experiments show that the new numerical method performs quite well in both two
and three spatial dimensions. Currently, they are working on extending this
method to treat a wide range of problems, including for example combustion. Of
particular interest is the extension of this method to include interface motion
governed by the Cahn-Hilliard equation which models the non-zero thickness
interface with a molecular force balance model.

This proposed research on computational fluid dynamics is focused on the design,
implementation and testing of new methods for simulating fluids such as water
and gas using the computer. In particular, this work addresses problems where
more than one type of one phase of fluid exist, e.g. mixtures of water and air.
Our interest lies in improving the current state of the art algorithms so that
they are better able to treat the interface that separates two fluids such as
oil and water. The results of this research should be of interest to both the
military (e.g. many naval applications involve the study of water and air
mixtures) and to private industry. A particularly interesting example involves
the interaction of water and oil in an underground oil recovery process. The
research covered in this proposal has implications for math and science
education as well. Not only will the PI's be working with and training graduate
students in applied mathematics and engineering, but their research in extending
these techniques to other fields, such as computer graphics, can play a role
attracting the next generation of young scientists. For example, figure 7 in
"Foster and Fedkiw, Practical Animation of Liquids, SIGGRAPH 2001" shows the
lovable character "Shrek", from the feature film of the same name, taking a bath
in mud.