* 0107721
* QEIB: Mathematics of Complex Ecosystem Models
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2003
* Warren Burggren, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 06/30/2003
* USD 99,994.00

The Principal Investigator is a mathematician in the Department of Mathematics
at the University of North Texas (UNT). This grant will support the PI spending
a year visiting the Institute of Applied Sciences (IAS) at UNT. One objective is
to establish a collaborative research program in quantitative environmental
biology. Work will initially focus on developing and analyzing complex ecosystem
models, and applying stochastic optimal control techniques to evaluate resource
management strategies. The PI will also serve as a mathematics consultant for
the UNT Department of Biology. This will help the PI develop a basic
understanding of a wide range of biological research problems and so acquire
necessary firsthand knowledge to direct the development of an interdisciplinary
program in mathematical biology at the University of North Texas. Student
participation and community outreach will be important parts of the work.
Undergraduate and graduate mathematics students will be involved both in the
ecosystem research and in the consulting projects. The PI will develop
presentations including- three-dimensional computer visualizations- which
illustrate results from the proposed work for the IAS public education center.
This IGMS project is jointly supported by the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities (OMA) and the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS).