* 0107342
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Probing the Pulsar Emission Mechanism using Radio and X-ray Telescopes
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2001,11/30/2003
* Andrea Lommen, Lommen, Andrea N
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 11/30/2003
* USD 112,440.00

0107342 Lommen The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research
abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad. This award will provide twenty-four months of support to Dr. Andrea N.
Lommen to do research with Dr. Michiel van der Klis at the University of
Amsterdam in the Netherlands. Funding for this project is being provided by
NSF's Math and Physical Sciences Directorate Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities. For this project, Dr. Lommen will use the new capabilities of the
Westerbork Synthesis Radio Telescope (WSRT) in Dwingeloo, the Netherlands, in
conjunction with the x-ray expertise of the Astronomy Institute of the
University of Amsterdam to undertake three new projects to study the emission
mechanism in pulsars. She will study the validity of Dispersion Measure as a
widely used concept in Radio Astronomy, using the simultaneous multi-frequency
capability of WSRT. Second, she will measure off-pulse emission in a collection
of slow and millisecond pulsars. Third, she will use soon-to-be archival XMM and
Chandra data, in conjunction with radio timing data at WSRT to perform absolute
timing, and acquire phase resolved spectra of a number of x-ray emitting
rotation powered pulsars. Dr. van der Klis is one of the leading authorities in
the field of pulsar research. Westerbork is one of the world's premier radio
telescope facilities. ***