* 0107032
* ROLE:  Video Cases Online: Cognitive Studies of Preservice Teacher Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2005
* Cindy Hmelo-Silver, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 05/31/2005
* USD 1,338,422.00

Researchers, professional developers, educational institutions, funding
agencies, and commercial enterprises currently make huge investments in online
systems to support teacher learning with video cases of classroom instruction.
However, there is little scientific knowledge about how teachers learn from such
cases, how case design affects learning, and how online systems are best
designed to support that learning. Specific design features of case-based
teacher learning environments, such as design of instructional activities and
how the cases themselves are structured for presentation, probably significantly
impact teacher thinking and learning from case analysis. Given the substantial
expenditure in both human and nonhuman capital, scientific knowledge is needed
to guide this enterprise. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program of experimental
research, grounded in cognitive science theory about case-based learning and
reasoning, aims to develop a pedagogy and theory of online video case study for
teacher education. The research will be conducted in the context of two
innovative psychological foundations courses taught for teacher education majors
at two major universities. Both programs use STEP Web, a professional
development web site being developed by the PIs for use in preservice secondary
teacher education. STEP Web represents a hypermedia network of instructional
resources designed to support teacher learning with video cases. The goal of
instruction with STEP Web is to help teachers acquire instructionally relevant
scientific knowledge about student learning and development. The STEP Web design
is based on Cognitive Flexibility Theory. This theory of knowledge
representation and instructional design focuses on case-based learning in
multimedia environments, with the goal of promoting flexible transfer in fields
of professional practice, such as medicine and teaching.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using STEP Web as a test bed, the researchers will create
and test alternative theoretically motivated designs for online learning
environments supporting video case study for preservice teachers. They will
conduct controlled studies examining how different learning-environment designs
affect the individual and group learning processes of preservice teachers, as
well as the form and duration of teacher education students' case knowledge, and
their abilities to combine and use that knowledge in reasoning about
professional practice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will advance two
integrated programs of research:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. How to design video-
based teaching cases, which consist of various components and can vary in terms
of which components are included and how they are organized, segmented, and
connected to learning material. &lt;br/&gt;2. How to facilitate group case-based
learning on line, which focuses on study and training of group facilitators, as
well as design of online discussion environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is expected to develop a more exact picture of what undergraduate
education majors learn from video case study and to shed light on how to design
good cases and online multimedia environments to support such study. &lt;br/&gt;