* 0107209
* Physical Knots
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2006
* Jonathan Simon, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2006
* USD 177,000.00

The investigator and his colleagues study "Physical Knots," bridging the gap
between purely topological properties of knots and links, and physically
realistic systems in which properties such as thickness, curvature, repelling
forces, and randomness are evident. Focus areas include: understanding how
random tangling increases with filament length in different kinds of systems;
determining existence, uniqueness, and geometric properties of optimal
conformations of knots; modeling gel electrophoresis of knotted DNA loops;
understanding how the "symmetric energy" of knots models physical behavior such
as accessibility of molecules to enzymes and self-irradiation of filaments that
emit; determining relationships between various knot energies; understanding how
knots, such as folding proteins, form in filaments with free
ends.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project contributes to the understanding of one
of the fundamental ways that matter behaves: a solid object occupies space; a
sheet of material separates one part of space from another; and a string tangles
with itself or other strings. There is growing scientific awareness that
knotting and tangling happen, and are physically important, at every scale of
size, from molecules such as DNA and other polymers, to magnetic field lines in
the sun. But there are many basic questions that are not yet answered: How are
knots and tangles created, or destroyed, in various settings? What happens when
one pulls a knot tight? Why do mathematically different kinds of knots behave
the way they do in physical situations? How can we model knots on the computer,
and how well do the computer simulations reflect actual behavior? The
combination of importance of the phenomenon, together with substantial open
questions, makes this area fascinating and valuable for research. In particular,
the project seeks to contribute to areas of national interest, including
increasing understanding of the behavior of DNA molecules, and helping to
elucidate the process of protein folding.&lt;br/&gt;