* 0107263
* NSF International Research Fellowship Program:  A Direct Measurement of the Neutron-Neutron Scattering Length at YAGUAR
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2002,10/31/2004
* Sharon Stephenson, Gettysburg College
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 10/31/2004
* USD 19,840.00

0107263&lt;br/&gt;Stephenson&lt;br/&gt;The International Research Fellow Awards
Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four
months of research abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint
research, and the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and
experimental conditions abroad.&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide 6 months of
support to Dr. Sharon L. Stephenson of Gettysburg College to work with Dr.
Eduard I. Sharapov at the Joint Institute of Nuclear Physics in Dubna, Russia on
a direct measurement of the neutron-neutron scattering length at YAGUAR. This
project is being co-funded by the U.S.-Russia Cooperative Research Program and
the MPS Directorate's Office of Multidisciplinary Activities.&lt;br/&gt;A direct
measurement of the neutron-neutron scattering length has never been done. What
is needed is a high instantaneous value for the neutron flux and a careful
attention to systematic errors. The relatively new YAGUAR pulsed reactor has the
necessary instantaneous flux. One way to address systematic errors is by
modeling. The PI will use the Monte Carlo N-Particle (MCNP) transport code to
model the YAGUAR pulsed reactor in Snezhinsk, Russia. She will help design and
perform a first and second generation experiment; the first will achieve an
accuracy in the neutron-neutron scattering length ann of 3% and the second
1%.&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Sharapov is a professor of nuclear physics at the Joint
Institute. He is an authority on nuclear structure and is best known for leading
the lanthanum parity violation experiment in the early 1980's.&lt;br/&gt;