* 0107754
* Secondary Symbiotic Origin of Algal Plastids and the Phylogeny of the Bangiophycidae (Rhodophyta)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Kirsten Muller, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2005
* USD 311,363.00

DEB-0107754&lt;br/&gt;Debashish Bhattacharya&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has
been awarded to Dr. Debashish Bhattacharya at the University of Iowa to
determine the phylogeny, or evolutionary tree, of the red algae (Rhodophyta).
The red algae are important primary producers and key players in the genesis of
a multitude of other photosynthetic cells though a process termed secondary
endosymbiosis. In secondary endosymbiosis, existing algae are engulfed by other
single-celled protists and maintained indefinitely as photosynthetic machines
(plastids) in the cell. Genes encoded in the plastid genomes of red algae and
other algae containing red algal secondary endosymbionts (e.g., brown and
cryptophyte algae) will be studied to determine how often secondary
endosymbiosis has occurred, and which red alga was the donor of the plastid in
the different algal groups. The red algal phylogeny will also be the basis for a
much-needed taxonomic revision of the Rhodophyta.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
biodiversity of the algae is an infinite reservoir of organisms for fundamental
biological research, and a resource for commercially important products.
Furthermore, the algae are important suppliers of oxygen as well as consumers of
carbon dioxide, a gas that contributes to the green-house effect. Although
problems in algal biology have been studied to a much lesser extent than efforts
devoted to "model" systems, the advent of modern molecular biology has enabled
scientists to broaden their scope of investigation to all life forms. The red
algal project touches on two cornerstones of modern biological research,
determining the biodiversity on our planet, and using taxa in nature to address
fundamental questions about the origin and diversification of individual species
and whole lineages. The red algal phylogeny will provide a firm basis for
addressing issues in systematics and biodiversity, whereas the plastid gene tree
will help us understand when and how often novel photosynthetic lineages have
been created through secondary endosymbiosis. &lt;br/&gt;