* 0107893
* Automated Morphometry of Dendritic Spines
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* W.Brent Lindquist, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2004
* USD 181,000.00

Lindquist&lt;br/&gt;0107893&lt;br/&gt; The investigator creates quantitative
computational tools&lt;br/&gt;for the automated analysis of neural images,
including software&lt;br/&gt;algorithms to provide automated morphology
measurements both of&lt;br/&gt;neuron dendrites and of dendritic spines (the
primary synaptic&lt;br/&gt;receivers). These tools are developed in close
collaboration&lt;br/&gt;with the neural imaging research programs of two groups,
led by&lt;br/&gt;Prof. K. Svoboda at Cold Spring Harbor Lab. and by Profs. P.
Hof&lt;br/&gt;and S. Wearne at Mt. Sinai School of Medicine. In
preliminary&lt;br/&gt;work, automated algorithms have been developed and
verified&lt;br/&gt;(against manual measurements) to identify and
extract&lt;br/&gt;morphological measurements of dendritic spine length and
density&lt;br/&gt;from 3D images. This project develops algorithms to&lt;br/&gt;
i) provide spine volume measurements, which are currently&lt;br/&gt;available
only through manually intensive, scanning electron&lt;br/&gt;microscopy
measurements;&lt;br/&gt; ii) analyze (two-channel) images containing two dyes
that&lt;br/&gt;fluoresce at different frequencies. One dye is a marker
for&lt;br/&gt;spine morphology, the second is a marker for
specific&lt;br/&gt;functionality. This allows for direct correlation studies
of&lt;br/&gt;form and function. The primary application of these
algorithms&lt;br/&gt;is in structural genetics work.&lt;br/&gt; iii) determine
higher moment (shape) measures both of spines&lt;br/&gt;and dendrite cross
sections. The primary application of these&lt;br/&gt;algorithms is in developing
models of neural integration behavior&lt;br/&gt;and age-related deficits in
short-term memory.&lt;br/&gt; Biological science technologies are now capable of
producing&lt;br/&gt;data at a rate so fast that only with computers and
sophisticated&lt;br/&gt;numerical and statistical algorithms can biologists
analyze these&lt;br/&gt;data. In the past decade, laser scanning
fluorescence&lt;br/&gt;microscopy, enabling non-invasive, three dimensional
imaging of&lt;br/&gt;living neurons, has produced a revolution in neural
research.&lt;br/&gt;The wealth of information available from a time sequence of
three&lt;br/&gt;dimensional neuron images is outstripping our current
information&lt;br/&gt;processing capacity, which has been based upon
manual&lt;br/&gt;identification and tracing of structures of interest.
Although&lt;br/&gt;it uses the superb recognition capability of human sight,
manual&lt;br/&gt;measurement is tedious, susceptible to systematic and hard
to&lt;br/&gt;characterize human biases, restricted to measurements
involving&lt;br/&gt;only length and counting, and effective only for small data
sets.&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this project is to develop computer based
tools&lt;br/&gt;for the automated analysis of neuron images, eliminating
manual&lt;br/&gt;analysis. The resultant computer tools will make practical
such&lt;br/&gt;studies as&lt;br/&gt; i) the relationship between neuron
structure and age-related&lt;br/&gt;deficits in memory as well as some forms of
mental retardation;&lt;br/&gt; ii) where in neurons certain proteins concentrate
and how&lt;br/&gt;their presence and concentration correlates to the
signal&lt;br/&gt;processing role of neurons;&lt;br/&gt; iii) large scale
screening of drug treatments designed to&lt;br/&gt;correct genetic- or trauma-
induced deficiencies in neuron&lt;br/&gt;structure.&lt;br/&gt;The project is
supported by the DMS/Computational Mathematics,&lt;br/&gt;DMS/Applied
Mathematics, and IBN/Computational Neuroscience&lt;br/&gt;programs and by the
MPS/Office of Multidisciplinary Activities.&lt;br/&gt;