* 0107396
* Dispersion in Spacio-Temporally Heterogeneous Environments
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Konstantin Mischaikow, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2005
* USD 153,000.00

Mischaikow 0107396 The goal of this project is to better understand the
relationship between dispersal rates and the spatio-temporal heterogeneity of
environments. In particular, the investigator would like to understand if there
are any fundamental relationships upon which a framework for this theory can be
developed. Therefore, to minimize extraneous effects the investigator continues
to study what is perhaps the simplest continuous model that explicitly
incorporates a spatial variable: a system of reaction diffusion equations with
Lotka-Volterra reaction terms, where the reaction term of each species is
identical, and where the birth rate is spatially and temporally heterogeneous.
This model allows for a variety of perturbations through which one can study the
impact of various factors in the evolution of dispersal rates. Of course, this
model has several limitations. The first is the assumption that leads to the
dispersal being represented as simple diffusion. The investigator wishes to
understand the effects of taxis on the relationship between dispersal rates and
spatial heterogeneity. On a more general level the investigator intends to
replace diffusion by an integral kernel. That ecology and evolution are
fundamentally influenced by the spatial characteristics of the environment is
well accepted. As an example of this one may consider the paradox of diversity.
Simple mathematical models that do not include any spatial component give rise
to the principle of competitive exclusion: when two species compete for the same
limited resource one of the species usually becomes extinct. On the other hand
it is commonly observed that in a wide variety of habitats a multitude of
species coexist. This can be explained, at least in part, by including spatial
effects. Of course, once spatial components are introduced, dispersal rates
become a central feature. Unfortunately, our understanding of cause and effect
in this more general situation is poor. The reasons for this appears to be
fourfold. First, the number of variables in realistic ecological and
environmental models is enormous. Second, spatial heterogeneities occur at all
scales of the environment. Third, obtaining precise data for these variables
from field studies is extremely difficult. Finally, current mathematical
techniques for handling models that incorporate both spatial and dynamical
properties seem to be inadequate. Given this state of affairs, a simple model is
thoroughly investigated in the hopes of elucidating the basic biological
principles and identifying the fundamental mathematical issues.

