* 0107304
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Mechanisms of Auditory Scene Analysis in the European Starling (Sturnus vulgaris)
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2001,09/30/2004
* Mark Bee, Bee, Mark A
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 09/30/2004
* USD 62,520.00

0107304 Bee The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research
abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad. This award will provide twenty-four months of support to Dr. Mark A. Bee
to work with Dr. Georg M. Klump at the University of Oldenburg in Bremen,
Germany on the mechanisms of auditory scene analysis in the European Starling.
The purpose of this research is to gain a greater understanding of the
underlying neural mechanisms of auditory scene analysis, which is the
organization of sounds into perceptual representations of the events that
produced the sounds. The PI will study the neural basis of auditory scene
analysis in the starling, a songbird that is an excellent model system of
behavioral and neurobiological studies of auditory perception. He will use a
methodological approach in which microelectrodes are chronically implanted into
the starling's auditory cortex and neural responses to acoustic stimuli are
recorded from awake, unrestrained birds via radiotelemetry. These experiments
will identify areas of the auditory forebrain where different forms of auditory
scene analysis occur and how these areas accomplish this complex task. The
results will increase our understanding of the mechanisms of auditory scene
analysis, contribute to a better understanding of human language acquisition and
the evolution of hearing and potentially lead to the development of better
hearing aids and voice-recognition-based computer-user interfaces. Dr. Klump,
formerly of the University of Technische Universitat Munchen, is a leading
expert in the study of comparative audition and hearing in birds, and is the PI
on a grant held by eight research groups in the Munich area focussing on the
mechanisms of auditory scene analysis.

