* 0107763
* RUI: A Phylogenetic analysis of subfamily Gesnerioideae (Gesneriaceae) and sequence divergence in a cycloidea homolog.
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* James Smith, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 07/31/2005
* USD 301,492.00

Dr. James Smith at Boise State University is investigating the evolutionary
history of a large tropical plant group, the African violet family Gesneriaceae
(a major portion of which occurs in the Americas and not in Africa). The
evolutionary history will be studied with comparative gene sequencing, a process
that examines genes directly to trace the evolutionary history of the whole
organism. Once an evolutionary tree is produced from these data, the history of
the organisms will be used for several objectives. 1) Because different forms of
floral symmetry occur in this group of plants, the phylogenetic tree will
provide a means of determining how often switches from one form of symmetry to
another have occurred. 2) Floral symmetry is known to be controlled by a few
genes in related plants and the tree will provide a means of examining the
evolution of one of these genes in a plant family that has different types of
symmetry. 3) The tree will provide a framework for all future investigations
among this group of plants, especially evolution of pollination biology and
chromosomes. One of the greatest problems facing systematics is determining
homology (where traits have a common evolutionary origin). Phenotypes (physical
appearance of an organism) are the result of genes viewed through complex
developmental mechanisms operating during the growth of the organism. Similar
developmental pathways may result in similar phenotypes across non-related
organisms. This uncoupling of developmental homology (identical developmental
processes) from phylogenetic homology (identical history) can result in
misinterpreting relationships among organisms. Few opportunities have allowed
systematists to investigate the genetic mechanisms that underlie phenotypes and
the changes in these mechanisms that result in patterns of diversity. The
evolutionary history of selected groups of Gesneriaceae will allow an
opportunity to examine the changes in floral phenotypes and changes in the genes
that regulate these phenotypes to see if they share developmental and
phylogenetic homology.