* 0107520
* SGER: Amount, Rate and C-isotope value of Soil Organic Matter Production by Armadillidium vulgare
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2001,02/28/2003
* Hope Jahren, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Knute Nadelhoffer
* 02/28/2003
* USD 60,000.00

Feeding activities of soil macrofauna exert critical influence upon the chemical
and physical transformation of soil organic matter. In mesic and xeric habitats
where earthworms are absent (e.g., parts of the Southwestern U.S.), soil isopods
can be the primary detritivores. It is therefore likely that soil isopods play a
pivotal role in organic matter processing, carbon and nitrogen cycling, and soil
development in these regions. This research represents preliminary work on the
influence of terrestrial isopods on the organic horizons of the soil profile
through feeding and excretion. The research will utilize natural abundance
13C/12C ratios to investigate the source and fate of organic matter utilized by
soil isopods. In feeding experiments to Armadillidium vulgare, a model organism
for terrestrial isopod research due to its ubiquity, the investigators will
determine feeding amount and rate across a gradient of soil organic substrates:
green leaves, litter layer, and soil humus. They will also assess changes in
C:N, %C and *13C composition of organic matter during feces production. The
research has widespread implications to ecosystem processes in mesic and xeric
habitats, due to the global distribution of Armadillidium vulgare.