* 0107919
* SGER: Ultrasound as a Sole or Synergistic Disinfectant in Drinking Water Treatment
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2001,10/31/2002
* Jeanine Dudle, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Clesceri
* 10/31/2002
* USD 95,425.00

0107918 Plummer The objective of this project is to evaluate the disinfecting
capability of ultrasound for the inactivation of microorganisms in drinking
water treatment, used alone and in conjunction with chlorination. Specific
microbes to be tested are E. coli and F-specific coliphages. Chlorine has been
chosen for this initial work because it is anticipated that sonication would
have application at smaller drinking water treatment facilities that typically
use chlorination for disinfection. Lower chlorine demand with sonication is
expected to reduce the formation of disinfection by-products. Implementation of
newer or more complicated disinfection technologies that reduce disinfection by-
product formation, such as ozonation or UV radiation, may not be feasible for
smaller drinking water utilities. The research will first be conducted using a
synthetic water with the two proposed organisms to study the disinfection
effectiveness in the absence of particulate matter, organic matter and other
microorganisms; subsequent experiments will be conducted using Wachusett
Reservoir water. The results of this work are expected to provide a basis for
improving the disinfection of drinking water, particularly in smaller drinking
water utilities that require disinfection strategies that are both simple and
effective. ***