* 0107380
* International Research Fellowship Program:  The Formation of Two Muisca Prehistoric Communities, Sutamarchan and the Infiernito, in the Valle de Leyva, Colombia
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2001,01/31/2003
* Helen Henderson, Henderson, Helen H
* Fellowship Award
* John Tsapogas
* 01/31/2003
* USD 50,400.00

0107380 Henderson

The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research fellowship for Dr.
Helen H. Henderson to work with Dr. Carl Langebaek at the Universidad de Los
Andes in Bogota, Colombia.

This project involves the investigation of the political strategies of
prehistoric Muisca chiefdoms of Colombia by reconstructing the internal
organization of two central communities from 800 AD to 1600 AD. The PI will
reconstruct long term patterns in household production, wealth differentiation,
long distance exchange, and the spatial organization of two central Muisca
communities to evaluate current models of complex society that view early
political leaders as 1) able to directly control local production or 2) able to
control religious activities, long distance exchange or warfare.

Dr. Langebaek has extensive knowledge of ethnohistoric sources, as well as
experience in fieldwork in the Muisca area and specifically, the Valle de Leyva.