* 0107118
* Mechanism(s)and Conditions(s) of Growth of Metamorphic Diamonds from Ultra-High Pressure Felsic Gneisses in Kazakhstan and Germany
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* Harry Green, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 07/31/2003
* USD 74,950.00

Dobrizhinetskaya&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0107118&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microdiamonds of the
Kokchetav massif in Kazakhstan grew under conditions of "ultra-high-
pressure"(UHP) metamorphism of quartzofeldspathic sediments in a subduction
zone. The recognition of this phenomenon a decade ago initiated a revolution in
the understanding of continental collision terranes. Similar diamond-bearing
rocks have now been discovered in the Saxony region of Germany, in the
Erzgebirge of Variscan age. Erzgebirge and Kokchetav diamonds are strikingly
similar. However, Erzgebirge diamonds appear to have suffered greater back-
reaction to graphite and/or dissolution at lower pressures. The study of
diamonds in situ in garnet and zircon shows that in both terranes, diamond
inclusions are very frequently accompanied by a hydrous phase and cavities
indicative of a free fluid. This pilot project will pursue two studies relating
to the genesis of microdiamonds. The first will be a study of inclusions in
recently discovered diamonds from Saxonian Erzgebirge, Germany by TEM utilizing
techniques similar to those we recently successfully developed for Kokchetav
diamonds. Determinations of the composition and structure of inclusions in
Erzgebirge diamonds coupled with our previous research on similar diamond
formation from Kasakhstan will provide constraints for the evaluation of
pressure conditions of diamond crystallization and an understanding of the depth
to which crustal quartzofeldspathic rocks have been taken by tectonic processes.
Such techniques could later be used in many other studies in both Earth and
material sciences dealing with TEM research on the nanometric sized natural and
synthetic minerals. The second study will be an experimental test of the diamond
growth hypotheses suggested by De Corte et al. (1999) and Dobrzhinetskaya et al.
(2001) to put constraints on the process(es) which may be responsible for
preferential growth of hopper/hollow, skeletal, cuboidal and cube-octahedral
diamonds in fluid-rich subduction-zone environments. Traditionally, experimental
attempts to replicate natural diamond formation within the diamond stability
field have been based on syntheses in metal-carbon systems in a highly reduced
environment. Only recently has experimental modeling of natural diamonds at high
P and T conditions been extended to the carbonate-carbon system in presence of
H2O. The latter ideas have been corroborated by results of fluid-inclusion
studies in natural diamonds. It is now believed that C-O-H fluids can be very
effective in diamond formation. Our focus will be on experimental syntheses of
microdiamonds in the diamond stability field to test current models of growth.
We will conduct several pilot experiments using a starting material composed of
natural mineral mix of composition similar to the natural diamond-bearing felsic
gneiss from Kokchetav upon which we reported in Dobrzhenitskaya et al. (2001).
We will explore the effects of presence and absence of a C-O-H fluid phase,
although we expect little results under fluid-absent conditions. Oxygen fugacity
will be controlled by buffering with metal-oxide pairs. This pilot study will
allow us to develop initial understanding of some aspects of graphite-diamond
kinetics in presence of H2O as well as technical aspects of such experimentation
to enable subsequent pursuit. Our experimental program will be the first study
of diamond growth under such conditions. Specifically, we will synthesize
diamonds under relatively oxidizing conditions (conditions under which diamonds
and carbonates coexist stably) using C-O-H fluid in starting material whose bulk
composition is close to Kokchetav and Erzgebirge diamond-bearing
quatzofeldspathic rocks. &lt;br/&gt;