* 0107273
* International Research Fellowship Program:  The Role of Indigenous Conflcit Resolution Strategies and Practices in Natural Resource Management: Implications for Theory and Research
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2001,11/30/2003
* Chudi Okafor, Okafor, Chudi H
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 11/30/2003
* USD 85,525.00

0107273 Okafor

The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four month postdoctoral research fellowship for
Dr. Chudi H. Okafor to work with Dr. Daniel Obikeze at the University of
Nigeria, in Enugu State, Nigeria.

This study will examine the nature and role of indigenous conflict resolution
strategies and practices concerning natural resource management in Nigerian
society. It will provide a framework for examining dimensions of land conflict.
Nigerians face numerous critical decisions that revolve around the distribution
of limited resources and the development of appropriate methods for resolving
disputes that emerge. They must also decide how to ensure that limited resources
are provided efficiently and equitably. Within this context, Nigeria needs
conflict resolution processes that commit parties to change, reduce resistance
to change, and allow creative solutions to be implemented. For this to happen,
the parties involved must share ideas about who and what is responsible for the
conflict, type of conflict, dimensions of conflict, and resources, values and
experiences for resolution processes. In this study, in-depth interviews, focus
group discussions, and case studies will be used to assess strategies, practices
and techniques used in indigenous land conflict resolution. The study represents
an effort to combine qualitative, comparative and quantitative research
methodologies in understanding indigenous social conflict transformation in
order to provide a knowledge base on which to design and implement programs for
conflict transformation.

Dr. Dan Obikeze is the director of the Center for Indigenous Knowledge on
Population Resources and Environmental Management (CIKPREM) at the University of
Nigeria. Dr. Obikeze and members of CIKPREM have been involved in multiplying
the capacity for preventive efforts in conflict management/resolution. CIKPREM's
interest in agricultural programs in Africa has a special ability to contribute
to food production, land, and natural resource management in Africa, as well as
to foster conditions that prevent violence and destruction.