* 0107617
* Transport in Stable Boundary Layers and Thin Drainage Flows
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2007
* Larry Mahrt, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 09/30/2007
* USD 634,847.00

The purpose of this project is to improve our understanding of the exchange of
heat, moisture, momentum, and contaminants between the earth's surface and the
lower atmosphere when the atmospheric layer near the ground is extremely stable.
In these conditions, the variation of the wind with height and time and the
vertical transport of heat and other material by the atmosphere do not conform
to the theories appropriate for ordinary daytime conditions. During the day,
surface heating causes the air next to the ground to become unstable, leading to
convection, well-developed turbulence, predictable profiles of temperature, wind
velocity, and humidity, and therefore predictable vertical fluxes of heat and
water vapor. But at night, the surface is cold, the air stable, and the
turbulence often intermittent and caused by vertical wind shear associated with
terrain-induced drainage flows. The recent CASES-99 field program (Kansas,
October 1999) showed that drainage winds often form over ground that is only
gently sloping, and may be confined to only the lowest few meters of the
atmosphere. The vertical flux of heat and other properties is determined by the
shear and turbulence in the drainage flow, but these characteristics are not
well known because measurements are ordinarily too widely separated in the
vertical to give a good representation of the true structure. Two approaches are
pursued in this project. One is to analyze existing data from past field
programs (especially CASES-99). The analysis focuses on understanding the
intermittent bursts of turbulence that account for much of the eddy transport of
heat and momentum in stable conditions. The CASES data make it possible to
distinguish between the turbulence generated locally by shear at the top of the
drainage flow and that which is created elsewhere and advected over the
observing site. The second approach is to conduct a small field program focussed
on thin drainage flows employing new instruments to enable measurements with
high resolution in space and time. These instruments include hot-film
anemometers, sonic anemometers with short path lengths and miniaturized
transducers, and laser-Doppler anemometry. The result of the research will be an
improved formulation of transport processes in the very stable boundary layer
for use in large-scale numerical models for weather forecasting and climate
prediction.