* 0107253
* Symmetry Tests and Vortex Imaging in Unconventional Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Dale Van Harlingen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 08/31/2004
* USD 300,000.00

This individual investigator award will provide support to a professor for a
project that will address the role of the phase and phase coherence in
superconductor systems. One objective of the project will be to determine the
symmetry of the order parameter in a series of exotic superconducting materials.
Josephson interferometry experiments, instrumental in establishing the symmetry
of the high temperature cuprates, will be applied to several other systems
suspected to exhibit unconventional symmetry, including heavy fermion
superconductors, which exhibit two distinct superconducting phases transitions,
organic superconductors, believed to be d-wave, and certain ruthenate
superconductors, thought to be p-wave with a complex order parameter that
corresponds to a state with broken time-reversal symmetry. Supplementing these
are measurements of the low temperature penetration depth in these materials,
the most sensitive test of nodes in the superconducting order parameter. These
experiments are crucial to identifying the pairing symmetry, thereby allowing
characterization of the thermodynamic, electromagnetic, and transport properties
of complex superconductors, and pointing the way to discovery of the microscopic
mechanism responsible for the superconductivity. A second set of experiments
will apply Scanning SQUID Microscopy to study the distribution and motion of
magnetic vortices in superconducting films and crystals. Key problems to be
addressed are the geometry of the vortex lattice and structure of the vortex
core in unconventional superconductors, the pinning of vortices and flux creep
at low temperatures, and the motion of vortices in patterned films including
asymmetries in vortex flow in step and ratchet structures. In connection with
this project, several significant advances of the Scanning SQUID Microscopy
technique will be developed: enhancement of the spatial resolution into the
submicron regime, implementation of imaging at ultralow temperatures in a
dilution refrigerator, and development of schemes for moving and positioning
individual vortices in superconductor systems that will enable direct tests of
vortex interactions and pinning. Associated with this project will be the
presentation of an established graduate level course in Superconductor Device
Physics and the development of a new course in Nanoscale Devices and Probes. %%%
This individual investigator award will provide support to a professor for a
project that will address the role of the phase and phase coherence in
superconductor systems. Superconducting materials are characterized by a
quantity, the order parameter, which largely determines their electronic
properties. More than any single quantity, it is the phase of this order
parameter that is responsible for the fascinating properties of superconductors
and leads to the unique potential and capabilities of superconductor electronic
devices. Two of the most significant advances have been the identification of
unconventional pairing in the cuprates superconductors that is characterized by
a strong phase anisotropy (in contrast to the isotropic order parameter observed
in ordinary superconductors), and the development of novel magnetic field
detection instruments that make possible direct imaging of magnetic domains and
vortices. This project will build on these advances in two directions: (1)
Experiments will be carried out to determine the order parameter symmetry of
several exotic superconducting materials that are suspected to be
unconventional, including heavy fermion superconductors, organic
superconductors, and ruthenate superconductors. Two complementary approaches
will be used: phase-sensitive interferometry experiments which directly probe
the anisotropy of the phase of the order parameter, the most definitive test of
the pairing symmetry, and measurements of the low-temperature magnetic
penetration depth, which is perhaps the most sensitive of the probe of the
magnitude of the order parameter. (2) Scanning SQUID Microscopy will be used to
study the distribution and motion of magnetic vortices in superconducting films
and crystals. This instrument scans a sensitive dc SQUID detector over the
surface of a sample to map out the magnetic field distribution with high
magnetic field and spatial resolution. This project will provide training for a
number of graduate research students in the field of superconducting phase
electronics, an topic of current interest for quantum information processing and
computing. Associated with this project will be the presentation of an
established graduate level course in Superconductor Device Physics and the
development of a new course in Nanoscale Devices and Probes. ***