* 0107284
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Statistical Dynamics of Biopolymers and Biopolymer Gels
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2001,08/31/2001
* Chris Wiggins, Wiggins, Chris H
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 08/31/2001
* USD 15,750.00

0107284&lt;br/&gt;Wiggins&lt;br/&gt;The International Research Fellow Awards
Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four
months of research abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint
research, and the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and
experimental conditions abroad.&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide three months
of support to Dr. Chris H. Wiggins to work with Dr. Erwin Frey at the Hahn-
Meitner Institute in Berlin, Germany to study the statistical dynamics of
biopolymers and biopolymer gels.&lt;br/&gt;The primary focus of this research is
on the dynamics of elastic materials in Stokes flow (the fluid dynamics of the
very small or the very slow). Specifically, this will involve the study of the
finite-temperature dynamics of semi-flexible biopolymers both to explain
existing experiments and to suggest new experiments in diverse fields from
polymer physics to genomics. He will also study the interrelation between
single-molecule dynamics and rheological properties of naturally-occurring
biopolymer gels.&lt;br/&gt;Professor Frey will have a joint appointment at the
Freie Universitat Berlin and the Hahn-Meitner Institute. Besides working with
Professor Frey, the PI will have the opportunity to interact with other
researchers in Berlin, such as Professors Reinhard Lipowsky and Udo
Seifert.&lt;br/&gt;