* 0107055
* Seismic Study of Continental Orogenic Zones: The Rocky Mountains and the Midcontinent Rift
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2004
* Stephen Gao, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2004
* USD 150,110.00

Abstract for proposal EAR0107055 (PH #17x)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Seismic
Study of Continental Orogenic Zones: The Rocky Mountains and&lt;br/&gt;the
Midcontinental Rift&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI's: Stephen Gao, Kelly Liu, Kansas
State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The formation and evolution of continental
orogenic zones is one of the most fundamental yet poorly understood problems in
geoscience. Among the various types of continental orogenic zones, the two that
are most pervasive are those in the vicinity of a plate boundary such as the
western North American orogenic zone, and those associated with continental
rifting such as the 1.1 billion-year old Midcontinent rift (MCR) in the central
United States. The proposed study is aimed at improving our understanding about
the formation and evolution of continental orogenic zones by using a unique
broadband seismic data set that we recently recorded along an E-W profile across
Kansas. We propose to locate and characterize the mantle transition between the
Rocky Mountains and the Great Plains, and to explore the deep structure and
possible fossil anisotropy beneath the MCR by apply various of seismological
techniques to the broadband data set. We will also perform geodynamic modeling
aiming at looking for a model that best explains the uplift history of the Rocky
Mountains since the Laramide orogeny by using the seismic results as
constraints.&lt;br/&gt;