* 0107797
* Organic Ion-Molecule Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 11/01/2001,04/30/2007
* Steven Kass, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 04/30/2007
* USD 494,750.00

Organic ion/molecule reactions will be explored in the gas phase with a Fourier
transfolm mass spectrometer and a variable temperature flowing afterglow-triple
quadrupole apparatus (190 C to 400 C). The results will be contrasted to those
in condensed media and supplemented with ab initio molecular orbital and density
functional theory calculations. Particular attention will be focused on
antiaromatic compounds, reactive intermediates, and zwitterionic ions.
Previously, long-lived cyclopropenyl anions were generated in the gas phase and
solution. These species in general are discussed in all introductory organic
chemistry textbooks because they are of fundamental interest and may serve as
potential sources of novel materials. During this grant period,
spectroscopically characterizing cyclopropenyl anion derivatives and probing
their reactivities and structures are planned. The energetics of a variety of
antiaromatic and homoantiaromatic compounds (ions and neutrals) also will be
obtained so that these long sought after but elusive species can be better
understood. Reactive intermediates play a central role in understanding chemical
reactions and considerable emphasis will be placed on studying their reactivity
and energetics. Some technologically important intermediates will be examined in
addition to a number of strained ring compounds. Much of this work will be
facilitated by the recent development of a general and highly selective method
for preparing radical anions in the gas phase. Finally, electrostatic effects
will be examined. These interactions are extraordinarily important in a wealth
of areas ranging from organic synthesis, material design and chromatography, to
molecular recognition, enzyme structure, and drug development. Recently, the
first zwitterionic ion and its neutral counterpart in the gas phase were
prepared. This makes it possible to explore the structure, reactivity, and
energetics of dipolar ions, develop models to explain zwitterionic species, and
obtain a much better understanding of electrostatic
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this Accomplishment-Based Renewal award the
Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program supports the ongoing work of
Professor Steven R. Kass at the University of Minnesota- Twin Cities. The
research focuses on understanding the reactivities and thermodynamic properties
of reactive organic intermediates. The work will be of interest to chemists
trying to understand the fundamental factors which control several types of
reactions in gases and liquids, and will provide valuable research training to
both graduate and undergraduate students.