* 0107235
* Twenty First Fungal Genetics Conference, being held in Pacific Grove, CA on March 13-18, 2001.
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Marc Orbach, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 08/31/2002
* USD 10,000.00

The Twenty First Fungal Genetics Conference is being held at the Asilomar
Conference Center at Asilomar, California on March 13-18, 2001. Approximately
650 scientists and students from around the world are expected to attend. The
conference focuses on the molecular biology, genetics, biochemistry and cell
biology of filamentous fungi. This meeting consists of four plenary sessions,
four sessions devoted to concurrent workshops in specialized areas, three poster
sessions and time set aside for informal discussions. Topics covered in the
plenary sessions are: Comparative and Functional Genomics, Fungal-Host
Interactions, Cell Biology, and Genome Structure and Maintenance. Specialized
sessions cover Signal Transduction in Growth, Adaptation and Development;
Comparative and Evolutionary Genomics; Mating and Heterokaryosis; Fungal
Photobiology and Clocks; Mutation, DNA Repair/Genome Stability; Plant
Pathogenesis: Mycotoxins, Secondary Metabolism and Gene Clusters; Accessory
Genetic Elements: Introns, Plasmids Prions and Transposons; Horizontal Gene
Transfer; New Tools: Microarrays, Transcriptome, Knockouts and Transposon
Tagging; and Fungi in Teaching. In this meeting, strong emphasis is placed on
the participation of young scientists and students, particularly those from
underrepresented groups. The meeting actively promotes the interaction of these
junior scientists with more senior scientists in the field to allow them
opportunities to develop collaborations. Funds are to help defray the travel and
participation costs of students, postdoctorals and others who would otherwise be
financially unable to attend.