* 0107347
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Study of Duetting in the New Zealand Kokako
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Laura Molles, Molles, Laura E
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 08/31/2004
* USD 80,350.00

0107347 Molles

The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twentyfour months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four month postdoctoral research fellowship for
Dr. Laura E. Molles to work with Dr. Joseph Waas at the University of Waikato in
Hamilton, New Zealand. This project will involve the examination of duetting in
an endemic New Zealand bird, the kokako, to explore the advantages of duetting
over the far better-known songbird strategy of solo singing. Hypotheses
regarding the mate-guarding, pair-bond maintenance, and territory defense
functions of duets will be tested using recordings, observations, and playback
experiments. Kokako have been decimated by deforestation and the introduction of
mammalian predators to New Zealand. The islands of New Zealand are inhabited by
some of the most unique and endangered bird species in the world, including the
Kokako. Scientific efforts have focused intensively on issues related to
preservation of threatened species. Little is known about these species' social
behavior and communication systems. Understanding their behavior can lead to
improvements in management of endangered populations. In this study, examination
of male-male and male-female duets may provide a means to identify same-sex
pairs without the disturbance of capture and cost of genetic analysis.

Dr. Waas has begun in-depth studies of kokako songbirds and his lab has produced
the first description of their duets, documented the genetic diversity within
mainland populations, and explored ranging in male-male and male-female pairs.