* 0107355
* International Research Fellowship Program:  The Evoluton of Reproductive Skew in A Communally Breeding Insect
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2001,11/30/2003
* Michael Loeb, Loeb, Michael L
* Fellowship Award
* John Tsapogas
* 11/30/2003
* USD 90,000.00

0107355 Loeb

The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four month postdoctoral research fellowship by
Dr. Michael Loeb to work with Dr. Bernard J. Crespi at Simon Fraser University
in Burnaby, Canada. Funding for this project is from the Americas Program of the
Division of International Programs.

A major goal of evolutionary biology is to develop a unified theory predicting
the conditions under which natural selection favors cooperative group living
over solitary existence. Central to this goal is to explain why some individuals
within groups often limit their own production of offspring and instead assist
others in reproduction. Thus, cooperation has costs and the key is to explain
how cooperation evolves despite costs. Reproductive skew theory, an extension of
kin selection theory, predicts the circumstances under which reproduction is
unevenly shared (high-skew societies) or when reproduction is more equitably
shared (low-skew societies). In spite of skew theory's potential to unify the
study of social evolution, few manipulative field studies have tested its major
predictions. The objective of this project is to test two skew theory's
predictions using a communally breeding insect as a model system. Dr. Loeb will
use populations of the lace bug Leptobyrsa decora introduced to Hawaii.
Leptobyrsa decora is an ideal system to test skew theory because kinship among
cooperatively breeding females can be manipulated while holding other factors
constant. He will test the theoretical expectations that (a) highly related
groups show high reproductive skew, and (b) populations with relatively poor
conditions for solitary breeding should show higher skew.

Dr. Crespi is an authority on insect social systems and he has incorporated
reproductive skew theory into his own research program.

