* 0107406
* Collaborative SGER: Dispersal and Local Population Dynamics Following Large-Scale Fire
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2001,12/31/2003
* Jessica Gurevitch, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 12/31/2003
* USD 27,846.00

Gurevitch&lt;br/&gt;0107406&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data from population responses
to recent Florida wildfires offer the possibility of extending
and&lt;br/&gt;testing demographic models we have been developing for pitch pines
in a new system. The investigators propose to acquire these data, parameterize
and test models on the interaction between dispersal and local population
dynamics in longleaf and slash pine in Florida flatwoods. A similar opportunity
is not expected to be available until, at least, the next major La Nina event.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The terrestrial ecosystems of Florida and adjacent regions
of the Southeastern US are strongly fire-dependent. Fire in Florida occurs
frequently because rainfall is strongly seasonal. The intensity and extent of
these fires varies greatly among years, largely as a result of the El Nino -
Southern Oscillation. During La Nina years, Florida often experiences unusually
strong spring droughts. Fires can thus be more intense and of greater spatial
extent. The drought of Spring 2000 was the most extreme ever recorded, and
consequently the fire season involved fires of very great spatial extent and
intensity. The 1999-2000 La Nina, which caused the severe spring drought,
appears to be over; all climate models are now predicting normal rainfall for
the ensuing years. Thus, there is a time -critical aspect to data
acquisition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, a number of large-scale fires
occurred in pine flatwoods. In much of this type of habitat - which covers much
of peninsular Florida -- pine stands are naturally fragmented. What motivates
this proposal as an SGER is the spatial extent of the Spring 2000 fires and this
natural fragmentation. Jointly, these factors permit study the spatial component
of recruitment with unusually high resolution. Because fires of this kind will
not recur for many years, there is a time-critical component to this
request.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research involves demography in disturbance-
prone populations. The models and data have been developed in the context of
pitch pines in the pine barrens of Long Island, NY. One question of particular
importance is how much spatial data is needed? A principal result is that
populations are expected to undergo substantial shifts from dynamics dominated
by local demography to dynamics dominated by inter-stand dispersal, as the scale
of disturbance increases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;