* 0107065
* Collaborative Research:  Tectonic Geomorphology of Grand Canyon--Testing a Hypothesis for Differential Incision Due to Quaternary Slip on the Hurricane-Torweap Fault System
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2003
* Joel Pederson, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 05/31/2003
* USD 79,722.00

0107117&lt;br/&gt;Karlstrom&lt;br/&gt;0107065&lt;br/&gt;Pederson&lt;br/&gt;Excav
ation of Grand Canyon by the Colorado River, previously thought to have happened
between 6.0 and 1.2 Ma, is actually relatively young, ongoing, and happening at
variable rates along the length of the Grand Canyon. Information from middle-
late Quaternary stream terraces in eastern Grand Canyon indicates that strong
side-stream and mainstream responses to glacial/interglacial climate changes
have been superimposed on an overall incision rate of 0.2 to 0.6 mm/yr. This
suggests that up to half of the present-day relief in eastern Grand Canyon has
been generated in the Quaternary Period. In contrast, new data from western
Grand Canyon indicate up to an order of magnitude lower incision rate over the
same time period. This discrepancy is interpreted to be due to west down
Quaternary slip on the Toroweap-Hurricane fault system modulating the incision
of crustal blocks in the region. Recently recognized slip rates of ~0.25 mm/yr
on this fault system are approximately equal to the difference between greater
upstream rates (eastern Grand Canyon) and smaller downstream rates obtained
within and immediately below the fault zone. A new picture is emerging of a
younger, segmented Grand Canyon, which contains a sensitive record of the
denudational history of the Colorado Plateau. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is a focused test of this hypothesis using detailed geomorphic and structural
field studies combined with U-Series dating of travertine within alluvial
terraces and Ar-Ar dating of basalts. These data provide an improved
understanding of the age of the Grand Canyon and the forces that drive and
modulate the incision of this and other high plateau regions. This work also has
a broad educational and outreach impact; we are working closely with the
Interpretive Division of Grand Canyon National Park to design the "Trail of
Time" to communicate geologic understanding to the 5 million visitors that come
to the Park annually. Additionally, we continue to train a host of graduate and
undergraduate students in the context of a multi-university collaboration that
deals with numerous aspects of the tectonic and landscape evolution of the
southwestern U.S.A.&lt;br/&gt;