* 0107917
* Critical Threshold Phenomena in Nonlinear Balance Laws
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Eitan Tadmor, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2004
* USD 134,464.00

We plan to study the so-called critical threshold phenomena associated with
different nonlinear balance laws, in which the persistence of global features of
the solutions hinges on a delicate balance between nonlinear convection and a
variety of forcing mechanisms. Thus, for example, solutions for nonlinear
hyperbolic conservation laws will develop generic singularities in finite time,
whereas the existence of balancing forces in other time-dependent problems,
e.g., the 2-D incompressible Euler equations, retain global smoothness for all
time. This project proposes to analyze those borderline cases, where the
persistence of features such as smoothness and finite-time breakdown vs. time
decay etc., does not fall into any one particular category. Instead, global
features depend on crossing critical threshold associated with the intrinsic
configurations of our problems. The presence of various forcing mechanisms in
nonlinear convection-dominated PDEs changes the physical situation, and is
responsible for the complexity of the underlying problem. Our proposed research
falls into four major sub-categories, all tied to the central issue of critical
threshold phenomena in nonlinear balance laws: (i) The question of global
smoothness/finite-time breakdown for Euler-Poisson equations. We also plan to
study the critical threshold phenomena for solutions of Euler-Poisson equations,
its relation to semi-classical limits of nonlinear Schrodinger equations and to
augment these studies by high-resolution numerical simulations; (ii) Lack of
L2-concentrations (-- and hence global existence) of weak solution for Euler
equations, depending on the initial configuration in appropriate borderline
regularity spaces; (iii) Questions of global vs. local existence for restricted
Euler and Navier-Stokes dynamics; and finally, (iv) The issue of crossing the
critical sub-characteristic threshold condition in hyperbolic relaxation
problems, where there is a balance between different orders of nonlinear
convective waves.

The breakdown of waves on the beach is a familiar phenomenon. This breakdown
phenomenon depends on whether the waves accumulate sufficient strength, height
etc. and in general, they depend on whether the initial configuration crosses
intrinsic critical thresholds which distinguish between finite time breakdown
and long term persistence of the smooth wave patterns. The goal of this project
is to study a variety of critical threshold phenomena in problems governed by
time-dependent problems. While many such problems develop finite-time
singularities and other problems retain global smooth solutions, we focus on
borderline cases, where intrinsic features of the solutions like smoothness vs.
generic finite time breakdown, boundedness, time decay, etc, hinge on the
delicate balance between the nonlinear convection and the (possibly nonlinear)
forcing terms. In particular, the persistence of such global features does not
fall to any particular category, but instead, these features depend on crossing
critical threshold associated with the general configurations of our problems,
very much like the conditional breakdown of waves on the beach. These are
precisely the kind of problems that are of great research interest in various
applications. The critical threshold phenomenon in nonlinear balance laws is not
well understood, and the available techniques to study such phenomena need to be
further investigated. In this context, there are many issues to be clarified,
inter connections to be analyzed -- even in simplified settings, and general
understanding of the critical threshold phenomena in realistic situations is
sought in terms of both analytical and numerical studies. Professors E. Tadmor
and H. Liu will continue their ongoing cooperative and individual research on
the critical threshold phenomena in the context of Euler-Poisson equations,
incompressible Euler equations, long time existence and finite time breakdown of
restricted Euler and Navier-Stokes dynamics, and hyperbolic relaxation systems.