* 0107054
* Collaborative Research:  Argon Retentivity and Closure Temperature in Micas and Amphiboles
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Kenneth Foland, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 07/31/2005
* USD 198,078.00

EAR-0107054/0106987&lt;br/&gt;Foland/Dahl&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potassium-bearing
micas and amphiboles are widely used in 40Ar/39Ar age studies to determine
thermochronologic histories and are recognized to have ages that reflect
temperature, although the actual mechanism(s) and controls are neither well
understood nor well documented. This research will investigate the factors
governing Ar retention and 40Ar/39Ar ages of mica and amphibole in slowly-cooled
terranes. Relationships in specimens from the Adirondack Lowlands of New York
will be studied. The research will test the often-assumed volume diffusion
control of argon loss, while also seeking to evaluate alternative mechanisms and
factors governing argon retention and ages of individual mica and amphibole
crystals. Specific objectives of the research are to clarify: (1) the
mechanism(s) of argon loss in nature and the question of volume-diffusion
control on argon retention and closure, with specific examination of the roles
of stress and fluids (in addition to temperature); (2) the crystal-chemical
dependence of retention; and (3) the roles of microstructures and other factors.
The research will involve an array of modern microanalytical techniques on
individual crystals, including: 40Ar/39Ar and Rb/Sr geochronology, featuring UV
laser-ablation Ar microanalysis; chemical microanalysis; transmission electron
microscopy for elucidation of microtextures; X-ray diffraction determination of
crystal structures; and, analyses of O and H isotopes. This research targets the
next level of understanding of these mineral ages and, thus, their use in
interpreting, deciphering, and refining crustal histories.&lt;br/&gt;