* 0107195
* SGER:  Characterization of InP as a MEMS Material for the Development of Micro-Electro-Mechanical Lossless Cross-Connect Waveguide Switch
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2001,02/28/2003
* Reza Ghodssi, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Filbert J. Bartoli
* 02/28/2003
* USD 57,000.00

We envision the development of an innovative optical cross-connect switch based
on mechanical transducers for switching between optical waveguides as shown in
Figure 1. It consists of 4 input fibers connected to 4 input waveguides on the
switch. At each of the interconnect points, a microactivated micro-stage can be
moved along a 45 axis to allow for steering the beam at 90 with respect to the
original direction. In this way, any inputs can be steered to any outputs in a
non-blocking way. Contrary to what is typically done in the area of micro-opto-
electro-mechanical systems, the mechanical movements of the switch are not
implemented using silicon technology but are directly realized in III-V compound
semiconductors [1]. This has the important advantage of permitting the
monolithic integration of active (i.e. semiconductor lasers, SOA, etc.) and
passive waveguide devices (like the WDM filters, arrayed waveguide gratings)
with the switching fabric. It can be envisioned that this should lead to complex
wavelength cross-connect systems on a single chip. Switching time will be
optimized by minimizing the mass of the moving parts and by reducing the
required displacements to distances of the order of 3 microns. Dissipation of
activated in one of its possible states. On the 4 output waveguides, SOA's are
monolithically integrated to compensate for optical losses in the same way that
we recently demonstrated a lossless 1 x 2 splitter. A passive-active resonant
coupler to move the mode from a passive waveguide to a vertically positioned
active waveguide using the PARC platform technology [2] can be used for the
integration.&lt;br/&gt;