* 0107628
* Polyhedral Approximation and Other Computational Aspects of Geometric Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Mario Lopez, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2006
* USD 158,000.00

The investigator and his colleague study computational aspects of various
geometric problems in two directions: (1) Design and implementation of efficient
algorithms for the approximation of various convex and nonconvex objects in
multidimensional space by polytopes, and research of the computational
complexity as well as practical efficiency of these algorithms. (2) Application
of high performance computing as a tool to solve or advance toward a solution of
open theoretical problems in convex geometry, among them, Kneser's problem
concerning the relationship between volumes of intersections or unions of balls
in multidimensional Euclidean space and their mutual distances. Because of its
practical importance in many application areas, the approximation of both convex
and nonconvex polytopes by "simpler" polytopes is given special attention, and
fully constructive solutions are developed for these cases. Extensions and
variants such as approximation under various metrics, requiring the
approximating object to enclose or be contained within the approximated object,
and finding minimal enclosing polytopes of a specific type (like parallelotopes,
for example), are also considered. Some of these variants find important
applications in mobile computing and multidimensional databases. The
investigators develop efficient computational solutions for the problem of
approximating multidimensional bodies by polytopes (solids formed by flat faces)
of a prescribed size. Such approximation is an important tool in many
disciplines, including molecular modeling, optimal control, computer-aided
design, and computer visualization. They also investigate the problem of
enclosing and approximating multidimensional bodies by polytopes of a prescribed
type, such as "boxes" (parallelotopes), for example. Solutions to these problems
find important applications in the rapidly growing areas of mobile computing and
multidimensional databases. Furthermore, due to their simplicity, polytopes are
by far the most widely used form of model representation. Thus, the work is also
important because it facilitates the use of the large body of methods already
available for polytopes, provided that the resulting approximation is good and
can be performed efficiently. Development of these algorithms produces tools of
high performance computing. The investigators use these tools in turn to study
long-standing geometric problems.