* 0107495
* Numerical Methods for Layered Models of Ocean Circulation
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Robert Higdon, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2005
* USD 140,000.00

The goal of this project is to develop numerical methods for layered (isopycnal)
models of the general ocean circulation. In such models, the vertical coordinate
is not linear distance, but instead is potential density or some other related
quantity. When an isopycnal model is discretized in the vertical, the effect is
to represent the ocean as a stack of layers that are approximately immiscible.
This corresponds to the observation that the upper and lower regions of the
ocean are approximately isolated thermodynamically from each other. However,
this isolation is not complete, and in an isopycnal model the exchanges that do
occur are under the control of the modeler. This type of model shows great
promise for representing the long-term behavior of ocean dynamics. In the
present project, the principal investigator will develop and incorporate methods
for solving the momentum equation in a flux form for which momentum, not
velocity, is the dependent variable. It appears that the momentum formulation
may give more reliable results, such as in situations where layer thicknesses
tend to zero because of layer interfaces intersecting the top or bottom of the
fluid domain. This approach may also be valuable in modeling vertical transport
in the ocean. Non-oscillatory or nearly non-oscillatory advection algorithms
will be used to solve the momentum equation. Such methods will be analyzed and
incorporated into a two-level time-stepping algorithm that the investigator has
recently developed for formulations of the governing equations in which the fast
and slow time scales are split into separate subsystems. The resulting
algorithms will be tested on model problems for which the solution behavior is
known. As time permits, the PI will then pursue the implementation and testing
of these methods in existing, operational models of ocean circulation. During
this project the PI will be in regular contact with ocean modelers at Oregon
State University and at Los Alamos National Laboratory.

The long-term objective of this work is to contribute to an understanding of the
global climate system. An important tool towards understanding this system
consists of computer simulations involving coupled models of the atmosphere,
ocean, sea ice, and terrestrial effects. With such simulations one can test the
response of the earth's climate to changes in external forcing, such as
increased emissions of greenhouse gases. The world's oceans store and transport
tremendous amounts of heat energy, so the oceans play a crucial role in our
climate system. When the circulation of the ocean is simulated on a computer,
one is using the computer to obtain approximate solutions to mathematical
equations that describe the evolution of fluid flows. The goal of the present
project is to improve the methods that are used to solve those equations.