* 0107488
* Mixed Matrix Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2005
* Michael Tsapatsis, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric S. Peterson
* 07/31/2005
* USD 330,001.00

CTS-0107488&lt;br/&gt;Eva Marand&lt;br/&gt;Virginia Polytechnic Institute and
State University&lt;br/&gt;The Development of Mixed-Matrix Membranes&lt;br/&gt;&
lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Membrane
separations represent a growing technological area with potentially high
economic reward due to low energy requirements and facile scale-up of membrane
modular design. Advances in membrane technology, especially in novel membrane
materials, will make this technology even more competitive with traditional,
highly energy-intensive, and costly processes such as low-temperature
distillation and adsorption. In particular, there is need for large-scale gas-
separation-membrane systems that can accomplish processes such as nitrogen and
oxygen enrichment, hydrogen recovery, acid gas (CO2, H2S) removal from natural
gas, and capture of greenhouse gases as well as separation of various
hydrocarbon mixtures. Materials employed in these applications must offer
durability, productivity, and highly selective separation performance if they
are to be economically viable. Currently, polymers and certain inorganic
membranes are the only candidates, and each of these two classes has
limitations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to develop
structured composite zeolite/polyimide thin-film membranes that will exhibit
gas-separation performance superior to that of existing polymer-based membranes
and which will retain their processing versatility and ruggedness compared to
inorganic membranes. This work incorporates anisotropic ETS-4, ZSM-2, LTL and
MFI plate-like molecular sieves in mixed-matrix membranes. These zeolites can be
produced with controlled nanometer-scale size distribution and surface
functionalization. The success of the mixed-matrix materials lies in the
elimination of defects at the molecular sieve/polymer interface and in the
control of the film's microstructure at the sub-nanometer level. This can be
achieved by employing zeolite nanoparticles with functionalized surfaces to
promote bonding with the polymer matrix. A series of new, well-characterized
polyimides has been developed with pendant carboxylic functional groups to serve
as the membrane matrix. These polyimides already have excellent separation
properties for various gas mixtures and are thermally stable above 400oC in air.
A defect-free polymer-zeolite interface is achieved by forming hydrogen bonds or
direct covalent linkages between the polyimide chains and the functionalized
zeolite nano-particles. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;