* 0107812
* Southeast Conference on Applied Mathematics to be held November 9-11, 2001 in Raleigh, North Carolina
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Hien Tran, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 08/31/2002
* USD 10,000.00

0107812 Gremaud

This award will support the Southeast Conference on Applied Mathematics (SECAM).
The conference will focus on four overlapping themes: i) Mathematical Methods
for Multiscale Problems, ii) Industrial Mathematics, iii) Mathematical and
Computational Biology, and iv) Material Science. Multiscaled models are found in
a wide range of applications and pose difficulties for both mathematical and
numerical analysis. What is, for instance, the effect of the fine scale behavior
on the solutions? How well should the fine scales be resolved to obtain accurate
information? etc. The problems to be discussed in Industrial Mathematics come
from areas such as microelectronic, chemical manufacturing and material
processing, and will focus on the process of technology transfer. The extreme
complexity of the problems studied in Mathematical Biology precludes a
traditional "pencil and paper" approach and calls rather for an integrated
approach between mathematical modeling and computer analyses. This trend has
been accelerated by the development of productive partnerships between
experimentalists, theoreticians and mathematicians with similar interests but
very different areas of expertise. Successful examples will be discussed. The
study of emerging applications in the Material Sciences such as granular flows,
thin films or smart materials has led to the discovery of new kind of
instabilities and interface propagation problems. This session will aim at
facilitating the migration of the most successful analysis and computational
techniques from specific areas of Material Science to other problems.

The conference aims at accomplishing three main goals: Interaction, Showcase,
and New Activities. Interaction: The conference will provide a forum and
gathering place for applied mathematicians in the Southeast. It will reach out
to several groups that are underrepresented in traditional meetings. First, many
successful collaborations have been established between applied mathematicians
and scientists from local companies and governmental laboratories in
technological parks such as Research Triangle Park, NC. Several industrial
partners have been invited to give presentations. Second, there are emerging
centers of excellence within the many local colleges and historically black
institutions. Speakers and students from such institution have been invited to
contribute to the success of the conference. Showcase: The high level of
activity in Applied and Industrial Mathematics is not always accurately
represented through the usual channels of communication. Indeed, by its very
nature, a sizable part of the work done in Industrial Mathematics gets to be
published in specialized engineering type journals, reaching only a small
portion of the Applied Mathematics community. Conferences such as this one can
play a fundamental role in unifying and improving approaches that may be similar
in many aspects but are used in very distinct applications. Special care has
been taken to provide younger scientists and graduate students with the
opportunity to present their work and take an active part in the conference. New
activities: The audience is expected to span a whole spectrum of expertise,
experience and background, from recognized researchers in academia to engineers
from the private sector and national research laboratories to students and
people with limited research experience in Applied Mathematics. It is expected
that not only will the conference give an accurate idea of significant ongoing
and future trends in Applied Mathematics, but also will lead to new
collaborations and applications.