* 0107456
* Dissertation Research: Evaluation of a Hypothetical Model of Local Community Assembly in a Temporally Dynamic, Species Rich Neotropical River
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2001,04/30/2002
* Kirk Winemiller, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Susan Mopper
* 04/30/2002
* USD 6,005.00

Evaluation of a hypothetical model of local community assembly in a temporally
dynamic, species rich neotropical river

DEB 0107456; PI: Kirk O. Winemiller, Co-PI: D. Albrey Arrington

Abstract

Results from this study will further our understanding of biological community
structure and formation. Natural communities are affected by characteristics of
the environment and interactions among constituent organisms. Understanding the
relative importance of these factors and their interactions is highly relevant
to the preservation of healthy communities and restoration of damaged
communities. Our study investigates the temporal and spatial dynamics of
community assembly in a tropical floodplain river with very high biodiversity.
Our previous work has demonstrated consistent patterns in local fish and
invertebrate communities that depend on physical habitat complexity and seasonal
dynamics. In this study, we will conduct field experiments that manipulate
habitat patches with variable physical complexity to evaluate the relative
importance of physical and biological factors for species colonization. Our
experimental design also will allow us to determine the relative importance of
stochastic and deterministic processes in the formation of local communities. In
other words, we hope to determine whether or not local biological communities
are simply collections of individuals and species that happened to find an
available habitat patch, or if community membership results from species
interactions such as competition and predation. Based on previous descriptive
research, we hypothesize that nonrandom processes result in highly patterned
fish and invertebrate communities during the low-water period, and that
colonization of local habitats becomes more random during the annual flood
period.