* 0107839
* WORKSHOP: Global Grid Forum Travel Funding:   October 8-10, 2001, Rome, Italy
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2001,12/31/2002
* Charles Catlett, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Xiaodong Zhang
* 12/31/2002
* USD 53,487.00

Grid Forum is a grass-roots community organization that began as a BOF session
at SC98 in November&lt;br/&gt;1998. Grid Forum has held five highly successful
workshops in the US since that time and has formed ten&lt;br/&gt;focused working
groups, each developing best practices and standards within a particular set of
technical&lt;br/&gt;areas. Over 500 individuals participate in Grid Forum
electronic newsgroups and typical workshop&lt;br/&gt;attendance is 150-190
people. Grid Forum has served as the primary gathering point and
collaboration&lt;br/&gt;vehicle for major initiatives including the NSF
Partnerships for Advanced Computational Infrastructure&lt;br/&gt;(PACI) program,
NASA's Information Power Grid (IPG) program, the DoD modernization program,
DOE&lt;br/&gt;grid-based programs, and others.&lt;br/&gt;Two of the primary
advantages to the existence of such a collaboration vehicle are that it allows
these&lt;br/&gt;programs to leverage one another and it assures that the various
agency-specific grid systems are able to&lt;br/&gt;interoperate. During the past
year, Grid Forum has joined with similar efforts in Europe and Asia-
Pacific,&lt;br/&gt;increasing the opportunity to leverage to major grid projects
outside of the US. Beyond the advantages of&lt;br/&gt;leverage and ensuring
interoperability, a single global standards activity ensures that grid
technologies do&lt;br/&gt;not fragment at continental boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;Grid
Forum will hold its sixth major workshop, "Global Grid Forum 1" in Amsterdam in
March 2001.&lt;br/&gt;This meeting will be held in conjunction with the kick-off
meeting for the European Data Grid project&lt;br/&gt;that is managed by CERN.
This project supports travel by approximately 30 US participants, including
students and researchers from Minority Serving Institutions, to that meeting.
The participants will be&lt;br/&gt;recruited from the ranks of existing Grid
Forum leaders.&lt;br/&gt;