* 0107739
* International Discussion Meeting on Relaxations in Complex Systems; June 18-26, 2001; Hersonissos, Crete, Greece
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2001,02/28/2002
* Donald Plazek, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 02/28/2002
* USD 4,000.00

Relaxations and diffusion play an important role in many branches of science,
technology and engineering. Relaxation phenomena occur widely in physics,
biophysics, chemistry, materials science, metallurgy, rheology, glass sciences,
polymer/biopolymer physics and engineering, colloids, fiber optics, opto-
electronics and electronics. It is the primary concern in basic physics as well
as in very practical applications. The wide variety of areas in which relaxation
enters into consideration demonstrates its interdisciplinary nature. Research
finding in the last decade have shown common features of relaxation phenomena in
different materials that are often studied separately in different specialised
and isolated fields. This remarkable commonality of properties of relaxation in
complex materials suggests an exciting opportunity for rapid development in all
the specialised fields by a multidisciplinary
approach.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;Recognising the importance of providing a
channel of communication between workers on relaxation phenomena in different
materials and fields and the benefit it will bring to many research disciplines,
a "Discussion Meeting on Relaxations in Complex Systems" is being organised in
Crete, Greece, June 18th - 26th , 2001. The objective of this NSF support is to
help young and other investigators from academia in the United States to pay for
the registration fee and, if there is sufficient money, part of the travel cost
for attending this International Discussion Meeting.&lt;br/&gt;