* 0107898
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  A Paleocene/Eocene Boundary Golden Spike:  Stratigraphic Studies in the Nile Valley (Egypt)
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2001,12/31/2005
* William Berggren, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 12/31/2005
* USD 23,600.00

0107898&lt;br/&gt;Aubry&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a collaborative project between a US team headed by Dr. Marie-Pierre
Aubry, Department of Geological Sciences at Rutgers University, Piscataway, New
Jersey and an Egyptian team headed by Dr. Khaled Ouda, Geology Department,
Assiut University, Assiut, Egypt. They plan to conduct research in the central
Nile Valley (Upper Egypt) designed to recover a complete upper Paleocene-lower
Eocene marine sedimentary stratigraphic section. The main thrust is the recovery
of a complete stratigraphic record of the major biotic and stable isotope events
that have characterized the Paleocene-Eocene boundary interval that spans the
2.55-m.y.-long Chron C24r, and, in particular, the Late Paleocene Thermal
maximum (LPTM). They plan to conduct a series of analyses (integrated bio-
magneto-cyclo-stable isotope stratigraphy and sedimentology) on outcrop (and
corehole) material which will provide an integrated high-resolution chronologic
framework for this critical interval in earth history. Reconstructions of
conditions on Earth during the LPTM may unravel the general dynamics of a sudden
warming and serve as the framework for a predictive model for the greenhouse
world of the decades/centuries ahead.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The project
supports collaboration between two experienced teams of investigators. The site
for the fieldwork is best suited for the purpose of delineating the P/E
boundary. The US team members, including staff from Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution in Woods Hole, Massachusetts. The research will provide for training
of graduate students at Assiut University in various topics in geology and
paleontology in particular, and will provide baseline studies and data in lower
paleogene stratigraphy of the upper Nile Valley of Egypt, which are of interest
to Egyptian and US academic geologists. One US graduate student also will
participate in this research and gain experience in international research
projects. The proposal meets the INT objective of supporting collaborative
research in areas of mutual interest. This project is being supported under the
US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers
in both countries to carry out these cooperative activities. &lt;br/&gt;