* 0107907
* Floral Adaptations to Pollinators:  Evolution of Bat Flowers
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2001,01/31/2003
* Michelle Zjhra, Keene State College
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 01/31/2003
* USD 35,000.00

Plants have repeatedly evolved flowers that attract bats as pollinators.
Although New World and Old World bats differ in their foraging behavior (using
echolocation versus vision and olfaction, respectively), flowers pollinated by
bats are considered a single "bat flower syndrome." This research aims to
identify the various aspects of what makes a flower attractive to bats by
comparing bat-pollinated plant species in a single family (Bignoniaceae). The
plant family Bignoniaceae has repeatedly evolved bat flowers in separate
lineages that are restricted to different continents. The bat flowers of these
species found on Africa versus South America, for example, are likely to use
different means of attracting (e.g., floral scents vs. flower shape) the species
of bats found on these two continents. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to
identify what makes a flower attractive to bats and to determine how bat flowers
evolve, bat flowers will be examined in an evolutionary framework. Bat flowers
restricted to Old vs. New World will be compared and their morphology, ecology
and floral odor will be contrasted. The evolutionary framework is determined by
sequencing the DNA of seventeen species of Bignoniaceae that are putatively
pollinated by bats and adding these sequences to an already established
sequence-based set of relationships for this plant family. Furthermore,
different means of analyzing the (morphological, ecological, and odor) data
using an evolutionary framework will be compared by utilizing and contrasting
various current approaches. This study contributes to the practical
understanding of the various analytical approaches of using evolutionary
relationships to explore broader questions of evolution of particular traits,
such as flower types (e.g., bat flowers). Moreover, this study adds greatly to
an understanding of a group of plants that is a good model for looking at
questions involving ecology and evolution of rainforest trees. Finally, this
study adds to the body of knowledge of how plants and animals interact and
evolve in relationship to one another.&lt;br/&gt;