* 0107680
* Interdisciplinary Grants in the Mathematical Sciences: Reconstructing Unobserved Hypothalamic Neuroendocrine Signals
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Richard Sundberg, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 08/31/2005
* USD 99,925.00

This Interdisciplinary Grant in the Mathematical Sciences project is twofold:
formal educational training in the biological sciences and the experience of
immersion in a research laboratory environment. The principal investigator will
be a visiting faculty member in the Division of Endocrinolgy, School of
Medicine, University of Virginia. The composition of the total effort will be
75% coursework and 25% research and laboratory exposure. The educational and
experiential components of this award will allow the PI to reach that
understanding of the biological sciences, including practical laboratory
aspects, which is&lt;br/&gt;necessary for collaborative interactions at the
frontier of neuroendocrinolgy. As a simple example of the anticipated
experience, a general understanding of how, and the precision by which,
biomolecular (DNA, RNA, protein, steroid) concentrations are calculated within a
laboratory environment will be enormously valuable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Animal
and human reproduction, bodily growth, and the response to stress are but three
of the many critical processes, which are regulated and controlled by
(neuro-)hormones produced in the hypothalamus, the pituitary gland, and remote
target glands. Understanding the (mal)functioning of such neuroendocrine systems
is a fundamentally important problem in contemporary biology. One of the most
fascinating and challenging aspects is that the neurohormones produced in the
hypothalamus, which ultimately control much of the resulting dynamics of these
systems, are unobservable in most cases (for practical and ethical reasons).
Guiding the award activities will be the issue of how to reconstruct such
unobserved hypothalamic signals, a key link in understanding animal and human
reproduction, growth, and control of physiological stress. This award will allow
the PI to gain the knowledge necessary not only for collaboration at the
frontier of neuroendocrinolgy, but also to design needed academic courses
focusing on the important areas of computational biology, bioinformatics, and
statistical genetics. The success of this award can be measured by the quality
and number of both published research papers and Ph.D. theses directed in these
interdisciplinary areas. The benefits of the award will be disseminated by the
presentation of conference and seminar talks, publications in both the applied
mathematics and the physiology literature, and publication of a book on
biological modeling in space and time. This IGMS project is jointly supported by
the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the Division of
Mathematical Sciences (DMS).