* 0107927
* Systematic Determination of Complex Reaction Mechanisms
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2001,11/30/2005
* John Ross, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Raima Larter
* 11/30/2005
* USD 324,000.00

John Ross of Stanford University is supported by the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry Program to develop further approaches to the
determination of reaction pathways and mechanisms of complex reaction systems.
The effort emphasizes the need for methods with small numbers of measurements,
possibly of limited accuracy. Four new methods will be explored. In the first, a
pulse perturbation approach will be examined using theory, model reaction
calculations, and experiments, in order to elucidate the causal connectivities
of species in the reaction pathways. A variant of this approach, a delayed
response method, will be studied using theory and calculations with the goal of
providing information on the number of chemical species in the reaction
pathways, on rate coefficients, and on the reaction mechanism. Genetic algorithm
methods will be used on a model system to study the possibility that oscillatory
chemical reactions may have evolved in biological systems as a result of regular
periodic perturbations, focusing on evolutionary changes in a reaction mechanism
due to external effects. Finally, the reaction mechanism and stochastic analysis
of memory effects and oscillations in single-molecule reactions will be
investigated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Establishing how chemical reactions occur is
an important goal in all fields of chemistry, including biological chemistry.
This task has been approached, for nearly the last hundred years, by determining
the chemical species present, studying separately the rates of various
elementary chemical reactions in the entire reaction system, and then guessing
the reaction mechanism, which is the proper combination of elementary reaction
steps that lead from reactions to products that reproduce observations. For
complex chemical reaction systems, this is an arduous and often controversial
task, since many different proposed reaction mechanisms frequently fit the
available data. The research that will be carried out in this project approaches
the solution of chemical reaction mechanism problems from an alternative
viewpoint, and the outcomes may have substantial impact on the determination of
the mechanisms of complex chemical and biochemical systems in vitro, and
ultimately in vivo.