* 0107374
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Event-Related Potentials (ERP) Investigation of Russian Scrambling
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2001,11/30/2001
* Irina Sekerina, Sekerina, Irina A
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 11/30/2001
* USD 12,311.00

0107374 Sekerina

The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will provide three months of support to Dr. Irina A. Sekerina to work
with Dr. Matthias Schlesewsky at the University of Potsdam's Institute of
Linguistics in Potsdam, Germany on Event-Related Potentials (ERP) technique
investigation of Russian scrambling.

Recently, with interest growing in comparative psycholinguistic research
focusing on linguistics phenomena in languages other than English, it has become
possible to address the issue of differences between processing of languages
with fixed (English) and flexible word order (German). This research project
will investigate the question of how speakers of a free word order language such
as Russian comprehend complex sentences with moved constituents. The goal is to
conduct a pilot experiment with native Russian speakers using the Event-Related
Potentials technique at the Institute of Linguistics in Potsdam. Event-related
potentials are small brain potentials within the spontaneous electrical activity
of the brain. Their multidimensional nature makes them suitable for
differentiating between qualitatively different processes to systematically
investigate language processing, particularly in the domains of semantics and
syntax. The experimental sentences will be Russian constructions with Scrambling
and Wh-Movement comparable to the German sentences used by Friederici,
Schlesewsky, and Fiebach; results from this experiment will serve as a baseline
for this comparative psycholinguistic project. The results of this study will
increase our knowledge on how the human mind works in relationship to language,
brain psychology, and psychology.