* 0107095
* Fundamental Evaluation of Tracer Techniques for Characterizatiion of Non-Aqueous Phase Liquids (NAPLs) Retention Volumes in Heterogeneous Aquifers
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Tissa Illangasekare, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/2005
* USD 280,001.00

0107095&lt;br/&gt;Illangasekare&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Difficulties associated
with the detection and quantification of non-aqueous phase liquids (NAPLs) in
the subsurface have prompted the development of innovative, less-intrusive site
characterization methods that utilize partitioning and interfacial tracers.
Although these techniques have been utilized at many field sites in USA and
Europe, current application is limited to NAPLs that are at or near residual
saturation. It is hypothesized that the combined use of these tracers may also
be useful for identifying occurrences that diverge from cases of residual
saturation such as isolated pools and macro-entrapment zones that occur in
naturally heterogeneous subsurface formations. The goal of this research is to
evaluate the behavior of partitioning, interfacial, and conservative tracers in
water-saturated subsurface systems where NAPLs are entrapped under conditions of
natural heterogeneity. The following research issues will be
addressed:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The influence of subsurface heterogeneity on
the distribution of NAPL will result in tracer behavior that is not necessarily
controlled by local equilibrium, an assumption that is frequently used in
analyzing tracer data. However, NAPL entrapment under natural heterogeneity may
have unique, identifiable tracer signatures, even under non-equilibrium
conditions. These unique signatures may be distinguishable for resolving and
characterizing complex NAPL occurrences.&lt;br/&gt; The up-scaled field behavior
of NAPLs differs considerably from what is observed in one-dimensional column
experiments, particularly when media heterogeneity is introduced. The ability to
resolve the behavior of tracers at larger spatial scales and added
dimensionality may lead to refinements in theoretical constructs and
improvements in computational methods for characterizing complex NAPL
distribution in the field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach consists of both
experimental studies conducted in columns, cells and intermediate-scale soil
tanks and development of methods for tracer data analysis using improved
numerical models. This research has both intrinsic scientific merit in terms of
the measurement and evaluation of fundamental parameters as well as practical
implication for NAPL detection, remediation, and risk assessment.&lt;br/&gt;