* 0107353
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Modeling Sustainable Harvesting Regimes for Forest Conservation
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2001,12/31/2002
* Roland deGouvenain, de Gouvenain, Roland C
* Fellowship Award
* John Snyder
* 12/31/2002
* USD 48,462.00

0107353 De Gouvenain

The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will provide 11 months of support to Dr.Roland de Gouvenain to work
with Professor Joelisoa Ratsirarson at the University of Antananarivo in
Madagascar on the modeling of sustainable harvesting regimes for forest
conservation. Of the 11 month duration, five months will be spent back in the
United States at the University of Connecticut, working with Dr. John Silander,
analyzing the data and writing up his results.

The objective of this project is to determine whether sustainable tree
harvesting is compatible with forest biodiversity conservation. The PI proposes
to determine the sustainability of different tree harvesting regimes, and to
analyze the possible causal relationship between harvesting and changes in
forest structure, forest composition and site environmental variables from a
"no-harvest" baseline forest condition. He will use a regeneration probability
model to simulate how different harvesting regimes may impact forest
regeneration and how it affects long-term forest conservation.

The study forest of Tampolo is an ideal "field laboratory" with a range of
harvesting "treatments" resulting from unequal protection at different sites.
These harvesting regimes could be incorporated into future management and
conservation plans for the study forest and other threatened forests. ***