* 0107595
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biological Informatics for FY2001
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2003
* Ronald Peterson, Peterson, Ronald W
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 06/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biological
Informatics for FY2001. The fellowship supports research and training at the
postdoctoral level at the intersection of biology and the informational,
computational, mathematical, and statistical sciences. The goal of the
fellowship is to provide training to a young scientist in preparation for a
career in biological informatics in which research and education will be
integrated. There is an increasing need for training in biological informatics
at all occupational levels, and it is expected that Fellows trained through
these fellowships will play important roles in training of the future workforce.

The research and training plan for this fellowship is entitled "Development of
strategies for designing novel catalytic enzymes." This work includes an
informational approach followed by experimental application of the results. The
informatics portion includes parameterization of a whole protein energy function
based on mutant to wild-type redesigns of proteins from various structural
databases. Second, a comprehensive cataloging of specific interactions in
natural cytochromes is being conducted, noting the conformational positioning of
the reactive centers of these molecules. The strategies developed from these
sections will be applied experimentally to design a novel synthetic cytochome
with heme binding and reactivity approaching that of its naturally occurring
counterparts.