* 0107293
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Determinants of Interspecific Diversity in Tropical Carnivora
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2003
* Shyamala Ratnayeke, Ratnayeke, Shyamala
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 12/31/2003
* USD 90,490.00

0107293 Ratnayeke

The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will provide twenty-four months of support to Dr. Shyamala Ratnayeke
of Spelman College to work with Dr. Kalinga Padmalal of Open University of Sri
Lanka in Nugegoda, Sri Lanka on the determinants of interspecific diversity of
tropical carnivora.

This study will examine questions underlying variations in animal diversity and
the local processes limiting the coexistence of species within an area. The
findings will have direct implications for the allocation and management of
protected areas in tropical regions and contributes to an increased
understanding of global patterns of biodiversity. Specifically, Dr. Ratnayeke
will measure species diversity in a group of animals occupying a higher trophic
level and sharing a common phylogenetic ancestry, namely the mammalian
Carnivora. Species diversity in this taxon will be compared in 2 tropical
habitats that show marked contracts in primary productivity. Mammalian
carnivores as a group occupy the highest position in the food chain, are highly
mobile, and demonstrate tremendous inter- and intraspecific variation and
flexibility in behavior and ecology.

Dr. Padmalal is the Head of the Environmental Studies Unite at the Open
University and is currently involved in avian diversity and cervid research.