* 0107685
* Travel to 9th International Conference on Properties and Phase Equilibria for Product and Process Design
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2001,02/28/2002
* John O'Connell, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 02/28/2002
* USD 20,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;CTS-0107685&lt;br/&gt;O'Connell, John P.&lt;br/&gt;U. of
Virginia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Conferences on Properties and
Phase Equilibria for Product and Process Design (ICPPEPPD) are held every three
years. For the Past 21 years the locations have alternated between North
America&lt;br/&gt;and Europe; in 2001, the conference will be held in Asia for
the first time. The first eight conferences have produced highly desirable
interactions between academic and industrial and government workers in this
vital area of chemical process design and simulation. The meetings have also
become the most important gathering for workers from all over the world; the
Eighth conference held in 1998 in Nordwijkerhout, The Netherlands attracted 250
participants from 29 countries. Each conference has produced important
collections of papers in review archival proceeding volumes. The Eighth
Conference provided over 1000 pages of reviews and new research published in the
international journal Fluid Phase Equilibria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Ninth
Conference is scheduled for May 20 -25 2001, in Kurashiki, Japan, with a similar
format that has been successful at the previous Conferences, though with some
significant enhancements in workshops and new session
topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present proposal requests funds for travel, and
meals and lodging in some cases, for as many needy US academic researchers as
possible. A small request is included for communications costs between them and
the PI. Those supported would include presenters of invited and contributed
papers as well as young research workers who would not be able to attend without
such support. No request is made for meeting organization expenses or for non-US
participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;