* 0107156
* Pore Formation during the Crystallization of Crosslinked Polymers which are Swollen in Supercritical Fluids
* NONE,NONE
* 10/15/2001,09/30/2004
* H. Henning Winter, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 09/30/2004
* USD 217,779.00

CTS-0107156 Winter, H. Henning U of Massachusetts - Amherst

This research explores the creation of open-pore morphology by crystallizing
polymers from a gel state. The gels used are chemically crosslinked polymers
which were highly swollen in a supercritical fluid (SCF) at elevated temperature
and pressure. Upon cooling below their crystallization temperature, polymer
molecules begin to assemble into a three-dimensional, semicrystalline
superstructure of high specific surface area and with narrow, open pores filled
with SCF which then gets released. Pore sizes are in the order of 10nm to 10mm,
depending on polymer and processing conditions; pore volumes might be anywhere
between 0 and 90% of the entire sample. The new strategy differs from the
classical foaming process (no bubble growth is needed) and from the commercial
TIPS process (no polymer solution involved), but it integrates aspects of
established processing methods to provide crosslinked precursors of desired
shape. SCFs are used here for several reasons. SCF can be removed from the
polymer without collapsing the pores. Subsequently, SCFs are recoverable, self-
cleaning, and reusable; for repeated use, cleaning of the supercritical fluid
comes naturally since the supercritical alkane (which we use) transforms into a
poor solvent by depressurizing at the end of each processing cycle. The
resulting porous polymers are exceptionally clean (free of residues), and retain
shape and structural integrity. SCFs also lower surface tension and increase
molecular mobility during crystallization; these are properties which could
potentially have an affect on crystallization kinetics and pore formation. These
are open questions which need to be pursued.

Solvent character, molecular parameters of the polymer, crosslinking method,
crosslink density and homogeneity, crystallization temperature, and swelling
conditions are expected to be the controlling parameters for pore volume and
size distribution, and for crystallinity. The research is aimed at elucidating
these relationships with the objective of achieving tunable pore size and size
distributions. Model polymer systems in this study are various crosslinked
polyethylenes (xHDPE, xLDPE, xLLDPE) swollen in supercritical propane.

The fundamental findings on polyethylenes are expected to apply to a wide range
of semicrystalline polymers in catalysis separations, high performance materials
and biomedical applications. Environmental Impact: Increasingly strict
environmental legislation has forced many industries to re-evaluate their use of
hazardous solvents. The novel process offers a process-wide design alternative
for making porous polymers. It will reduce waste generation by:

(a) supercritical fluids substitution of organic solvents during production.

(b) complete elimination of a final cleaning step which otherwise is typical for
porous materials (in comparison, cleaning of porous polymers from traditional
processing is currently performed with special cleaning fluids which often are
hazardous).

(c) recovery and repeated use of the supercritical fluid.