* 0107117
* Collaborative Research:  Tectonic Geomorphology of Grand Canyon--Testing a Hypothesis for Differential Incision Due to Quaternary Slip on the Hurricane-Toroweap Fault System
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2001,12/31/2003
* Karl Karlstrom, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 12/31/2003
* USD 89,303.00

0107117 Karlstrom 0107065 Pederson Excavation of Grand Canyon by the Colorado
River, previously thought to have happened between 6.0 and 1.2 Ma, is actually
relatively young, ongoing, and happening at variable rates along the length of
the Grand Canyon. Information from middle-late Quaternary stream terraces in
eastern Grand Canyon indicates that strong side-stream and mainstream responses
to glacial/interglacial climate changes have been superimposed on an overall
incision rate of 0.2 to 0.6 mm/yr. This suggests that up to half of the present-
day relief in eastern Grand Canyon has been generated in the Quaternary Period.
In contrast, new data from western Grand Canyon indicate up to an order of
magnitude lower incision rate over the same time period. This discrepancy is
interpreted to be due to west down Quaternary slip on the Toroweap-Hurricane
fault system modulating the incision of crustal blocks in the region. Recently
recognized slip rates of ~0.25 mm/yr on this fault system are approximately
equal to the difference between greater upstream rates (eastern Grand Canyon)
and smaller downstream rates obtained within and immediately below the fault
zone. A new picture is emerging of a younger, segmented Grand Canyon, which
contains a sensitive record of the denudational history of the Colorado Plateau.

This project is a focused test of this hypothesis using detailed geomorphic and
structural field studies combined with U-Series dating of travertine within
alluvial terraces and Ar-Ar dating of basalts. These data provide an improved
understanding of the age of the Grand Canyon and the forces that drive and
modulate the incision of this and other high plateau regions. This work also has
a broad educational and outreach impact; we are working closely with the
Interpretive Division of Grand Canyon National Park to design the "Trail of
Time" to communicate geologic understanding to the 5 million visitors that come
to the Park annually. Additionally, we continue to train a host of graduate and
undergraduate students in the context of a multi-university collaboration that
deals with numerous aspects of the tectonic and landscape evolution of the
southwestern U.S.A.