* 0107241
* Very High-Spin Polyradicals and Chiral Pi-Conjugated Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 11/01/2001,10/31/2005
* Andrzej Rajca, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 10/31/2005
* USD 583,000.00

This research comprises two research projects directed at the design, synthesis
and characterization of very high-spin polyradicals and chiral pi-conjugated
systems The objectives of the first project, the characterization of high-spin
polyradicals, are (1) to prepare organic polyradicals with the highest possible
spin quantum numbers and minimum spin polydispersity, (2) to synthesis and study
high-spin and/or switchable polyradicals with stability at ambient conditions.
Modern synthetic methodologies will be employed to obtain the proposed
polyradicals. For nanometer-sized molecules (polyradicals and its derivatives),
molecular sizes and shapes will be determined by small angle neutron scattering,
in conjunction with the Monte Carlo conformational searches. Magnetic properties
will be characterized using SQUID magnetometry. For stable polyradicals, X-ray
crystallography, ESR spectroscopy, and SQUID magnetometry will be the primary
characterization techniques. The objectives of the second project,
characterization of chiral pi-conjugated systems, are (1) to develop new
approaches to optimize interactions between pi-conjugated systems in three-
dimensions, using tetra-o-phenylenes and thiophene-based chiral carbon-sulfur
mixed allotropes and (2) to develop asymmetric synthesis and/or optical
resolutions for pi-conjugated helices (and double helices) and to characterize
their redox states, including barriers for racemization. This project will rely
on the development of new synthetic methods. The primary characterization for
chiral molecules (their radical ions and polyions) in solution will be circular
dichroism (CD); a CD spectropolarimeter will be setup with its sample
compartment accessible from an inert atmosphere glovebox. The solid state
characterization will include X-ray crystallography and electrical conductivity
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate and postdoctoral students carrying
out the experiments will be trained in the synthesis of molecules of mesoscopic
dimensions, and the experimental and theoretical characterization of their
electronic properties. With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry
Program support the educational and research activities of Dr. Andrzej Rajca of
the Chemistry Department at the University of Nebraska. His work promises
advances in the production and understanding of two kinds of materials: organic
magnets and chiral conjugated oligomers. The research should be significant in a
number of fields: chemical synthesis, the physics of magnetic materials, and the
physics of conductors.