* 0107891
* The Evolution of Microhabitat Specialization in Avian Ischnocera: Displacement or Assortment?
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Kevin Johnson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 09/30/2005
* USD 240,000.00

Abstract



Closely related sympatric species often differ in the way they use resources or
escape their natural enemies. These repeated differences can be attributed to
two processes: repeated character displacement or lineage assortment. Feather
lice (Insecta: Ischnocera), parasitic on birds, provide an opportunity to test
for these two alternatives in a relatively diverse system that involves several
host microhabitats related to parasite escape from host preening. This research
will construct a phylogeny of avian feather lice based on an integration of
molecular and morphological data, including DNA sequences for one mitochondrial
and three nuclear genes and nearly 6000 base pairs. The phylogeny will permit a
critical assessment of microhabitat specialization, the first such rigorous test
in a host-parasite system.

This host-parasite system of adaptations is of interest to population
geneticists, systematists, and ecologists and has implications for understanding
the origin of parasitic relationships of interest to medical and veterinary
entomologists. Integration of morphological and molecular data will support the
first rigorous, modern concepts of feather lice phylogeny and form the basis for
greatly improved and predictive classifications.