* 0107413
* Chiefdom to Manor: An archaeological settlement survey of Viking Age and Medieval Skagafjordur, Iceland
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2001,01/31/2004
* John Steinberg, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2004
* USD 103,647.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. John Steinberg and his
colleagues will conduct two seasons of archaeological fieldwork in the
Skagafjordur region of Northern Iceland. The goal of the fieldwork is to survey
26 farms in five areas of this important Icelandic fjord valley to understand
the changes in the settlement pattern from the Viking Age through Early Danish
Rule (AD 874-1800). Over this period, Iceland was transformed from a system of
chiefdoms to a manorial organization incorporated into the larger Norwegian
State. The research seeks to outline the factors and timing involved in this
transition. Specifically, the Skagafjordur Archaeological Settlement Survey
(SASS) will track the selected farms over 900 years to assess the variation in
building construction and the economic potential of each farm. The result of
this work will be an archaeological characterization of the household economy,
which can then be related to the larger, documented, political economy described
in the written sources. The Medieval sagas, written down in the 13th century,
describe the events of the Settlement of Iceland (AD 874-930) and of the
Commonwealth (AD 930-1264). For the Late Medieval (1264-1500) and Danish periods
(1500-1800) a series of tax records tell much about the manorial organization.
During the Settlement and Commonwealth periods, Icelandic social structure
changed from a collection of autonomous farmers who each held large territories,
to a nationwide assembly of chieftains, and finally to state. Over this period,
the climate became more variable and cooler. At the same time, overgrazing and
forest clearance destroyed a substantial percentage of the productive land. The
Medieval and Danish periods saw the rise and fall of the manorial system. In our
study area, the Bishopric of H-lar and other church organizations owned upwards
of 65% of the farms. The independent farmer, wooed by the local chieftains of
the first period, ended up a serf on the land. While the sources tell us who was
successful and who failed, they do not tell us why. Most buildings from these
periods were constructed of turf and are now buried in deep wind-blown deposits,
thereby making them almost impossible to identify systematically. In 1999, Dr.
Steinberg's NSF-funded "High Risk Experimental Research" addressed these
archaeological problems with electro-magnetic remote sensing techniques. The
research showed that specific electrical conductivity signatures signaled deeply
buried and sometimes well preserved Viking Age houses. Once these buried
structures are located, dating their construction with the sequence of volcanic
tephra layers is routine. If the sagas are correct, Settlement Age Iceland is
one of the relatively few examples of the formation of property rights without
the presence of a strong central government. The other notable example is that
of 1849-1852 California (before it became a state) when miners formed districts.
Solving the buried-turf-structure problem opens up Iceland to the examination of
the demographic changes that took place from the initial formation of property
rights, through the development of chiefdoms, and to the incorporation into the
Norwegian State. The archaeological data gathered by the SASS project will allow
scholars to better understand the advantages of being the first to settle a
landscape, the importance of farm economic potential for political success, and
the changing ratio of land and labor to the fall of the chiefly and manorial
systems.

