* 0107329
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Engineered Polymeric Biomaterials for Enhancement of Cell Migration and Nerve Regeneration
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2005
* Andrew Metters, Metters, Andrew T
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 05/31/2005
* USD 106,640.00

0107329 Metters The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research
abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad. This award will provide twenty-four months of support to Dr. Andrew T.
Metters to work with Dr. Jeffrey Hubbell at the Swiss Federal Institute of
Technology (ETH) and University of Zurich in Switzerland on engineered polymeric
biomaterials for enhancement of cell migration and nerve regeneration. Novel,
biomaterials that guide cell growth and migration offer great potential as
scaffolds for the engineering of complex tissues. This research involves
tailoring the three-dimensional architectures of enzymatically degradable,
poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG)-co-peptide hydrogels. These specialized networks
actively promote regeneration of peripheral nerves through their unique
combination of chemical and structural parameters. Dr. Hubbell heads a research
group at ETH that consists of approximately 30 doctoral students, postdoctoral
fellows and senior researchers with multidisciplinary backgrounds. The institute
contains state-of-the-art research equipment for peptide synthesis, polymer
chemistry analysis, microscopy, cell culture, and biochemical analysis.