* 0107492
* Elliptic Inverse Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Ian Knowles, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2004
* USD 95,158.00

This is a continuation of work on a new approach to parameter estimation inverse
problems. The coefficients in question are computed as the unique global minimum
of certain non-negative functionals that also tend to have unique critical
points, the latter property being of crucial importance if one seeks truly
effective numerical algorithms. The core of the idea involves the observation
that the Dirichlet principle for self-adjoint elliptic equations can be
reformulated to produce the coefficients in the equation, rather than the
solution. Recent work indicates that the techniques extend readily to parabolic
and hyperbolic systems as well, which extends the range of applicability
considerably. As these methods confront the nonlinear inverse problems directly,
they are computationally more expensive than algorithms wherein the problem is
initially linearized. On the other hand, when successful, the direct methods
tend to give better images, free from the various artifact problems that
surround the linearization methods. The methods also exhibit remarkable
stability and accuracy in the face of significant ill-posedness. The proposal
concentrates mainly on two generic cases, the (as yet unsolved) problem of the
reconstruction of all the coefficient functions in the equations for groundwater
flow and transport and the electrical impedance tomography problem. These
examples have been chosen in part to indicate the broad applicability of this
circle of ideas. The first is chosen as a representative of the class of
problems in which measurements of the solution are available from inside the
region, while the second is an example representative of the situation in which
only boundary information on the solution is available. An indication is also
given on an extension to imaging undersea regions from reflection seismological
data, and landmine detection using microwave impulse radar. These methods may
also have profound theoretical implications as well, in the direction of proving
associated inverse problem uniqueness theorems.

Complex physical processes are often represented mathematically by systems of
linear ordinary or partial differential equations. A crucial part of this
modeling process involves the determination of all of the coefficient functions
in the equations modeling certain processes. In many situations of practical
interest it is, for various reasons, impractical to measure these functions
directly. In groundwater modeling, for example, one cannot easily measure most
subsurface parameters, and in medical imaging, one is always trying to infer
internal properties ``non-invasively." On the other hand, it is often true that
one can make useful measurements of the effects of a particular physical
process. For example, in groundwater flow, one can measure the height (head) of
water, over time, in a grid of wells, and in electrical impedance tomography,
one can apply currents at the surface of a body and measure the resulting
surface voltages. Mathematically, in each of these examples one is given data on
the solution of a underlying equation with the intent of using this data to
estimate some or all of the parameter functions. This is the essence of an
inverse problem. This project continues work on computational algorithms for
inverse problems involving medical imaging, landmine detection, undersea seismic
exploration, and groundwater modeling. Expected benefits would include greatly
improved image quality in low energy electrical tomography and the possibility
of producing complete flow and contaminant models for use in the management and
remediation of underground aquifers.