* 0107439
* Interdisciplinary Grants in the Mathematical Sciences: Modeling Microbial Populations, Biofilms and Competition Dynamics in a General Gradostat
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Neal Smatresk, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 08/31/2002
* USD 99,998.00

This grant supports an interdisciplinary research project in applied mathematics
and aquatic ecology. Specifically, the principal investigator will spend an
academic year visiting the Department of Biology at&lt;br/&gt;the University of
Texas-Arlington to substantially broaden his background in aquatic ecology and
expand his skills and knowledge in mathematical modeling of population dynamics,
microbial competition, and transport&lt;br/&gt;processes in heterogeneous media.
The main research effort in this project is to compare experimental gradostat
results to those predicted by existing theoretical models of resource
competition, and to develop and implement new, important mathematical and
computational methods for accurate modeling of the bacteria-algae-nutrients
interactions in a general gradostat.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the
principal investigator in the proposed research
project&lt;br/&gt;are:&lt;br/&gt;(1) to participate in and assist with the
modeling of ongoing experiments on microbial competition along spatial gradients
of resource supply;&lt;br/&gt;(2) to develop a better understanding of aquatic
microbial ecology and the skills necessary for continued research in this area;
and &lt;br/&gt;(3) to create curriculum guides and supplemental materials for
new graduate and undergraduate courses in the principal investigator's home
department as well as in the Department of Biology at the University
of&lt;br/&gt;Texas-Arlington.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary
project will be the foundation for a continuing collaboration between the two
departments aimed at developing a combined experimental and theoretical research
program addressing microbial interactions in heterogeneous systems for
application to problems in aquatic ecology and environmental engineering. This
IGMS project is jointly supported by the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities (OMA) and the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS).