* 0107383
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Early Binocular Integration of Motion and Depth Information
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* Erich Graf, Graf, Erich W
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 07/31/2003
* USD 91,810.00

0107383 Graf

The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four month postdoctoral research fellowship for
Dr. Erich Graf to work with Dr. Martin Lages at the University of Glasgow in
Scotland.

The perception of motion is one of the most important features of low-level
information processing shared with all seeing creatures. While tremendous
advancements in our understanding of motion processing in the cortex have
occurred in the past decades, many issues are left unresolved. One issue
concerns the location along the processing pathway where the integration of
binocular motion information occurs. The work proposed uses psychophysical and
computational approaches to attempt to find an answer. The PI and his host will
use the results obtained from their investigations as well as other relevant
motion literature to extend simulation studies of single cell responses to
populations of binocular simple and complex cells using new algorithms inspired
by analogous work in the field of audition.

The Department of Psychology at the University of Glasgow has an ideal group of
researchers who will work with Dr. Graf on this project. They include
researchers in the areas of ophthalmology, psychophysics and computational
vision.