* 0107251
* Independent State Formation in Northern Mesopotamia: Excavation of the Uruk Period at Tell Brak, Syria
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2001,01/31/2003
* Geoff Emberling, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2003
* USD 119,334.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Geoff Emberling and his colleagues
will conduct one season of field research and a second of analysis at the
archaeological site of Tell Brak, located in Northeastern Syria. The site
consists of a 65 hectare mound about 45 m high and is surrounded by a ring of
five or more small sites at a radius of 0.5-1.0 km. While first excavated almost
50 years ago, only recently have the lower levels which date to the fourth
millennium BC been uncovered and the limited soundings have exposed a large
building with niched and buttressed walls, a massive gateway with stone door
sill and door socket still intact, and an enclosed courtyard with large-scale
non-domestic cooking facilities. The single associated cylinder seal impression
recovered suggests a developing system of administrative control. The most
recent excavations in the same level in a different part of the site have
revealed a ceramic production area with kilns and a large clay pit, suggesting
not only specialization of production but spatial concentration of such
activities. The significance of these findings lie in both their early date and
their location in northern Mesopotamia. Archaeologists have traditionally
believed that the Tigris and Euphrates region of southern Mesopotamia served as
the cradle of Near Eastern civilization and that the more poorly watered
northern periphery was of secondary importance. While agriculturally fertile,
the southern region however lacks essential natural resources such as timber and
copper and archaeologists have attributed development in the North to
colonization by Southerners to gain these materials. It is, in fact, clear that
such settlement did take place. Tell Brak however significantly changes this
picture because the recent excavations appear to reveal an unexpectedly high
level of scale and social complexity which predates southern expansion and
exceeds comparable developments in the South. Dr. Emberling and his colleagues
will continue excavation in this early level to expand exposure both in the
central area as well as an outlying region to determine the degree of social
differentiation. They will address three specific questions: 1. When did Tell
Brak grow in size and complexity and a series of high precision radiocarbon
determinations will aid in development of a ceramic chronology. 2.In what
sequence did trade, administrative control and specialization of production
increase? This will provide insight into the processes with led to development
at the site. 3. What were the effects of later southern expansion into the site.
Dr. Emberling postulates that control over trade in crucial and abundant raw
materials such as copper ore and obsidian (used to make stone tools) play a
crucial role in Tell Brak's rise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Scientists wish to
understand how states developed from a simple egalitarian agricultural base and
how elites arise. Because states by definition incorporate large geographic
regions, the process can be understood only in broad areal context. Tell Brak,
because of its unexpected degree of complexity and its location at the "edge" of
Mesopotamia has the potential to provide significant insight. A number of
graduate student will participant, and thus the project will also serve an
important educational function.&lt;br/&gt;