* 0107270
* International Research Fellowship Program:  River Metabolism Within the Amazon Basin: Constraints on the ROMBUS Model
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Anthony Aufdenkampe, Aufdenkampe, Anthony K
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 05/31/2004
* USD 57,000.00



0107270 Aufdenkampe

The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
Program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month postdoctoral research fellowship for
Dr. Anthony Aufdenkampe to work with Dr. Reynaldo L. Victoria and Dr. Alex V.
Krusche of CENA and Dr. Ron Benner of the University of South Carolina. Support
for this project is coming from the Ecosystem Studies Program of the BIO
Division and the U.S.-Brazil Program in the Division of International Programs.

These experiments are designed toward two objectives: (1) Develop empirical
relationships of river metabolism as a function of water composition, discharge
hydrograph, and sub-basin characteristics, to be immediately applicable to the
first parameterization of the ROMBUS model. (2) Interpret microbial organic
matter transformations in rivers from the more detailed perspective of
bioenergetics, which is the first step toward a more mechanistic
parameterization of these processes.

The goal of the proposed research is to explore controls on rates of organic
matter remineralization within the Amazon River system. The benefit of this
project is that it will advance the knowledge of our understanding of Amazon
River basin, and river ecology as well as provide us with a better understanding
of river metabolism and water composition.