* 0107123
* Structural and Geochronological Investigations of Neoproterozoic Rifting in Southwestern Laurentia
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2002
* Brian Wernicke, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 05/31/2002
* USD 89,480.00

EAR-0107123&lt;br/&gt;Wernicke&lt;br/&gt;The Cambrian explosion and its
Neoproterozoic precursors occurred in a context of extraordinary environmental
perturbations, including extreme fluctuations between warm and cold climate,
possible True Polar Wander, at least one significant impact event, and the
reorganization and eventual breakup of a supercontinent. The tectonic events may
have been a primary cause of both climatic and polar wander events. Despite
significant progress over the last decade, the lack of absolute age control on
key successions has severely limited developing reliable global correlations and
a chronology of rifting and continental plate motions on a par with the
Phanerozoic. For this project, the investigators are obtaining U/Pb ages of
authigenic xenotime overgrowths on detrital zircons, as well as standard U/Pb
dating on detrital zircons, on sandstones from the relatively complete
Neoproterozoic succession in southwestern Laurentia (Kingston and Panamint
Ranges, southern California). This succession contains a rich record of multiple
rifting events and subsequent passive margin subsidence, interspersed with a
record of glaciations and subsequent warming events, incisions, and a possible
impact event. The investigators have sampled key areas that contain a number of
structural and stratigraphic constraints on the relative timing of rifting and
glaciation, and are testing a recent hypothesis that a particular sandstone
horizon in the passive margin sequence contains detritus derived from the
Acraman impact structure, which would provide a key time-correlative horizon
between East Gondwana and Laurentia, and suggest proximity of southern Australia
and southwestern Laurentia during subsidence.&lt;br/&gt;