* 0107738
* Entrainment and Microphysics of Stratocumulus Clouds
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2003
* Hermann Gerber, Gerber Scientific Inc.
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 05/31/2003
* USD 127,976.00

The objective of this project is to study mixing processes and cloud droplet
growth as part of DYCOMS-II (Dynamics and Chemistry of Marine Stratocumulus), a
collaborative field program conducted off the coast of California in July 2001.
The experimental program, based on the NSF C-130 research aircraft, will provide
data of unprecedented high resolution on air motions, temperature, and humidity.
The Particle Volume Monitor (PVM) of Dr. Gerber will also be deployed, to give
information on the fine-scale variability of cloud water content. Four studies
related to entrainment and mixing at cloud top will be undertaken: 1. Estimation
of entrainment rate using high-resolution measurements of liquid water content,
humidity, and vertical air velocity. 2. Investigation of the cause of an
apparent "scale break" at a scale of several meters in the spectrum of liquid
water content fluctuations. 3. Formulation of a conceptual model of the
structure of the cloud-top layer. 4. Exploring the possibility of enhanced
condensation near cloud top caused by the mixing of air parcels with different
temperatures. The ultimate goal of the research is to improve the ability to
model the development of marine stratocumulus clouds, taking into account mixing
processes at cloud top. This will lead to better parameterization of cloud
processes in climate models.