* 0107315
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Single Molecule Protein Conformational Dynamics with Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2002
* Anna Rhoades, Rhoades, Anna E
* Fellowship Award
* John Snyder
* 12/31/2002
* USD 55,980.00

0107315 Rhoades

The International Research Fellowship Awards Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will provide twelve months of support to Dr. Anna E. Rhoades to work
with Dr. Gilad Haran at the Weizmann Institute in Rehovot, Israel. Co-funding
for this project comes from the Math and Physical Science Directorate's Office
of Multidisciplinary Activities.

The goal of this project is to characterize the folding and conformational
dynamics of a single cytochrome c molecule with surface enhanced Raman
spectroscopy. Experiments will focus on developing this technique for measuring
conformational fluctuations and using it for studies in varying equilibrium
conditions, to obtain both equilibrium and kinetic information. The PI will
develop a model that explains how a protein folds from a linear chain of amino
acids through a series of conformational intermediates, to its functional three-
dimensional structure. The protein-folding problem is sometimes referred to as
the "second half of the genetic code" and is one of the major unresolved
problems in contemporary biophysics. The impact of this research will be in
areas such as the determination of the structure of a protein based on its gene
sequence, understanding the misfolding and aggregation of particular proteins
involved in some diseases.

The laboratory of the Weizmann Institute has all the necessary equipment
required to accomplish the goals described in this proposal.