* 0107294
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Evolution, Biogeography, and Conservation of Frogs in Sulawesi
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2001,02/29/2004
* Ben Evans, Columbia University
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 02/29/2004
* USD 93,994.00

0107294&lt;br/&gt;Evans&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Research Fellow
Awards Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-
four months of research abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for
joint research, and the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and
experimental conditions abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide 24
months of support to Dr. Ben J. Evans to forge a research collaboration with Dr.
Jatna Supriatna at the Center for Biodiversity and Conservation at the
University of Indonesia in Depok, Indonesia. Of this 24 months, 12 months will
be spent in Indonesia working with Dr. Supriatna, eight months working with Dr.
Don Melnick at Columbia University in New York, and four months in Austin, Texas
working with Dr. David Cannatella at the University of
Texas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will work to increase our understanding
of how frogs dispersed to and on Sulawesi and how natural selection influences
evolution of different adaptations. This research will also delineate regions of
high priority for conservation management based on geographic differentiation of
frogs. It is expected that dispersal to Sulawesi is rare and that when it does
occur, it is followed by explosive diversification. It is also expected that
fragmentation of Sulawesi played an important role in partitioning variation in
frog adaptations and that existing conservation areas to not adequately protect
Sulawesi's biological heritage. This study will include fieldwork on Sulawesi
and surrounding islands to sample genetic specimens for analysis, molecular
analysis to generate DNA sequence data from genetic specimen, and evolutionary,
biogeographical, and conservation genetic analysis of molecular
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Supriatna is head of Conservation International
Indonesia and a professor of biology at the University of Indonesia. As the main
site for this work, Sulawesi was chosen because of its unusual amphibian fauna,
complex geology, and critical conservation value. Dr. Melnick is a specialist in
molecular evolution and biogeography of Southeast Asian vertebrates. Dr.
Cannatella specializes in evolution and systematics of frogs and frog
vocalization.&lt;br/&gt;