* 0107160
* Dynamical Systems in Biology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2001,01/31/2005
* Hal Smith, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 01/31/2005
* USD 143,041.00

Smith&lt;br/&gt;0107160&lt;br/&gt; The investigator develops mathematical
methods that exploit&lt;br/&gt;the special properties inherent in dynamical
systems arising in&lt;br/&gt;the biological sciences and applies them to
specific problems.&lt;br/&gt;The main focus is on the long-term behavior of the
dynamics after&lt;br/&gt;transient effects have disappeared. The work on
biofilms focuses&lt;br/&gt;on systems of advection-diffusion equations coupled
to ordinary&lt;br/&gt;differential equations with coupled nonlinear boundary
conditions&lt;br/&gt;in piecewise-smooth domains. Aside from well-posedness and
the&lt;br/&gt;existence of multiple steady states, which are
nontrivial&lt;br/&gt;questions, the important biological information comes from
key&lt;br/&gt;eigenvalues for associated nonstandard eigenvalue problems
and&lt;br/&gt;their dependence on parameters. Both mathematical analysis
and&lt;br/&gt;numerical simulations are required for an understanding. The
work&lt;br/&gt;on the paradox of the plankton focuses on the classical model
of&lt;br/&gt;n-species exploitative competition for k essential&lt;br/&gt;(non-
substitutable) nutrients. If n is larger than k there can be&lt;br/&gt;no
equilibrium coexistence of all n species so one must seek&lt;br/&gt;oscillatory
coexistence. The investigator exploits certain&lt;br/&gt;heteroclinic structures
(cycles of equilibria) that arise&lt;br/&gt;naturally in such systems in order
to seek periodic coexistence&lt;br/&gt;solutions. The theory of competitive and
cooperative systems can&lt;br/&gt;play a significant role. Abstract dynamical
systems theory comes&lt;br/&gt;into play in the work on robust persistence.
Specifically,&lt;br/&gt;understanding chain recurrent sets and Morse
decompositions of&lt;br/&gt;the boundary dynamics (where one or more species are
absent) are&lt;br/&gt;key to showing that persistence for a dynamical system is
robust&lt;br/&gt;to perturbation of that system or of its parameters.&lt;br/&gt;
Dynamical systems that arise naturally in many areas in the&lt;br/&gt;biological
sciences often have special features not shared by&lt;br/&gt;systems arising in
the physical sciences. Broadly speaking, the&lt;br/&gt;investigator develops
mathematical methods that exploit these&lt;br/&gt;special properties and applies
them to specific problems. The&lt;br/&gt;main focus is on the long-term behavior
of the dynamics after&lt;br/&gt;transient effects have disappeared. Progress in
this area can&lt;br/&gt;help to answer important biological questions that are
subject to&lt;br/&gt;mathematical modeling, such as whether an infectious
disease&lt;br/&gt;becomes endemic in a population or becomes extinct, or
which&lt;br/&gt;species in an ecosystem can survive and which will
become&lt;br/&gt;extinct. A substantial effort is devoted to understanding
the&lt;br/&gt;dynamics of mathematical models in three areas of
the&lt;br/&gt;biosciences. The first is microbial growth and competition
in&lt;br/&gt;environmental settings where biofilms may form on
surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;Biofilms are of great importance in the health sciences and
food&lt;br/&gt;industry where their formation typically results in
negative&lt;br/&gt;outcomes. They are responsible for food and water
contamination,&lt;br/&gt;dental caries and periodontal disease, and the
contamination of&lt;br/&gt;medical implants. The investigator studies under what
conditions&lt;br/&gt;biofilms may form and what bacterial densities can be
expected.&lt;br/&gt;The second is a fundamental issue in population biology,
the&lt;br/&gt;so-called "paradox of the plankton": why can so many
plankton&lt;br/&gt;species (and, more generally, species of other taxa) be
supported&lt;br/&gt;by so few limiting resources? The investigator
provides&lt;br/&gt;mathematically rigorous results for the existence of
oscillatory&lt;br/&gt;coexistence states of the relevant mathematical models
when the&lt;br/&gt;number of species exceeds the number of resources, as is
typical&lt;br/&gt;in natural environments. The third is a more robust theory
of&lt;br/&gt;persistence (also called permanence) for dynamical
systems&lt;br/&gt;arising in population dynamics. In its simplest form, this
theory&lt;br/&gt;seeks not to determine the global behavior of solutions of
a&lt;br/&gt;dynamical system representing interacting populations but
rather&lt;br/&gt;to answer the more basic question: What species are present
at&lt;br/&gt;the end of the day? While past research in this area
has&lt;br/&gt;primarily ignored the fact that population models are
only&lt;br/&gt;approximately correct, the investigator seeks to provide
answers&lt;br/&gt;to the basic question that hold true for all small
perturbations&lt;br/&gt;of the model equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;