* 0107027
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  A Sequence-, Chemo-, and Biostratigraphic Study of Late Early Cambrian Rocks, Southern Selwyn Basin, Mackenzie Mountains,  Canada
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Michael Pope, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2004
* USD 134,211.00

ABSTRACT Collaborative Research: A Sequence-, Chemo-, Biostratigraphic Study of
Late Early Cambrian Rocks, Southern Selwyn Basin, Mackenzie Mountains, Canada

This project investigates how early episodes of animal evolution, which
occurred roughly 520 million years ago during the so-called Cambrian radiation,
were influenced by environmental changes. To investigate these issues we will
study the sedimentology, paleontology, and geochemistry of the Early Cambrian
rocks of the Mackenzie Mountains, Northwest Territories, Canada. This is a
remote location, but it has a remarkably complete geological record for the
Early Cambrian interval. This gives us a window into the life forms and
environments of both shallow and deep water settings, a situation found nowhere
else for this time period. The types of environmental changes we will study
include both changes in the relative level of the seas as well as temperature
changes: the two are partly linked. During the Cambrian radiation there may have
been rapid oscillations between relatively warm and cold climates. To determine
the nature of these environmental changes, it is necessary to understand the
variations in the rock types, which we will study in detail. It is also
necessary to study when these variations occurred; this we will accomplish by
documenting the sequence of fossil species and through use of chemical isotopes.
Evolutionary changes and extinction events in this region, and elsewhere, and
their relationship to the environmental changes, will also be documented. In
this manner, we will not only come to better understand the nature of the
environmental changes that occurred during this critical interval in earth
history, but we will also determine how one of the key episodes in the history
of life may have been fundamentally driven by climatic changes.