* 0107175
* Acquistion of a New Automation System for an Electron Microprobe
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Bruce Marsh, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2004
* USD 90,444.00

0107175&lt;br/&gt;Ferry&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support is requested for
acquisition of a new automation system for the JEOL JXA-8600 electron microprobe
in the Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences at Johns Hopkins University.
The instrument is 13 years old and a number of components are failing and
unreliable including the memory devices, the LSI 11/73 computer, the energy
dispersive spectrometer (EDS), and the stage motor drives. In addition, because
the operating system, EDS, and computers are outdated, the instrument is
incapable of a number of important functions that modern microprobes can perform
such as light element detection by EDS (B through F); position-tagged
spectroscopy; simultaneous collection of images and compositional data;
integrated data collection, data reduction, and image processing with the same
computer; and rapid exchange of images and analytical data between the
microprobe and external computers. Support is also requested to replace the
aging and dysfunctional carbon coater in the microprobe laboratory. An upgraded
electron microprobe would be used in a wide variety of research projects
including studies in metamorphic petrology, igneous petrology, mineralogy,
crystallography, sedimentology, geochemistry, geochronology, radioactive waste
disposal and remediation, materials science, and medicine. An electron
microprobe, operating at top performance, will continue to play a key role in
training the next generation of Earth scientists by serving as a principal
research instrument for students at the undergraduate, graduate, and
postdoctoral levels. The Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences and the
School of Arts and Sciences have pledged to cover 16.7% and 33.3% of the cost of
the acquisition, respectively. NSF is requested to cover the remaining 50%. The
Department will continue to support the electron microprobe facility by paying
the salary and benefits of the technician. The School of Arts and Sciences will
continue to support the facility with an annual block
contribution.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;