* 0107803
* Altering the Course of Quantum Dynamics Phenomena
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Herschel Rabitz, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* joyce guest
* 07/31/2004
* USD 445,500.00

Herschel Rabitz of Princeton University is supported by the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry Program for research that deals with development of new
theoretical concepts relevant to the control of quantum phenomena and the
extraction of mechanistic and other physical information from the control
process. The project has four components: (A) design and analysis of molecular
controls, (B) exploration of special control objectives, (C) development of
closed loop algorithms to guide laboratory learning control, and (D) development
of closed loop algorithms for extracting molecular interactions from laboratory
control experiments. Components (A) and (B) aim to attain physical insights into
the control of quantum phenomena through theoretical and computational analysis.
The emphasis in items (C) and (D) is on bolstering the emerging closed loop
laboratory capabilities for controlling quantum processes by the introduction of
new algorithms. Close connections exist among all of the proposed research
categories, with some of the design and analysis studies serving as forerunners
to the closed loop algorithm development. Although this research is theoretical
and computational in nature, it aims for direct impact on emerging laboratory
control experiments. Several collaborative laboratory ventures have therefore
been established, with the objective of transferring the proposed concepts and
algorithms into the laboratory for rapid implementation. Collectively, the
research aims to advance the capabilities to manipulate molecular processes and
more general quantum phenomena while simultaneously extracting as much physical
information as possible from the efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the
invention of laser, chemists have dreamed of selectively exciting regions within
a molecule and thus causing a controlled chemical reaction to occur. Long ago it
was realized, however, that energy redistributes in molecules so rapidly that it
is it not possible to concentrate enough energy in a selected bond to cause it
to break. With the advent of laser pulse modulation techniques and the
application of quantum control theory, it now appears that laser selective
chemistry could potentially become a reality with ultimately practical
applications.