* 0107922
* RUI:  The Early Evolution of the Pholidota and a Reexamination of the Monophyly of the Cohort Edentata (Mammalia)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2005
* Timothy Gaudin, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 07/31/2005
* USD 126,388.00

The members of the mammalian orders Pholidota (the Old World pangolins, or scaly
anteaters) and Xenarthra (the New World armadillos, anteaters and sloths and
their extinct kin) are among the most unusual of all placental mammals. Despite
the differences in anatomy, ecology and geographic distribution presented by
these mammals, previous studies have suggested that these two orders share a
close common ancestry, as evidenced by the reduction or elimination of their
teeth and a handful of other detailed anatomical similarities. Unfortunately,
the potential relationship of these two groups to one another or to other groups
of placental mammals remains one of the least investigated portions of placental
mammal phylogeny. The goal of the proposed study is twofold: (a) to support
research at the National Museum of Natural History in Washington, D.C. including
preparation, illustration and description of a complete skeleton of the fossil
pangolin Patriomanis americanus.; and (b) to conduct an analysis of the
phylogenetic relationships of the order Pholidota, including all seven living
species as well as the three other well-known extinct pangolins, Eomanis and
Necromanis, from the Eocene and Oligo-Miocene of Europe respectively, as well as
an undescribed taxon from the Eocene of Mongolia. The results from this new
phylogenetic study will be combined with the results of previous studies on the
systematic relationships within the order Xenarthra to form the foundation of a
broader study on the phylogeny of the Cohort Edentata, a group that ostensibly
includes the pholidotans, xenarthrans and an extinct early Tertiary group of
burrowing mammals, the Palaeanodonta. The proposed study will examine skeletal
characteristics in representatives of each of the major extinct and living
family level groupings within Pholidota, Xenarthra and Palaeanodonta. These
characters will then be compared to the condition in a range of living and
extinct placental and marsupial ingroup and outgroup taxa. This study will be
the first comprehensive cladistic investigation of edentate relationships based
on anatomical features. It will also be the only such study to incorporate all
the major edentate lineages, as well as a broad sampling of other placental
orders, including representatives of each of the major placental supraordinal
groups identified by previous studies. The results of the proposed study will
serve as an important groundwork for understanding the evolution of the various
unusual anatomical and ecological specializations that characterize pholidotan
and xenarthran mammals, the prevalence of convergent adaptations in these
groups, and the biogeographic history that underlies their diversification.
Furthermore, some previous work has suggested that some or all of these edentate
groups diverged from other placental mammals at or near the base of the
placental radiation. If this is indeed the case, an improved understanding of
edentate evolution may yield insight into the early biogeographic history and
adaptive radiation of all placental mammals. One or more undergraduate students
will be trained in various aspects of paleontological and systematics research.

