* 0107437
* High Temperature Corrosion Gordon Conference; New London, NH; July 22 - 27, 2001
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2001,04/30/2002
* Carlyle Storm, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 04/30/2002
* USD 4,000.00

0107437&lt;br/&gt;Storm &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High temperature corrosion is a
topic of considerable technological importance that deals with very complex
systems. The purpose of this conference is to examine fundamental issues of the
corrosion process in order to understand and improve material performance in
high-temperature applications. The conference includes the following sessions
whose topics are considered timely for discussion and where significant recent
developments have been made: 1. Effect of Water Vapor; 2. Fundamentals of the
Oxide/Metal Interface; 3. Initial Stage Oxidation; 4. Bond Coat Oxidation; 5.
Stresses in Scales and Coatings; 6. Stresses and Scale Failure; 7. High
Temperature Coatings; 8. Corrosion in Aggressive Industrial Environments; and 9.
Oxide Scales in Bio-Materials. Nine sections are planned for the conference,
each led by a scientist familiar with the subject area to facilitate
discussions. Speakers are invited by the chair for their expertise and recent
progress in areas deemed to be at the frontiers of science. Ample time is
allowed after each presentation for extensive discussions between the speaker
and the audience. Graduate students have been encouraged to attend and present
posters. The poster sessions further broaden the program and create more
opportunities for the exchange of ideas. The award is used to support graduate
students so that they can have an opportunity to meet and interact with experts
in their field in this unique environment.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The Gordon
Research Conferences were established with the aim of bringing together
scientists in a particular area and permit them to discuss in depth all aspects
of the most recent advances in the field and to stimulate new directions for
future research. This goal is met today by the selection of highly qualified
speakers with a meeting format that promotes interactions and
discussions.&lt;br/&gt;***