* 0107455
* Graphs and Patterns in Mathematics and Theoretical Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Detlef Gromoll, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2003
* USD 70,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0107455&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Mikhail Lyubich&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Conference
on Graphs and Patterns in&lt;br/&gt;Mathematics and Theoretical Physics at SUNY
Stone Brook in 2001&lt;br/&gt;will bring together researchers in several
branches of&lt;br/&gt;mathematics and theoretical physics in which graphs play
a&lt;br/&gt;central role, hoping to encourage fruitful interactions
between&lt;br/&gt;these fields. This conference is a celebration of
Dennis&lt;br/&gt;Sullivan's sixtieth birthday and addresses some of the topics
of&lt;br/&gt;recent interest to Sullivan. Themes to be emphasized include
(1)&lt;br/&gt;graphs and algebra, (2) graphs and discrete Riemannian
geometry&lt;br/&gt;and discrete gauge theory, (3) graphs and bifurcation
patterns in&lt;br/&gt;dynamical systems, (4) graphs and quantum field theory
and&lt;br/&gt;topology. Minicourses on conference topics will be
pointed&lt;br/&gt;towards graduate students and junior
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A graph in the sense used in the title of this
conference is a&lt;br/&gt;data structure consisting of some number of
"vertices," usually&lt;br/&gt;drawn as dots, joined by "edges," usually drawn as
curves&lt;br/&gt;beginning at one vertex and ending at another. This kind
of&lt;br/&gt;graph is a common combinatorial structure, encountered every
day&lt;br/&gt;in problems of transportation and scheduling (consider a
network&lt;br/&gt;of roads or telephone lines, for example), but useful in
many&lt;br/&gt;less obvious ways. Some of the recent uses of graphs in
geometry&lt;br/&gt;and physical theory grow out of Richard Feynman's celebrated
idea&lt;br/&gt;of describing parts of quantum theory with graphs that
represent&lt;br/&gt;possible lifetimes for a particle in space-time.
Feynman's&lt;br/&gt;notion that a quantum theoretic quantity may represent a sum
over&lt;br/&gt;all possible histories is reduced from a large,
continuous&lt;br/&gt;calculation to a summation indexed by the different
possible&lt;br/&gt;Feynman graphs. In a similar manner, modern geometers
and&lt;br/&gt;physicists are exploring ways to work with the very
large&lt;br/&gt;collections of all possible geometric structures on a
particular&lt;br/&gt;space by reducing to manipulations of a family of graphs.