* 0107159
* The Barrett Lectures May, 2001 "New Directions and Developments in Computational Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2001,04/30/2002
* Ohannes Karakashian, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Mavriplis
* 04/30/2002
* USD 9,320.00

The investigator and his colleagues organize the 2001 John H. Barrett
&lt;br/&gt;Memorial Lectures in the University of Tennessee at Knoxville from
&lt;br/&gt;May 10-12, 2001. The Barrett Lectures have been held annually since
1972. &lt;br/&gt;Each year a different topic is chosen, representing the
research interests &lt;br/&gt;of the mathematics faculty of the University of
Tennessee. &lt;br/&gt;Since 1993, the lectures have consisted of
three&lt;br/&gt;one-hour survey talks by each of three leading
researchers&lt;br/&gt;representing different themes/directions in a single
field. The topic of &lt;br/&gt;the 2001 Barrett Lectures is: ``New Directions
and Developments in &lt;br/&gt;Computational Mathematics". The focus of the
lectures is parallel &lt;br/&gt;numerical algorithms for partial differential
equations and their &lt;br/&gt;implementations and applications. The main
speakers of the 2001 Barrett &lt;br/&gt;Lectures are Jinchao Xu of Penn State
University, David Keyes of &lt;br/&gt;Old Dominion University and ICASE, and
Mary Wheeler of University of &lt;br/&gt;Texas at Austin. Each of them will
deliver three one-hour survey lectures &lt;br/&gt;on recent developments on
parallel numerical algorithms with three &lt;br/&gt;different emphases: theory
(Xu), computer implementation (Keyes), &lt;br/&gt;and application (Wheeler). In
addition to the main speakers, six&lt;br/&gt;speakers are also invited to give
one-hour talks on topics related &lt;br/&gt;to one of the main
lectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Barrett Lectures are partly funded by a grant
from Tennessee Science &lt;br/&gt;Alliance, and have often received additional
support from the National &lt;br/&gt;Science Foundation. They attract wide
interest, with an audience of between &lt;br/&gt;40 and 50 participants from the
whole country, in addition to faculty and &lt;br/&gt;students from Knoxville and
the Oak Ridge National Laboratory. They represent &lt;br/&gt;one of the few long
standing lecture series in mathematics in the southeastern &lt;br/&gt;United
States. The main objective of the 2001 Barrett Lectures is to provide
&lt;br/&gt;the participants with an exposition of parallel numerical algorithms
for &lt;br/&gt;partial differential equations arising from various
&lt;br/&gt;scientific/engineering/industrial applications, through in-depth
survey&lt;br/&gt;lectures and informal discussions with the above three leading
researchers &lt;br/&gt;in the field. Additional goals are to foster
interdisciplinary collaboration, &lt;br/&gt;particularly with researchers in the
Computer Science Department and in the &lt;br/&gt;College of Engineering at the
University of Tennessee and several other &lt;br/&gt;southeastern institutions,
and to generate a set of written surveys in the &lt;br/&gt;subject, which the
organizing committee will endeavor to have published &lt;br/&gt;in book form.
The fund being requested from the NSF will be spent&lt;br/&gt;providing partial
support towards travel and accommodation for $20$ graduate&lt;br/&gt;students
and recent Ph.D.'s who do not have research grants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;