* 0107368
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Linking Large-scale Tree Inventory Efforts in the World's Richest Forests
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2005
* Nigel Pitman, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 05/31/2005
* USD 60,000.00

0107368&lt;br/&gt;Pitman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Research Fellow
Awards Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-
four months of research abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for
joint research, and the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and
experimental conditions abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide
twelve months of support to Dr. Nigel C. Pitman to work with Dr. Eduardo E.
Ceron at the Universidad Central del Ecuador in Quito, Ecuador on a study of the
linking of large-scale tree inventory efforts in the world's richest
forests&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;In the past, plant ecologists had to use data from
just one or two vegetation samples, datasets often comprised of fewer individual
plants than the number of species in the flora of the area they were studying.
Today, there are large networks with dozens of hectares of tree plots scattered
over hundreds of square kilometers. This project will link two of these large-
scale datasets via a transect of new plots joining Ecuador and Iquitos, and a
web-based standardization program in Ecuadorean and Peruvian herbaria. The
project will provide specific answers to questions about how and why forest
composition and diversity vary on a regional scale across Amazonia, and it will
permit careful comparisons of patterns of habitat preferences, dominance and
rarity between these two well-studied sites. Finally, the project will bring
together Ecuadorean and Peruvian botanists and institutions, until recently
separated by a 45-year border conflict, and provide a first demonstration of how
to link other Amazonian networks in the future&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Ceron
has carried out quantitative inventories of Ecuadorean vegetation and has long-
term experience in identifying tree species in the Amazonian
lowlands.&lt;br/&gt;