* 0107172
* Dissertation Research: Evolution of a Disease-resistance Polymorphism in Ipomoea purpurea
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2004
* Mark Rausher, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 05/31/2004
* USD 8,800.00

Rausher&lt;br/&gt;0107172&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Natural populations of the tall
morning glory (Ipomoea purpurea) are commonly infected by a fungal pathogen,
Coleosporium ipomoeae. This plant has a single gene with two alleles that
condition either complete resistance or susceptibility to infection. Both
alleles are represented in natural populations of the tall morning glory, a
pattern found in many wild plant species. This observation contradicts the
intuitive prediction that an allele providing resistance against a harmful
pathogen should approach a frequency of one. Hypotheses proposed to explain the
resistance/susceptibility allele paradox suggest the net benefit of a resistance
allele is mediated by inherent costs when the pathogen population is dynamic.
This project will use field experiments to explore the potentially conditional
benefits of the resistance allele in the tall morning glory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work attempts to explain how natural selection may
act to maintain genetic variation using the resistance/susceptibility allele
paradox as a case study. In addition to contributing to the resolution of a
fundamental issue in evolutionary biology, this work may also have applications
to crop breeders who have historically incorporated resistance alleles from the
wild progenitors of crop plants. As many countries become increasingly skeptical
of transgenic crops, there is a renewed need to understand how natural selection
acts on resistance alleles in natural populations, both to better utilize
current resistant crops and to better conserve the natural resource that
resistance alleles represent. &lt;br/&gt;