* 0107384
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Experimental Determination of Lifecycles of Cestode Parasites of Elasmobranchs Using DNA Sequence Data
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2003
* Gaines Tyler, Tyler, Gaines A
* Fellowship Award
* John Tsapogas
* 12/31/2003
* USD 42,126.00

0107384 Tyler

The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will provide twelve months of support to Dr. Gaines Tyler to work
with Dr. Thomas H. Cribb at the University of Queensland in Brisbane, Australia.

This project will determine life-cycles for 9-12 species of tapeworms from
elasmobranches (final hosts). DNA sequences from adult specimens will be used to
construct a library. Larval stages will be identified by comparing their DNA
sequences to sequences in the library. By identifying hosts for both adult and
larva, the final stage of the life-cycle will be determined. This project will
address the specificity of parasite-host relationships in these cestode species.
The life cycles of tapeworms in elasmobranches are poorly known and this project
will extend our knowledge.

The research site, Australia's Great Barrier Reef, hosts one of the greatest
diversities of elasmobranches in the world. Dr. Cribb has extensive experience
in the resolution of flatworm life-cycles using molecular techniques.