* 0107357
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Self-Assembly of Coated Colloidal Particles for Optical Applications
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* Matthew Yates, University of Rochester
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 07/31/2003
* USD 23,430.00

0107357&lt;br/&gt;Yates&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Research Fellow
Awards Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-
four months of research abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for
joint research, and the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and
experimental conditions abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a
six-month postdoctoral research fellowship by Dr. Matthew Z. Yates of the
University of Rochester, to work with Dr. Frank Caruso at Max Planck Institute
for Colloids and Interfaces in Potsdam, Germany.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photonic
crystals are materials that are opaque to certain wavelengths of light while
allowing the transmission of other wavelengths. The wavelength region where
these materials are opaque is referred to as the photonic band gap. Photonic
crystals offer promise for use in the next generation of communications and
computing technology in which light is used instead of electrons for information
transmission and processing. The unique optical properties of photonic crystals
arise from the periodic variation in the refractive index of the material on a
length scale near the wavelength of light. One promising route for the synthesis
of photonic crystals is the ordered stacking of colloidal particles. When
monodisperse sized colloidal particles are allowed to sediment slowly, they will
form a hexagonally stacked structure referred to as a "colloidal crystal". It is
the goal of this research project to form colloidal crystals from polymer
particles coated with a thin layer of nanoparticles to modify optical properties
of the colloidal crystal. Both high refractive index nanoparticles such as
titanium dioxide or lead sulfide, and luminescent nanoparticles such as CdS and
CdTe will be used to modify the optical properties of the photonic crystals.
Caruso and coworkers have recently formed colloidal crystals of polystyrene
coated with luminescent nanoparticles. The presence of the luminescent
nanoparticles enhanced the photonic band gap of the polystyrene photonic
crystal, as shown with UV-Vis spectroscopy. The optical properties of coated
colloidal crystals remain to be investigated in detail. Key questions to answer
are how the photonic band gap varies with the thickness of the coating layer,
overall particle size, and optical properties of the nanoparticles in the
coating layer.&lt;br/&gt;