* 0107376
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Charge Transport Processes in Novel High Quality Organic Molecular Crystals
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2001,05/31/2002
* Hugh Hillhouse, Hillhouse, Hugh W
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 05/31/2002
* USD 20,465.00

0107376 Hillhouse

The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a six month postdoctoral research fellowship by Dr. Hugh
W. Hillhouse to work with Dr. Teun M. Klapwijk at Delft University of Technology
in the Netherlands.

This project will study organic based materials that can be used in the
development of semiconductors and superconductors. Recently there was an
important breakthrough in the synthesis of organic molecular crystals. This
resulted in high quality crystals that are insulating, but may be converted to a
semiconductor, metallic, or superconducting state by simply turning a knob. This
unique property provides experimenters with an extra degree of freedom to study
the fundamental physics of the solid state. However, still little is known about
the synthesis of these crystals. The objective of this project is to first study
the growth of these crystals with particular emphasis on correlating structural
order, defects, and purity to the measured electronic structure. The crystals
will then be used as model systems to study the fundamentals of charge
transport, the nature of the metal-insulator transition, and the origin of
superconductivity.

Dr. Klapwijk is an expert on superconductivity, nanoscopic phenomena, and charge
transport in organic materials. He also has strong collaborative ties to Philips
Research Laboratories where there is an active program to develop electronic
devices based on organic transistors.