* 0107219
* Dissertation Research: Do Virulence Costs Help Maintain Avr Genes in Plant Pathogen Populations?
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2003
* Joy Bergelson, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2003
* USD 9,880.00

0107219&lt;br/&gt;Bergelson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants can recognize gene
products produced by pathogens, and this recognition triggers a strong defensive
response that severely limits the pathogen's growth in the plant. An important
question in the area of plant disease, is "Why do pathogens carry genes which
ultimately trigger a defense response against them"? In this Doctoral
Dissertation Improvement Grant, the researchers propose to look for benefits
associated with the pathogen genes that elicit plant defenses. They propose to
take a plant pathogenic bacteria and remove several of the elicitor genes, and
then compare the performance of the original strains (which have all the genes)
to the mutant strain (which possesses a subset of the genes). The researchers
will investigate several factors including disease pathology, epidemiology, and
survival, under both greenhouse and natural field conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Agriculture and the plant biotechnology industry are very
interested in pathogen defense elicitor genes. It is now possible to engineer
plants to express new resistance genes that recognize the elicitor genes of
common plant pathogens. Before such a strategy is attempted, it would be
valuable to understand how the elicitor genes function and are maintained in
pathogen populations. If elicitor genes can be removed with little or no fitness
cost to the pathogens, then a biotechnology strategy that depends on the
expression of elicitor genes can easily fail.&lt;br/&gt;