* 0107666
* IGMS:  Optimizing Supply Networks and Re-Entrant Manufacturing Systems in the Semiconductor Industry
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Matthias Kawski, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 08/31/2003
* USD 99,945.00

The PI will perform research on supply networks and scheduling of re-entrant
manufacturing systems while in residence in the Technology and Manufacturing
Group at INTEL Corporation. While transferring theoretical results and paradigms
of nonlinear control into large scale industrial applications, a major objective
is to develop in-depth knowledge of the practical needs, constraints, and
objectives of industrial operations, sufficient for effective future
collaborations with representatives from industry, business, and industrial
engineering faculty, and to optimally prepare future undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical focus is on problems of immediate
interest to the semi-conductor industry. As a roughly $100B business in the US
alone, this industry is characterized by capital intensive manufacturing plants
and&lt;br/&gt;short product life-cycles. Together with rapidly changing demands
and prices, this framework promises a particularly high return on investments to
optimize operations. The first problem is to optimize the management of the
global supply networks of the semiconductor industry. This includes phasing
in/out changing products, using facilities that are distributed around the
globe, avoiding overproduction and hedging against fluctuations in demand and
production. A key objective is to connect commonly used financial with optimal
control. The second problem is to optimize the scheduling of re-entrant
manufacturing systems. A major theoretical problem is to formulate an analogue
of the dynamic programming paradigm for such systems without a distinguished
direction of signal flow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will immediately
impact the many courses taught and seminar series organized by the PI. He will
also quickly communicate his insights to the larger communities in mathematical
control and undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;education. This IGMS project is jointly
supported by the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the
Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS).