* 0107074
* The Chanka Archaeological Project
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2004
* Brian Bauer, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2004
* USD 87,853.00

The Chanka Archaeology Project under the direction of Dr. Brian Bauer is
dedicated to documenting and interpreting the development of &lt;br/&gt;complex
societies in the Andahuaylas region of the Peruvian Andes from AD 500
&lt;br/&gt;to AD 1532. The Chanka who once lived in the region are of special
interest &lt;br/&gt;to archaeologists and historians since they once rivaled and
fought against &lt;br/&gt;the Inca State for control of the central
Andes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The topic of early state development is a major
theoretical issue of current &lt;br/&gt;anthropological research. The Chanka
have been excluded from these discussions &lt;br/&gt;since very little original
archeological research has been conducted in their &lt;br/&gt;core region. What
theories have been presented concerning the development of &lt;br/&gt;the Chanka
are largely derived from readings of the Spanish chronicles. Until
&lt;br/&gt;these models are tested against archaeological data they will remain
&lt;br/&gt;hypothetical and untested and the study of the pre-Hispanic social
&lt;br/&gt;organization of the Chanka can not advance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project, which will run for three field seasons, includes a systematic
&lt;br/&gt;archaeological survey of the Chanka heartland and an extensive review
of &lt;br/&gt;archival materials located in Peru and Spain. The survey will
cover an area &lt;br/&gt;of approximately 200 square kilometers and provide a
comprehensive data base &lt;br/&gt;on the location, size and age of
archaeological sites in the Andahuaylas &lt;br/&gt;Valley. The results of the
survey will be used to address a series of &lt;br/&gt;questions concerning the
development of complex societies in the region. For &lt;br/&gt;example: What
effect did the conquest of the region by the Wari Empire (AD
&lt;br/&gt;550-1000) have on the indigenous populations?, Is there evidence of
early &lt;br/&gt;state development in the valley during the Late Intermediate
Period (AD 1000 - &lt;br/&gt;1400)? and, What was the social organization of the
Andahuaylas area during &lt;br/&gt;the period of Inca
rule?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The archival research will take place in Cuzco,
Andahuaylas, and Lima (Peru) &lt;br/&gt;as well as in Seville (Spain). The
historical research will support, &lt;br/&gt;complement, and extend the
archaeological field work by providing concise data &lt;br/&gt;on specific sites
and by procuring additional information on the land &lt;br/&gt;holdings,
populations, and social organization of Chanka kin
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In sum, the Chanka Archaeological Project will
provide a regional context to &lt;br/&gt;study the development of the Chanka and
it will enable scholars to address &lt;br/&gt;questions concerning the
development of Chanka society before and after Inca &lt;br/&gt;expansionism. The
project will also enable researchers to make comparisons &lt;br/&gt;between the
development of the Chanka and that of other important groups, both &lt;br/&gt;in
the Andes and elsewhere in the ancient New
World.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;