* 0107297
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Phylogenetic Analysis of the Phaeophyceae (Brown Algae)  Based on rbcL and LSU Sequences
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2001,10/31/2003
* Naomi Phillips, Phillips, Naomi E
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 10/31/2003
* USD 72,540.00

0107297 Phillips

The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will provide twenty-four months of support to Dr. Naomi E. Phillips
to work with Dr. Gary W. Saunders at the University of New Brunswick in
Fredericton, Canada.

This project will use the rbcL and LSU sequence information to elucidate the
ordinal and some familial relationships among the Phaeophyceae (brown algae).
Brown algae are one of the most dominant and biologically diverse groups of
primary producers in coastal marine environments. They exhibit a wide range of
morphological forms, from simple microscopic and macroscopic filaments to large
and complex parenchymatous thalli. Economically, brown algae are major sources
of natural products and biomedical supplies. Despite their importance, research
is just beginning to examine objectively evolutionary relationships and a
consensus in terms of a natural classification system that reflects phylogenetic
relationships is missing. It is critical to our conservation of these resources
that we initiate comprehensive studies to understand them. The results of this
research will contribute no only to our understanding of this group of
organisms, but will facilitate future research in other areas, such as ecology.

Dr. Gary Saunders is an established researcher in brown algal systematics with
expertise in both traditional and molecular techniques.