* 0107322
* International Research Fellowship Program:  The Breaking of Electroweak Symmetry in the Standard Model
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2001,01/31/2003
* Bruce Knuteson, University of Chicago
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 01/31/2003
* USD 37,750.00

0107322&lt;br/&gt;Knuteson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Research
Fellow Awards Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to
twenty-four months of research abroad. The program's awards provide
opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a six month postdoctoral
research fellowship for Dr. Bruce Knuteson, University of Chicago, to work with
Dr. Bolek Pietrzyk at the European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) in
Geneva, Switzerland. This project is co-funded by the Math and Physical Science
Directorate's Office of Multidisciplinary Activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Standard Model is a very successful theory of elementary particles and their
interactions, accurately predicting (or at least accommodating) nearly all
particle physics measurements to date. The PI is interested in understanding the
nature of electroweak symmetry breaking in the standard model through the
analysis of particle interactions at extremely high
energies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Pietrzyk works on ALEPH, one of four large
experiments on the Large Electron-Positron (LEP) colliders at CERN. In the past
ten years, the ALEPH experiment has made precision tests of the standard
model.&lt;br/&gt;