* 0107938
* Collaborative Research: Host-Associated Genetic Differentiation in the Goldenrod Elliptical-Gall Moth Gnorimoschema Gallaesolidaginis - Parallel Host Race Formation?
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* John Nason, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2006
* USD 240,000.00

0107938&lt;br/&gt;Nason&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The astounding diversity of
herbivorous insects (1-5 million species) is poorly understood, but one possible
mechanism for their diversification is sympatric speciation via host race
formation - that is, adaptation to and speciation on different host plants in
the absence of geographic barriers to gene exchange. While a few cases of host
race formation in sympatry are known, it remains un-known whether this process
is rare and special or frequent and predictable. A promising avenue toward
answering this question is provided by the diverse group of insects attacking
the goldenrods Solidago altissima and S. gigantea.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Focussing on one of these insects, the goldenrod
elliptical-gall moth, Gnorimoschema gallaesolidaginis, we will use genetic data
to document the geographic extent and structure of genetic differentiation,
reconstruct the history of host shifting, and identify evolutionary forces
driving differentiation. At the same time, we will use lab and field experiments
to identify ecological mechanisms maintaining host plant affiliation and
reproductive isolation (e.g. mate choice, adult and larval host choice, and/or
host-associated tradeoffs in larval performance). Our studies of differentiation
in G. gallaesolidaginis will complement ongoing studies of differentiation in
other Solidago herbivores. Together, these studies will tell us much about how
(and how often) host race formation might have contributed to the spectacular
diversification of herbivorous insects. &lt;br/&gt;