* 0107360
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Subcatastrophic Floods: Effects on Lotic Ecosystem Structure and Function
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Steven Francoeur, Francoeur, Steven N
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 08/31/2002
* USD 35,420.00

0107360 Francoeur

The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will provide 12 months of support to Dr. Steven N. Francoeur to work
with Dr. Barry J. F. Biggs at the National Institute for Water and Atmospheric
Research in Christchurch, New Zealand.

The PI will conduct coupled field and laboratory investigations of the effects
of low-intensity flood events on stream periphyton and invertebrates. The
overall objectives of this work are to 1) discover patterns in the biotic
communities of natural streams related to low-intensity flood events by using
time-series sampling and correlative analyses, and 2) test the causal role of
low-intensity floods in generating these patterns by conducting manipulative
experiments in large, outdoor artificial streams. He expects that low-intensity
flood events may cause quite different biological responses than high-intensity
floods, perhaps even resulting in increased biomass or productivity. Working in
New Zealand with Dr. Biggs provides an ideal setting because of the great number
of streams with differing flood regimes in a small geographical area, and they
already have an artificial stream facility for experimental work, plus, Dr.
Biggs leads a highly productive research team specializing in investigation of
the role of flood events in stream ecosystems.