* 0107875
* U.S.-Germany Workshop: An Integrated Assessment of the Ecological, Meteorological, and Human Dimensions of Global Desertification
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2002
* James Reynolds, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 07/31/2002
* USD 15,000.00

0107875&lt;br/&gt;Reynolds&lt;br/&gt;This award supports James Reynolds of Duke
University and junior and senior researchers from various U.S. universities to
participate in a workshop on assessment of the ecological, meteorological, and
human dimensions of global desertification. Desertification is the result of a
complex mixture of causes, including over-cultivation, overgrazing, fuel
gathering, and climate variability. In areas affected, many perceive that the
capacity of the land to support human populations, livestock, and wild
herbivores has thereby been substantially reduced. Although much international
effort has addressed this problem, many uncertainties and misconceptions still
exist. A major challenge is to come up with a synthetic assessment framework for
identifying what matters where and when in order to extrapolate results from
studies in one area to other regions. To meet that challenge, the present
workshop will focus directly on the synthetic framework and on forging working
collaborations with international researchers from different disciplines.
Especially important is that scientists recognize the need for new
interdisciplinary approaches for addressing the pressing global problem of
desertification and seek to explore a new paradigm for a synthetic framework
that goes beyond regional concerns.&lt;br/&gt;