* 0107429
* Fundamental Studies of Novel Inorganic Fullerenes
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Bruce Parkinson, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 08/31/2005
* USD 447,437.00

The focus of this project is to study a recently discovered class of inorganic
closed shell nanostructures, composed of nested octahedra of layered-structure
transition metal dichalcogenides that are expected to have discrete
stoichiometries. The synthesis and properties of the molybdenum disulfide and
-diselinide nano-octahedra as well as other layered materials such as tantalum
disulfide, niobium diselinide, tungsten disulfide, molybdenum diselinide, and
molybdenum diteluride, produced by laser ablation of the bulk material will be
investigated. The currently used laser ablation method for "inorganic
fullerenes" (IF) production will be optimized, and other methods for producing
these novel structures such as are discharge will be explored. The structural
and electronic properties of the novel IF phases will be investigated with
scanning probe microscopies. Individual IF particles will be imaged and their
electronic properties measured via tunneling spectroscopy, both under ambient
conditions and as a function of temperature in an ultrahigh vacuum environment.
The electronic density of states, measured by tunneling spectroscopy, will
determine if these new materials are semiconducting or metallic. Additionally
these properties will be studied as a function of size, shape and composition of
the IF structures. The IF materials are potentially useful as lubricants due to
a combination of low rolling and sliding friction. The intrinsically
monodisperse semiconducting IFs will be useful for quantum dot applications. %%%
Both graduate and undergraduate students working on this project will be exposed
to the excitement of discovery associated with opening a new area of solid state
chemistry and materials science. They will get experience with many different
synthesis, separation and characterization techniques and learn to communicate
their results to each other and the scientific community. The resulting
interdisciplinary training will make them well prepared for future positions in
academia, industry and government laboratories in areas of chemistry, materials
science and nanotechnology.