* 0108160
* Study of Acceleration and Transport of Energetic Ions in the Heliosphere via Energetic Neutral Atoms (ENA)
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Jozsef Kota, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Bellaire
* 08/31/2004
* USD 199,243.00

The investigators will perform a study of acceleration and transport of
energetic ions in the heliosphere via energetic neutral atoms (ENA) by comparing
observation with simulation. The study encompasses the heliosphere and its
immediate interstellar environment. The main effort is to continue development
of simulations of the production of ENA by the dominant ion populations of the
anomalous cosmic rays (ACR) at and beyond the termination shock of the solar
wind and of the corotating interactions regions (CIR) in the inner heliosphere.
Previously, the investigators have shown that the use of energetic neutral atoms
(ENA) in the study of space plasma can provide the needed global view of the
distribution of energetic charged particles in the entire heliosphere,
especially in regions not easily accessible to space missions. The approach
complements all existing in situ investigations. Simulating the production of
ENA requires modeling the parent ion population. Modeling of the ion populations
needs understanding of ion acceleration and transport as well as the ambient
magnetic-field configuration. Comparing simulated distribution of ENA with the
observed, then, provides a self-consistent global view of ion acceleration and
transport. The main goals of the research are more realistic ACR and CIR
simulations, simulation of production of ENA by other inner heliospheric ion
populations, and simulation of production of energetic helium atoms in ACR, CIR
and other populations. Since the University of Arizona is a student-centered
research university, the project will involve the participation of one
undergraduate and one graduate student.