* 0108932
* The Design of Optimal Social Interaction for Repeated Games
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* Roger Lagunoff, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* LAURA RAZZOLINI
* 07/31/2003
* USD 123,032.00

The theory of repeated games is a vital tool for understanding how groups
overcome collective action problems. In such problems, decisions that are
optimal for the individual may fail to be optimal for the group. So-called "free
rider problems" manifest themselves, for example, in attempts to collude in
oligopolistic industries, in attempts to achieve multilateral tariff reductions
in trade negotiations, and in attempts to cooperate when group effort is
required in voluntary participation problems. In repeated games, the use of
intertemporal sanctions can be used to re-align individual incentives with
collective incentives. It is well known that collectively optimal outcomes can
be sustained in these cases if the participants are sufficiently patient.
Unfortunately, in many cases the players are not patient. In these cases "full
cooperation" often cannot be sustained. However, situations do exist in which
the pattern of interaction in the game can be chosen to maximize the likelihood
of collectively desirable outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One example of this is
found in the design of team projects in firms. A manager must choose the size
and makeup of the team, given the characteristics of the pool of lower level
managers at the firm. Once chosen, individual effort can be mutually enforced by
repeated contact. Another example is in residential planning. Local spillovers
between neighbors are common. Mowing the lawn, leaving one's porch light on, or
volunteering to maintain communal gardens are examples of positive spillovers. A
city planner who knows something about the aggregate population characteristics
must choose among developers' plans, each of which proposes a number and spatial
arrangement of houses. Some plans may be more conducive to facilitating
"neighborly cooperation" than others. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
examines the tradeoffs involved in determining which interaction pattern is
optimal, and how the answer depends on the particulars of the environment. In
the simplest type of such a problem, in each period every individual has a
binary choice between a "cooperative" and an "uncooperative" or "free-riding"
action. The project investigates how the size of the group and the degree of
social connectivity within the group matters for achieving socially desirable
outcomes. The project describes and examines two models of optimal interaction
for repeated play. The first limits a planner's choice to group size. Randomly
determined discount factors introduce unobserved differences in the population.
A planner, knowing only the aggregate distribution of discount factors, chooses
group size m to maximize expected average payoff to the group, given the
anticipated strategic interaction within the group. The second model generalizes
the first to allow the planner to determine, not only group size, but also the
pattern of social linkage within the group. The planner's choice determines both
the pattern of spillovers and the pattern of information
flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present project also extends the investigation
to analyze: (a) the effect of correlation in the types (discount factors) of
individuals, particularly when congestion and crowding play a role; (b) the role
of communication as a way of increasing social interaction in the optimal
solution; and (c) the effect of complexity of equilibrium sanctions on the
optimal pattern of interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;