* 0108815
* SunRISE - Application Of Spectral Synthesis To The Study Of Solar Visible, UV, EUV And Infrared Variability
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Peter Fox, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Continuing Grant
* Paul A. Evenson
* 08/31/2002
* USD 0.00

The investigators will work to understand the physical origins of solar
radiative variability. The main effort is to utilize semi-empirical models of
the solar atmosphere to represent features on the solar surface and, where
discrepancies are discovered, redefine the models. The investigators will then
determine the effect of the distribution of surface features on irradiance and
combine the information with spectral synthesis lines and broad spectral bands
so as to compute spectral and total irradiance for a particular state of the
Sun. Ultimately, the investigators seek to determine the most efficient
measurements to make in the future in order to take advantage of the basic
redundancy in the solar spectrum. The aim of the RISE program is to improve
physical understanding of present, past, and future radiative output variations
in the extreme ultraviolet (EUV), ultraviolet (UV), visible and infrared. In a
practical sense, spectrum synthesis gives insight into the reliability of the
use of surrogates (also known as proxies) to estimate total and spectral
irradiance in the absence of direct measurements of appropriate accuracy. This
exploitation of the natural redundancy and coherence in the solar spectrum can
lead to more efficient measurement and analysis programs. Previous work of the
investigators illustrated the importance of the evolution and spatial
distribution of both plage and network (i.e. magnetic flux emergence) in
determining the detailed time variability of irradiance. This work also revealed
the sensitivity of the continuum intensity variation to structures deeper in the
photosphere. The continuing speculation of a link between solar and climate
variability on timescales longer than a decade raises the important issue of
changes in the color of the solar spectrum due to variability of lines and
continuum. An accurate theoretical estimate of the total solar irradiance and
the shape of the solar radiation spectrum are essential to climate studies.