* 0108358
* Systematics Of The New World Grasshopper Subfamily Melanoplinae
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Daniel Otte, Academy of Natural Sciences Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2005
* USD 217,164.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This research involves a
taxonomic revision of grasshoppers of the subfamily Melanoplinae, accounting for
37% of the known species north of Panama in the Americas. This project includes
collaborative activities among scientists in the U.S., Argentina, and Mexico,
and will generate new collections of material from northern Mexico, Mato Grosso,
Brazil, and highlands of Ecuador. Existing classifications of New World
grasshoppers are almost all wholly or substantially artificial. Phylogenetic
analyses in this study will form the basis for a natural, predictive
classification. Special emphasis will be placed on the large and important genus
Melanoplus. Described species of this genus account for more than half those of
the subfamily and perhaps 20% of American species remain undescribed. The
project will result in a clarification of relationships among species groups and
genera of the subfamily; production of comprehensive electronic taxonomic
"publications" including catalogs and interactive, web accessible diagnostic
keys; collection of new specimens and species; an analysis of evolutionary
patterns within this diverse group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Accurate
identification and predictive classifications for melanopline grasshoppers will
be a valuable resource for many biologists. These animals are of interest to a
wide range of researchers for several reasons. Among them are documented rates
of speciation more rapid than known for any other terrestrial environment.
Species of the subfamily annually consume 6-12% of available forage and are
serious pests in crops and gardens. Currently, it is difficult to identify
species or to distinguish among those that are harmful, beneficial, or neutral
with regard to agriculture. Increasingly, these insects are of interest to
conservation biologists as well. The reference materials produced will have both
research and teaching applications.&lt;br/&gt;