* 0108823
* Development and Applications of Computational Methods of Spectral Analysis: From Quantum Dynamics Calculations to NMR Data Processing.
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2001,12/31/2004
* Vladimir Mandelshtam, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Raima Larter
* 12/31/2004
* USD 296,000.00

Vladimir Mandelshtam is supported by the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry
Program to develop and apply novel theoretical/computational methods, ranging
from data processing in nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) experiments to quantum
chemical dynamics calculations. The central technique that will be used and
further explored is the Filter Diagonalization Method (FDM) for spectral
analysis of time signals, along with variants that will be designed to target
different types of spectral analysis problems. The studies will include
algorithm and code development, in particular the generalization to 2D, 3D, and
4D NMR experiments, and various test calculations using real and synthesized
data. Moreover, the design of new experiments that are uniquely possible with
FDM data processing will be explored in collaboration with experimental NMR
groups. The development and applications of numerical algorithms for quantum
chemical dynamics will continue as well, focusing on physically important
problems such as tunneling splittings and energy shifts (caused by the
environment or isotope substitution). For both numerically exact quantum and
approximate semiclassical approaches, the general two-step scheme involving
signal generation followed by signal processing will be approached with several
methodologies. Successful applications have the potential to reveal new
information or lead to dramatic computational savings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
theoretical and computational methods developed in this spectral analysis
research have broad application possibilities in science and engineering. Along
with enabling major improvements to data analysis in magnetic resonance
spectroscopy, outcomes from this research can potentially impact diverse areas
such as communications science and economics.