* 0108797
* From Solitons to Precessional Dynamics and Chaos - Nonlinear Spin Waves in Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2001,10/31/2004
* Carl Patton, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 10/31/2004
* USD 345,000.00

This project deals with response of thin magnetic films to microwave radiation.
Microwaves can produce novel responses in the films, such as magnetic envelope
(MME) solitons. The thin films provide a powerful and versatile "test bed" for
the study of high frequency nonlinear dynamics and the fundamental properties of
the envelope solitons. The results are relevant to microwave nonlinear wave
propagation in magnetic films and spin-off applications of these effects in
microwave and millimeter wave thin film signal processing. In addition, there is
substantial interest in dynamical nonlinear magnetization processes associated
with flux reversal and spin injection in multi-layer films. The new program will
focus on: (1) direct measurement of the spin waves associated with or generated
by MME solitons; (2) the use of new time and space resolved probe techniques to
measure the spatio temporal and wave vector make up of these pulses on a
nanosecond or subnanosecond time scale; and (3) the nonlinear magnetization
dynamics associated with modulational instability and chaos, free precession,
and spin wave generation by spin injection. Graduate students and post-docs
associated with the project receive excellent training in technical magnetism,
using cutting-edge research tools. They are well equipped for careers in
academe, industry or government. %%% This project studies the properties of
correlated magnetic dipoles (similar to tiny compass needles) in magnetic thin
films. In magnetic field, the dipoles rotate, or precess, much like the
precession of a spinning top due to gravitational field. This leads to so-called
nonlinear effects when the precession angle is large. Chains of such precessing
dipoles can be used to form nonlinear pulses in the form of solitons. Such
soliton pulses are very robust and can propagate without spreading. The
precession can also lead to a switching in the direction of the overall magnetic
moment of a film. Both solitons and switching can lead to other nonlinear
effects such as the generation of new pulses and additional waves of precessing
spins at different frequencies. The unique feature of the work is in the use of
special probes to map the precession dynamics on a nanosecond time scale and a
sub-millimeter distance scale. The results will be useful for the understanding
of nonlinear dynamics in general, with long range applications in microwave
signal processing and magnetic information storage. Graduate students and post-
docs associated with the project receive excellent training in technical
magnetism, using cutting-edge research tools. They are well equipped for careers
in academe, industry or government.