* 0108541
* Inferring Process From Pattern Testing Population Genetic Theory With Temporal Genetic Data
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Elizabeth Hadly, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2004
* USD 255,000.00

0108541&lt;br/&gt;Hadly&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is
to use prehistoric information to test ideas about why animal populations are
distributed as they are across modern landscapes. Geographic variation of modern
species contributes to our understanding of population biology. The research is
important because few opportunities exist to use historic samples to investigate
population structure in naturally functioning ecosystems through time. This
study will use fossil and modern specimens to trace two rodent species (pocket
gophers and montane voles) through the last several thousand years in the
northern Rocky Mountains. The work will reveal which aspects of a species' life
history, such as dispersal ability, litter size and social organization, must be
considered in the analysis of long-term population genetic data. The fossil
deposits span several climatic warming and cooling events, thus providing a
context for investigating species response to environmental
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study is the first in the burgeoning field of
ancient DNA to analyze sequential fossil populations through thousands of years.
In assessing genetic variation through time and across geographic space, this
study will deepen our understanding of processes underlying the history and
future survival of species. Results will provide a historical context for how
mammals with different life histories respond to climatic change. &lt;br/&gt;