* 0108696
* Infrared Photorefractive and Light-Emitting Polymers for Optical Technologies
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Nasser Peyghambarian, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2005
* USD 360,000.00

Objectives. We propose an experiment - theory effort focused on the development
of two classes of multifunctional organic materials to be used for information
technologies. The first class of ma-terials consist of infrared compatible
photorefractive polymers that are suitable for reconfigurable filters, switches
and interconnects. The second class of materials are pi-conjugated polymers with
emission in the infrared. This effort will capitalize on our past experience in
developing photorefrac-tive and light emitting polymers through a combination of
many-body calculations incorporating electron-electron interactions on these
materials and the characterizations of their electrical and nonlinear optical
properties. The operation of existing photorefractive and light emitting
polymers is restricted to the visible region of the spectrum which prevents
their use in telecommunication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Approach. To extend the
spectral sensitivity of photorefractive polymers to the infrared we will use
multiphoton absorption to generate photoconductivity from high energy two-photon
excited states in either a pi-conjugated polymer matrix or an electro-active
chromophore dopant. Theo-retical work will be performed in identifying two-
photon states from which enhanced photogener-ation efficiency is expected. These
results will also guide the design of one-photon photorefractive polymers with
sub-millisecond response time. The search for pi-conjugated polymers with photo-
luminescence in the infrared will build on our recent discovery of the principle
that excited state ordering conducive to light emission at low frequencies is
obtained in pi-conjugated polymers with large molecular unit cells. The specific
structural requirement is that there exists molecular conju-gation transverse to
the direction of conjugation along the polymer chain, leading to longitudinal
confinement and transverse delocalization of the optical exciton. Experimental
studies will be con-ducted on soluble derivatives of poly(isothianaphthene),
which satisfy the structural requirement for infrared
emission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significance and Impact. The proposed infrared
compatible photorefractive and light emitting polymers will enable new devices
for telecommunication technologies. In spite of the rapid advances made in the
area of organic optoelectronics, existing organic materials amid devices operate
largely in the visible region of the electromagnetic spectrum. Our work will
extend the spectral range of applications, and it is expected that the outcomes
of our research will have strong impact on the device physics of organic
materials. The aim is not to compete with the technology utilizing con-ventional
inorganic semiconductors, but to develop new functionalities and applications,
utilizing the unique processing capability of organic materials. Importantly,
the strong coupling between experiment and theory will lead to enhanced
understanding of the fundamental processes of photo-generation, multiphoton
absorption and light emission in organics, an area that is still in its infancy.
Finally, the proposed research provides a unique multidisciplinary framework to
integrate research and teaching. Students working on the project are exposed to
chemistry, optics, engineering, and the fundamental physics of nonlinear
absorption, charge-injection, charge- and energy-transfer, and light
emission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;