* 0108284
* Microbial Communities: Advantages of Multicellular Cooperation; May 3 - 5, 2002, Tucson, Arizona
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2003
* Everett Greenberg, American Society For Microbiology
* Standard Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 04/30/2003
* USD 15,000.00



Microbial communities- complex, self-assembling entities composed of various
types of microorganisms- profoundly affect human society in many ways. Examples
include those that promote plant growth, those that are responsible for ruminant
digestion, and those that carry out the controlled degradative processes used to
treat sewage and break down environmental pollutants. Most microbial processes
upon which the well-being of the biosphere depends are carried out by well-
integrated microbial communities with a high level of structural sophistication
and developmental control. While a microbial community may resemble a
multicellular organism because it has a primitive circulatory system and a
degree of cellular specialization, it differs from these life forms in
significant ways. The community is not assembled from a single genome, as is a
plant or animal, but from a large number of genomes that are programmed to
cooperate in community formation. These ubiquitous communities are not killed by
starvation or limited by reproductive necessities, so perhaps it should not be
surprising that they are among the most successful inhabitants of all ecosystems
on earth, including the most hostile and extreme.

If scientists are to understand microbial communities sufficiently to control
their development or to manipulate them for the benefit of society, they must
understand their "embryology" and their "physiology." A colloquium entitled
"Microbial Communities: Advantages of Multicellular Cooperation" will convene
May 3-5, 2002, in Tucson, Arizona, to generate a consensus on the state of the
field and to develop recommendations for its advancement. The colloquium will
bring together experts in microbiology, bioinformatics, signaling, and ecology.
Following the colloquium, a report will be prepared-in both print and electronic
formats-that will be analytical and comprehensive, and will offer practical
recommendations for the future.





