* 0108459
* Systematics of Polemoniaceae Subfamily Cobaeoideae
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2005
* Larry Prather, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 07/31/2005
* USD 154,608.00

Dr. Larry Prather of Michigan State University is exploring the process of
diversification in the tropical subfamily Cobaeoideae of the Polemoniaceae
(Phlox family) by providing comprehensive taxonomic and phylogenetic studies of
all the species and by combining morphological, ecological, and phylogenetic
data to explore patterns of evolution in the lineage. The tropical subfamily, as
defined here, includes five genera: Acanthogilia, Bonplandia, Cantua, Cobaea and
Huthia. Taxonomic studies will be based on herbarium, field, and greenhouse
studies and will include new data on morphological variation, pollen and seed
morphology, distribution, ecology, chromosome numbers, pollination, reproductive
biology, biogeography, and phylogeny. Morphological phylogenetic studies will be
complemented by molecular studies using nuclear (ITS) and&lt;br/&gt;chloroplast
DNA sequences (trnT - trnL 5' and trnL 3' - trnF spacer regions, and partial
ndhF coding region). Prather, graduate student Anna K. Wiese, and J. Mark Porter
of Rancho Santa Ana Botanic Garden, will perform twelve weeks of South American
fieldwork to document morphological variation and pollination systems.
Phylogenetic data will be combined with comparative morphological studies in at
least two sets of species that have convergent floral morphologies associated
with similar pollination mechanisms. These analyses will help to discern how
homology and character evolution contribute to the repetitive evolution of
similar floral syndromes. &lt;br/&gt;Groundbreaking evolutionary and ecological
studies have been performed on&lt;br/&gt;members of the plant family
Polemoniaceae, yet little is known about the tropical members of this group.
Several of these species have important cultural contributions; they have been
in cultivation since the time of the Incas, who used these beautiful plants to
adorn their temples. One species, Cantua buxifolia, is the national flower of
both Bolivia and Peru. These species are distributed in the neotropics and occur
in environments from desert to rainforest; many are narrow endemics and are
threatened with extinction, thus this study will provide the basic information
needed for conservation of these species. Preliminary studies suggest that
several new species may be described as a part of this study, thus furthering
our understanding of tropical diversity. This study will also provide insight
into the mechanisms and pattern of evolutionary diversification. For example, at
least two sets of species that are unrelated, but that have the same floral
shape, size, and color, will be studied in detail so that we can learn how these
similar morphologies arise multiple times. These studies will provide insight
into how these evolutionary patterns develop not only in the Polemoniaceae,
but&lt;br/&gt;in plants in general. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;