* 0108108
* RUI: Evolution of the Endemic Lizard Fauna of New Caledonia
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Aaron Bauer, Villanova University
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2004
* USD 327,727.00

New Caledonia is an ancient island in the South Pacific that supports
a&lt;br/&gt;highly endemic terrestrial biota. Among vertebrates, lizards are
particularly diverse (~ 20 genera). The evolutionary history of the endemic New
Caledonian lizards will be reconstructed in order to evaluate how events over
the last 80 million years have interacted to yield high biodiversity in a small
insular setting. Drs. Bauer and Jackman at Villanova University will reconstruct
phylogenies for all New Caledonian lizards based on a combined data set of
morphological and molecular characters (DNA sequences). Phylogenies will be used
to erect hypotheses about the geographic distributions of the organisms through
time. A molecular clock will be invoked to distinguish between older lineage
splits associated with the fragmentation of New Caledonia from Australia in the
Late Cretaceous and qualitatively later divisions indicative of over-water
dispersal. The historical biogeography of New Caledonia will be examined by
combining phylogenetic information from reptiles with that from other organisms
showing similar patterns of diversification within the island. Regions of
congruent distribution of these taxa will be recognized as areas of endemism
that will be analyzed using several current analytical biogeographic
approaches.&lt;br/&gt; This research will provide a robust phylogenetic
background for subsequent studies of the evolutionary morphology and ecology of
the New&lt;br/&gt;Caledonian lizards and will serve as the foundation for more
detailed and sophisticated biogeographic studies of this biodiversity hotspot.
The DNA sequence data collected will be made available for the use of other
researchers, and museum material will be deposited in collections in the United
States, Australia, and France for future studies. The project will promote
international research cooperation (United States, Australia and New Caledonia
[a French territory]) and will foster the professional development of
undergraduates and a postdoctoral associate, as well as strengthen the research
environment at a primarily undergraduate institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;