* 0108704
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Ethnography of Indebtedness: The Emergence of Credit Card Use in Greece
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Eugenia Georges, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 08/31/2003
* USD 12,000.00

Abstract 0108704 Georges / Placas This dissertation research by a cultural
anthropology student from Rice University will study the social and cultural
life of credit cards in Greece. The use of cards has increased dramatically in
recent years, related to European Union integration. Through an ethnographic
study in three distinct neighborhoods of Athens, from working class to upper
class, the student will study how credit cards have been interpreted as cultural
objects signifying "modernity" and will analyze the impact of the cards on those
who use them as well as those who are excluded form using them. The traditional
cultural meaning of indebtedness will be studied as it has developed and changed
in light of the new prevalence of impersonal credit. Concerns with consumption,
debt, status, and social mobility will be studied as well as general changes in
Greek society affiliated with EU integration. Methods will include participant
observation and a formal interview of about 100 respondents drawn from the three
neighborhoods, as well as follow up intensive and repeated interviews with a
small subsample of 30 respondents (10 from each neighborhood), interviews with
bankers, and analysis of articles, records and documents on the credit card
industry. This research will advance our understanding of how this ubiquitous
financial instrument is being incorporated into a changing traditional society,
and this new knowledge will help us understand the use of credit cards in our
own society. The project also adds to the training of a young social scientist
and increases our knowledge about this important region of the world.