* 0108354
* Collaborative Research: The Evolution of Tolerance to Herbivory among Populations of Scarlet Gilia, Ipomopsis aggregata
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2001,03/31/2007
* Jeffrey Conner, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 03/31/2007
* USD 103,199.00

0108354&lt;br/&gt;Conner&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant responses to herbivory can
be divided into two components, plant defenses and tolerance. Tolerance refers
to the ability of plants to regrow and reproduce following herbivore damage;
i.e., the ability to compensate. Yet little is known about how tolerance
evolves, with most studies to date focusing on plant defense. Over the past
fifteen years studies have been conducted on a specialized case of tolerance in
a biennial/perennial herb, scarlet gilia, where plants have been observed to
achieve greater reproductive success by overcompensating for tissues lost to
herbivory. However, scarlet gilia's compensatory response is not universal;
exhibiting tremendous variation both within and between populations. To assess
whether there is a genetic basis to population differences in compensation, as
well as whether selection on plant traits related to compensation differ between
populations and locations, reciprocal transplant experiments and selection
analyses will be conducted. These studies will be conducted within each of four
populations that have been subjected to very different historical levels of
herbivory; two of these overcompensate and the other two do
not.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies on the relative importance of genetic versus
environmental factors and selection in different environments should contribute
to our understanding of the evolutionary response of plants to herbivory, and
add general understanding to the factors that do and do not lead to enhanced
reproductive success following herbivory. If the mechanisms of overcompensation
are genetically based, such responses to herbivory should be of great interest
to agriculturists who, through recent advents in molecular genetic technique,
might incorporate these traits into crop plants. &lt;br/&gt;