* 0108894
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Friction Stir Welding of Superplastic Alloys
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2001,05/31/2004
* Jed Lyons, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 05/31/2004
* USD 24,250.00

0108894 Lyons

Description: This award is to support a collaborative project between Dr. Jed
Lyons and Dr. Anthony Reynolds, both in the Department of Mechanical Engineering
at the University of South Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina, and Dr. Hanadi
Salem, Department of Mechanical Engineering, the American University in Cairo,
Cairo, Egypt. They plan to develop manufacturing technologies for structural
metals for the transportation industry. Specifically, research will be conducted
to develop a fundamental understanding of the effects of friction stir welding
(FSW) on the superplastic forming (SPF) behavior and ambient temperature
properties of Al-Cu-Li sheets. FSW is a new solid-state welding process. Its
advantages relative to traditional fusion welding techniques are primarily
attributable to the fact that no melting is required. SPF alloys are good
candidates for FSW due to the need to maintain a dynamically recrystallized fine
grain microstructure. Preliminary collaborative work by the PIs indicates that
SPF behavior can be retained in superplastic Weldalite 049 and 2095 aluminum
alloys after FSW. An understanding of the role of FSW process variables on the
constituent properties and microstructure through the weld nugget and adjacent
thermo-mechanically affected zones (TMAZ) is required in order to make the
process commercially viable. Research techniques and instruments to be employed
include an instrumented friction stir welding machine, thermo-mechanical testing
facilities for measuring tensile properties and SPF behavior, computer vision
technology including digital image correlation and microstructural
characterization with scanning electron microscope (SEM), transmission electron
microscope (TEM) and optical microscopy and x-ray spectroscopy analysis.

Scope: The project supports collaboration between two teams of investigators to
carry out an important research project. The US team will be responsible for
determining and investigating the FSW process conditions and for making the
welds. They will test the FSW process at various conditions of weld and with
various weldalite alloys with variable copper and lithium contents and different
thickness. Dr. Salem will, with the assistance of a US graduate student, run the
SPF tests and perform TEM investigations. Dr. Salem will also direct one of her
graduate students at AUC in completing the optical and SEM examinations for the
same alloys. Using the resources at both the University of South Carolina and
the American University in Cairo, this project contributes to the development of
combined FSW/SPF processes that enable the net-shape fabrication of complex
multi-sheet structural components from custom blanks. The project will include
two US scientists and one US graduate student who will gain experience in
international cooperative research. The proposal meets the INT objective of
supporting collaborative research in areas of mutual interest. This project is
being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to
scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative
activities.