* 0108575
* Molecular and Morphological Systematics of the Spider Infraorder Mygalomorphae (Araneae)
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2001,10/31/2005
* Marshal Hedin, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Charles Lydeard
* 10/31/2005
* USD 219,648.00

Abstract

The spider infraorder Mygalomorphae includes tarantula, baboon, trapdoor, purse
web, and funnel web spiders. While not as diverse as its sister lineage the
Aranemorphae ("true" spiders, for example the orb weavers), mygalomorphs are
rich in species (over 2,500 species in 280 genera placed in 15 families) and use
silks to build an amazing diversity of nests. These silk constructs, generally
regarded as primitive, include trapdoors, collars, turrets, tubes, funnels,
sheets, and space filling webs. Although these spiders show many interesting and
unstudied patterns of morphology and show classic biogeographical patterns
(e.g., members of the same family occurring in New Zealand, Madagascar, South
Africa, and southern South America), much of the phylogeny of this group remains
unresolved. Furthermore, all mygalomorph phylogenetic studies to date have
relied solely on morphological characters, thus lacking independent
corroboration. This study examines mygalomorph phylogeny using an integrated set
of both morphological and molecular characters. Specimens collected in North,
South, and Central America, Southern Africa, Asia, and Western Australia will be
used in conjunction with specimens from major museum collections, for molecular,
morphological, and natural history studies. Digitized images of all
morphological characters scored and detailed natural history notes will be made
available on the World Wide Web as part of a myglomorph internet database.

The resulting phylogeny will support studies of the origin and diversification
of silk use and spinning structures, the relationship between silk use, habits
and convergent evolution, and the influence of miniaturization on morphological
change. This is the first analysis of molecular sequence data for this important
taxon. And two graduate students will be trained in spider systematics, an area
with inadequate existing expertise.