* 0108914
* Structures and Properties of Hydrogen-Containing Defects in Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2001,10/31/2005
* Michael Stavola, Lehigh University
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 10/31/2005
* USD 267,000.00

Hydrogen-containing defects in semiconductors continue to be the subject of
intense theoretical and experimental study because of their fascinating
microscopic properties and the important role they play in determining the
properties of electronic materials and devices. This individual investigator
award will provide support for a project to investigate hydrogen-containing
defects in Si. The project consists of several complementary thrusts for which
recent advances make new studies attractive. The first concerns new
opportunities for the study of H2 molecules in semiconductors by vibrational
spectroscopy. Other studies are concerned with the structures, vibrational
properties, and formation mechanisms of deep-level defects that are complexed
with hydrogen. The primary goal of the project is to develop a fundamental
understanding of hydrogen in semiconductors and its interactions with other
defects and impurities. A variety of techniques will be employed, including
vibrational spectroscopy, uniaxial stress, and electron irradiation of Si
containing H2 molecules. This experimental research program provides an
excellent means to train students in experimental semiconductor physics. The
work focuses on important, current problems in semiconductor materials research
and provides graduate and undergraduate students a solid foundation for
successful careers in industrial research and development. %%% Hydrogen in
semiconductors has been of interest for many years because of the important
effect hydrogen can have on the electrical properties of device materials. For
example, hydrogen is a frequent unintentional contaminant that can have
deleterious effects on the controlled doping and reliability of semiconductor
materials. Alternatively, hydrogen can have beneficial effects in low-cost
materials that are highly defective. For example, hydrogen is intentionally
introduced into solar-grade Si to increase the efficiency of solar cells. The
mechanisms by which hydrogen passivates defects and participates in defect
processes remain poorly understood. This individual investigator award will
support a project having the primary goal developing a fundamental understanding
of hydrogen in semiconductors and its interactions with other defects and
impurities. This experimental research program provides an excellent means to
train students in experimental semiconductor physics. The work focuses on
important, current problems in semiconductor materials research and provides
graduate and undergraduate students a solid foundation for successful careers in
industrial research and development. ***