* 0108110
* Speciation and Dispersal of Fungal Symbiots of Insects (Harpellales) in Eastern North America and Europe
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Merlin White, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2004
* USD 200,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Harpellales, one of three
orders of the class Trichomycetes, are fungi that live as symbionts in the guts
of insects, particularly stoneflies (Plecoptera), mayflies (Ephemeroptera), and
lower flies (Diptera: Nematocera). Typically, the fungus is transmitted from
larval insect to larval insect, raising questions about how the fungi are
dispersed over great geographic distances. Evidence exists that they may have a
parasitic life stage in which cysts are formed in the ovaries of host insects
that then disperse and deposit fungi in new habitats. Details of the association
of these fungi with host insects are poorly known as are relationships among the
fungi and explanations for their origins and
diversification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Because host insects include many species
of ecological and medical importance (e.g., mayflies and stoneflies, mosquitoes,
black flies, biting midges), an understanding of parasitism that can result in
sterilization of the host insect has great interest to entomologists. Field and
laboratory studies will help unravel the interactions between these fungi and
their hosts, including a molecular informed phylogeny for the fungi that can
help explain their diversification and origins. This will permit a better
understanding of a very enigmatic group of fungi, and make its species
accessible to biologists interested in symbiosis, parasitism, historical
biogeography, and possibly co-speciation.&lt;br/&gt;