* 0108244
* Collaborative Research: Total Evidence Phylogeny of Gobioidei (Teleostei:Perciformes) and Cladistic Biogeography
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Anthony Gill, Milwaukee Public Museum
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 09/30/2005
* USD 110,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TOTAL EVIDENCE PHYLOGENY OF GOBIOIDEI (TELEOSTEI:
PERCIFORMES) AND CLADISTIC BIOGEOGRAPHY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fish suborder
Gobioidei includes more than 2000 extant species of small fishes found
throughout the tropical, subtropical, and temperate regions of the world, in
freshwater and nearshore marine habitats. Many gobioids live on or near the
bottom, often in burrows. Many others are reef-dwellers, a few are oceanic, and
some estuarine representatives have the ability to breathe air. Their wide
distribution and great diversity of form and ecology make gobioids ideal for
studies of broad questions in vertebrate evolution and biogeography. However,
the incredible gobioid diversity has also hindered investigations of their
evolutionary relationships, and no comprehensive phylogenetic hypothesis for
gobioids has been advanced. Previous studies have focused on small groups of
taxa or restricted suites of characters, and because of the fishes' small size,
the morphological characters identified are often reductive and highly variable.
The closest relatives of Gobioidei are unknown, and the classification has been
in flux. Currently, the roughly 270 gobioid genera are classified in nine
families, some containing only a single genus. The larger families
(Eleotrididae, Gobiidae) are almost certainly not natural groups, and the
relationships of species within those families, and among families, are
unknown.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study seeks to resolve gobioid relationships
using a total evidence approach and focusing primarily on basal gobioid groups
and outgroups. DNA sequence data from five genes (four mitochondrial and one
nuclear) will be combined with osteological and myological characters. The data
will be analyzed separately and combined, and the resultant phylogeny will then
be used to produce a classification for the suborder. The phylogeny will be used
to examine the historical biogeography of gobioids, using cladistic
biogeographical techniques to discover congruent patterns of area relationships
and examine the origins of gobioid diversification. The common assumption that
gobioids originated in a marine environment and diversified into freshwater once
or repeatedly will be investigated by mapping the distribution of habitats on
the taxon cladogram.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gobioid fishes have been studied for
over a century but the group is so large, diverse, and widely distributed that a
comprehensive phylogenetic and biogeographic study has never been attempted.
This study will provide the first such comprehensive phylogenetic hypothesis and
provide the basis for exploring the biogeography of a major group of fishes. It
will also provide a historical foundation for future studies that will examine
ecology, adaptation, and development, using the potential of this diverse group
as a model for research on many aspects of evolutionary biology.