* 0108424
* Mycorrhizal Cheaters in the Monotropoideae:  Costs, Benefits, and Life History Traits of an Unholy Alliance.
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2005
* Thomas Bruns, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 06/30/2005
* USD 318,381.00

DEB-0108424 Bruns Epiparasitic plants are not photosynthetic, and they
indirectly obtain sugars from green plants through a mycorrhizal fungus that is
connected to both plants. This behavior makes them cheaters of one of the most
widespread mutualisms in terrestrial ecosystems. Our goals are to understand the
costs and benefits of epiparasitic plants to their direct fungal and indirect
plant hosts, and to examine life history traits related to the establishment of
epiparasite seedlings. We address these goals through four specific hypotheses
related to conditional changes in the symbiotic continuum, to effects on host-
fungal competitive interactions, and to ecological mechanisms for host
specificity. These hypotheses are tested by coupling symbiotic germination
experiments in the field with manipulative growth chamber experiments. We use
precise molecular identification of fungi and plants in both settings. Results
will provide an in-depth understanding of the nature of the interactions at the
plant-parasitic end the mycorrhizal symbiosis, will yield novel data on
specificity, germination, and development of these plants, and will further
develop a unique experimental system of symbiotic cheating. This information
will increase of our knowledge of mycorrhizal symbiosis, and will help us to
manage populations of some of the rare and endangered species in the
Monotropoideae.