* 0108369
* Cretaceous (Turonian) Angiosperm Flowers from New Jersey (USA):  Structural Diversity, Systematics, and Phylogenetic/Evolutionary Implications
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* William Crepet, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2005
* USD 330,000.00

Drs. Crepet and Nixon have been awarded a grant to study significant deposits of
fossil flowering plants. These deposits represent some of the finest fossil
sites ever discovered including a virtual treasure trove of exquisitely
preserved fossil flowers-a kind of fossil with enormous potential scientific
value and one once thought to be prohibitively rare and beyond the reach of
science(at least 200 species-more than all other reports of similar aged fossils
combined). Flowering plants are the most dominant, diverse, economically
[including medicinally], and ecologically important groups of existing plants.
Uncertainties exist as to origins, relationships and reasons for their success.
Together, these unknowns circumscribe "Darwin's Abominable Mystery" and it
constitutes one of the most visible voids in our understanding of the history of
life. In spite of recent progress based on breakthroughs using molecular data to
determine taxonomic relationships, extinct missing links would be helpful in
understanding the history, relationships and success of the flowering plants by
filling some of the gaps now separating living species and by introducing
"historical testability" to hypotheses of relationships that are based
exclusively on comparisons among living species. In other words, if hypothesized
relationships are inconsistent with newly discovered fossil taxa (that is, if
the attributes of the fossils cause them not to fit into and thus challenge
modern hypotheses), then the hypothesis or the interpretation of the fossil is
incorrect and a careful study should ensue. Also, the pattern of appearance of
different species generated by such studies should be roughly compatible with
the evolutionary sequence implied by hypotheses based only on living species-if
there is a conflict further examination of all data and interpretations is in
order. Yet another particularly significant benefit of this investigation is its
contribution to establishing a sequence of appearance of different floral types
through time. In addition to including many of the taxonomically important
structural characteristics of angiosperms, flowers provide a key to the
reproductive biology of their species, particularly pollination biology. Knowing
the pattern of appearance of various modes of pollination from fossil evidence
will be most helpful in evaluating various hypotheses seeking to explain
angiosperm success-especially those relating angiosperm diversity to mode of
pollination. Thus studies of fossils at this locality stand to provide important
insights into what has widely been recognized as a major gap in our knowledge.
The proposed research will include a diverse set of approaches to and interests
in angiosperm fossil history, floral evolution, history of pollination and
insect-plant interactions, phylogenetic relationships of angiosperm groups,
origin of angiosperms, history of monocots, Cretaceous gymnosperm and fern
diversification, and theoretical and practical aspects of cladistic analysis and
phylogenetic reconstruction involving new algorithms and approaches to placing
the fossils in phylogenetic context. Drs. Crepet and Nixon will continue
fieldwork aimed at discovering additional species. They continue to find
additional taxa of great interest and potential importance. Existing and newly
collected fossils will be intensively studied in order to elucidate the
structural details and taxonomic affinities of as many as possible. Particular
attention will be paid to certain groups of critical interest that are well or
uniquely represented in the collections. The careful explication of fossil
structure depends upon light and electron microscopy (particularly SEM).
Fossils, once described, will further require a significant curation and
databasing effort. The next step is the evaluation of the relationships of the
fossils through the process of contrasting their characteristics with those of
all other known flowering plants. This process, phylogenetic analysis, involves
computer algorithms and results are testable and reproducible and provide
accurate assessments of the taxonomic affinities of the fossils. Thus, a
carefully produced reliable pattern of angiosperm floral history is established.
These fossils already encompass the earliest evidence of numerous angiosperm
lineages and they include the oldest documented examples of numerous features
and species with important implications for the pattern and timing of evolution
of pollination mechanisms. In toto these fossils provide a breathtaking array of
floral innovations from a relatively early and critical period in angiosperm
diversification. The fossils include enough representatives of major taxonomic
groups, including the earliest reliable evidence of the monocots (wheat,
grasses, orchids etc.) to strongly alter our perception of the timing of
flowering plant evolution. The project has the potential to provide quantities
of unique data that will be relevant to many other workers in these areas
including especially angiosperm systematists and pollination biologists. These
data will in the form of primary (descriptions, phylogenetic matrices), and
secondary results (e.g. phylogenetic trees including fossils, insights into the
history of angiosperm-insect relationships, and minimum ages of extinct
lineages). In addition to publishing the results and cooperatively sharing them
with colleagues including graduate students being trained in this area, a
website will be maintained that will make specific data and photographs
available to the scientific community. The PI's will continue to publish results
of their work in the form of popular articles in order to reach a broad segment
of the public.

