* 0108759
* SGER: Elemental Ratio Anomalies Associated with Antarctic Marine Phytoplankton
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2001,10/31/2002
* Michael Lizotte, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 10/31/2002
* USD 39,756.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;OPP-0108759&lt;br/&gt;P.I. Michael
Lizotte&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent cruises to the Ross Sea under the JGOFS and
ROAVERRS programs have documented that the removal of dissolved carbon and
nutrients can be significantly different from the ratios predicted from typical
Redfield ratios (e.g. 106:16:1 for C:N:P) for seawater particulates. The non-
Redfield nutrient removal ratios were associated with phytoplankton species
composition. For example, C:N:P uptake ratios determined from measurements of
dissolved inorganic carbon, nitrate and phosphate were ca. 80:10:1 in diatom-
dominated stations and ca. 140:20:1 for Phaeocystis antarctica-dominated
stations. Non-Redfield dynamics could be critical for understanding the
biogeochemistry of the geological record as well as predicting the impacts of
climate change. Samples are to be collected from a ship of opportunity during a
geophysics cruise (NBP 01-01, Hobart to Capetown) to the Indian Ocean sector of
the Southern Ocean. Species composition will be quantified by microscopy from
preserved water samples. Nutrient concentrations (nitrate, nitrite, phosphate,
and silicate) will be measured from frozen sampled collected in conjunction with
water a sampling program that is to be conducted to study carbon dynamics. These
"samples of opportunity" will provide a data set to be used in evaluating
whether the non-Redfield situation observed in the Ross Sea occurs in distant
coastal systems around Antarctica, and whether it is associated with the same
species or similar oceanographic conditions.&lt;br/&gt;