* 0108872
* Dissertation Research: Kinship, Houses and the Socialist State: The Effects of Housing Nationalization and Restitution in Romania (1950 - )
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2002
* Katherine Verdery, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 06/30/2002
* USD 10,850.00

Verdery / Chelcea&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation research project by a cultural
anthropologist from the University of Michigan studies the role of houses in
maintaining and creating kinship relations during and after state socialism. The
student will compare the kinship relations of households in a neighborhood of
Bucharest (Romania) whose houses were confiscated by the socialist state in 1950
with those of households who managed to avoid this tragic process. Using data
from archival research and intensive interviews with about 125 persons, the
student will test four hypotheses relating family property and genealogical
memory; the timing of housing appropriation by the state and the stage of the
family cycle; the authority of household heads and the appropriation experience;
and the effects of restitution process on kinship solidarity and conflict. The
project will advance our understanding of the impact of state policies on
kinship networks; will extend our understanding of the impact of privatization
and restitution on people's conceptions of property rights; and will provide
valuable comparative data for other former socialist countries experiencing
restitution of previously nationalized property. In addition the project adds to
the training of a young social scientist, and advances our knowledge of this
important region of the world. &lt;br/&gt;