* 0108705
* Stakeholder Analysis Of Framing In Intractable Environmental Conflicts
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2003
* Linda Putnam, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 08/31/2003
* USD 110,000.00

Stakeholders play a critical role in managing environmental issues. Their
perspectives on the issues and their interactions with policy makers often shape
the direction that an environmental situation takes, particularly when it
escalates into a spiraling conflict. This project aims to depict the worldviews
of stakeholders in intractable environmental conflicts. It focuses on how
stakeholders frame or interpret the myriad of elements that comprise a
protracted environmental conflict, including (1) how disputants define and label
what the problem is, (2) who should control or decide on these issues, (3) how
disputants identify with the environmental problem, (4) how they view other
stakeholders, (5) what type of power or authority is being exercised, (6) what
are their views of natural resources, and (7) what should be done about the
conflict. In effect, this study investigates stakeholder differences in defining
and privileging seven different elements of environmental framing: whole story,
views of social control, stakeholder identity, characterization, views of
power/authority, views of nature, and conflict management
preferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will code data from interview
transcripts of 156 stakeholders, involved in four different environmental cases-
resource allocation, anti-degradation, natural resource protection, and chemical
pollution. It will develop profiles of stakeholder framing among groups such as
developers, citizen activists, farmers and irrigators, environmentalists, local
and regional regulatory agencies, state agencies, federal governmental
officials, local city councils and officials, facilitators and mediators, and
media reporters-profiles that move beyond broad-based descriptors. Then through
the use of configural frequency analysis, the researchers will test clusters or
configurations of frame types among stakeholders by examining similarities and
differences in framing. Finally, the researchers will develop detailed
descriptive analysis of these patterns of stakeholder framing within and across
the four environmental cases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stakeholder analysis is a
complex and important problem for environmental policy making. Research to date
has centered on stakeholder attitudes toward environmental issues such as
conservation and risk-taking. Very little work examines the way that
stakeholders perceive or approach environmental conflicts, especially ones
rooted in case situations that cross diverse environmental problems. This study
has both theoretical and practical value in developing a rich understanding of
stakeholder perspectives. At the theoretical level, this project tests a model
of environmental framing that extends stakeholder analysis, and at the practical
level, this project will develop profile analyses that can be used to train
agency officials, conflict interventionists, and policy makers in understanding
stakeholders. This understanding could move parties beyond stereotyping toward a
model of collaborative learning in managing critical but highly divergent
issues.&lt;br/&gt;