* 0108308
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Development of An Intelligent Agent-Based Architecture for the Development and Deployment of Distributed Knowledge Based Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Ahmed Kamel, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2004
* USD 25,000.00

0108308&lt;br/&gt;Kamel &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a collaborative project between Dr. Ahmed Kamel, Department of Computer
Science, North Dakota State University, Fargo, North Dakota and Dr. Ahmed Rafea,
Department of Computer Science, The American University in Cairo, Cairo, Egypt.
They plan to devise new capabilities for complex-problem solvers by utilizing
two technologies, the knowledge-based system technology, which is a mature
technology, and the intelligent agents technology which is emerging and is still
evolving. They plan to develop a distributed knowledge-based intelligent
architecture for cooperative problem solving, and to test the new system in an
application dealing with agricultural (wheat) production management.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The project supports collaboration between a US
scientist and an Egyptian scientist in a research project that is timely and
which has significant potential applications. The two PIs are currently
collaborating on a project for the management of irrigated wheat in Egypt. That
project is generating a working set of applications that will be utilized as a
test bed for the distributed knowledge-based intelligent architecture developed
in this research. Such architecture will be useful in many similar problems
where the data sources and computer tools are geographically distributed. The
research will involve one US graduate student and two graduate students from
Egypt. This project meets the INT objective of supporting collaborative research
in areas of mutual interest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/
&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;