* 0108907
* Radical Ion Rearrangements - Principles and Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2005
* James Tanko, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 07/31/2005
* USD 321,000.00

With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor
James M. Tanko, of the Department of Chemistry at Virginia Polytechnic Institute
and State University, is studying the principals and applications of radical ion
rearrangements. Professor Tanko is exploring the structural features which
govern the rate of rearrangement of radical anions derived from carbonyl
compounds as well as the influence of solvent and counterion on these
rearrangement reactions. Study of the oxidation potentials of cyclopropyl- and
cyclobutylamines and determination of rate constants for the ring opening
reactions of radical cations generated from their oxidation may shed light on
the biological oxidations catalyzed by monoamine oxidase. Both electrochemical
and laser flash photolysis methods will be used to generate the desired ions.
Information regarding the driving force for ring opening will be obtained from
appropriately constructed thermodynamic cycles, while theoretical methods will
be used to provide information regarding the structure of radical ions and to
estimate thermodynamic properties in situations where such information cannot be
obtained experimentally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecules bearing both a net
charge (either positive or negative) and an unpaired electron appear as key
intermediates in many chemical and biological processes. Development of an
understanding of the structure and dynamics of these so-called radical cations
and anions is central to elucidation of the fundamental details of how such
processes occur. With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry
Program, Professor James M. Tanko, of the Department of Chemistry at Virginia
Polytechnic Institute and State University, is carrying out studies of the
preparation, structure, and reaction chemistry of radical anions and radical
cations. Through a combination of experimental and theoretical approaches,
Professor Tanko is shedding light on the nature of these elusive intermediates,
addressing fundamental issues of organic reaction mechanism and leading to a
deeper understanding of the function of biological catalysts such as monoamine
oxidase.