* 0108976
* Structure-Property Relationships for Functionally Tailored Multiphase Polymer Blends: In Situ Nanoscale and Microscale Structural Characterization
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2001,11/30/2002
* Yvonne Akpalu, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 11/30/2002
* USD 122,559.00

A new multivariable measurement approach to correlate melt phase separation with
microscale and nanoscale structural organization in crystal-amorphous polymer
blends with technologically useful properties is proposed. Significant
improvements in technologies that govern new products by the polymer industry
depend on the ability to correlate polymer structure resulting from melt phase
separation, crystallization and processing conditions with desired properties.
For potential biological applications, the microscale and nanoscale blend
morphology can determine the overall function of the tissue scaffold or drug
delivery device. However, a rapid and convenient method for characterizing and
correlating the nanoscale and microscale morphology simultaneously has not been
developed. In the proposed study, simultaneous small-angle light scattering
(SALS)/differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) will be used to measure the
microscale structure and averaged nanoscale quantities such as the fraction of
crystallized material within the superstructures. A new SALS apparatus, which
will allow one to perform scattering crystallization, will be constructed. Two
blend systems, polyethylene oxide(PEO)/polyenaminonitrile (PEAN) and
poly(caprolactone) (PCL)/poly(D, L-lactic acid) (PDLA) will be studied. PEAN is
a novel amorphous polymer with excellent thermal stability and good mechanical
properties for load bearing polymer film application in the aerospace and
automotive industries. PCL/PDLA blends have important potential biomedical uses
in the production of tissue scaffolds and drug delivery devices. Several
parameters that will be used to determine the microscale and nanoscale
morphology, crystallization kinetics, phase behavior and the enthalpy changes of
the thermal transitions will obtained in one combined measurement. Stress-strain
measurements will be performed on selected PEO/PEAN and PCL/PDLA blends to
detect useful correlation between the blend morphology and mechanical properties
(specifically the stress-strain behavior, Young's modulus, tensile strength,
toughness and elongation at break). In collaboration with Rena Bizios
(Department of Biomedical Engineering at Rennselaer), novel systematic studies
will be conducted to investigate whether control of the properties of PDLA rich
regions in PCL/PDLA blends by varying the phase separation process will in turn
allow us to tailor their biological response including for example cell adhesion
properties and the evolution of cells to functional tissue. %%% Comprehensive
predictive structure-property of structure-biofunction models for polymer blends
can be developed if the range of length scales probed by the proposed
experiments can provide sufficient information for this purpose. If these
predictive models and the proposed multivariable measurement method are
integrated into the research and development process, a significant decrease in
the time and effort for realizing the potential benefits of new biostable,
biomedical and ecological polymer products can be made. This can help the US
polymer industry gain an edge in the highly competitive mature global commodity
market for new polymer products. With regard to biological applications, the
used of simple, low cost biodegradable substrated for producing functional
tissues could be a significant first step to alleviate the acute donor shortages
for implants in the future. This SGER grant would make it possible to determine
if the proposed multivariable measurement method can provide a rapid and
convenient means for developing a fundamental understanding of structure-
property relationships in polymer blends.