* 0108860
* The Modeling of Two-Phase Turbulence
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Richard Lahey, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Michael W. Plesniak
* 09/30/2005
* USD 200,000.00

Abstract CTS-0108860 R. Lahey and K. Jensen, RPI

Two-phase turbulent flow occurs in many industrial processes including nuclear
reactors, separation and washing, and many chemical and heat transfer
applications. Prediction of this complex flow has been primarily based on
extension of two-equation turbulent models developed for single phase turbulent
flow. Although the two-equation models are effective for many industrial
applications, their validity and accuracy requires more direct simulation and
analysis.

This proposal is on direct numerical simulation (DNS) of two phase turbulent
flow using a combination of finite element method (FEM) and a level set (LS)
approach. The flexibility of the FEM to map irregularly shaped interfaces will
be used along with the volume-of-fluid (VOF) type approach to track the
interface by solving an additional transport equations for the location and
shape of the interface. To effectively capture and resolve the interface,
particularly during bubble breakup and coalescence, extremely fine and adaptive
grid structure is required. To this end, the proposal makes extensive use of the
well established adaptive grid refinement algorithms developed at RPI over the
years. The success of the proposed approach depends on the accuracy and
efficient implementation of the method on massive parallel processing systems.