* 0108645
* Dissertation Reseach: Determinants of Form in the Pubis of Middle/Late Pleistocene Anatomically Modern Humans and Neandertals
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2004
* Steven Churchill, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 06/30/2004
* USD 11,992.00

The front portion of the birth canal (the superior ramus, or SPR) of the
Neandertal pelvis differs from the modern human SPR in three ways: it is much
longer, it is much thinner, and Neandertal males (not females) possess the
longest SPR. These differences run contrary to what is expected, based on
overall patterns of bony differences between Neandertals and modern humans. Many
hypotheses accounting for the shape of the Neandertal SPR have been offered, but
the biomechanical data needed to test them have been
lacking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Four questions will be addressed by this study:
1) do the reported patterns of shape differences hold true in light of a fuller
sampling of SPR of later hominids [Neandertals + modern humans]? 2) how much
does the SPR vary in recent humans? 3) can any of the existing hypotheses for
SPR vari-ation in later hominids be rejected or supported? 4) can the trunk
torsion hypothesis, the only hypothesis to address all of the observed shape
differences seen in the SPR of later hominids, be rejected or supported?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Recent fossil discoveries have greatly increased the
available number of SPR of later hominids, while the increased availability of
CT scanners allows a more thorough analysis of internal SPR anatomy. This
project will use CT scanners to gather the cross-sectional data needed for
testing hypotheses of SPR function and variation. Nearly every pre-Holocene
(older than 8,000 BC) Eurasian later hominid SPR will be examined, as will a
large and diverse sample of recent humans in order to assess the modern range of
SPR variation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The SPR plays a role in childbirth,
locomotion, posture, and muscular force transmission between ab-domen and thigh.
This project will help clarify the biomechanical role of the SPR in Neandertals,
as well as the extent to which SPR differences between Neandertals and modern
humans may be indicative of functional and behavioral differences.&lt;br/&gt;