* 0108749
* RUI: Continued Investigation of the Ambient pH Signal Transduction Pathway of Aspergillus Nidulans
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Steven Denison, Eckerd College
* Continuing Grant
* Jermelina Tupas
* 08/31/2005
* USD 129,279.00

Cells of microorganisms as well as human cells encounter changes in
environmental pH.&lt;br/&gt; Responses of cells to altered environmental pH may
involve changes in gene expression. A system for the&lt;br/&gt;regulation of
gene expression by environmental pH was first identified in the
filamentous&lt;br/&gt;Ascomycete fungus Aspergillus nidulans. Components of this
regulatory system include&lt;br/&gt;the pacC gene-encoded zinc-finger
transcription factor and the products of the palA, B, C,&lt;br/&gt;F, H and I
genes, which lead to activation of the PacC transcription factor at alkaline
pH.&lt;br/&gt;This system ensures that extracellular enzymes are produced under
conditions of pH&lt;br/&gt;where they can function: acid phosphatase under acid
conditions and alkaline&lt;br/&gt;phosphatase under alkaline conditions, for
example. The pH regulatory system is also&lt;br/&gt;important for alkaline
adaptation (survival in alkaline environments) and for
conidial&lt;br/&gt;development in A. nidulans. The aims of this research are to
discover new&lt;br/&gt;components of this regulatory system and to further
define the roles of known&lt;br/&gt;components. Research on the A. nidulans pH
signalling pathway has contributed to the&lt;br/&gt;larger field of cell
signalling. For example, the palB gene product was the first
example&lt;br/&gt;of a calpain, calcium-activated cysteine protease in a
microorganism and in a specific&lt;br/&gt;signalling pathway. The study of pH
regulation in the model organism A. nidulans has also helped the understanding
of pH regulation in fungi of medical and economic importance. The study of
pH&lt;br/&gt;regulation is most advanced in A. nidulans. This fact and the
availability of well-&lt;br/&gt;developed genetics tools and resources make A.
nidulans one of the best systems for the&lt;br/&gt;study of this important
eukaryotic regulatory pathway. In this research, a&lt;br/&gt;recently-developed
gene library will be used to identify high copy number suppressors
of&lt;br/&gt;A. nidulans strains with mutations in the pH regulatory pathway.
With this library, the&lt;br/&gt;expression of A. nidulans genomic DNA inserts
is under control of the inducible niiA&lt;br/&gt;(nitrite reductase) promoter.
As the plasmid used to construct the library also has the&lt;br/&gt;AMA1
sequence, which allows extrachromosomal maintenance of plasmids, isolation
of&lt;br/&gt;plasmids from Aspergillus transformants is straightforward.
Significant preliminary&lt;br/&gt;results have already been achieved in this
study. For example, 166 putative copy number&lt;br/&gt;suppressors of a pacC
loss-of-function mutation have been obtained. An assay for
palB&lt;br/&gt;protease activity will also be developed and work will be
completed to determine the&lt;br/&gt;cellular location of the palI gene product,
which may function as the pH-sensing protein.&lt;br/&gt;For this study, a palI-
green fluorescent protein gene fusion construct has been made.
In&lt;br/&gt;addition to the contribution to scientific knowledge of the
proposed research, the project&lt;br/&gt;will make an important contribution to
education. As undergraduate students will&lt;br/&gt;participate in this
research, it will provide valuable training for future scientists
and&lt;br/&gt;educators.