* 0108165
* Multifaceted Parental Investment and its Effects on Population-level Sex Allocation Ratios in Ants.
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2001,10/31/2002
* Peter Nonacs, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 10/31/2002
* USD 50,000.00

This project focuses on theories of parental investment strategy that predict
different patterns of size distributions in offspring. This one-year, Proof-of-
Concept grant will examine variance in size of males and females in natural
populations of ants. The work will consist of: (1) Collections of specimens from
the area surrounding the Sierra Nevada Aquatic Research Lab and at Stunt Ranch
in the Santa Monica Mountains; (2) Morphometric measurement of specimens; and
(3) Sophisticated statistical analyses of data to detect patterns.

The project will examine a fundamental trade-off facing parents in their
reproductive strategy: quantity of offspring (in terms of total numbers) versus
quality (in terms of individual size of offspring). Older theoretical models
predict that size should not vary. Parents should make all offspring roughly the
same size. Newer models, however, identify conditions under which it is often
advantageous to also vary offspring size. Ants are ideal for testing these
competing ideas because colonies are plentiful and produce many offspring per
year (i.e., patterns are readily identifiable). The results, however, will be
relevant across all species, and a greater understanding of parental behavior
will provide insight into the growth and regulation of species populations.