* 0108303
* Transition Temperatures in Plasticity and Fracture of SiC
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Pirouz Pirouz, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 09/30/2005
* USD 409,997.00

This project examines dislocations in single-crystal, single-polytype SiC and
strives to establish their role in deformation and fracture. The approach is to
produce fresh dislocations in SiC by deformation, investigate their morphology
by TEM, and assess activation parameters of dislocation glide from yield
behavior of the crystals. Emphasis is on dislocation formation, glide of partial
dislocations, and relationships between mechanical and electrical properties of
silicon carbide (SiC). SiC diode degradation is associated with the appearance
of dark triangular shaped areas that correspond to stacking faults on parallel
(0001) planes (sometimes forming 3C-SiC inclusions) similar to degradation of
the early generations of laser diodes fabricated from GaAs and other III-V
compound semiconductors by the occurrence of dark line defects. In these cases,
recombination of electron-hole pairs is thought to provide the energy for
formation of the lattice defects; in the case of SiC diodes, the recombination
energy is used in the creation and motion of partial dislocations to produce
stacking faults. More complete understanding of such effects requires knowledge
of the activation energies for formation and glide of partial dislocations in
SiC, and the efficiency of electron-hole recombination at preferred sites [e.g.
kinks, anti-phase defects (APDs), or APD/vacancy complexes] on different
partials. Additionally, it is planned to directly measure the brittle-to-ductile
transition temperature, TBDT , in 4H- and 6H-SiC at different strain rates and
compare the results with the transition temperature Tc as measured by
deformation experiments. The range of temperatures for compression tests will be
extended to assess whether a transition is present for deformations at higher
strain rates. The research aims to relate two different transition temperatures:
one in the yield stress and the other in the fracture behavior of the crystals,
and to relate both to atomic level processes. %%% The project addresses basic
research issues in a topical area of materials science with high technological
relevance. It is expected that the project will provide useful data for growth
and practical applications of SiC, a material with many potential applications
in high-temperature, high-frequency, high-power devices, as well as in
optoelectronics. An important feature of the program is the integration of
research and education through the training of students in a fundamentally and
technologically significant area. The project is expected to provide unique
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students through experiences made
possible by a forefront research environment. ***