* 0108497
* PUI/MRSEC Collaboration to Create Opportunities for Women in Materials Research
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2005
* Velda Goldberg, Simmons University
* Continuing Grant
* Ulrich Strom
* 06/30/2005
* USD 430,000.00

Simmons College, a predominantly undergraduate women's college, and the
Materials Research Science and Engineering Center at Cornell University
establish a partnership to develop opportunities for science students at Simmons
to participate in materials-related research throughout their undergraduate
careers. The overall thrust of the project focuses on establishing a
collaborative Simmons/Cornell research program on organic electroluminescent
materials that provides opportunities for students to work with faculty on
timely research projects, have access to sophisticated instrumentation, and gain
related work experience in industrial settings. Another goal of the project is
to interest female undergraduates in participating in material research and to
encourage them to consider further career explorations in this area.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project establishes a model relationship between a
predominantly undergraduate institution and a large research university and its
federally funded research Center. The undergraduate institution enhances its
research efforts through increased access to collaborators and instrumentation
at the large research university. The latter benefits from enhanced recruitment
access to a talented pool of undergraduates and from opportunities for its
graduate students to interact with undergraduate faculty and to consider a
postgraduate career at an undergraduate institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;