* 0108931
* RUI: Collaborative Research on Mechanisms Underlying Salamander Population Fluctuations
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2001,10/31/2007
* Scott Wissinger, Allegheny College
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 10/31/2007
* USD 520,331.00

The purpose of this research is to understand the mechanisms responsible for
dramatic fluctuations in the number of salamanders in subalpine wetlands in
central Colorado. Boom and bust cycles are often observed in animal populations,
but such cycles are poorly understood in amphibians. A combination of approaches
including long-term monitoring of salamander reproduction and survival in
natural populations, field experiments that manipulate food (aquatic
invertebrates) and other resources, and laboratory studies will be used to study
mechanisms that could lead to population cycles. These data will be used to
construct mathematical models to determine which mechanisms are capable of
producing long-term the fluctuations in population size observed in this
amphibian. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The decline of amphibians around the world is
of great concern to ecologists, and it is important to be able to distinguish
natural causes of change in amphibian populations from those related to human
activities. Salamanders are the native top predators in subalpine wetlands and
it is well documented that they play a key role in determining how many and
which invertebrates coexist in the food web. This research is a first step
towards understanding how cycles in the number of salamanders will affect the
foodwebs and ultimately the functioning of these remote, pristine, ecosystems.
&lt;br/&gt;