* 0108474
* Consequences of Community Structure and Nutrient Supply Rate for Dynamic Response to Perturbation:  Theory and Experiments
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2006
* Kathryn Cottingham, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 08/31/2006
* USD 242,831.00

CONSEQUENCES OF COMMUNITY STRUCTURE AND NUTRIENT SUPPLY RATE FOR DYNAMIC
RESPONSES TO PERTURBATION: THEORY AND EXPERIMENTS

The ability to accurately predict how ecological systems respond to perturbation
is a major goal of ecology. Although ecologists have developed a rich body of
theory regarding which properties of ecological systems might be reliable
predictors of dynamics following perturbation, there are two major gaps in this
theory. First, there have been relatively few experimental tests of theoretical
expectations, despite the applied importance of such tests. Second, most studies
have focused on "removal" perturbations that involve loss of accumulated
biomass, such as hurricanes that knock down trees and stream scouring events
that remove biota. However, many ecosystems are also subjected to "addition"
perturbations such as nutrient pulses. An important question, therefore, is
whether theory developed for removal perturbations is also applicable to
addition perturbations.

This research project addresses both needs through field experiments and
simulation modeling. The experiments will test theoretical predictions in
freshwater plankton communities, whereas modeling studies will determine if
current theory applies to nutrient pulses. Together, these studies will result
in a more broadly based theory for how ecosystems respond to perturbations,
increased understanding of the short-term responses of algae to nutrient pulses,
and an evaluation of the possible indirect effects of common lake management
practices on algal dynamics.