* 0108104
* 2001 Electronic Materials Gordon Conference; Connecticut College, New London, CT; July 15 - 20, 2001
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2002
* Wayne Gladfelter, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 05/31/2002
* USD 5,000.00

A Gordon Research Conference on Electronic Materials will be held July 15-20,
2001 at Connecticut College. The conference will focus on the most exciting
developments in synthesis, processing and usage of electronic materials. There
will be extensive contributions representing nanoscience, new materials, and
device concepts based on semiconductor, organic, polymeric, and biological
materials. Presentations on new deposition methods, such as atomic layer
deposition, will emphasize the increasing need for atomic level control of
interfaces. The program is organized around invited speakers, discussion
leaders, co-chairs, and co-vice-chairs; both contributed papers and posters are
scheduled. Objectives are to stimulate communications among the broad community
of researchers who address Electronic Materials research from a variety of
disciplinary backgrounds--chemistry, physics, engineering and materials science,
and to formulate and delineate critical research necessary to further basic
understanding and move concepts closer to technological success. The conference
is expected to provide an effective forum for discussion of critical scientific
issues surrounding Electronic Materials. Topics include: Nanoscale Materials and
Molecular Electronics; Patterning Strategies; Organic Optoelectronic Devices,
Biological Computing and Bioelectronics; Deposition and Properties of Dielectric
Films; Layered Inorganic and Organic Structures; Dendrimers and Conducting
Polymers in Devices; Semiconductor Surfaces and Microelectronic Processing; and
MEMS and Miniaturization. Along with the opportunity to assess the field and
future directions, it is expected that new ties will be established between
universities, research institutions, and industry. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;An
evaluation of the progress and status of Electronic Materials research issues
associated with growth and processing of a variety of electronic materials
including semiconductor, organic, polymeric, and biological materials and device
related structures along with current assessments of the most important
developments will be of great value to the understanding and enhanced
utilization of materials in computing, data processing, and communications.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;