* 0108986
* Dissertation Research: Continuity and Change at Cerro la Cruz: A Study of Architecture on the North Coast of Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2002
* Clark Erickson, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2002
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Clark Erickson, Ms. Melissa Vogel will collect and
analyze data for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct archaeological
excavations and continue mapping at the site of Cerro la Cruz on the north coast
of Peru. Ms. Vogel's research will examine the relationship between architecture
and sociopolitical change, through a diachronic analysis of the expansion and
modification of Cerro La Cruz, a hillside walled settlement on the north coast
of Peru. Supplementary data such as ceramics will provide indicators of cultural
affiliation, while botanical remains and soil samples will be analyzed for
indications of dietary or environmental changes. These various lines of evidence
will be combined to reconstruct the events which occurred at Cerro La Cruz. For
the archaeology of the Andes, this project will provide a method for testing and
revising current models of sociopolitical organization during the late Middle
Horizon (AD600-1000), a time of great social and political change in the region.

These periods of cultural transition are important for understanding the
development of human societies. From a historic or prehistoric perspective,
archaeology can explore the ways in which people have adapted to fluctuating
social and political conditions. The built environment is an essential focus of
anthropological research, especially for understanding architecture and the use
of space as it reflects and shapes social life. Changes in architectural form
and style are often taken as indices of societal change. Some styles of
household architecture have been shown ethnographically to reference ethnicity
or other aspects of community identity, while the enlargement of public
buildings or temples may mark the accession of a new ruler. In this project, the
relationship between architectural change and social life can be investigated at
one site, during a period that is thought to involve widespread social and
political upheaval. Rather than the traditional "top-down" approach of examining
political relations from the perspective of those in power, this study will
emphasize the perspective of local people in their interactions with an outside
political entity. A thorough spatial analysis of the expansion and modification
of Cerro La Cruz as a possible manifestation of sociopolitical change will
provide a critical test of earlier models of Andean political organization. From
the perspective of the social sciences, the results of this case study will
contribute to our understanding of the catalysts for culture change and how
local people adapt during periods of transition. Ms. Vogel's research will
increase our knowledge of a poorly understood period in Peruvian prehistory and
will also contribute to the training of a promising young scientist.

