* 0108874
* The Impact of Forest Fire Management on the Population Structure of Glade Species in the Ozarks
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2008
* Alan Templeton, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 08/31/2008
* USD 444,999.00

gThe collared lizard (Crotaphytus collaris) lives on rocky outcrops in the
Ozarks called glades. Suppression of forest fires has destroyed many glades and
has transformed the surrounding forest from an open woodlands into a forest with
a dense understory. By 1980 no populations of collared lizards existed within or
nearby the Stegall Mountain Natural Area. Between 1984 and 1989, we translocated
three populations of collared lizards onto restored glades in this natural area.
All three flourished, but we observed no animal dispersing between glades and no
colonization of new glades up to 1993. In 1994 the Missouri Department of
Conservation began prescribed burns in this area. Under fire management, genetic
interchanges began to occur between glades, 44 glades were colonized, and the
population size increased over10-fold. We propose to (1) continue to document
the lizards' range expansion and characterize its genetic consequences, (2)
quantify the amount of extinction and recolonization on glades under fire
management, (3) measure the amount of genetic interchange among glade
populations, and (4) monitor the genetic health of the populations.

We rarely have the opportunity to observe drastic alterations in a species'
population structure. Here we can. Conservation biology places great importance
upon interchange among local populations, and here we can directly test whether
or not landscape-level management affects such interchanges. Another basic tool
of conservation biology is effective population size, which can be used to
monitor the rate of loss of genetic diversity and the rate of accumulation of
potentially deleterious inbreeding. Because we know the initial state (the
original three translocated populations), we can estimate effective sizes with
unprecedented accuracy and compare our estimates to those based on the commonly
used approximations. Such a comparison is long over due given the importance of
effective size in conservation, and we are in a unique position to do it.