* 0108992
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Effects of Ethnicity and Migration on Forest Use and Conservation in Central VietNam
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2001,03/31/2003
* Michael Dove, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 03/31/2003
* USD 10,500.00

0108992&lt;br/&gt;Dove / McElwee&lt;br/&gt; The impact of native groups on
tropical forests is not well understood. In some cases, analysts feel that
traditional societies have a benign conservationist effect on the forest, in
others, that they exploit and degrade the forest with no thought on future
productivity. This project involves the dissertation research of a
Forestry/Environmental Studies and Anthropology student from Yale University.
The student will analyze the effects of ethnicity, migration and land tenure on
forest use in Vietnam through ethnographic fieldwork using participant
observation, household surveys, mapping and analysis of extant records. The
hypotheses to be tested are that ethnicity, migration and land tenure play a
role in how different user groups manage the forest. Three different ethnic
groups will be studied: indigenous Chut, in-migrant and longer-term Vietnamese,
and in-migrant Muong. The new knowledge created by this project will advance our
understanding of how multi-ethnic societies can manage a scarce resource, a
timely question in the contemporary world. In addition the project contributes
to the training of a young social scientist, and increases our knowledge of this
important region of the world. &lt;br/&gt;