* 0108372
* Signal Evolution and the Origins of Biodiversity in African Mormyridae Fishes
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Carl Hopkins, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2005
* USD 372,000.00

During a pilot project funded by the NSF International Program, researchers at
Cornell University, working in Gabon in Central West Africa, have discovered a
new species flock of weakly electric fishes in the genus Brienomyrus of the
family Mormyridae. So far they have discovered approximately 34 new species. All
of these new fishes were uncovered during two field trips to the river basins of
Gabon, in West Africa's equatorial rainforests. They are often morphologically
cryptic, so they cannot be easily distinguished. What makes it possible to
recognize different forms is their distinctive electric organ discharges (EODs)
that facilitate identification in the field. EODs are essential for species
recognition and reproductive isolation. There are three goals for the research
program. First, the researchers hope to continue the successful fieldwork in
Africa with new studies in Gabon, Ivory Coast, and the Congo in order to more
extensively document the biodiversity of this species flock. They will collect
specimens, make biogeographic distribution maps, make EOD recordings, and
collect tissue samples for DNA analysis. Second, they will study the nature of
sensory processing of the species-specific EOD waveforms of these fishes by
making electrophysiological recordings from electroreceptors, when the receptors
are presented with naturalistic electric discharges. Finally, they will do
behavioral studies using the technique of playback to explore the stimulus
preferences of females to EODs of electric fishes from conspecific and
heterospecific individuals.

Proposed Research. The researchers will use DNA sequences derived from multiple
loci including both mitochondrial and nuclear genes to produce a species-level
phylogeny for the newly discovered Gabon clade of Brienomyrus. They propose
using multi-locus DNA fingerprinting techniques with amplified fragment length
polymorphisms (AFLP) to provide hundreds of binary allelic characters for
phylogenetic analysis. The species-level phylogenies will be used to reconstruct
the evolution of the electric organs within these clades. A centerpiece of the
study of the evolution of this species flock is a good molecular understanding
of the evolutionary relationships of existing forms. From this, patterns in the
evolution of signal diversity can be explored. In addition to the species-level
phylogenies the field data will provide the first detailed information on
geographical distribution patterns of these electric fishes. Integration of
biogeography with phylogeny and electrical recordings will permit a detailed
analysis of reproductive character displacement in EODs and geographic variation
in EOD waveforms within species. A complete taxonomic revision of the genus
Brienomyrus will be done to recognize the 34 putatively new taxa in a group that
currently lists only 11. Recognizing the importance of international
cooperation, the Cornell researchers will initiate collaboration with Gabonese
fish researchers. Because of the central importance of electric signals in the
systematic biology of mormyrids, the researchers will also create a web-site
database of electric organ discharges that researchers can access to obtain
field recordings of EODs from voucher specimens. The database will be used to
archive and catalogue thousands of similar EODs collected during more than 20
years of field work in Africa, and it will set a national standard for recording
signals tied to a systematic collection.

Impact. These studies should have broad interest to researchers working in
evolutionary and systematic biology. To discover a new species flock has
intrinsic interest, especially when it concerns a well-known vertebrate group,
but this particular group has potential interest to neurobiologists interested
in comparative sensory and motor systems biology. The studies of behavior,
neurobiology, systematics, and evolution of the Gabon-clade mormyrids will give
us a better understanding of the mechanisms of evolution of new species.