* 0108795
* Emergence of Status Inequality at the Keatley Creek Site, British Columbia
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* Anna Prentiss, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2003
* USD 51,593.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. William C. Prentiss and his
colleagues will conduct archaeological research at the Keatley Creek site, a
large housepit village located in the Middle Fraser Canyon of south-central
British Columbia. The Keatley Creek site contains extensive and well-preserved
archaeological deposits, representing a globally significant record of change in
hunter-gatherer culture and community organization spanning at least 5000 years.
Early in its occupational history, the site was a frequently occupied camp for
generalized (socio-economically egalitarian) hunter-gatherer peoples. However,
by the height of its occupation, around 1100 years ago, a permanent winter
village had evolved, likely featuring a hierarchically ranked society of
approximately 1000-1500 persons residing in housepits as large as 22 meters in
diameter. Residents of this complex hunter-gatherer community participated in a
large-scale exchange network and maintained a subsistence economy centered on
intensive salmon fishing and storage. Some households may have even owned or at
least controlled access to portions of the surrounding landscape including
fishing sites and stone quarries. The Keatley Creek site thus provides an
optimal opportunity for studying the processes and events associated with the
emergence of social inequality in a North American hunter-gatherer context.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will focus on the evolution of the Keatley
Creek village with an emphasis on the processes which give rise to complex
social organization. To accomplish this, Dr. Prentiss will direct
multidisciplinary research that will include archaeological excavation,
assessment of site stratigraphy, radiocarbon dating, and studies of change in
subsistence behavior, technology, and organization of activities on house
floors. More specifically, excavation will focus on archaeological deposits
chronicling the shift from generalized to complex hunter-gatherers. Radiocarbon
analysis will establish the date at which social complexity emerged in the
village. Studies of plant remains, animal bones, and stone tools will permit an
assessment of changes in the organization of food procurement, preparation, and
consumption during this important transition. The research team will focus on
several questions: 1. When did the transition to social complexity occur? 2. Was
this cultural transition abrupt or gradual? 3. Was the transition accompanied by
a major change in subsistence? 4. Did the transition follow a reorganization of
technology? 5. How did labor organization change during this time? Results of
the project will advance the anthropological understanding of the evolution of
complex societies. It will also provide insight into the organization of complex
hunter-gatherer communities during the late period of the Northern Plateau.
Finally, it will build positive working relationships between Indian people and
archaeologists in the Pacific Northwest region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;