* 0108816
* Faces of the Nunamiut: Tourist Art and Traditional Knowledge in Northern Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2001,12/31/2009
* Margaret Blackman, SUNY College at Brockport
* Continuing Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 12/31/2009
* USD 117,510.00

This project addresses cultural and economic aspects of the making of
distinctive caribou skin masks by the Nunamiut Eskimo of Anaktuvik Pass, Alaska.
Devised in the 1950's for the tourist trade and remaining little changed to the
present, these masks and the motives underlying their making present a unique
research opportunity. The masks have cultural significance well beyond their
souvenir status. Mask-making has been, and continues to be, essential to the
local economy. The masks have become a prominent feature of the Alaskan tourist
art market and constitute a village "signature" recognized throughout and beyond
Alaska. Production of these masks draws upon traditional knowledge of the land
and animals of the central Brooks Range in Alaska, a knowledge that is slowly
being lost. Finally, the history and development of mask making in Anaktuvuk
Pass is synonymous with recent cultural change among the Nunamiut. The project
will address these issues through a comprehensive study of masks and mask-making
in Anaktuvuk Pass. This study will: 1) document the origin and development of
mask-making; 2) document, for comparative purposes, selected museum collections
of masks; 3) obtain, in narrative form, perspectives of current mask-makers on
their individual work and on mask-making in general; 4) document
photographically the processes and products associated with mask-making; 5)
detail the economic aspects, locally and within the larger Alaskan tourist
market, of mask-making; and, 6) investigate relationships among mask-making,
cultural identity and traditional knowledge of Arctic fauna, with emphases on
the fur-bearers that provide raw materials for the masks. This project presents
an unusual opportunity to investigate the development of a significant tradition
while the individuals tied to its origins are still alive. It will advance our
understanding of, and provide a case study in, economic anthropology,
ethnography of art, economic development, and cultural change. Results will be
presented in a publisheable book-length manuscript to be submitted to the
University of Washington Press.