* 0108977
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: River Tourism in Nepal: A Social, Environmental, and Economic Assessment
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2002
* Robert Rhoades, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 07/31/2002
* USD 11,920.00

0108977&lt;br/&gt;Rhoades / Van De Berg&lt;br/&gt;Tourism is one of the world's
major industries, and the impact of this industry upon local cultures is an
enduring field of study. This dissertation research involves an anthropology
student from the University of Georgia studying the role of river-based tourism
(whitewater rafting) in local communities in Nepal. The student will study
rafting company owners, river guides, and local river villages as well as the
rafting tourism clients. The study will elicit the major costs and benefits of
the river tourism industry from each of these groups of stakeholders; assess the
level of agreement about the social, environmental and economic costs and
benefits within and between each group using consensus analysis; and compare the
economic contributions made by clients of river tourism along two rivers, one of
shorter and one of longer trip duration. The research will advance our
understanding of the role of river tourism in the subsistence of local villagers
and gather data to help assess the impact of planned changes in the river
environment. In addition it will advance the anthropological methodology of
consensus analysis, a way of analyzing the knowledge of a group of persons about
a defined topic; will contribute to the training of a young social scientist,
and advance our understanding of this important region of the world. &lt;br/&gt;