* 0108652
* A Decision-Making Framework for Stream Restoration from Acid Mine Drainage
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Donald Waldman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 08/31/2004
* USD 110,000.00

Acid mine drainage is a common feature of the Rocky Mountain Region of the
United States and in many other regions of the world. Acid mine drainage has
been referred to as the greatest water quality problem facing the Western United
States. The fact that so many mines are abandoned makes acid mine drainage a
truly public problem. This research provides a decision making framework to help
determine where to begin restoration activities. The heart of the framework is
the measurement of the public's preferences for cleaning up acid mine drainage
at the watershed level. The framework employs scientific information and
economics to develop and evaluate acid mine drainage restoration alternatives
within the watershed. The framework provides an avenue for measuring preferences
for both quantifiable and non-quantifiable ecological information. Though the
research uses a case study approach, the design is easily transferable to other
watersheds thanks to the use of technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The heart of
the problem, and the decision making framework, is choice between alternative
restoration plans. Restoration plans differ by the area of the watershed
targeted for restoration and the level of restoration. When researchers use
innovative and thoughtful communication protocols of the consequences of
alternative restoration plans, citizens are able to make meaningful choices
between restoration alternatives. Individual choices regarding the most
preferred restoration alternatives are used to estimate the public's preferences
over restoration alternatives. The main benefit of using this flexible framework
is that although the model is based on economic principles, the information
provided facilitates a broader range of perspectives. The framework allows
analysis of restoration according to majority/plurality rule decisions, economic
efficiency, and distributional considerations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
demonstrate the framework, the research provides a case study of Colorado's
Snake River Watershed which is located in Summit County, Colorado. The case
study is developed in close cooperation with the Snake River Basin Task Force,
the group charged with making recommendations for addressing the problem of acid
mine drainage in the Basin. Ecological data collected through a separate U.S.
EPA-funded research project is used to determine baseline conditions. A random
sample of Summit County residents are used as subjects in the choice experiment.
The choice experiment is administered using two different administration modes
by split-sample design. One group has the option of participating in the choice
experiment over the Internet from home, over the Internet from a workstation
provided by the project at the Keystone Community Center, or by mail. A second
group participates in a mail-only format. This split-sample design facilitates
investigation of the effectiveness of sampling for experiments that offer
Internet access as well as mail participation relative to mail-only
participation. The information from the choice experiments and the split-
sampling design provides the basis for conducting future similar research in the
Snake River Basin as well as other watersheds affected by acid mine
drainage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;