* 0108905
* Quantitative Investigations of Backward Masking
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2004
* Gregory Francis, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher T. Kello
* 07/31/2004
* USD 119,188.00

This project will investigate quantitative theories of backward visual masking;
the project results will promote development of new experiments and theories of
cognition and perception. Backward visual masking is used throughout cognitive
and clinical psychology as a tool to interrupt various stages of cognitive
processing. Because masking is used in virtually all areas of experimental
psychology, it is important to understand how it works. Previous work has
identified three general methods of masking that account for important aspects
of experimental data. The project will use mathematical theorems and computer
simulations to identify fundamental properties of systems that use these
methods. These properties will be connected to existing data and to existing
models of backward masking. The fundamental properties will also be used to
generate predictions under new backward masking conditions. The project will
test these predictions with new experiments that are able to compare alternative
general methods of backward masking. An additional analysis will explore current
mathematical models of backward visual masking to determine how these models
behave relative to the general methods. This analysis will identify which part
of a model's behavior is due to its use of a general method and which part is
due to the specific attributes of that model. The project will provide a better
understanding of the types of mechanisms that are involved in backward visual
masking. Such understanding will allow experimentalists to develop more precise
tests of cognitive systems and will allow modelers to develop more accurate
theories of cognition and perception. In addition, the research project will
provide information about backward masking that will be applicable to any
situation where people interact with a rapidly changing world. Thus, results
from the project will apply to situations where people are, for example, driving
cars, reading text, flying planes, and working on computers.