* 0108201
* Mitochondrial Phylogenomics: Investigation of Fish Phylogeny and Nucleotide Character Sampling in Large-scale Phylogenetic analysis
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Richard Broughton, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2005
* USD 235,000.00

Mitochondrial phylogenomics: Investigation of fish phylogeny and nucleotide
character sampling in large-scale phylogenetic analysis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Molecular systematics employs variation in DNA to reconstruct
historical&lt;br/&gt;relationships among organisms and investigate evolutionary
processes that&lt;br/&gt;have given rise to the earth's biodiversity. The
growing volume of DNA&lt;br/&gt;sequence data and the increasing number of
characters and/or species that&lt;br/&gt;may be included in evolutionary
investigations have placed greater&lt;br/&gt;importance on methods of
phylogenetic analysis and experimental design. It&lt;br/&gt;is intuitive that
the more data that can be applied to a phylogenetic&lt;br/&gt;question, the
greater the probability of recovering an accurate estimate of&lt;br/&gt;the
phylogeny. Although phylogenetic accuracy may be positively
correlated&lt;br/&gt;with the number of species sampled from a particular group,
a fundamental&lt;br/&gt;question in molecular systematics remains: How many
nucleotide characters&lt;br/&gt;are required to resolve the phylogeny of a given
number of species,&lt;br/&gt;particularly when all (or most) of the extant
members of a group have been&lt;br/&gt;sampled? This project will employ a
large, robust phylogeny to investigate&lt;br/&gt;the sensitivity of phylogenetic
analysis to nucleotide character sampling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ray-finned
fishes (class Actinopterygii) exhibit extreme diversity&lt;br/&gt;with more
extant described species than all other vertebrate groups&lt;br/&gt;combined and
are of major ecological and economic importance. Despite&lt;br/&gt;extensive
morphological study, phylogenetic relationships among
many&lt;br/&gt;actinopterygian lineages remain unclear. This project will
compile a data&lt;br/&gt;set of complete mitochondrial genomes from 73 species
of ray-finned fishes,&lt;br/&gt;including representatives of 32 (out of 42)
orders and extensive sampling&lt;br/&gt;from the two largest orders,
Cypriniformes and Perciformes. Mitochondrial&lt;br/&gt;genomes are small
chromosomes that are inherited independently of the&lt;br/&gt;majority of DNA
found in the nucleus. The clonal, maternal inheritance
of&lt;br/&gt;mitochondrial DNA makes it particularly useful in phylogenetic
studies. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Mitochondrial genome sequences, along with
nuclear gene sequences, will be&lt;br/&gt;used to generate a robust hypothesis
of phylogenetic relationships among&lt;br/&gt;the most important lineages of
ray-finned fishes. This data set will&lt;br/&gt;reveal patterns of
diversification among fishes and provide important&lt;br/&gt;insights on the
evolution of early vertebrates. The mitochondrial data, in&lt;br/&gt;conjunction
with the best phylogenetic hypothesis, will then be used
to&lt;br/&gt;investigate nucleotide sampling properties in phylogenetic
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;Sub-samples of different numbers of species will be drawn
from the group of&lt;br/&gt;73 species. For each sub-sample, the number of
nucleotides required to&lt;br/&gt;recover the correct phylogeny, with various
levels of support, will be&lt;br/&gt;determined. The influence of several
important evolutionary parameters on&lt;br/&gt;phylogenetic accuracy will be
investigated. These parameters include a)&lt;br/&gt;the frequency of variable
nucleotide sites in the sample; b) the amount of&lt;br/&gt;evolutionary
divergence among taxa; c) the amount of evolutionary rate&lt;br/&gt;variation
among included lineages; and d) the extent and distribution
of&lt;br/&gt;nucleotide compositional bias among sampled taxa. The results will
provide&lt;br/&gt;a deeper understanding of the behavior of nucleotide data in
phylogenetic&lt;br/&gt;analysis and should identify a range of nucleotide sample
sizes required&lt;br/&gt;for accurate estimation of phylogeny as a function of
the number of taxa&lt;br/&gt;under investigation and relevant evolutionary
conditions. Such objective&lt;br/&gt;criteria for experimental design will be of
practical benefit to the field&lt;br/&gt;of molecular systematics by providing
guidance in budgeting and allocation&lt;br/&gt;of resources and by improving the
efficiency and accuracy of molecular&lt;br/&gt;phylogenetic
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;