* 0108667
* Ecosystem Values and Surface Water Protection: Basic Research on the Cotingent Valuation Method
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2004
* William Schulze, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 08/31/2004
* USD 160,000.00

Ecosystem values are required in the conduct of cost-benefit analyses for a wide
variety of regulations and policies. These range from climate change, to acid
rain, to surface water protection. In this proposal, it is argued that the
current state-of-the-art in contingent valuation (or stated preference methods)
is inadequate to provide credible estimates of many types of ecosystem values. A
review of the literature on ecosystem values shows that embedding or part-whole
bias in a variety of forms is a major unresolved problem. That is, stated values
for individual components of the ecosystem (e.g., spotted owls) appear to be
disproportionately, and perhaps unreasonably, large relative to stated values
for the entire ecosystem (e.g., old growth forests). This fundamental problem
possibly results from three causes. First, embedding or other biases in values,
may result from the presence of other-regarding behavior (motivated by warm
glow, altruism, or fairness/equity concerns). Second, part-whole bias may result
from the view of many respondents that ecosystem attributes (commodities) are
jointly determined so that one cannot, for example, save a particular species
without preserving the entire ecosystem that it uses as habitat. Third, even
where neoclassical theory may suggest that part-whole bias is theoretically
unlikely, strong evidence suggests the converse, even in the controlled
environment of the laboratory. Thus, behavioral anomalies, not contingent
valuation in-and-of itself, may be responsible for part-whole bias.

Given the complexity of possible behaviors and the cost of conducting valuation
studies in the field, this project is directed toward conducting controlled
laboratory economic experiments to explore the causes of embedding and part-
whole bias. Although parallel hypothetical questions will be asked in some
experiments, the reduced variance obtained by providing incentives and the
control of a laboratory environment should allow rapid progress using relatively
small samples (compared to contingent valuation) at a relatively modest cost. A
demand revealing mechanism for public goods that combines majority voting rules
with the Becker-deGroot-Marschak (BDM) mechanism will be developed and used in
these experiments. Substantial experimental economics research has demonstrated
that the BDM is readily understood and creates appropriate incentives for
individuals to reveal their value for a good. Majority voting rules also have
well known theoretical and empirical properties. Building on past experimental
research, the goal will be to identify the possible presence of warm glow,
paternalistic (merit goods) and non-paternalistic altruism, joint products, and
other anomalies in the demand for a variety of public goods. Since warm glow,
non-paternalistic altruism, and anomalies may produce values inconsistent with
the efficiency condition for public goods provision, methods for identifying the
presence or absence of such values is critical for the credibility of contingent
valuation. This research will also explore alternative hypothetical elicitation
mechanisms that can consistently test for and possibly isolate components of
value that are inappropriate for cost-benefit analysis.