* 0108892
* SGER: Indirect Effects of Biocontrols: Do Gall Fly-induced Increases in Deer Mouse Populations increase the Prevalence of Hantavirus?
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2001,04/30/2002
* Ragan Callaway, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 04/30/2002
* USD 22,783.00

0108892&lt;br/&gt;Callaway&lt;br/&gt;The indirect effects of consumers in food
webs are known to be important in natural ecological systems, and the
consequences of disrupting natural food webs are sometimes disastrous. However,
our knowledge of indirect effects has not been well integrated into invasive
weed biological control theory and practice. Over 700 species on non-native
insects have been introduced worldwide with the expectation that they will have
negative direct effects on invasive weeds, resulting in indirect positive
effects on native species. However, preliminary data indicate that even well-
behaved biocontrol insects may have profound, negative indirect effects on
native species. Research indicates that the larvae of gall fly insects
introduced in the early 1970's to control the highly invasive exotic plants,
spotted knapweed (Centaurea maculosa and C. diffusa), may have substantial
undesired indirect effects because they have become an abundant winter food
source for deer mice. Deer mice are the primary vectors for the Sin Nombre
hantavirus, which results in high mortality when contracted by humans. Results
indicate that predation on gall fly larvae increases deer mouse populations and
causes deer mice to seasonally aggregate in high-density knapweed patches where
the mice persist on large numbers of gall fly larvae during the fall, winter and
spring. Seasonal aggregations and increases in population densities of deer mice
may increase the prevalence of hantavirus on the landscape - especially in areas
adjacent to humans where knapweed reaches high densities. Field experiments will
be conducted to test the hypothesis that gall flies increase the prevalence of
hantavirus. Rapid execution of this research is critical to developing
management guidelines to reduce the risk of hantavirus infection for people
living in urban interface and rural settings in the West where spotted knapweed
occurs. Moreover, the proposed research has the potential to provide extensive
insights into how important the overlooked indirect effects of biocontrols may
be to natural ecosystems, thereby introducing and extensive area of new research
opportunities in both the fields of biocontrol and indirect effects in
ecology.&lt;br/&gt;