* 0108439
* Collaborative Research: Prey Movement in Hazardous Environments: Studies in a Tropical Stream Fish System
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2007
* James Gilliam, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2007
* USD 281,604.00

Abstract

Proposal Number DEB-0108439 James F. Gilliam North Carolina State University

RUI: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: PREY MOVEMENT IN HAZARDOUS ENVIRONMENTS: STUDIES
IN A TROPICAL STREAM FISH COMMUNITY

The goal of this study is to explore the effects of two phenomena, predators
and individual variation, on the dispersal of a tropical stream fish. Their
effects on dispersal are unknown. The first question addresses whether
increasing predator threat, with the addition of predatory fish species, slows
dispersal rate of the prey species through threatened zones of a river (a
previous study found that a predatory fish increased rather than suppressed prey
movement). The second question evaluates if individual boldness in the tendency
to explore beyond the home range contributes to dispersal rate within a
population and if so, whether individual differences are inherited. Fieldwork
will be done in natural streams in Trinidad that contain the prey species, but
which differ in the number of predator species that they contain. Movement in
each stream will be determined by mark-recapture procedures. Individual
variation in boldness will be evaluated through behavioral assays, and its
heritability assessed by rearing offspring of movers and non-movers. To directly
determine whether individual variation in boldness contributes to dispersal rate
in nature, a reciprocal transplant experiment will be done in two sister
tributaries of a river in which movers in one tributary will be exchanged for
stayers in the other. If boldness is an individual characteristic, the two
streams should eventually contain populations that differ in rates of dispersal.
The results of the proposed studies with fish are expected to open new avenues
to understanding the factors that affect the dispersal in natural habitats of
tropical rivers.