* 0108981
* Support for the Advanced Seminar on Paleodietary Research at the University of California, Santa Cruz
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2002
* Paul Koch, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2002
* USD 8,450.00

This award provides partial support for the 6th Advanced Seminar on Paleodietary
Research, to be held on the campus of the Univ. of California, Santa Cruz in
September 2001.The Advanced Seminars have been the premier forum for high-level
discussion among anthropologists, geochemists, paleobiologists, and ecosystem
scientists about the ways that fossil chemistry can be used to reconstruct the
ecology, physiology, and migration patterns of humans and other mammals.
Approximately 30 seminar participants will explore the diverse chemical
approaches to hominid paleobiology. The list ranges from senior scientists to
graduate students and from archaeologists to chemists, including speakers from 8
nations. The speakers will examine the following general topics: 1) how
biological isotope signals are influenced by the effects of growth dynamics and
post-mortem alteration, 2) how isotopes can be used to study the scale and
pattern of human mobility, 3) new isotopic tools for studying hominid diets and
habitat use, and 4) how physiology and nutritional status are reflected in the
isotope composition of fossils. For example, several speakers will focus on the
ecology and diet of australopithecines that are several million years old,
determining the extent to which these relatives of modern humans consumed meat
versus plants. Another set of speakers will focus on the diets and food
processing technologies of modern humans over the past few thousand years. A
number of speakers will examine shifts in human migration patterns and
nutritional status, looking at the interplay between climate and cultural change
as causal agents. As has been the case with all of previous seminars, we will
publish a set of papers resulting from the presentations, preferably as a
special issue of an archaeological journal. The publication will summarize
important advances, making results available in a centralized format to both
specialists and non-specialists. If the past is any guide, the chemical
approaches to human and animal ecology, biogeochemistry, and environmental
reconstruction explored in the publication will extend to workers in many other
fields. For the past 30 years, anthropologists and archaeologists using chemical
methods have been blazing a trail, a trail that has recently been picked up by
wildlife biologists, terrestrial paleoclimatologists and global change
researchers. The 6th Advanced Seminar on Paleodietary Research should continue
this tradition.

