* 0108691
* Evaluating the Effectiveness of Collaboration in Water Resource Planning in California: A Case Study of CALFED
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2004
* Judith Innes, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 08/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This project will evaluate the effectiveness of collaboration in the contentious
water-resource planning arena in California, through an in-depth study of
CALFED, a large-scale effort to decide the guiding policies and management
strategies for the largest estuary on North America's west coast. CALFED brings
together federal, state and local agencies, as well as stakeholders, to develop
a comprehensive and long-term program for restoring and managing this critical
environmental and economic resource. Despite the deep tensions between these
aspects of California's water system, the effort has already produced
significant outcomes that are changing the way California's water resources are
discussed and managed by fostering constructive dialogue among participants. The
principal objective of this study is to test three related hypotheses about
collaborative policy dialogues. First, the better a dialogue meets certain
collaboration conditions, the more likely it is to produce innovations, shared
understandings, long term working relationships and politically acceptable
solutions. Second, participants in collaborative dialogues change their views of
the problem and of their own interests and options. Lastly, new norms,
practices, and patterns of interaction emerge in some instances which spread
beyond the individuals involved and persist over time.

The research methods include in-depth interviews of CALFED participants,
observation of meetings, and review of documents recording the debates and
actions and providing supporting analysis for the discussions. The analysis will
compare the more and less collaborative dialogues within CALFED in terms of
their outcomes and effects on participants and on the practices and
relationships among players. The researchers will also update the historical
account of water policy and water issues in California prior to CALFED and will
document the changes since CALFED.

The underlying developmental pressures evident in the CALFED case are
increasingly common and apply to water sharing situations throughout the US and
to other multi-jurisdictional resource issues in many locations. Decision-
makers, planners, and managers routinely must incorporate both environmental and
economic concerns in their activities. The proposed research will build basic
theory on these practices and on the conditions under which they do and do not
work.

