* 0108232
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Cultural Beliefs and Health Status in Type 2 Diabetics
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Roberta Baer, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 08/31/2004
* USD 171,181.00

This collaborative project (with 0108228) studies a core issue in medical
anthropology, the relationship between cultural beliefs and health status. The
project investigates patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus to understand what
strategies people use to successfully manage the disease, and whether these
strategies differ by ethnic group. Three groups will be studied, Mexican,
African- and European-American diabetic patients in Galveston, Texas, as well as
Mexican patients in Guadalajara, Mexico (studied with Mexican colleagues). The
project will also analyze whether patients whose cultural models of diabetes
agree more closely with the understanding of providers enjoy better health
status than patients whose understanding is more variant. The project will also
study whether the co-occurrence of the folk illness "susto" with diabetes is
associated with a generally poorer health status. Methods include ethnographic
interviewing, consensus analysis, the measure of hemoglobinA1c to assess health
status, standard self-report scales available in Spanish which focus on
depression and stress and formal interviews about social support. The results
from this research will advance our understanding of the role of cultural and
individual belief systems in a person's health status; will advance the use of
consensus analysis in ethnographic research; and will contribute valuable new
knowledge to health professionals dealing with diabetes to help advise patients
on treatment regimes.