* 0108626
* The macroscopic response of composites
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Graeme Milton, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2005
* USD 214,100.00

DMS Award Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Award #: 0108626&lt;br/&gt;PI: Milton,
Graeme&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Utah &lt;br/&gt;Program: Applied
Mathematics&lt;br/&gt;Program Manager: Catherine
Mavriplis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: The macroscopic response of
composites&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to investigate the
macroscopic response of materials, focusing on four topics. The first topic
concerns creep in a two phase composite given that one knows the behavior of the
constituent phases. The problem is to obtain bounds on the range of creep that
might occur, and to identify microstructures having the maximum and minimum
creep. The second topic concerns the complex dielectric constant of homogeneous
or heterogeneous materials which governs how a material reflects, transmits and
absorbs radiation. Given measurements of the complex dielectric constant over a
range of frequencies, the problem is to say something definite about the
response of the material over an interval of frequencies outside the measured
range. The third topic, which represents a continuation of previous work, is to
explore the range of values the average strain can take in a composite which is
subject to a fixed average stress, as the microstructure is varied. The
objective is to bound this range, and to identify optimal structures that
generate strains at the boundary of the range of admissible values. Such
structures should be useful as ``stress guides'' for channeling stress to
desired locations. The particular question of what microstructures make the best
possible hydrostatic compression to shear converters will be investigated. The
fourth topic is to explore the properties of a rather exotic class of
microstructures, called partial differential microstructures. These may turn out
to be the best microstructures for solving certain optimal design
problems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A better understanding of the macroscopic
response of materials is of central technological importance. This importance
stretches across the board, from understanding the macroscopic response of
engineered materials (of critical importance to the defense, automotive, and
aerospace industries), to understanding the macroscopic response of
polycrystalline and porous rocks (relevant to earthquake prediction and to the
oil industry), to understanding the macroscopic response of sea ice (important
to climate modeling), to understanding the macroscopic response of biological
materials (such as tissues, bones, shells and tendons). This proposal will
enhance our understanding in ways that will (1) facilitate the development of
new materials having unusual properties that are achieved by tailoring the
microstructure; (2) provide limits on the response of composite materials, that
could be essential for assessing the safety of such materials in desired
applications; and (3) predict certain aspects of the response of materials to
radiation outside frequencies where the response has been measured, which could
be important if the material is biological and if one wants to know if radiation
could be harmful outside frequencies where its effects are
known.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Date: May 30, 2001&lt;br/&gt;