* 0108589
* Phylogenetics of Acanthaceae:  A nested approach to resolving relationships of Acanthaceae and their closest relatives
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Thomas Daniel, Academy of Natural Sciences Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 07/31/2005
* USD 160,534.00

Dr. Lucinda McDade of the Philadelphia Academy of Natural Sciences and Dr.
Thomas Daniel at the California Academy of Sciences are conducting a
collaborative study to resolve phylogenetic relationships at several levels
within the diverse (&gt;4,000 species), largely tropical plant family
Acanthaceae and between these plants and their closest relatives in the order
Lamiales (mints and relatives). The primary source of data will be DNA sequences
from chloroplast and nuclear genes; in addition, morphological information
(including pollen) and chromosome counts will also be acquired whenever
possible. The work to be accomplished has four goals; these were chosen to test
hypotheses regarding relationships, to interpret morphological evolution, to
contribute toward understanding the evolution of pollinator relationships in
Acanthaceae, and to provide data for continued studies of molecular evolution.
Goal 1 is to identify the closest living relatives of Acanthaceae. Goal 2 is to
establish the precise phylogenetic placement of the black mangrove genus
Avicennia. These plants have been shown by previous work to be closely related
to Acanthaceae. Goals 3 and 4 are to clarify relationships within two
sublineages of Acanthaceae, Acantheae and Justicieae. Taxon sampling and data
gathering strategies will complement existing and on-going projects, with field
work in Madagascar providing critical new samples along with material from
Africa and South America from colleagues there. Regions of DNA to be sequenced
were determined by the level of relationships to be resolved: higher level work
(goals 1 and 2) requires sequences from relatively slowly evolving loci, whereas
work within Acanthaceae (goals 3 and 4) requires sequences from gene regions
that are evolving more rapidly. &lt;br/&gt; The species richness, extreme
morphological diversity, and nearly worldwide distribution of Acanthaceae mean
that achieving the goals of this project will have impact beyond systematics. In
the context of phylogenetic relationships, derived characters can be sorted from
primitive characters to clarify both the pattern of morphological evolution and
suggest testable ideas about process. Plants interact with environments as
morphological beings and thus morphology is key to understanding ecological and
evolutionary processes. For example, by interpreting morphological evolution,
the stage is set for studies of the evolution of pollinator relationships.
Acanthaceae have been thought of as Gondwanan in origin, but it is clear that
biogeographic history has been much more complicated than simple vicariance. The
research proposed will point to groups of tractable size with which to address
historical biogeography. Finally, it is clear that there are fascinating
problems of molecular evolution in this group. The non-coding DNA regions for
which sequences are available are not evolving in a clock-like fashion
throughout the group. Adding sequences for protein-coding genes (part of the
work to be accomplished during this project) will not only provide better
resolution of phylogenetic relationships but will also advance knowledge of the
relationship between morphological and molecular diversity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;