* 0108146
* LTREB: Mangrove Forest Structure and Gap Dynamics: Experimental Studies of the Roles of Competition and Herbivory
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2007
* Wayne Sousa, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 06/30/2007
* USD 330,443.00

LTREB: MANGROVE FOREST STRUCTURE AND GAP DYNAMICS: EXPERIMENTAL STUDIES OF THE
ROLES OF COMPETITION AND HERBIVORY

The proposed research continues long-term monitoring of the patterns and
mechanisms of gap regeneration in mangrove forests on the Caribbean coast of
Panama, and their effects on forest structure and stability. Fieldwork includes
sampling vegetation in a variety of permanent plots and transects along a tidal
gradient as well as in natural light gaps. Soil physicochemical characteristics
and the light environment will be monitored to evaluate if changes in vegetation
are associated with changes in abiotic characteristics. This study includes a
number of field experiments that test hypotheses that have been proposed to
explain mangrove zonation, including the Physiological Specialization, Included
Niche Competition, Tidal Sorting and Dominance-Predation hypotheses. In
addition, an herbivore exclusion experiment will assess the impact of insect
folivores and stem-borers on the growth, survival, and distribution of species
along the tidal gradient, as well as the mediating effect of herbivory on
interspecific competition. In general, these studies will advance our
understanding of the interactions of disturbance with competition and herbivory
in structuring natural ecosystems, and thereby contribute to our ability to
predict the ecological consequences of various human-caused alterations of these
endangered wetlands.