* 0108213
* Macro Evolutionary Trends in Tortoise Beetle Host Use and Shield Defenses
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2006
* Francis Johnson, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2006
* USD 420,000.00

Beetle diversity exceeds that of any other animal or plant group. Their
inordinate success is related to two factors: herbivory and dietary
specialization. Plant chemistry and predation are thought to be major factors
responsible for the repeated evolution of dietary specialization. However, their
relative importance, and the degree to which they interact to favor
specialization, are unknown. This project will test a model of diet evolution,
the 'nasty' host plant hypothesis (NHPH), which states that an herbivore's diet
becomes restricted to fewer plants as it increases its dependence on dietary
sources of chemistry that confer protection from predators. &lt;br/&gt; Tortoise
beetles (Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae) are a widespread, hyper-diverse group of
leaf-eating insects that feed upon hosts in over 10 mono- and dicotyledonous
plant families. The most remarkable aspect of their biology and the project's
study system - the larval shield - is a mobile appendage that can deflect
attacking enemies. Shields are not only barriers, but because they are laced
with host-derived, noxious metabolites, they also function as chemical defenses.
Shields can be removed, chemically neutralized, augmented with test compounds,
and then can be reattached without harming the larvae. The PIs will combine
these micro-manipulation techniques with bioassays, and a resolved beetle
phylogeny, to test the predictions of NHPH.&lt;br/&gt; The project's three aims
are: (1) to experimentally test if, as NHPH predicts, the defenses of
specialized species are more effective against major predators than are those of
their congeneric, oligophagous relatives; (2) to determine if specialists make
more efficient use of the host's chemistry for defense than do congeners feeding
on the same plant, and; (3) to determine if selection by predators has been
intense enough to produce patterns of escalation, due to the inclusion of novel,
uniquely host-derived compounds that serve to increase the effectiveness of
shield defenses. Chemical screening of shields and host plants will determine
shield composition and compound origin (host-derived or de novo synthesis). In
field bioassays using a suite of natural predators, the PIs will compare the
efficacy of shields and of compounds found in them. The PIs will map shield
chemical characters onto the beetle phylogeny, infer ancestor-descendent
relationships, and test NHPH's central tenet that predation should produce a
sequential host-shift pattern that yields increasingly effective shields - a
process that would ultimately result in the colonization of fewer, but more
chemically noxious hosts.&lt;br/&gt; Identification of the factors guiding host
shifts across the tortoise beetles radiation is critical to understanding the
evolution of plant-insect associations. This project will yield greater
empirical insight into the origin of herbivore dietary specialization as a net
response to selection by both an herbivore's predators and by its host's
chemistry. In the limit, the PIs want to know how the evolution of dietary
specialization has enhanced the rates of beetle speciation that produced much of
Earth's biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;