* 0108249
* Multilocus Tests of Speciation Models and Comparative Phylogeography of Australian Birds
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2001,11/30/2004
* Peter Beerli, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 11/30/2004
* USD 375,000.00

DEB-0108249&lt;br/&gt;Scott V. Edwards&lt;br/&gt;Peter
Beerli&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to Drs. Scott Edwards and
Peter Beerli at the University of Washington to apply molecular genetic tools to
study the evolution of Australian birds. Specifically, the project will use
genetic data to make inferences about (1) when in geological time a series of
avian species diverged across an important ecological barrier in northern
Australia, the Carpentarian barrier; (2) the size of the populations of the
ancestral species from which this series of present-day bird species in
Australia arose; and (3) the magnitude of genetic differences between
populations of songbirds distributed across this barrier. The research will use
DNA sequence variation in a class of molecular genetic markers known as single-
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) at many different places in the genomes of these
birds, as well as novel statistical methods, to make these
inferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is significant because it will
help clarify the timing and places of diversification of birds on an isolated
continent (Australia), and thereby will facilitate comparisons with
diversification of birds and other animals on other continents. This project
will distinguish between two competing theories for the origin of current-day
animal species, one of which says that much of this divergence took place very
recently, less than 2 million years ago, the other of which, says that these
divergence events probably took place much earlier. The results will help
document global patterns of biological diversification, relate these patterns to
environmental change, and thereby provide an historical context for conserving
and even predicting evolutionary history. In addition, the data will provide
measures of the amount of genetic variation within Australian bird species,
thereby providing a gauge by which the genetic variability found in other
species, including humans, can be compared.&lt;br/&gt;