* 0108951
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  On-Line Tonal Tuning of a Variable Inertia Vibration Absorber
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Behrooz Fallahi, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 09/30/2005
* USD 25,000.00

0108951&lt;br/&gt;Fallahi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a collaborative project by Dr. Behrooz Fallahi and Dr. Mohamed Seif,
both in the Department of Mechanical Engineering, Northern Illinois University,
Dekalb, Illinois, and Dr. Said Megahed, Mechanical Design and Production
Department, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt. They plan to study the dynamics and
control of a new class of adaptive Tuned Vibration Absorber (TVA: variable
effective inertia absorber). The approach has two facets: spectral analysis of
the excitation and online tuning of the absorber. The spectral analysis reveals
the frequency content of the excitation. The online tuning uses the frequency
content of the excitation to reposition a moving mass for tonal vibration
suppression. The analytical work, involving linearization of equations and study
of its effect, will be supplemented by experimental study to assess the
effectiveness of the proposed tonal tuning method. The novelty of the method is
that the absorber tuning is done online for tonal vibration suppression, that
moving a secondary mass changes absorber resonant frequency, and that the
dynamic equation is derived with time dependent control
parameter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The proposed technique may be widely
implemented in industrial cases such as civic structures, airplane wings,
submarine hulls, and helicopter cabins. The stability of the vibration
suppression device is always guaranteed. The US and Egyptian collaborator have
strong records of research and experience in mechanical dynamic systems,
vibrations and control, and application to robotics and automating systems. The
two sides complement each other, as Dr. Megahed is particularly experienced in
modeling and simulation, while the US team is particularly strong in the
planning and execution of the experiments and in the analysis of the data. The
proposal meets the INT objective of supporting collaborative research in areas
of mutual interest. This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint
Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both
countries to carry out these cooperative activities.&lt;br/&gt;