* 0108222
* Do Riparian Habitat Disturbances that Alter Cross-habitat Resource Subsidies Magnify Effects of Nonnative Fish Invasions on Stream Food Webs?
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2001,10/31/2005
* Kurt Fausch, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 10/31/2005
* USD 308,713.00

DEB-0108222 Fausch Habitat destruction and biotic invasions are the two leading
agents of global environmental change causing loss of species worldwide. An
estimated 40-50% of the land on Earth has been degraded by human actions, and
more than 90% of riparian zones adjacent to streams have been altered. Nonnative
species invasions cost $137 billion annually worldwide to control. Habitat
degradation and species invasions occur simultaneously in most ecosystems and
are believed to interact strongly, but there is little experimental evidence to
help predict what kinds of habitat disturbances will facilitate invasions or
increase their effects. The field experiments proposed here test the idea that
riparian habitat disturbances that reduce inputs of terrestrial invertebrate
prey from forests to headwater streams during summer magnify the direct and
indirect effects of invading fish on stream food webs. In addition, effects of
the fish invaders on stream invertebrates are predicted to reduce reciprocal
subsidies of emerging aquatic insects from stream to forest during fall through
spring. If so, this will demonstrate the potential for habitat loss and fish
invasions to have negative indirect effects on terrestrial consumers like birds
and spiders. Experiments by Japanese ecologists showed that excluding
terrestrial insects from a stream in northern Japan using a canopy (to mimic the
usual result of riparian habitat disturbance) caused native trout (charr) to
deplete herbivorous stream invertebrates, producing a 'top-down' trophic cascade
that increased algal biomass. Further research showed that inputs of forest
terrestrial insects (TI) to the stream during summer supplied about 50% of the
annual energy budget of fishes, and that aquatic insects emerging from the
stream supplied about 25% of the annual energy budget of forest birds. Rainbow
trout, a globally-important nonnative stream fish, are rapidly invading streams
in northern Japan, apparently exclude native charr, and specialize on TI.
Therefore, the current experiments will compare controls with native charr alone
in replicate stream reaches to two treatments, one where rainbow trout are
added, and another with rainbow trout added but TI excluded using stream
canopies. Direct effects of rainbow trout are predicted to reduce native charr
growth, abundance, and ultimately to exclude native species via emigration and
mortality. Exclusion of TI as well is predicted to intensify effects of rainbow
trout on native charr, reduce benthic invertebrate biomass and species richness,
and reduce aquatic insect emergence that supplies forest consumers. Predicted
indirect effects include foraging shifts by charr that further reduce benthic
invertebrate biomass, increase algal biomass via a trophic cascade, and reduce
cross-habitat flux of emerging aquatic insects that subsidize forest consumers.
This will be the first large-scale experiment to test the idea that human
disturbance in one habitat can exacerbate effects of an invasion in another. A
richer understanding of the interactions between habitat disturbances and biotic
invasions in complex real-world food webs is needed to foster more complete
theory in both fields, and to aid natural resource managers attempting to
conserve native fish, invertebrate, and bird diversity.