* 0108778
* The Relationship Between Thymic Nurse Cells and Macrophages During MHC Restriction
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2004
* Jerry Guyden, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Jermelina Tupas
* 07/31/2004
* USD 420,000.00

Project Summary:

Thymic nurse cells (TNCs) are epithelial cells with the ability to internalize
immature thymocytes into specialized intra-cytoplasmic vacuoles. The function of
this interaction during thymocyte development is the focus of this proposal.
TNCs have been shown a) to bind and internalize immature abTCRlowCD69- double
positive thymocytes, b) to rescue a subset of the internalized population from
apoptosis, and c) to allow a subset of the rescued population to mature to the
abTCRhiCD69+ stage of development. These data suggest that TNCs play a pivotal
role in determining the fate of developing thymocytes. To specific aims of this
project are:

(1) To determine the relationship between macrophages and TNCs during MHC
restriction, we will monitor the intra-thymic and intra-TNC location of CFDA-
stained macrophages (after homing to the thymus from the peritoneum) during the
process of MHC restriction. We will determine the temporal relationship of
macrophages with intra-TNC thymocytes using Nomarski and fluorescence
microscopy. These studies are important because the process of MHC restriction
determines the profile of T cells that function within the mammalian immune
system. This unusual arrangement of the cells is like no other developmental
system reported to date. Future studies of this unique cellular complex should
yield unprecedented insights into T cell development.

(2) To determine the role of the TNC/macrophage interaction during MHC
restriction, we will use H-Y transgenic mice to establish a direct correlation
between TNCs and the process of MHC restriction. Each developing thymocyte in
these transgenic animals produces a cell surface abTCR that recognizes the male
specific H-Y antigen. The vast majority of male transgenic thymocytes are
deleted through negative selection while an abnormally high percentage of
positive selection is detected in female transgenic animals. TNCs are directly
involved in these processes. Female H-Y transgenic mice have large TNCs that
contain 5 times as many cytoplasmic thymocytes. There are 40 times as many TNCs
in female versus male H-Y transgenics. This correlates well with the increased
percentage of positive selection found in female animals. Further, the male
transgenic animals have very few TNCs. The male TNCs are small and almost half
of their cytoplasmic thymocytes are apoptotic, which would result from the high
level of negative selection reported to occur in the H-Y transgenic mouse. These
data imply a direct involvement of TNCs in the process of MHC restriction. Using
the CDFA-staining technique, macrophages will be obtained from male H-Y
transgenics (which express the HY antigen that drives negative selection) and
delivered into female H-Y transgenic mice. Changes in TNC complex numbers and
sizes will be determined by immunofluorescence staining of thymic sections as
well as by enzymatic dissociation of the thymus and microscopic analysis.
Profile changes of developing thymocytes in injected animals will be determined
using FACS analyses.



