* 0108342
* FRG: Organoapatite-Coated Titanium Foam: A Biohybrid for Skeletal Repair
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2001,03/31/2005
* David Dunand, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 03/31/2005
* USD 570,000.00

This is a Focused Research Group(FRG) award co-funded by the Polymers, Ceramics
and Metals Programs in the Division of Materials Research. Effective, rapid and
permanent skeletal repair is one of the grand challenges of bioengineering and
biomaterials research. Load-bearing bone repair is critical in cases of aging-
related surgery, accident, disease, and trauma. Current metallic implant
technology usually relies on solid implants with a porous coating to enhance
cell attachment. Difficulties with stress-shielding and interface failure as
well as prolonged recovery times however persist. Here, this Focused Research
Group proposes to make a significant contribution in this area by creating a
novel biohybrid implant material for bone repair. The biohybrid will consist of
a biocompatible titanium foam with pores coated with bioactive organoapatite, in
which a biological phase will be grown to provide a biomimetic system with
improved strength, stiffness and attachment to the
skeleton.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;In the first stage, a fully porous titanium
scaffold will be fabricated by a novel process based on the superplastic
expansion of argon bubbles in a titanium matrix. In the second step, the inner
and outer surfaces of the titanium scaffold will be coated with organoapatite,
containing small quantities of organic molecules. Self-assembling molecules and
supramolecular clusters will be used to bind the organoapatite to the metal
surface. In the third step, bone growth will be induced by rotating the implant
in an aqueous solution containing rat calvaria cells. In-vitro testing will
assess ability to fully integrate bone into coated Ti foam and the influence of
microstructure on mechanical properties and cell ingrowth will carefully
studied. Each of the processing steps will be studied in detail, from which
models will be developed to predict biologically and mechanically optimal
biohybrids. The microstructure of the implant will be studied at each step with
particular emphasis on (i) pores in the foamed materials (pore, size, volume
fraction, shape and connectivity), (ii) coating morphology and microstructure in
the biohybrid, and (iii) cell characteristics in the complete biohybrid. The
mechanical properties of the implant will also be studied at each step, with
emphasis on both the macroscopic scale (overall strength, stiffness, fatigue
resistance) and the microscopic scale (metal/ceramic/bone interfaces). The
experimental results will be validated using analytical and numerical mechanics
models. The processing, microstructural and mechanical models will be integrate
to allow for the design of an optimal biohybrid.&lt;br/&gt;