* 0108857
* Oscillations and Waves in Conductance-Based Neuronal Network Models
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Jonathan Rubin, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2004
* USD 87,262.00

Rubin&lt;br/&gt;0108857&lt;br/&gt; This investigator develops and applies
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;techniques for the study of activity patterns
in&lt;br/&gt;conductance-based neuronal network models incorporating
features,&lt;br/&gt;such as continuous coupling, diffusive interactions,
and&lt;br/&gt;heterogeneity in parameter values, that have largely
been&lt;br/&gt;neglected in previous mathematical work on these systems.
Many&lt;br/&gt;of the mathematical results relate to the derivation
and&lt;br/&gt;subsequent analysis of subsystems of equations capturing
dynamics&lt;br/&gt;on disparate time scales. One challenge in this endeavor is
that&lt;br/&gt;the additional features considered prevent the application
of&lt;br/&gt;known methods that could otherwise be used to reduce
the&lt;br/&gt;subsystem sizes and thereby facilitate analysis. The
particular&lt;br/&gt;activity patterns that are investigated are sustained,
localized&lt;br/&gt;activity of cell populations in the thalamus involved in
sleep&lt;br/&gt;rhythms and in tracking head direction; wave propagation,
block,&lt;br/&gt;and reflection in inhomogeneous neuronal media such as
branching,&lt;br/&gt;thickening, or damaged neurons; and periodic and
chaotic&lt;br/&gt;oscillations in a heterogeneous population of
respiratory&lt;br/&gt;pacemaker cells in the brain stem. While this work is
motivated&lt;br/&gt;by particular neuronal systems, it provides new steps
in&lt;br/&gt;directions with broad relevance. Thus, the results of
this&lt;br/&gt;project yield insight into pattern formation and
selection&lt;br/&gt;mechanisms that apply in specific neuronal contexts but that
also&lt;br/&gt;constitute more generally occurring phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;
Neuronal networks of the central nervous system can&lt;br/&gt;typically display
multiple types of rhythmic activity, ranging&lt;br/&gt;from periodic bursts of
synchronized oscillations to traveling&lt;br/&gt;waves of activity to more
disorganized patterns. Many of these&lt;br/&gt;forms of activity appear to be
relevant to fundamental neuronal&lt;br/&gt;processes. The overall goal of the
investigator is to study&lt;br/&gt;mathematically the oscillatory population
rhythms and wave&lt;br/&gt;propagation arising in certain models of neuronal
networks, based&lt;br/&gt;on systems involved in such disparate tasks as
navigation,&lt;br/&gt;respiration, and the generation of sleep rhythms. This
work&lt;br/&gt;elucidates the mechanisms that allow these networks to
support,&lt;br/&gt;and to modulate between, distinct activity patterns.
These&lt;br/&gt;results lead to conclusions about the roles of
various&lt;br/&gt;biophysical parameters in shaping network dynamics,
with&lt;br/&gt;individual contributions teased apart in a way that may be
quite&lt;br/&gt;difficult to achieve with a purely experimental approach.
Such&lt;br/&gt;findings can then serve as guideposts for future biological
and&lt;br/&gt;computational experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;