* 0108384
* Spatial Determinants of Insectivorous Bat Diversity: Pattern and Process in a Paleotropical Rain Forest
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Thomas Kunz, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2005
* USD 387,901.00

Insectivorous bats are a highly diverse yet vulnerable component of vertebrate
diversity in Old World rainforests. Nowhere is this more evident than in
peninsular Malaysia, a critical country for bat conservation, with over 100
known species and local richness in excess of 50 species. Bats that are highly
specialized and dependent on rainforests represent an exceptionally diverse
group in Malaysia (> 40 species) and are of particular conservation concern.
They are poorly suited for prey detection and forage in more open habitats that
arise from disturbance events. As a consequence, they are likely to experience a
severe decline in diversity as forest habitats are lost or become fragmented.
This project will establish the Malaysian Bat Conservation Research Unit,
comprising U.S. and Malaysian researchers. The mission of the unit includes: 1)
long-term research on bat diversity and conservation; 2) the development and
acquisition of skills and resources in the host country; and 3) implementation
of a local and web-based education program to highlight the diversity and
biology of bats, as well as the international importance of Malaysia to bat
conservation. Research will focus on establishing how patterns of species
abundance and distribution vary across space and time in undisturbed forest, and
identifying the ecological processes that influence these patterns. To this end,
we will intensively survey six bat communities within an area of contiguous
primary forest and implement radio-tracking studies to test the influence of
roosting and foraging ecology on bat abundance and distribution. Both research
foci are key considerations for the development of conservation programs to
protect this unique fauna.