* 0108172
* C-RUI: Tolerance to Damage: Examining Genetic Architecture and Selection of Candidate Traits Using Hybrid Willows
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,03/31/2008
* Robert Fritz, Vassar College
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 03/31/2008
* USD 475,578.00

0108172&lt;br/&gt;Fritz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is well know that some plant
species tolerate damage by herbivores more than others, but information about
how natural selection acts to change the expression of tolerance is scarce. In
this project, the investigators use a hybrid willow system to examine the role
of tolerance to damage as an adaptive response to browsing herbivores. The
researchers will evaluate traits that confer tolerance to damage, measure the
selection gradient for those traits in F2 hybrids, determine the sets of trait
combinations that are generally favored by selection, use six genetic classes of
willows to investigate the genetic architecture of tolerance and its traits, and
determine how plant age alters tolerance and its mechanisms. To evaluate these
aspects of tolerance to damage, plant cuttings propagated from controlled
crosses will be grown in common gardens, given a treatment of either 50% shoot
damage or 0% shoot damage, and evaluated for fitness responses and for traits
that confer fitness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By measuring the selection gradient
for candidate traits of tolerance, the researchers will elucidate the role that
natural selection can play in the evolution of tolerance to damage. In addition,
they will assess how past selection has shaped the expression of tolerance
traits in each parental species. By determining how tolerance to damage is
expressed, they can evaluate the influence of epistasis on the evolution of
tolerance, as well as the presence or absence of additive genetic variance
between the two plant species. These findings will provide insight into the
potential for hybridization to enhance the adaptive responses of plants to
herbivore damage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;