* 0108100
* Phylogenetics and Plastid Genome Evolution of Vanilloideae (Orchidaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Kenneth Cameron, New York Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2004
* USD 142,667.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Kenneth M. Cameron at The New York Botanical
Garden to continue his laboratory and field studies on the evolution and
classification of the orchid subfamily Vanilloideae, which includes Vanilla
planifolia -- the only orchid species out of approximately 25,000 that has
significant agricultural value. These are considered an ancient lineage of
relatively primitive orchids that are found worldwide in distribution. They have
always been considered critical to fully understanding the evolution and
classification of the large orchid family, but have resisted attempts to
shoehorn them into traditional subfamilies. Previous molecular research by Dr.
Cameron has shown these vanilloid orchids to represent a separate, distinct
subfamily that is the most primitive of all but two genera of orchids. However,
the relationships of the species within the subfamily are still unclear. These
findings emphasize the evolutionarily pivotal position occupied by these plants
and the need for further, in-depth systematic investigation.&lt;br/&gt;
Specifically, the research will include a molecular component that will focus on
constructing a solid evolutionary tree for the subfamily using DNA sequences
from a suite of nuclear, chloroplast, and mitochondrial genes. However, the
molecular aspect of the project will not be limited to DNA sequencing. In
addition, select genes and their products from within the chloroplast genome
will be studied in detail to better understand the pattern and process of
degeneration of the photosynthetic apparatus among the non-green taxa that live
as parasites on soil fungi. Already, Dr. Cameron has investigated three
different classes of photosynthesis genes, and has discovered that two of the
three (rbcL and psaB, but not atpB) are characterized by significant deletions
in some of the non-photosynthetic taxa, and extremely high rates of mutation in
others. These findings suggest that the vanilloid orchids are in the early
stages of chloroplast genome degradation. They are, therefore, an ideal group of
organisms in which to study this biological phenomenon. Finally, in addition to
molecular research, new studies on floral morphology and pollination biology in
the group will be initiated. Many of the vanilloid taxa are characterized by
complex flowers with prominent petal ornamentation in the form of mobile scales
and bristles. These structures, in particular, are unlike any other in the
orchid family. They deserve careful examination in order to understand their
form, function, and evolutionary derivation. &lt;br/&gt;The vanilloid orchids
have been long recognized as an economically valuable and unique group of
plants, but several aspects of their natural history have been the source of
controversy among biologists. A more thorough knowledge of this pivotal group
undoubtedly will be valuable to our understanding of the evolution and diversity
within the second largest family of flowering plants on Earth. Despite the
economic importance of Vanilla to humankind, there exist few thorough systematic
investigations of these plants. Comparative morphological, anatomical, and
pollination studies of the group are also lacking. For these reasons, the
combined results of these morphological and molecular studies should provide a
solid phylogeny of Vanilloideae for which nomenclatural issues, patterns of
biogeography, trends in floral morphology, and genome evolution can be examined.
Few of the vanilloid orchid species take to cultivation. As a consequence, many
are endangered or already extinct. It is imperative and warranted, therefore,
that systematic research continues on this fascinating and pivotal group of
orchids if their unique interactions with fungi and animal pollinators are to be
understood before they are lost to habit destruction and
overcollecting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;