* 0108542
* Foraging in Plants: Do Plants Selectively Associate with more Effective Ectomycorrhizal Fungi?
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2006
* Daniel Durall, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 06/30/2006
* USD 286,268.00

DEB-0108542&lt;br/&gt;Goldberg&lt;br/&gt;Most plants and mycorrhizal fungi have
a mutually beneficial exchange of nutrients (from fungi) and carbohydrates (from
plants). We propose that plants can increase their growth by choosing the most
beneficial species of mycorrhizal fungus in each environment and therefore that
their growth, competitive ability with other plants, and ultimate success is
strongly influenced by these mutually positive interactions. This hypothesis
assumes that 1) species of mycorrhizal fungi differ in their benefits to plant
growth, 2) the beneficial effects of each fungal species depend on environmental
conditions, and 3) the plants have the capability of "choosing" a particular
fungal species. These assumptions that different fungi will be predominant in
different environments. We will test this hypothesis using field and laboratory
studies of tree seedlings and mycorrhizal fungi. First, we will survey the fungi
species that associate with several species of forest seedlings in different
field environments. Second, we will test the fungal species found in the field
to quantify how effective they are at providing nutrients to plants in each
environment and to determine the most beneficial fungus for each environment.
Third, we will test whether seedlings "choose" the most beneficial fungus in
each environment by planting seedlings with a mixture of all the fungi in each
environment. Finally, we will test the importance of these processes in nature
by manipulating the field environments and testing whether the fungal mutualist
partners of each plant change according to the predictions generated from the
previous experiments. &lt;br/&gt;