* 0108365
* RUI: Collaborative Research:Prey Movement in Hazardous Environments: Studies in a Tropical Stream Fish Community
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Douglas Fraser, Siena College
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2006
* USD 136,915.00

The goal of this study is to explore the effects of two phenomena, predators and
individual variation, on the dispersal of a tropical stream fish. Their effects
on dispersal are unknown. The first question addresses whether increasing
predator threat, with the addition of predatory fish species, slows dispersal
rate of the prey species through threatened zones of a river (a previous study
found that a predatory fish increased rather than suppressed prey movement). The
second question evaluates if individual boldness in the tendency to explore
beyond the home range contributes to dispersal rate within a population and if
so, whether individual differences are inherited. Fieldwork will be done in
natural streams in Trinidad that contain the prey species, but which differ in
the number of predator species that they contain. Movement in each stream will
be determined by mark-recapture procedures. Individual variation in boldness
will be evaluated through behavioral assays, and its heritability assessed by
rearing offspring of movers and non-movers. To directly determine whether
individual variation in boldness contributes to dispersal rate in nature, a
reciprocal transplant experiment will be done in two sister tributaries of a
river in which movers in one tributary will be exchanged for stayers in the
other. If boldness is an individual characteristic, the two streams should
eventually contain populations that differ in rates of dispersal. The results of
the proposed studies with fish are expected to open new avenues to understanding
the factors that affect the dispersal in natural habitats of tropical rivers.