* 0108302
* Plant Diversity-Productivity Relationships: An Experimental Evaluation of the Roles of Local Ecological Processes and Species Pool Effects
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2001,05/31/2007
* Val Smith, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 05/31/2007
* USD 362,746.00

Understanding how local and regional processes balance to regulate species
diversity is a fundamental goal in ecology. Our research will examine the
relative significance of local-scale ecological interactions and species
availability in governing relationships between grassland plant diversity, soil
nutrient supply, and habitat productivity. We will conduct two factorial field
experiments concurrently within a Kansas grassland. In experiment 1, we will
directly manipulate soil nutrient supply and plant productivity by applying
nitrogen and phosphorus fertilizers to field plots. We will manipulate species
availability through the use of multi-species seed additions. In experiment 2,
we will manipulate species availability via seed additions in plots arrayed
across a natural grassland productivity gradient. With these complimentary
approaches, we seek to test a set of predictions regarding: (1) how the pool of
available colonists affects the relationship between plant diversity and
productivity; (2) how nitrogen and phosphorus supply interact to influence the
nature of the diversity-productivity relationship; and (3) how species
availability influences rates and pathways of vegetation succession under
different conditions of nutrient supply and productivity. We are seeking new
insights into the organization of plant communities as well as an enhanced
understanding of the processes governing the development of diversity-
productivity patterns in grasslands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;