* 0108605
* Novel Semiconductor-Based Epitaxial Magnetic Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2001,12/31/2004
* Frank Tsui, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 12/31/2004
* USD 282,000.00

This research is focused on the synthesis and properties of a new class of
epitaxial heterostructures containing multi-component magnetic alloys and
semiconductors. It is aimed at integrating magnetic materials and
semiconductors, in order to explore phenomena involving both charge and spin
degrees of freedom, for both fundamental, basic scientific studies and
technological applications. The systems to be investigated will include ternary
alloys containing transition metals (TM), Mn, and group B elements (Z), i.e.
TMx-Mny-Zz, which will be coupled with conventional semiconductors, e.g. Si, Ge,
and GaAs. The former include some predicted half-metallic Heusler alloys with
fully spin-polarized conduction states, and may also include some magnetic
semiconductors, both of which are excellent candidates for spin injection and
analysis. The interactions between carrier charge and spin, and their long mean-
free-path and spin coherence length in semiconductors are expected to give rise
to many novel phenomena and spin device concepts that are not available in
conventional heterostructures and can revolutionize electronic and memory
devices. However, the field is limited by the lack of materials systems, and by
the complex nature of the multi-component systems. The proposed approach is
combinatorial molecular beam epitaxy synthesis and characterization of the
structure, magnetism and transport effects. The strength of the proposal is in
epitaxial synthesis and the systematic approach, from which new materials and
properties will result. Graduate and undergraduate students involved in the
project will be trained rigorously in novel synthesis and characterization that
are essential for the current and future technologies. Pre-college summer
research projects for K12 teachers and students will also be conducted to
introduce these groups to the technology issues involved in this
research.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This work is focused on the synthesis and
properties of a new class of heterostructures containing single crystalline
films of magnetic alloys and semiconductors. It is aimed at exploring phenomena
involving both the charge and spin of electrons for both fundamental, basic
scientific studies and technological applications. Current state-of-the-art
systems process the electron charge and spin separately. An example of the
former is the microprocessor that uses only the charge to do logic operations;
in contrast the magnetic hard disc processes only the spin. The separation of
the two makes these systems intrinsically slow and bulky, while integrating the
two can revolutionize information technology, for example, making electronic and
memory devices substantially faster and more compact. However, the field is
limited by the lack of materials systems, and by the complex nature of the
multi-element systems. The suitable materials candidates must be selected from
an enormous number of possible combinations. The proposed approach is to
systematically process and screen a large number of new materials and their
properties in parallel, the so-called combinatorial approach, such that for the
first time libraries of new materials and properties will be generated rapidly.
Materials to be discovered from this work for the intended integration are
expected to be the multi-element magnetic alloys having all of their conduction
electrons polarized while compatible with conventional semiconductors like
silicon. The new materials will make it possible to process both the charge and
spin simultaneously, leading to novel quantum phenomena and device concepts.
Graduate and undergraduate students involved in the project will be trained
rigorously in processes and techniques that are essential for the current and
future high technologies. Pre-college summer research projects for K12 teachers
and students will also be conducted to introduce these groups to the technology
issues involved in this research.&lt;br/&gt;***