* 0108422
* Phylogeny, Andean Biogeography, and Multivariate Evolution in Phyllotine Rodents
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2008
* Scott Steppan, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 08/31/2008
* USD 432,104.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project consists of two integrated parts: a
detailed reconstruction of the evolutionary history of the populations that make
up several closely related species of leaf-eared mice (Phyllotis), and a test of
whether those species share the same inherent tendencies for the evolution of
morphology. I will sequence at least 5 genes, some inherited from just the
mothers, some from just the fathers, and some inherited from both, for over 200
mice collected from more than 100 localities throughout the Andes and nearby
areas where Phyllotis lives. Those gene sequences will be used to estimate the
evolutionary genealogy, or phylogeny, for those populations. This phylogeny will
show the role that the Andes or other physical features have played in promoting
speciation, estimate rates of gene flow across the species ranges, and test
models of speciation. At the same time, we will establish controlled breeding
colonies for 4 of the species. These breeding programs are needed to calculate
the heritability of morphological traits and how much those traits are
correlated with each other due to genetic control and developmental processes.
These genetic parameters, summarized by the genetic variance-covariance matrix,
G, will be compared among the species to determine if they remain constant over
evolutionary time-scales. If the environmental effects on those G matrices is
small or consistent, then the morphological data (32 measurements of the skull)
will be combined with already collected measurements from more than 30
populations, and analyzed using the phylogeny discussed above, for a detailed
exploration of the evolution of those inherent tendencies that are described by
the G matrix.&lt;br/&gt; This study will address several critical questions in
evolutionary biology. Most importantly, it has been suggested that
microevolution (population and quantitative genetics) is decoupled from
macroevolution (the long term changes we see among species). Perhaps the best
method to unify these two fields is through quantitative genetics, but to do so
requires that the G matrix evolves in a predictable manner. This will be the
most comprehensive and phylogenetically based study to test that question.
Additionally, this study will be the first to explore the biogeographic history
of the southern Andes and southern South America in a comprehensive manner.
Because geographic populations of Phyllotis are very distinct from each other
genetically, their phylogenetic history can be estimated in great detail. That
will allow robust tests of several &lt;br/&gt;models of how new species
originate. By integrating a detailed phylogeny with the comparative quantitative
genetics, we will also be able to test the interplay of geography, population
history, and quantitative genetics to produce morphological evolution and
diversification of species. Few if any studies have combined all these types of
data to address these questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;