* 0108389
* Assessing The Fine Root And Mycorrhizal Components Of Net Primary Production Across A Tropical Rain Forest Landscape
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2001,03/31/2003
* Deborah Clark, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 03/31/2003
* USD 148,101.00

Assessing the fine root and mycorrhizal components of net primary production
across a tropical rain forest landscape

Allocation to fine root production has been estimated to be the largest fraction
of C allocation by plants and thus may represent the largest carbon input to
soils. Yet for tropical evergreen forests there is very little information on
fine root production, and there have been no studies of the fungal component of
belowground NPP. In this one-year project the investigators will develop a
methodology for estimating the mycorrhizal component of belowground production
by assays for the fungal glycoprotein glomalin, a protein that is produced
exclusively by symbiotic arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi. The PIs will use forest
plots along a soil fertility gradient in old-growth lowland rain forest in Costa
Rica. The results will determine whether glomalin can be used as an indicator
for carbon allocation to symbiotic fungi, and will contribute to a more
comprehensive process-level understanding of the carbon cycle than has been
attained to date for any tropical forest. The study will have wide applicability
for analyses of regional variations in tropical forest productivity, for
managing human-influenced tropical ecosystems, and for predicting the responses
and global role of tropical forests under changed global climate and atmospheric
conditions.

