* 0108938
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Cultural Analysis of Risk Management in the Korean Venture Capital Industry
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* George Marcus, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 08/31/2003
* USD 11,500.00

0108938 Marcus / Chung This dissertation research project by a cultural
anthropology student examines how recent attempts in South Korea to establish
and promote the growth of venture capital industry have been shaped by salient
Korean cultural institutions. The project will study risk management in the
venture capital industry, defined as firms that fund technology-intensive
enterprises characterized by high risk with the potential for high return, as
affected by traditional Korean values of the primacy of social relations over
finance; the quality of human relations; and the quality of emotional reactions.
Prior to the establishment of a venture capital industry in South Korea,
entrepreneurs usually relied solely on their own savings, often from informal
credit associations, gifts and loans from family and friends, and sometimes
credit from lending institutions, to finance their business projects. Many of
the strategies used to understand and minimize the risk of capital loss involved
the cultivation of culturally specific social bonds. Using a variety of
qualitative methods, this project will describe and assess the degree to which
these culturally informed social practices inform venture capital investment in
four firms: a foreign venture capital company; a domestic venture capital
company; a start-up communication company seeking funding; and a more
traditional rotating credit association. Hypotheses relating the specifically
"Korean" nature of transactions to the level of foreign involvement in the
relationship will be tested. The new knowledge created by this project will help
locate the intersection between cultural and capitalistic frameworks in this
domain of business. By understanding Korean influences on venture capital
investment, we will further our understanding of the influence of US culture on
similar business. In addition, the research advances our knowledge of this
important region of the world, and contributes to the training of a young social
scientist.