* 0108937
* Tests of Newtonian Gravitation and the Equivalence Principle and Cryogenic Torsion Pendulum Development
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Riley Newman, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 06/30/2005
* USD 742,272.00

A program of laboratory experiments in gravitation is to be continued and
expanded, in parallel with continued development of the cryogenic torsion
pendulum as a general tool for research in gravitational physics. Much of this
work will be done in collaboration with the gravitational physics group of
Professor Paul Boynton at the University of Washington.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research to be conducted
includes:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Completion in the first year of a precision
measurement of the gravitational constant G, with&lt;br/&gt;target accuracy of
15 ppm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jointly with Professor Boynton's group, a test of
the inverse square distance dependence of the gravitational force for mass
separation on the order of 15 centimeters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jointly with
Boynton's group, tests of the equivalence principle over various distance
ranges,&lt;br/&gt;for gravitational field sources which include laboratory
masses, a nearby mountain, and the&lt;br/&gt;sun.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These
projects will be conducted in an underground laboratory that has been prepared
with support from the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory in a former Nike
missile bunker on an isolated environmental preserve near&lt;br/&gt;Richland,
Washington. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In conjunction with these projects, the
performance of the cryogenic torsion&lt;br/&gt;pendulum will be progressively
improved through development and refinement of seismic isolation, tilt control,
temperature control, and fiber choice and preparation techniques.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cryogenic torsion pendulum being developed is of
potential value to any research in gravitation or other fields which requires
the measurement of extremely small slowly varying
forces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides research experience and
training in a variety of widely applicable technologies, to undergraduate and
graduate students as well as to a postdoctoral researcher. &lt;br/&gt;