* 0108484
* Evolution of the North American Whiptail Lizards (Teiidae: Cnemidophorus) and Re-evaluation of Unisexual Origins:  A Multi-genic Approach
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Tod Reeder, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

0108484 Reeder Whiptails (genus Cnemidophorus) belong to the lizard family
Teiidae. Whiptails range widely throughout the New World, extending from the
U.S. southward to Argentina. However, their greatest diversity is in the arid
and semi-arid regions of the Southwest U.S. and Mexico where they are a
conspicuous component of the reptile fauna. Whiptails are an ecologically
important lizard group, which is reflected by numerous ecological and life
history studies. Whiptails have been one of the most extensively studied group
of lizards, third only to Sceloporus (spiny and fence lizards) and Anolis
(anoles). Besides their abundance and geographic proximity to North American
biologists, another reason whiptails have been intensively studied is the
occurrence of parthenogenetic all-female species (of likely hybrid origin).
Approximately one third of the species are unisexual, with the majority of these
all-female species (=unisexuals) occurring in the southwestern U.S. and northern
Mexico. While whiptails have been extensively studied and much is known about
their biology, ecology, and natural history, the phylogenetic relationships
among whiptails is still poorly understood. Also, in northern Mexico, much
confusion exists regarding the species limits within three major species
complexes. Many populations cannot be allocated to current subspecies or
species. It is unclear whether the confusion arises from extensive hybridization
between some taxa or whether new, undescribed taxa exist. And finally, while
biologists have spent some effort studying the origins of the unisexuals in this
group, the maternal and paternal ancestry of many lineages is still ambiguous.
DNA sequence data can be used to address these issues of phylogeny, species
limits, and unisexual origins within the North American group of whiptails.
However, before molecular data can be collected, tissue samples are still needed
from many bisexual and unisexual whiptail populations and/or species. Extensive
fieldwork will be conducted in the Southwest U.S. and Mexico by Dr. Tod Reeder
of San Diego State University and his colleague Dr. Adrian Nieto Montes de Oca
in Mexico, to obtain the necessary tissue samples. Samples will be collected
from essentially all North American bisexual and unisexual whiptail taxa. Once
tissues are available, DNA sequence data will be gathered from rapidly evolving
mitochondrial and nuclear genes. Besides addressing specific issues in whiptail
phylogeny, species limits, and unisexual origins, the results of this research
have broader scientific significance. The whiptail phylogeny can be used to re-
evaluate the extensive biological/ecological data on whiptails using modern
comparative/phylogenetic approaches and provide new insights on the evolution of
this diverse group. Unisexuals occur in other animal groups; thus, more
background data will be generated on the origins and persistence of unisexuals
in nature. This will be one of the first studies to use rapidly evolving nuclear
intron sequences to study hybridization and speciation. Thus, this study will
test the utility of these gene regions for addressing issues in these areas that
have been of long interest to evolutionary biologists. Undergraduate and
graduate students will be involved in all aspects of this project. Students will
gain valuable experience in modern field and laboratory techniques, learn basic
concepts in evolutionary and systematic biology, and acquire skills in the
presentation of research results (through oral presentation and written
manuscripts).

