* 0108742
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Communal Feasting and the Social Order at Late Classic El Coyote, Northwestern Honduras
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2003
* Ben Nelson, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2003
* USD 11,998.00

&lt;br/&gt;Under the direction of Dr. Ben Nelson, Mr. Christian Wells will
collect data &lt;br/&gt;for his doctoral dissertation. He will continue ongoing
archaeological research &lt;br/&gt;at the prehispanic site of El Coyote, located
in the Cacaulapa Valley of &lt;br/&gt;northwestern Honduras. This research will
investigate the relationship between &lt;br/&gt;community feasting and the
political organization of the polity that formed and &lt;br/&gt;collapsed
between the seventh and tenth centuries AD. Archaeologists wish to
&lt;br/&gt;understand the processes that integrate and differentiate individuals
in &lt;br/&gt;ancient communities, with the greater goal of reconstructing past
systems of &lt;br/&gt;government and their effects on the growth and change of
societies. Mr. Wells' &lt;br/&gt;previous excavations in the main civic-
ceremonial plaza at the site have &lt;br/&gt;revealed abundant evidence for food
production and consumption on a large &lt;br/&gt;scale, suggesting that communal
feasts were a central practice in the rulership &lt;br/&gt;of El Coyote. Such
events would have served as a mechanism for polity &lt;br/&gt;integration, as
well as a context in which exotic items were publicly displayed &lt;br/&gt;to
enhance the social prestige and political authority of local leaders. With
&lt;br/&gt;NSF support, Mr. Wells' doctoral dissertation research will examine
the &lt;br/&gt;organization of feasting in the plaza, including what material
culture was &lt;br/&gt;employed, where food consumption took place in relation
to the temples that &lt;br/&gt;delimit the plaza, and which social segments of
the polity participated. His &lt;br/&gt;research will incorporate archaeological
excavation of the plaza and adjacent &lt;br/&gt;buildings, as well as trash
middens that accumulated on the margins of the &lt;br/&gt;plaza. In addition, he
will chemically characterize soil samples from the plaza &lt;br/&gt;to study the
distribution of phosphorous and heavy metals, which will indicate &lt;br/&gt;the
locations of activity areas. His research will also examine the composition
&lt;br/&gt;of ceramic vessel remains from the trash areas in order to illuminate
the &lt;br/&gt;different social groups that participated in plaza-oriented
activities. &lt;br/&gt;Archaeologists are interested in the practice of feasting
and the social &lt;br/&gt;relations that are reproduced during feasts. The
examination of material &lt;br/&gt;culture and soil chemistry at El Coyote is a
direct method for the study of &lt;br/&gt;this phenomenon, and will yield new
information on the organization of feasting &lt;br/&gt;in ancient complex
societies and the degree to which this practice was involved &lt;br/&gt;in the
political and economic administration of El Coyote. In addition, the
&lt;br/&gt;research will enhance our knowledge of the material signatures of
feasting in &lt;br/&gt;the archaeological record and will assist in training a
promising young &lt;br/&gt;scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;