* 0108494
* Nonequilibrium Pattern Formation In Erosion Processes
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2001,09/30/2002
* Albert-Laszlo Barabasi, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 09/30/2002
* USD 75,000.00

0108494 Barabasi Ion-beam sputtering, the removal of material from the surface
of solids through the impact of energetic particles, is a widely used thin film
processing technique. Due to its relevance to a number of experimental
techniques, measuring tools, cleaning and patterning methods, the morphological
features of surfaces eroded by ion bombardment have been much investigated of
late. On the other hand, ion-beam sputtering is attracting increased interest as
a potential candidate for nanoscale surface patterning. Erosion with oblique ion
beams has been known to create regular self-organization ripples, potential
templates for quantum wires. But the interest in this technique has boomed
recently following the recent demonstration that normal sputtering can lead to
regular nanoscale islands or quantum dots. The observed high density islands,
whose size can be tuned with the ion energy, display a high degree of spatial
ordering and form a regular hexagonal lattice. These results signal the
emergence of a novel and powerful technique for surface patterning with a number
of desirable features that include material independence, tunable feature size,
as well as suitability for inexpensive mass fabrication. To turn these advances
into a viable patterning technology, we need to develop a better understanding
of the fundamental processes that affect the surface morphology. Therefore, the
research goal of this grant is to obtain a coherent understanding of the primary
physical factors contributing to the morphology of surfaces eroded by ion
bombardment.

The research will use a combination of numerical and analytical tools to model
the morphological evolution during ion bombardment. Since Bradley and Harper
have calculated the ripple wavelength in agreement with experiments, it is
generally accepted that continuum theories offer a surprisingly useful tool in
addressing the surface morphology in ion sputtering. The PI has shown that
nonlinear phenomena play a crucial role in determining the long-time features of
the surface morphology, being able to account for ripple stabilization and
quantum dot formation. These tools will be expanded to obtain better agreement
with experiments, aiming to reproduce not only the large scale features, but
also the island shapes and spatial ordering. In parallel, discrete microscopic
models will be developed to understand the effect of various microscopic
processes (surface diffusion, atom detachment, reattachment, etc) on the surface
morphology. The simultaneous use of the continuum and microscopic approaches is
expected to play a crucial role in uncovering the generic features of both
pattern formation and roughening. These tools will be used to investigate
several problems of immediate experimental and technological interest.

First, preliminary theoretical work indicates that the size dispersion, as well
as its dependence of the sputtered quantum dots, depends on erosion time, and
exists an optimal time at which the dispersion is minimal. This time dependence
of the dispersion on the erosion parameters (such as ion energy, ion cascade
parameters and temperature) will be investigated, aiming to determine the
optimal condition for island formation. Second, recent experiments have
demonstrated that regular islands appear if the surface is rotated.
Investigations will be made into the conditions under which the size dispersion
benefits from sample rotation. Third, the sputtering yield, a key quantity for
various surface characterization methods, is greatly affected by the surface
morphology. Methods will be developed to predict the dynamic coupling between
the morphology and the yield. This research is expected to lead to a
comprehensive comparison between the continuum theory, modeling results and
experiments, and could offer critical theoretical guidance to turn ion
sputtering into a mature patterning technology. %%% Ion-beam sputtering, the
removal of material from the surface of solids through the impact of energetic
particles, is a widely used thin film processing technique. Due to its relevance
to a number of experimental techniques, measuring tools, cleaning and patterning
methods, the morphological features of surfaces eroded by ion bombardment have
been much investigated of late. On the other hand, ion-beam sputtering is
attracting increased interest as a potential candidate for nanoscale surface
patterning. Erosion with oblique ion beams has been known to create regular
self-organization ripples, potential templates for quantum wires. But the
interest in this technique has boomed recently following the recent
demonstration that normal sputtering can lead to regular nanoscale islands or
quantum dots. The observed high density islands, whose size can be tuned with
the ion energy, display a high degree of spatial ordering and form a regular
hexagonal lattice. These results signal the emergence of a novel and powerful
technique for surface patterning with a number of desirable features that
include material independence, tunable feature size, as well as suitability for
inexpensive mass fabrication. To turn these advances into a viable patterning
technology, we need to develop a better understanding of the fundamental
processes that affect the surface morphology. Therefore, the research goal of
this grant is to obtain a coherent understanding of the primary physical factors
contributing to the morphology of surfaces eroded by ion bombardment. ***