* 0108536
* Phylogenetic, Biogeographic, and Monographic Studies of Asian Core Araliaceae
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Jun Wen, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2005
* USD 255,822.00

Previous biogeographic studies of the Northern Hemisphere have emphasized the
relationships of eastern Asia to other major areas, such as eastern North
America, western North America, Europe, and western Asia. Biogeographic patterns
within eastern Asia, however, have rarely been investigated using modern
phylogenetic evidence. Most intercontinental studies treat the vast area of
eastern Asia (often including the Himalayas) as a single biogeographic unit or
an area of endemism, but this is certainly a gross oversimplification. Many
floristic observations and studies clearly demonstrate that eastern Asia is
biogeographically very diverse. In turn, the lack of testable hypotheses for
biogeographic patterns within Asia has hindered more general understanding of
the evolution of intercontinental biogeography of the Northern Hemisphere. The
proposed study intends to employ a large Asian group of the plant family
Araliaceae (the ginseng family) as a model to examine biogeographic
relationships within Asia, emphasizing eastern and South Asia and the Himalayas.
This region is herein referred to as "Asia" for the convenience of discussion.
This "Asian Araliaceae group" comprises about 18 genera with a wide distribution
throughout "Asia," and several of the subgroups within the Asian Araliaceae
exhibit parallel distributional patterns across this region of interest. Thus,
the Asian Araliaceae represent an ideal system to examine both individual and
general biogeographic patterns within "Asia". The goals of the proposed study by
Dr. Jun Wen and her colleagues in the U.S. and China are to (1) construct a
robust genus-level phylogeny (evolutionary or genealogical relationships) of the
Asian Araliaceae based on evidence from morphology, nuclear ribosomal DNA, and
chloroplast DNA; (2) construct species-level phylogenies for two major lineages
of the Asian Araliaceae: the Eleutherococcus - Macropanax - Metapanax group and
the Brassaiopsis - Trevesia - Hedera group using four molecular data sets
(sequences of nuclear ribosomal ITS, and chloroplast ndhF, atpB-rbcL spacer and
trnC-trnD regions); (3) examine the biogeographic relationships of eastern and
South Asia and the Himalayas based on phylogenies of at least three lineages of
Araliaceae in this region (two groups mentioned above, and the Aralia - Panax
complex currently being investigated by Dr. Wen); (4) re-evaluate the
traditional taxonomic classification and generic delimitations of taxa within
the Asian Araliaceae, including an assessment of morphological character
evolution; and (5) provide a monograph of Aralia sect. Pentapanax, including the
establishment of an internet page on the systematics of the Asian Araliaceae.
Results from the proposed study will have several important implications. This
will be one of the first studies to examine the biogeography of the vast region
of eastern and South Asia and the Himalayas using a phylogenetic framework for a
particular plant group. The phylogenetic analyses of the Asian Araliaceae will
facilitate further systematic, evolutionary, and biogeographic studies in Asia
as well as in the ginseng family worldwide.

