* 0108300
* Natural Enemy Diversity and Biological Control
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Anthony Ives, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2005
* USD 323,401.00

Exotic pests are spread throughout the world either inadvertently or
intentionally by humans. This proposal evaluates two inter-related questions:
(1) does the ability of these pests to invade depend on the biodiversity of the
new ecosystems they encounter, and (2) are biologically impoverished ecosystems
more susceptible to invasion? The proposed research will address these questions
in agricultural systems that have been subjected to numerous types of exotic
pest. A dramatically successful pest, the soybean aphid, Aphis glycines, was
first identified in North America in 2000. In the Upper Midwest, this invader
reached outbreak levels, becoming the only serious insect pest in the otherwise
insect-poor community found in soybean fields. In contrast, in alfalfa crops the
pea aphid, Acyrthosiphon pisum, is a potential pest, but it never reaches
outbreak levels. Unlike the low biodiversity of soybean fields, alfalfa has a
high diversity of invertebrates, both herbivores and predators. My research will
test whether the low diversity of the soybean community relative to the alfalfa
community facilitates the invasion and outbreak of the soybean aphid, whereas
predators continuously control pea aphids. Experiments will be performed to
switch the invertebrate communities between soybean and alfalfa crops, thereby
forcing soybean aphids to face the community of species found in alfalfa, and
conversely making pea aphids face the species-poor community from soybeans. If
low biodiversity of soybean crops is essential for the successful invasion of
the soybean aphid, then when placed in the highly diverse community of alfalfa
crops, the soybean aphid should be suppressed.