* 0108740
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: "Federal-State Divided Government. Consequences for the Mexican Federal System"
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2001,12/31/2003
* G. Bingham Powell, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* James S. Granato
* 12/31/2003
* USD 6,624.00

This Doctoral Dissertation Research Support investigation examines how increased
party competition --- specifically the emergence of federal-state divided
government --- has transformed the Mexican Federal System during the nineties.
Riker (1964) suggests that one of the conditions that helps to maintain the
federal bargain is if one national party controls the federal executive and
shares with other parties control over the state executives, or, what might be
called federal-state divided government. The rationale behind this proposition
being that the constant possibility for the relevant parties to become the next
federal or state leaders actually prevents them from invading each other's areas
of responsibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hypothesis, however, presents a
problem for testing because, in democratic federal systems, federal-state
divided government is a common occurrence --- or at least, a very tangible
threat. For this reason, the Mexican case offers a unique opportunity for
testing because it is only recently that the party system has become truly
competitive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dissertation consists of two main parts.
The first part deals with the transformation of the Mexican federal system.
Using qualitative and quantitative analysis, the project explores whether the
increasing presence of non-PRI governors transforms the operation of the federal
system (legislative activity, Supreme Court decisions, and activities of federal
and state ministries). With econometric models, and qualitative analysis, the
second part investigates if federal-state divided government has affected the
selection, design and implementation of policies (specifically, allocation of
fiscal resources, public health, public education, and management of natural
resources). The second part of the project relies heavily on field research
(archive work and interviews) in the Mexican states of Baja California Norte,
Chihuahua and Sonora. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Upon completion, the project will
shed light on the operation of federal arrangements with an authoritarian
history that have undergone a democratization process recently (e.g. Argentina,
Brazil, Russia). We should also gain a deeper understanding of the relationships
between democratization, increased party competition, and the federal system.
The project will examine a critical but overlooked consequence of
democratization processes: changes in the relationships among the center and the
regions, and the consequences of these changes for policy. The data and
information collected will be provided to the scholarly community at
large.&lt;br/&gt;