* 0108690
* The phylogenetic Biology of the Paleotropical Tree Genus Lithocarpus (Fagaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Paul Manos, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2005
* USD 202,721.00

Dr. Paul Manos of Duke University is studying the predominantly paleotropical
tree genus Lithocarpus (ca. 300 species) to better understand the biological
significance of variation in fruit morphology and DNA sequences across a diverse
landscape. Modifications of the common acorn-like fruit typically mark subgroups
within the genus, but such changes appear to have evolved more than once. The
study will explore new quantitative methods to characterize changes in fruit
shape and compare and combine these data with DNA sequences to test whether
certain fruit types have multiple origins. The widespread distribution of
Lithocarpus on the continent of Asia and throughout the Malayan Archipelago also
provides an excellent opportunity to pursue the genetics of plant demography
using chloroplast DNA variation, a maternally inherited marker that tracks seed
movement. By sampling individuals throughout the range of the genus, the study
will address the relationship between plant migration and
geological/paleoecological change. A variety of methods will be used to test
explicit hypotheses of refugial areas and migration routes based on
paleoecological data. Trees will be sampled to examine genealogical structure
within populations through contrasting nuclear and cytoplasmic molecular markers
with reference to taxonomy, geography, and differential patterns of genome
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;The study of organismal diversity and molecular evolution
in tropical tree species requires a framework built upon thorough knowledge of
natural history, taxonomy, morphology, and genealogical relationships. Species
in the oak family present a broad spectrum of opportunities to study diversity
in form and patterns of plant migration and gene flow. Tropical woody plants are
poorly studied in this regard and a variety of basic biological questions have
never been addressed in the ecologically important relatives of the oaks. Given
the amount of carbon storage, ecosystem services, biodiversity, and physical
structure provided to the tropical rainforest by this tree community, this study
would be one of first of its kind to apply several powerful molecular techniques
to an important tropical genus. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;