* 0108294
* The First Near-Complete Skull of a Late Cretaceous Multituberculate From North America: Testing Hypotheses of Relationship and Vicariance
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2001,01/31/2005
* Anne Weil, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Carlos Morales
* 01/31/2005
* USD 16,355.00

The first near-complete skull of a Late Cretaceous multituberculate to
be&lt;br/&gt;found in North America will be described in detail. This is a skull
of Meniscoessus robustus, discovered in the Maastrichtian Hell Creek Formation
of South Dakota. The specimen preserves finely detailed external structures of
the basicranium, ear region, nasal region, and palate. Internal features of the
braincase and skull cavities will also be visible, without destructive analysis,
through the use of high-resolution X-ray computed tomography (CT scanning). In
addition, the site that yielded this skull produced partial skull and mandibular
fragments of several individuals of the same species. Study and description of
these more fragmentary specimens will make possible the assessment of
intraspecies ariation. Because the mammalian skull is a rich source of
morphological data useful in phylogenetic analysis, this material will allow
evaluation of the hypothesis that Late Cretaceous Asian multituberculates belong
to an endemic clade, an hypothesis that was not fully testable while no
contemporaneous North American skulls were known. Although North America and
Asia were joined by a land bridge for at least part of the Late Cretaceous, and
there was faunal exchange among dinosaurs, there may have been barriers to
mammalian dispersal, leading to the development of phylogenetically distinct
mammalian faunas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new material will provide a wealth
of data useful in determining the relationships among North American
multituberculates. Meniscoessus robustus has been hypothesized to be closely
related to the Paleocene Catopsalis and Taeniolabis; now that a skull of
Meniscoessus is available to be compared to those of Taeniolabis, we can
discover whether this is indeed a single lineage that survived the Cretaceous-
Tertiary extinction, or whether it is an instance of extinction followed by
immigration of a similar form. This will contribute to an improved and more
reliable classification of mammals.&lt;br/&gt;