* 0108245
* Systematics of Eucharitidae (Hymenoptera:  Chalcidoidea)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* John Heraty, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Charles Lydeard
* 07/31/2005
* USD 100,059.00

Eucharitidae are one of the most diverse parasitic groups attacking eusocial
insects. All eucharitid larvae are specialized parasites of ant pupae. Females
deposit their eggs in plant tissue, and the active first-instar larvae are
responsible for gaining transport to the ant nest. They are most common in
tropical regions, but a few species occur as far north as Alaska and the Yukon.
Initial results from a phylogenetic analysis of the 53 genera using 75
morphological features of adults indicate a strong correlation between the
relationships of Eucharitidae and their ant hosts: 1) parasitism of Myrmicinae
appears correlated with use of a thrips intermediate host to gain access to the
ant brood, 2) parasitism of Ponerinae is correlated with independent larvae, and
3) parasitism of Formicinae is associated with the attraction of ants to the egg
mass. Preliminary results from data collected for the D2 and D3 expansion
regions of 28S rDNA show a strong correspondence with results from morphology-
based analyses, but not without critical areas of conflict that need to be
resolved. If strongly corroborated, molecular analyses will be used to
reevaluate morphological character state coding and also to imply transformation
series so that a more resolved hypothesis can be proposed for all genera based
on morphology alone. Preliminary analyses suggest that Gollumiella and Akapala
are key elements for establishing the polarity of behavioral changes in
Eucharitidae, and emphasis will be made on obtaining new collections and
biological information for these genera. If use of a thrips intermediate host is
shown to be an ancestral mode for Oraseminae and Eucharitinae, this would
suggest the behavior as primitive for the family and might indicate how the
initial host shift to ants may have occurred. In Trigonalyoidea and Elasmus
(Chalcidoidea), adaptation to parasitism of eusocial hosts may have been
accomplished through a host shift from ancestors that were hyperparasitic in
lepidopteran hosts to the hymenopteran predators of those Lepidoptera. If
adaptation through a prey item to the predator is true for each of these groups,
this general hypothesis could be applied to other parasitoids of eusocial
insects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In natural or agricultural systems, Chalcidoidea
are one of the most important groups controlling insect populations. With only
about 20,000 of the estimated 400,000 thousand species named, and far fewer with
known biology, this is a relatively unknown group. Eucharitidae are unusual
within this assemblage because the genera and species are well known and they
have a relatively conservative biology that corresponds with the initial
analyses of relationships. As well, they show a high degree of geographic
endemism that corresponds with the breakup of the southern continents
approximately 40 to 70 million years ago. By providing a robust phylogenetic
hypothesis using multiple methods (molecular, morphological and behavioral), we
can better understand the mechanism of host shifts and the correlated increase
in taxonomic diversity. A resolved phylogeny and understanding of behavioral
evolution for Eucharitidae would form a model system for future comparative
studies across the superfamily.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;