* 0108099
* The Role of Herbivores in the Evolution of Dioecy from Gynodioecy
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2007
* Tia-Lynn Ashman, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2007
* USD 391,996.00

&lt;br/&gt;A central problem in plant biology is understanding when and how
separate sexes evolve from hermaphroditism. Recent research has pin-pointed the
environment as an important element mediating this transition, however, little
attention has been paid to the enemy dimension of the environment. The objective
of this research is to evaluate the role of herbivory in the evolution of
separate sexes from hermaphroditism using the wild strawberry and it's flower
bud clipping herbivore as a model system. This research will test a long
standing hypothesis for how male-biased herbivory could facilitate the evolution
of separate genders as well as four newly developed hypotheses for how herbivory
could impede this transition. These hypotheses will be tested using a
combination of greenhouse and experimental garden studies. Herbivore levels will
be manipulated and fitness through male and female function will be measured.
These studies will be complemented by direct measures of the response to
selection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will expand our understanding of the
plant-animal interactions governing the evolution of separate genders to include
enemies. In doing so, it will provide some of the first data on the role of
antagonists in breeding system evolution. Moreover, because this study utilizes
a wild relative of an agricultural species and one of its most damaging pests,
data gathered on resistance and tolerance in this system will be relevant to
development of alternatives to pesticide use in managed
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;