* 0108540
* Solutions and Grids from Genuinely Multidimensional Residual Distribution Schemes
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Bram van Leer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2005
* USD 160,000.00

The Fluctuation-splitting method for solving first-order partial differential
equations is a distributive scheme based on evaluating residuals over piecewise
linear simplex elements. The nature of the distribution step matches as closely
as possible the local physics, thereby achieving minimal numerical dissipation.
It is known how to implement this program is two space dimensions but new
physics arises in three dimensions. In supersonic flow this is due to the
replacement of characteristic lines by bicharacteristic surfaces, and in both
supersonic and subsonic flow by the appearance of helicity, the streamwise
component of vorticity, which interacts with the acoustics. We will attempt to
design distribution schemes around the system version of the linear wave
equation, which is the simplest model problem to exhibit these features, and
which is embedded in the Euler equations. Application to the Euler equations
themselves will be by means of a local linearization that is well
established.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many phenomena in nature and technology are
well enough understood that the mathematical equations describing them can be
written down, but to actually solve these equations requires huge computer
resources. Examples that could be cited include the flow round an aircraft, the
evolution of a galaxy, or the future of the weather. Especially in the last
decade, the computer resources available for such projects has grown enormously,
but the scientific appetite for computing power remains unsatisfied. When new
machines become available, they may initially lie idle for some fraction of the
day, but are soon fully utilized, typically within a month. To extract the most
information from given resources, it is important that attention be paid to the
set of instructions (the algorithm) by which the computer processes the data,
both from the viewpoint of efficient arithmetic and also with regard to the
process that converts the mathematical equations into arithmetical form (the
scheme). Numerous schemes of varying sophistication exist, but new ones are
continually sought, and this research seeks to extend the scope of one
particular scheme that is based on trying to mimic the physics as directly as
possible with few arbitrary decisions. It is hoped that the result of this will
be to reduce the amount of computer storage space needed to model a given
physical situation with given accuracy. Focus will on complex fluid flows in
which an important role is played by rotating vortices. Such flows are at
present very difficult to compute efficiently, Advances in this area would be
especially beneficial to the prediction of flow round an aircraft in its take-
off or landing configuration, and to computing the flows around helicopters.
&lt;br/&gt;