* 0108956
* Further Investigations of ODDSIMS, a New Method of Dating Hydrated Obsidian
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2005
* James Elam, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2005
* USD 254,988.00

One of the most common artifacts at many archaeological sites across the world
are tools, ornaments and weapons made from a volcanic glass called obsidian.
This versatile material was highly prized by ancient and prehistoric peoples due
to its fracturing properties, its lusterous appearance and its sharp cutting
edge. When properly fractured, raw obsidian blocks can be "flaked" into a
variety of tool forms. An additional property of obsidian that makes it valuable
to archaeologists is the fact that the fresh surfaces of a newly flaked obsidian
tool interact with water in the atmosphere and ground, producing a "hydration
rim", the thickness of which is dependent on time. In 1960, a USGS geologist,
Irving Friedman, developed a method of dating obsidian artifacts by measuring
the width of the thin hydrated rims (around .002 to .01 mm thick) with an
optical microscope. Dr. Friedman named his technique "obsidian hydration dating"
or OHD. Unfortunately, despite the promise of the method to produce inexpensive
and accurate dates, it has failed far more often than it has succeeded.

In 1998, NSF awarded a grant to a team of researchers at the University of
Tennessee and Oak Ridge National Laboratory who had done a preliminary
reassessment of OHD using secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) to precisely
measure the concentration of hydrogen in the hydrated rim as a function of depth
from the surface. This technique provides not only precise measurement of the
width of the interaction rim, but data on the glass-water chemistry as well.
During the three years of NSF support, the team carried out further research on
both obsidian that was experimentally hydrated under controlled laboratory
conditions and independently dated archaeological specimens (mainly from
Mesoamerica). As part of the laboratory work, the team developed a new type of
reaction vessel system for performing in-laboratory hydration of fresh samples,
and is currently under patent review.

Thus far, the team's has made a number of crucial observations and discoveries.
First, they demonstrated that optical measurement is inherently imprecise and
cannot be used for accurate dating. Second, they showed that the rate equations
used in traditional obsidian dating are incorrect, as the rate of hydration is
not constant with time, but rather varies with age. Third, they noted that the
glass is absorbing only hydrogen and not the whole water molecule as previously
thought, indicating that the mechanics of the hydrogenation process are far more
complex than previously assumed, requiring significant re-evaluation of glass-
water interaction theory. Fourth, the team was able to demonstrate that using
the shape and depth of the hydrogen concentration profile, a series of artifacts
from the Chalco, Mexico site could be precisely and accurately dated. However,
this method requires at least one independently dated artifact from any
particular site for calibration. Fifth, SIMS analysis suggests that the hydrogen
isotope ratios of the rim may preserve information on the average temperature of
hydration, which is a crucial factor controlling hydration rates. If confirmed,
this would provide a means of constraining hydration temperature, and would
allow obsidian dating to be a completely independent method. Finally, the
results of this study suggest that the long-term durability of nuclear waste
glass forms should be re-evaluated, as previous breakdown models may be based on
flawed assumptions.

The research team has been awarded an additional three years support to continue
this exciting and important research. Objectives of the project for the next
three years include: 1) to understand the interaction chemistry and structure of
the hydrogenation zone; 2) refine the hydration model to make it a fully
independent and robust dating method; 3) determine if temperature data can be
extracted from obsidian artifacts; and 4) test the method at various
archaeological sites. To accomplish these goals, the team will expand their
research to Old World obsidian (Melian obsidian from Greece) and have already
established ties with a team of Greek archaeologists (University of the Aegean)
to obtain the necessary samples. This makes this project truly international in
scope benefiting not only U.S. scientists in multiple disciplines (e.g.
archaeology, geology, chemistry, physics, materials science), but scientists
throughout the world.