* 0108969
* Organoboron Derivatives of Group 4 Metals
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2001,01/31/2006
* Arthur Ashe, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 01/31/2006
* USD 355,000.00

Dr. Arthur J. Ashe, III, Department of Chemistry, University of Michigan, is
supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of the
Chemistry Division for the study of heteroaromatic compounds involving group 13
and 15 elements, their use as ligands to form zirconium complexes, and the
development of these complexes as olefin polymerization catalysts. Previous
research has demonstrated that boratabenzene zirconium complexes can serve as
homogeneous catalysts for the polymerization of olefins. Building on this result
and by analogy to ansametallocenes that are known to be active catalysts, a
series of metal complexes containing heteroaromatic ligands will be designed
with the goal of obtaining highly active and stereospecific olefin
polymerization catalysts. Specifically, new oxaborolides, thiaborolides and
azaborolides will be synthesized. These compounds along with boratabenzenes,
which are bridged through boron or carbon-(2), will be used as ligands to form
Group 4 metal complexes, which will be evaluated as polymerization catalysts.
Additionally, the conversion of aminoboranediyl bridged zirconocenes to highly
active and stereoselective Ziegler-Natta catalysts will be
studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transition metal complexes promote very selective
catalytic and stoichiometric transformations of organic compounds. Much of the
unique reactivity at the metal center is a reflection of the density of
electrons surrounding the metal and this electron density can be controlled by
adjusting the groups that are attached to the metal. A very common 'group'
contains a ring of carbon-hydrogen units in what is called an 'aromatic'
arrangement. In this project a series of metal complexes will be prepared in
which an 'aromatic' group composed of carbon-hydrogen and boron species is
attached to a metal. This will permit the electron density about the metal to be
carefully adjusted in order to promote specific chemical and catalytic behavior
and will set the ground work both to understand existing processes and to
rationally design new catalysts.&lt;br/&gt;