* 0108118
* How Do Communities Assemble?  The Influence of Local Conditions and Regional Processes on Community Composition
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Jonathan Chase, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Susan Mopper
* 08/31/2002
* USD 194,635.00

DEB - 0194634 Chase&lt;br/&gt;How do communities assemble? The influence of
local conditions and regional processes on community
composition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Do similar communities develop at similar
sites? If local conditions, such as the primary productivity or disturbance
rate, are of primary importance in community assembly, then we expect that
community composition at sites with similar local conditions would converge
towards the single community state favored in that environment. Alternatively,
if regional processes, such as the rate at which species colonize a locality
within a meta-community, and the order in which they do so, more strongly drive
community assembly, then we might expect that communities developing at similar
sites would diverge towards one of multiple community states. In this project,
the PI will perform a long term experiment designed to discern between the
influences of local conditions and regional processes on meta-community
assembly. This research will provide some of the most comprehensive evidence to
date examining the relative roles of local and regional scale processes in
determining community structure in different environments. Further, the basic
understanding of community assembly that is the focus of this project will
directly relate to the conceptual foundation for the restoration of degraded
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;