* 0108556
* Bacterial Diversity Patterns along Gradients of Primary Productivity in Freshwater Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2004
* Brendan Bohannan, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2004
* USD 297,317.00

"Bacterial diversity patterns along gradients of primary productivity in
freshwater ecosystems"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; One of the most
striking aspects of life is that it is distributed unevenly across the Earth.
Some regions (such as lowland areas and the tropics) have a high diversity of
plant and animal life; others (such as mountain tops and the polar regions)
appear nearly devoid of life. Differences in available environmental energy are
a major cause of such patterns. However, it is unknown whether the diversity of
the largest group of organisms on Earth (microorganisms) also varies with
available energy. Preliminary observations suggest that a relationship may exist
between bacterial diversity and available environmental energy in aquatic
ecosystems. The goal of this project is to verify these preliminary
observations. More specifically, bacterial diversity will be estimated in ponds
that differ in available energy. Because most bacteria from environmental
samples cannot be grown in the laboratory, bacterial diversity will be assessed
using molecular techniques that do not require bacterial growth under laboratory
conditions. Bacterial diversity will be estimated by extracting bacterial
ribosomal genes from pond samples and sequencing these genes. Bacterial
taxonomic diversity will be estimated from the sequence diversity of these
genes. The diversity within a single bacterial functional group also will be
estimated by extracting and sequencing amoA genes from pond samples. The amoA
gene is unique to bacteria that oxidize ammonia. The diversity of these bacteria
will be estimated from the sequence diversity of these genes. This study will be
the first comprehensive attempt to measure bacterial diversity along a gradient
of available energy. It has the potential to generate fundamental new knowledge
concerning the distribution of microorganisms and could impact fields as diverse
as environmental management and the search for novel pharmaceuticals.&lt;br/&gt;