* 0108229
* Phylogeny and Biogeography of the Gondwanan Mistletoe Family Loranthaceae
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Daniel Nickrent, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2005
* USD 160,000.00

0108229&lt;br/&gt;Daniel L. Nickrent&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been
awarded to Dr. Daniel Nickrent at Southern Illinois University Carbondale that
will fund molecular phylogenetic and biogeographical (= phylogeographical)
research on a group of parasitic plants called mistletoes. Although related to
the Christmas mistletoes (family Viscaceae), this family (Loranthaceae) differs
in several ways including flower morphology, pollination mechanisms, and
geographic distributions. Whereas Viscaceae are thought to have originated on
the northern Laurasian landmass, Loranthaceae evolved on the southern
supercontinent called Gondwanaland. The origins of a number of plant families
can be traced to Gondwanaland, and one (Nothofagaceae - the southern beeches),
has been considered a model for examining the biogeographical history of the
southern landmasses. Surprisingly, despite knowledge of its morphology, fossil
history and phylogeny, the evolutionary origin of Nothofagus remains
controversial. The research proposed here will use Loranthaceae as another model
group that can be used to investigate similar biogeographical questions.
Loranthaceae provide several advantages over other plants in that they have
limited ability for long-distance dispersal (a factor that can complicate such
biogeographic analyses) owing to their parasitic habit and host requirements .
Endemic and relictual loranth genera occur on all the continents that were
formerly part of Gondwanaland, thus offering many opportunities to conduct
modern phylogeographical analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study has
four primary objectives: 1) to use nuclear and chloroplast gene sequences to
generate a molecular phylogeny of Loranthaceae; 2) to use the above molecular
phylogenetic results to test existing biogeographical hypotheses for the family
based upon chromosome number; 3) to use the resulting phylogeny to examine
evolutionary patterns in morphological features such as the inflorescence, and
4) to provide a revised classification of the family. This work will attempt to
be comprehensive in scope, thus sampling all or nearly all of the existing 73
genera in the family. These objectives will be achieved by building phylogenetic
trees from DNA sequence data. These trees will then be transformed into taxon
distribution (area) cladograms that can then be analyzed using a variety of
procedures based upon cladistic principles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is
significant because Loranthaceae represent the largest family in the sandalwood
order, a family for which no modern classification or phylogeny exists. These
mistletoes are a major component of tropical and subtropical ecosystems in the
southern hemisphere and have been the focus of research from diverse fields such
as pollination biology, cytology, coevolution with birds, and biogeography. For
these reasons, a phylogeny of the family will prove extremely valuable to others
wishing to place their data in the proper evolutionary context. For example,
interpretation of inflorescence morphology has traditionally proven extremely
difficult in many plant groups. Loranthaceae show a wide range of inflorescence
types and a well-resolved molecular phylogeny will allow one to determine, for
example, whether simple inflorescences arose via reduction from more complex
ones or whether evolution proceeded with the opposite polarity. This research
will be a component of the education and training of graduate and undergraduate
students in field, laboratory, and analytical methodologies. Many of the loranth
genera are susceptible to extinction owing to human-caused habitat destruction
or other unknown factors. Thus the proposed collection of loranth DNA represents
a unique and valuable resource not only for phylogeographic studies but also
from the perspective of gene-banking. This project helps meet the challenges of
the biodiversity crisis, as summarized by the Systematics Agenda 2000, by
generating a predictive classification system on Loranthaceae, a parasitic plant
group that can serve as indicators of ecosystem integrity and function.