* 0108828
* Dissertation Research: History, Cultural Models, and Property Rights in the Emergence of Groundwater Irrigation: The Upper Valley of Cochabamba, Bolivia
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2001,10/31/2002
* David Guillet, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 10/31/2002
* USD 12,000.00

This dissertation research project in cultural anthropology will examine the
emergence of new forms of property rights in the recent adoption of groundwater
irrigation by farmers in the Cochabamba valley of highland Bolivia. Historically
farmers had used water from descending rivers and streams stored in reservoirs
to irrigate their fields, but in recent times they developed the capacity to use
well water. Comparable systems that have been studied at first have appeared
unstructured and chaotic, but upon analysis have appeared to be products of
innovation, adaptation, learning and entrepreneurial skill. The student will
analyze the cultural models of property rights held by farmers as well as the
transaction costs of alternative forms of property rights, study the history of
institutions governing groundwater usage and use GIS and spatial analysis to
identify locations and spatial systems, to analyze how local Andean property
rights have adapted to a new economic strategy. The student's project will make
a significant contribution by widening the "New Institutional Economics"
approach to include cultural models, symbols and meaning, and will advance our
understanding of high altitude irrigation systems, as well as our knowledge of
this important region of the world. In addition the project contributes to the
training of a young social scientist.