* 0108285
* Quantifying the Role of Pollinator Mediated Selection in the Evolution of Pollination Syndromes in Silene (Caryophyllaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2008
* Charles Fenster, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 08/31/2008
* USD 375,998.00

This project will quantify whether flower traits such as shape, color, scent,
floral &lt;br/&gt;display, and nectar rewards reflects an adaptive response by
plants to specific animals pollinators. Three Silene species (carnation family)
will be investigated that differ in flower traits and a priori appear to be
adapted to different types of animal pollinators, including bees, moths and
hummingbirds. Through observations and manipulations we will determine how
important different pollinators are to the reproductive success of each species
and whether a particular group of pollinators actually selects for the present
suite of floral traits found in each of the three
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to understand the role
of pollinators in promoting floral diversity in the plant kingdom. For example,
flowers visited by hummingbirds are generally red, scentless and flower during
the day, while moth pollinated flowers are often white, richly fragrant and open
at night. Thus we hope to quantify whether hummingbirds and moths favor plants
that have greater expression of traits associated with either hummingbird or
moth pollination and whether this leads to greater reproductive success of the
plants. Whether we find that a species is successfully pollinated by many types
of animals or only by specific pollinators will have conservation implications.
In the former scenario, the loss of animals may decrease plant reproductive
success. However, in the later case, the loss of specific pollinators my result
in the loss of a plant species.&lt;br/&gt;