* 0108978
* U.S. Mexico Doctoral Dissertation:  Biological Pathology and the Cultural Construction of Illness: A Comparative, Cross-Cultural Study of Two Folk Illnesses
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Elois Ann Berlin, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 08/31/2002
* USD 7,799.00

0108978&lt;br/&gt;Berlin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Americas Program award will
provide support for dissertation research by Mr. George E. Luber, under the
direction of Dr. Elois A. Berlin of the University of Georgia. Mr. Luber will
work in Mexico with Dr. Austraberta Nazar Beutelspacher at El Colegio de la
Frontera Sur, in Chiapas. They will study the biological pathology and the
cultural construction of illness by carrying out a comparative, cross-cultural
study of two folk illnesses.&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this thesis dissertation
research will investigate two folk illnesses, the Tzeltal Mayan cha'lam tsots
and the Mixe metsk kuaay, which represent regional variations of cultural
representations of potentially fatal illnesses, primarily affecting children,
found in several Mesoamerican cultures. The research will involve a combination
of ethnographic, clinical epidemiological and nutritional anthropometric methods
to address a critical gap in the biocultural study of ethnomedical systems by
clarifying the role that biology and culture each play in the identification and
cultural construction of disease in two Mesoamerican linguistic groups. By
working with researchers at El Colegio de la Frontera Sur, this study will
increase understanding of and improve efforts to develop culturally-appropriate
and effective treatments for these and other ethnomedical conditions often
ignored and untreated by local doctors.&lt;br/&gt;