* 0108451
* Novel States of Quantum Hall Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2001,01/31/2005
* Herbert Fertig, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 01/31/2005
* USD 225,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;0108451&lt;br/&gt;Fertig&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research to explore a possible explanation for highly anisotropic metallic
states revealed in experiments on high quality quantum Hall systems, and a
possible mechanism for producing non-Fermi liquid metallic states. The proposed
research has four aims: (1) to develop quantitative models of stripes that allow
one to assess what kind of ordering is really present at low temperatures when
fluctuations are included; (2) to understand how this system might avoid
localization (Fermi liquid) and pinning (charge density wave); (3) to understand
the transition between bubbles and stripes, particularly when disorder is
present, and to search for new pinning behavior and possibly glassy behavior in
these unusual systems; and (4) to explore new physics associated with interlayer
phase coherence when a second layer is introduced. Various field theoretical
techniques, numerical simulations, and renormalization group methods will be
used to carry out the research. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
theoretical research that pursues a possible explanation of exotic metallic
states of electrons confined to two-dimensions and layers of such electrons. The
research will focus on unusual metallic states that have been observed in
experiments on quantum Hall systems. It is supposed that in these systems
electrons participate in novel bubble phases and striped phases that are
analogous to phases found in liquid crystals. Because of the good theoretical
tools available for studying quantum Hall systems, these may prove to be a
controlled proving ground for exploring striped phases more generally. The study
of striped quantum Hall phases may illuminate the origins of unusual metallic
states and striped phases observed in the high temperature superconductors. The
award will support postdoctoral training in state-of-the-art methods in
condensed matter theory.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;