* 0108163
* Characterization of a Newly Discovered Symbiosis between Bacteria and Leeches
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Susan Perkins, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2004
* USD 100,113.00

DEB- 0108163 Mark A. Siddall Susan Perkins

A grant has been awarded to Drs. Mark Siddall and Susan Perkins of the American
Museum of Natural History to study the historical relationship between leeches
and their bacterial symbionts. Species that rely on nutritionally poor diets are
often reliant on obligate bacterial endosymbionts. Vertebrate blood is deficient
in B vitamins and some amino acids. A broad array of blood-feeding invertebrates
harbor bacterial symbionts providing some of these essential nutrients to their
hosts. Leeches are known to have symbionts in organs that open into the
esophagus just in front of the crop where blood is stored. A diversity of
leeches will be collected from North America, South America and South Africa.
Using DNA sequences amplified and sequenced from the isolated bacteria and from
leeches, the project will answer significant issues regarding the evolutionary
origin of the bacteria and the degree to which they have coevolved with leeches
that harbor them. Modern phylogenetic analyses will determine the degree of
cospeciation through time by comparing the evolutionary tree topologies from the
two associated groups.

Preliminary data indicate that these bacteria living inside the leech epithelial
cells are closely related to Agrobacterium, Rhizobium and Sinorhizobium species
including those forming symbioses for nitrogen fixation in leguminous plants
(e.g., beans). If bacteria from different species of leech are each others'
closest relatives it would suggest that they have retained a tight
coevolutionary association with each other through time. The alternative is
independent acquisition of different bacterial associates by different groups of
leeches. What is particularly intriguing about this symbiotic association and
the phylogenetic position of the bacteria is the implication that these
intracellular symbionts may be playing a role in nitrogen metabolism for their
leech hosts. Furthermore the results should help to answer questions regarding
the evolution of blood-feeding in annelid worms.