* 0109377
* Novel Reactivity, Structures, Properties and Materials Based on Sulfonimides, Sulfones and Iodine Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2005
* William Pennington, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 07/31/2005
* USD 345,000.00

Dr. Darryl D. DesMarteau, III, Department of Chemistry, Clemson University, is
supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of the
Chemistry Division for research into sulfonimides, sulfones and iodine
Compounds. The research capitalizes on the unique properties of
perfluoroalkylsulfonimides, a class of strong nitrogen acids, to stabilize
unusual molecular structures and to promote unusual reactivity. The project has
three main thrusts. First, a new class of zwitterionic diaryl iodonium salts
containing both the anion and cation directly bound to the aromatic ring will be
investigated. A variety of these compounds, which have a broad range of
functionalization on the aromatic rings, will be prepared. These compounds have
excellent potential for use in photolithography as photoacid generators and may
aid in extending photolithography for integrated circuit manufacture to shorter
wavelengths for smaller device geometries. Second, a novel iodonium compound
that has the ability to selectively place a trifluoroethyl alkyl group onto an
amino acid in a water solution will be used to prepare new, potentially
bioactive compounds. Third, sulfonimides will be incorporated into dendrimer
polymers to give the first examples of perfluorinated dendrimers. Parallel to
this effort, a new functionalized crosslinking agent for ionene polymers will be
developed in order to obtain higher molecular weights and decreased
crystallinity, which will aid these species to form membranes.

The proposed research combines fundamental chemical science with applications of
importance in microelectronics, drug discovery, electrochemistry and catalysis.
The systems selected for study have potential as polymer electrolytes in fuel
cells and battery applications, as media in which nanoscale materials can be
formed, and as polymer based reagents. One objective is the design of new
catalysts for a number of `acid catalyzed` processes (petroleum refining, for
example, often uses acidic catalysts). Another is to design ways to introduce
fluorine into molecules that may have biochemical significance. This combination
will provide an excellent platform to train undergraduate, graduate and
postdoctoral students in basic research in the chemical sciences in
technological areas of high current interest.

