* 0109024
* Experimental Examination of Factors that Affect Public Information Use by Starlings
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2001,12/31/2003
* Jennifer Templeton, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Jerry  O. Wolff
* 12/31/2003
* USD 98,056.00

Understanding the behavior of animals often requires knowledge of how
individuals make decisions. This requires understanding the kinds of information
animals possess about their environment. The proposed research will study
decision-making in socially feeding starlings by examining how individuals
acquire and use information obtained from other foragers. This information is
known as public information and its existence and use can provide an important
benefit to individuals in social aggregations. This work will test hypotheses
regarding factors that affect the use of public information and evaluate how
individuals combine public information with their own personal sampling
information to estimate the quality of food patches. There are three potential
broader implications of the proposed work. First, public information use appears
to be widespread in several different contexts, including foraging, mate choice,
habitat selection, and sequential assessment of opponents. Thus, a better
understanding of how individuals acquire and use public information should
allows greater understanding of a potentially widespread general benefit of
sociality. As such, it may provide insight into the evolution and maintenance of
a variety of social systems. Second, this study will employ several
undergraduate students and target those students from groups traditionally
under-represented in science early in their academic careers. Early exposure to
the process of scientific discovery may encourage such students to pursue
careers in science. Third, starlings are agricultural pests in many regions of
North America. Insight from this work regarding how starlings estimate the
quality of food patches, derived from understanding the factors that affect the
use of public information, have the potential to be incorporated into mitigation
strategies in agricultural systems.

