* 0109249
* US-India Cooperative Research:  Theoretical Study of Colossal Magneto-Resistive Compounds
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Sashi Satpathy, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 08/31/2005
* USD 16,450.00

0109249&lt;br/&gt;Satpathy &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award
supports the US-India cooperative research, Theoretical Study of Colossal
Magneto-Resistive Compounds. The collaborators are Professors Sashi Satpathy,
University of Missouri-Columbia and T. Saha-Dasgupta, S.N. Bose National Center
for Basic Sciences, Calcutta. Colossal magnetoresistive (CMR) oxides are of
considerable interest because they exhibit a variety of rich physical properties
resulting from the coupling between the charge, orbital, spin, and lattice
degrees of freedom. They have great potential for industrial applications,
particularly in the area of magnetic devices. In recent years, a number of new
CMR materials have been discovered and are being studied both experimentally and
theoretically. In this joint project, the collaborators will study the
electronic structure and electron-lattice interaction in CMR materials and their
relationship to transport and magnetism. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The PIs
are both highly experienced in conducting electronic structure studies and this
project will synthesize the PIs' respective research skills. Theoretical study
of CMR is a very current, intellectually challenging topic. This research will
make important contributions to the physical understanding and technical
applications of CMR materials. It will, also, encourage international exchange
and greatly benefit the participants and their groups including graduate
students. This project is jointly supported by the Division of International
Programs and the Government of India's Department of Science &amp; Technology.
&lt;br/&gt;