* 0109762
* SBIR Phase I: Development of Integrated Fluid/Solid/Bio-Kinetic Simulation Software for the Characterization of Microsphere-based Bio-analytic Systems
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2001,12/31/2001
* Shivshankar Sundaram, CFD RESEARCH CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 12/31/2001
* USD 99,968.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I (SBIR) project will demonstrate
the feasibility and value of advanced simulation methodology for the prediction
of biomolecular binding on the surface of microspheres used in biosensing
applications. Models in current use employ many ad-hoc assumptions, particularly
related to convective mass transport. Large, systematic errors are commonly
encountered in predictive efforts. Novel, high-fidelity simulations proposed
here hold the promise of providing a systematic understanding of the complex
interaction between multiphase flow, diffusion and surface chemistry. An
integrated simulation environment featuring Discrete Particle Simulations
(suited for small beads) and Chimera Particle Simulations (for larger beads)
will be developed in Phase I. Detailed bead-surface chemistry models (featuring
finite-rate adsorption, desorption and conversion to irreversible state) will be
developed and fully coupled to the flow model. The technique will be
demonstrated using Immunoflow , a food bio-sensor based on fluidization
developed at Utah State University. Both flow and binding simulation results
will be validated against experiments. In Phase II, both Discrete and Chimera
particle techniques will be further developed along with more generalized, user
specifiable surface reaction mechanisms and model development for bio-molecule
specific binding phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The commercial
application of the technology and the software to be developed in this project
is in the area of biosensors for marketing to the biotechnology community. The
product will enable the rapid creation of the next generation of optimized
biosensors while simultaneously enhancing the fundamental understanding of
biochemical processes. The technology would also benefit research in the
traditional chemical and pharmaceutical industries.&lt;br/&gt;