* 0109794
* Structure and Function of Coatomer
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Rockford Draper, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 07/31/2005
* USD 231,000.00

This project addresses the question of intracellular membrane traffic; i.e., how
do cells move pieces of membranes from one physical location in the cell to
another? While much has been learned about this extremely complicated process
over the past twenty years, there are still many questions that remain
unanswered. This project focuses on the function of a particular protein
complex. COPI, that has been known to be involved in the specific movement of
certain membranes from one place to another in the cell and in the specific
inclusion of certain membrane proteins in the membranes that are
moved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coat protein I (COPI) is a macromolecular protein
complex consisting of ADP-ribosylation factor 1 (ARF1) and coatomer. ARF1 is a
small GTP-binding protein that recruits coatomer to Golgi membranes and coatomer
is a soluble complex that contains seven protein subunits alpha- through zeta-
COP; there's a beta and a beta-prime). After assembly on Golgi membranes, COPI
surrounds nascent vesicles that bud from the membrane. Once a vesicle has
formed, ARF1 hydrolyzes GTP and COPI dissociates from the membrane, releasing
coatomer and ARF1 into the cytosol for another round of coating. Although
general features of the COPI cycle are known, the function and molecular
mechanism of COPI action are poorly understood. Most researchers agree that
COPI-coated vesicles carry membrane in a retrograde direction, from the Golgi to
the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), but there is disagreement whether COPI-coated
vesicles also carry membrane in the anterograde direction, towards the plasma
membrane. It is not understood how COPI binds only to certain membranes, how
vesicles coated by COPI form, or precisely how COPI helps select cargo to be
included in a budding vesicle. The objective of this project is to better
understand the function and action of COPI. Participating in the project will be
a post-doctoral fellow, a Ph.D. student, plus rotating graduate and
undergraduate students. The work will be done in a university environment where
the PI has teaching responsibilities in graduate and undergraduate classes as
well as research responsibilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coatomer contains sites
that bind amino acid motifs present in the cytoplasmic domains of certain
transmembrane proteins. Binding of these motifs to coatomer is involved in
selecting cargo to be included in a COPI-coated vesicle. The best-characterized
cytoplasmic motif is the dilysine signal (KKXX and related sequences) that
functions in the return back to the ER of resident ER proteins that have escaped
to the Golgi complex. In published work supported by a previous NSF grant, Dr.
Draper studied di-amino compounds that appear to mimic the dilysine motif and
inhibit the association of beta-COP and delta-COP with Golgi membranes. The
research supported by this award is an extension of that previous work and
contains two related sub-projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sub-project 1 is to
investigate changes in coatomer caused by di-amino compounds and peptides. Dr.
Draper has recently discovered that certain di-amino compounds that appear to
interact with the dilysine binding sites on coatomer dissociate the large
coatomer complex into smaller particles. This work will be continued to
determine whether coatomer is dissociated into smaller particles by peptides
that are natural ligands for coatomer. Coatomer will be incubated with peptides
and the formation of sub-complexes will be analyzed by velocity sedimentation
centrifugation. Which coatomer subunits are in the sub-complexes will also be
determined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sub-project 2 is to understand the functional
consequences of changes in coatomer caused by di-amino compounds and peptides.
Dr. Draper has preliminary evidence that sub-complexes formed by coatomer in the
presence of di-amino compounds retain partial function, and this work will be
extended to study peptides that interact with coatomer. To assess function,
Golgi membranes will be incubated with cytosol and an energy source in the
presence or absence of peptides. Which coatomer subunits retain Golgi-binding
ability will be determined by immunoblotting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will thus examine the possible specific role played by the di-lysyl bearing
peptides in COPI function. If such a role is substantiated through these and
subsequent experiments, it would have a major impact on our understanding of
membrane trafficking and specificity. Additionally, the project will serve as a
vehicle for the education of the next generation of scientists as well as for
the education of scientifically literate members of our society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;