* 0109641
* Control of Microtopography at Silicon Surfaces and Interfaces
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2001,04/30/2005
* John Blakely, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 04/30/2005
* USD 387,471.00

This project addresses properties of defects at silicon and other semiconductor
surfaces and explores methods to control the topography of surfaces and
interfaces at the atomic level. The research involves the study of surface
atomic diffusion, the energetics and dynamics of surface atomic steps,
oxidation-induced strain and detailed control of surface and interface
morphology. Scanning tunneling microscopy and low energy electron microscopy are
used to observe the connection between atomic step motion and the evolution of
overall surface shape. Results are expected to be of interest to fundamental
surface science and in the fabrication of advanced semiconductor devices and
circuits. The research may contribute to the design and control of interfaces in
heterogeneous magnetic systems such as are used in magneto-resistive
applications as well. Surfaces with predetermined arrays of atomic scale
features may also be of value in making patterned substrates for biological
sensors. The primary project goal is to more fully understand the fundamental
processes involved in Si morphology control and to explore the extension and
application of these processes to other materials. Specific objectives of the
project include: 1)Study of the temperature and growth rate conditions to create
atomically flat mesa structures on Si(001) and Si(111) by vapor deposition plus
related work on the use of chemical etching as an alternative to sublimation.
2)Study of the types of point defects existing at high temperatures through AFM
and STM observations on quenched Si surfaces with extremely large terraces.
3)Develop ways to make potentially useful patterns of steps on Si and other
substrates as templates for adsorbed or deposited structures. Applications will
be sought with bio-molecules and with magnetic layers. 4)Study of the kinetics
of oxide growth on atomically flat Si using an X-ray technique to monitor the
intensity of forbidden reflections-analogous to RHEED oscillations. %%% The
project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of materials science
with high technological relevance. An important feature of the program is the
integration of research and education through the training of students in a
fundamentally and technologically significant area. The project assists
development of technical, communication, and organizational/management skills in
students through unique educational experiences made possible by a forefront
highly collaborative research environment. Key collaborators in this project
include Cornell-based researchers Dr. C.C. Umbach (Materials Science & Eng.),
Prof. J. Engstrom (Chem. Eng.), Dr R. Headrick (CHESS), Prof M. Hines
(Chemistry), Dr R. Tromp (IBM), and Dr N. Bartelt (Sandia). ***