* 0109925
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Effects of Wealth and Markets on Use and Knowledge of Brazilian Amazon
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2001,12/31/2002
* Marianne Schmink, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 12/31/2002
* USD 11,355.00

0109925 Schmink / Wallace This dissertation research project in cultural
anthropology studies the effects of markets and household wealth on the
extraction of resources from the tropical forest in the Brazilian Amazon.
Combining theories and methods from microeconomics, economic anthropology and
cognitive anthropology, the student will test hypotheses relating household
wealth, income, extractive activities, market integration, and knowledge of
forest resources among a sample of rubber tappers in the Chico Mendes Extractive
Reserve of Acre, Brazil. Although previous studies examined the effects of
wealth and markets on household livelihood strategies, this project advances our
understanding by studying these factors in an extractive reserve, where
livelihood strategies are limited; it also advances studies in cognitive
anthropology by relating intra-cultural variation in rubber tapper knowledge of
forest resources to the economic factors that contribute to shape livelihood
strategies. The project will examine changes over time, comparing research
findings from 1996 with current data, to provide policymakers a yardstick for
measuring change in the reserve. This new knowledge will be valuable for
creating policy in other tropical forest protected areas. The project also
advances our knowledge about this important region of the world, and contributes
to the training of a young social scientist.