* 0109909
* RUI:  Characterization and Purification of Mg-protoporphyrin IX Monomethyl Ester Cyclase from Photosynthetic Prokaryotes
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2001,01/31/2005
* David Bollivar, Illinois Wesleyan University
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 01/31/2005
* USD 334,598.00

The biochemical steps that are required for chlorophyll and bacteriochlorophyll
synthesis have been identified and in most cases the genes that encode the
various enzymes have been identified. One enzyme that is not as well understood
is the Mg-protoporphyrin IX monomethyl ester cyclase. This enzyme converts Mg-
protoporphyrin IX monomethyl ester into protochlorophyllide. To further
understand this enzyme in plants and bacteria, the following research will be
carried out. a) Demonstration of in vitro activity of the anaerobic cyclase from
Rhodobacter capsulatus and purification of the enzyme components. Purification
of the enzyme will allow determination of cofactor requirements. Determination
of the cofactors is key to testing the hypothesis that the anaerobic cyclase
utilizes a radical mechanism mediated by adenosylcobalamin. b) Determine
components of the anaerobic cyclase by genetic analysis. It is clear from
experiments in plant systems that two proteinaceous components are required for
cyclase activity. Recent results suggest that two components are required for
the anaerobic cyclase activity. Genetic approaches will be used to identify
additional loci affecting enzymatic activity. c) Test if the putative chlE gene
product from Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 is a functional homolog to bchE from R.
capsulatus. This will be accomplished by expression of the chlE gene in R.
capsulatus. This hypothesis will be tested more fully by purifying the ChlE
polypeptide and characterizing its function in the cyclase enzyme from
Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803. In addition, experiments will be performed to test
whether the cyanobacterial enzyme can function anaerobically. d)Involve
undergraduate science students in a research project that will prepare them for
advanced studies or for teaching at the secondary education level. Chlorophyll
is a very important compound because it is used to absorb light for
photosynthesis. The goal of this project is to better understand one of the
enzymes in chlorophyll synthesis. The enzyme under study is not well understood,
but is required for the synthesis of chlorophyll by cells. The enzyme is also
limited in iron-poor cells leading to yellowing of the plants. The project will
examine the proteins from bacteria that are involved in the reaction. Other
components of the cell that are required for this reaction to occur will be
identified.&lt;br/&gt; BENNING&lt;br/&gt;