* 0109079
* GOALI: Direct Numerical Simulation of Slurry Transport Focusing on Engineering Correlations
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Daniel Joseph, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Judy A. Raper
* 08/31/2005
* USD 290,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CTS-0109079&lt;br/&gt;D. D. Joseph, University of
Minnesota&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed effort is a GOALI
association between the University of Minnesota&lt;br/&gt;Fluid Dynamics Lab and
the oil-industry supported laboratory STIMLAB from Duncan, Oklahoma. It is an
attempt to explore the application of the direct numerical simulation technique
to slurry transport and also to proppant transport in reservoir fractures. In
both cases, the emphasis will be to identify the force interaction between the
particles and the ambient liquid. Also, numerical flow field calculations will
be fitted to experimental results with the help of relevant non-dimensional
power law parameters. This "method of correlations" should reveal self-similar
properties not immediately apparent from the traditional conservation equations
of fluid dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;The PI presents an extensive evaluation of the
progress he has already accomplished in that direction, in part with NSF
support. Many results have been obtained for a variety of applications, from the
simple (Poiseuille flow) to the very applied (foaming bubble columns, bitumen
froth transport...). Several finite element codes have been evolved (ALE, DLM),
and successful correlations (some of them by other groups) are presented. Out of
this abundance of results, the PI has produced a number of proposed research
extensions into interdependent properties: particle life off, circulation,
bifurcation, and levitation to equilibrium. A partial outline of the
correlations which the PI intends to investigate is given, as well as a short
statement of the more applied kind of problems where STIMLAB could use its
abundant data bank: proppant transport, collision models.&lt;br/&gt;