* 0109427
* Support for the Center for BioDynamics at Boston University
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2007
* Nancy Kopell, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2007
* USD 1,409,910.00

The investigator and her colleagues collaborate in a group&lt;br/&gt;project at
the Center for BioDynamics (CBD) to provide&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary
education and training for graduate students&lt;br/&gt;and postdoctoral-level
investigators in the context of a vigorous&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary research
program that focuses on areas of&lt;br/&gt;mutual interest in mathematics
(especially dynamical systems),&lt;br/&gt;biology, and engineering. Disciplines
include mathematics,&lt;br/&gt;biomedical engineering, aerospace/mechanical
engineering,&lt;br/&gt;biology, psychology, and physics. Training extends beyond
the&lt;br/&gt;usual classroom activities by engaging participants in a
variety&lt;br/&gt;of research projects as well. One of the major topics is
dynamics&lt;br/&gt;of the nervous system. The projects, which involve
experiments,&lt;br/&gt;modeling, and analysis, all deal with the variety of
rhythms in&lt;br/&gt;the nervous system and the potential functions of these
rhythms&lt;br/&gt;in key cognitive states and processes such as
attention,&lt;br/&gt;awareness, learning, and recall. A second major topic
is&lt;br/&gt;dynamics of gene expression. Progress in genomic research
is&lt;br/&gt;leading to maps of the building blocks of biology and fueling
the&lt;br/&gt;study of gene regulation, where proteins often regulate their
own&lt;br/&gt;production or that of other proteins in a complex web
of&lt;br/&gt;interactions. CBD projects focus on using techniques
from&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear dynamics, statistical physics, control theory,
and&lt;br/&gt;molecular biology to model, design, and construct synthetic
gene&lt;br/&gt;regulatory networks, and to probe naturally occurring
gene&lt;br/&gt;regulatory networks. The third major topic is the dynamics
of&lt;br/&gt;patterns and waves. Training activities include two
weekly&lt;br/&gt;working seminars, extra journal clubs and reading
groups,&lt;br/&gt;seminars to educate the CBD members in the research going
on&lt;br/&gt;within the Center, and a CBD-initiated team-taught
course.&lt;br/&gt; The Center for BioDynamics (CBD) helps to
advance&lt;br/&gt;understanding of difficult interdisciplinary problems at
the&lt;br/&gt;intersection of mathematics, biology, and engineering, and
it&lt;br/&gt;trains mathematicians, scientists, and engineers for the
21st&lt;br/&gt;century workforce. It does this by combining
traditional&lt;br/&gt;classroom education with significant engagement of
students and&lt;br/&gt;postdocs in interdisciplinary teams working on current
problems.&lt;br/&gt;The disciplines involved are mathematics, biomedical
engineering,&lt;br/&gt;aerospace/mechanical engineering, biology, psychology,
and&lt;br/&gt;physics. One of the major topics is dynamics of the
nervous&lt;br/&gt;system. The projects in this topic seek to shed light on
the&lt;br/&gt;origin of the electrical activity in the brain, and how the
brain&lt;br/&gt;uses this activity to process sensory information, to think,
and&lt;br/&gt;to regulate movement. A second major topic is dynamics of
gene&lt;br/&gt;expression. The web of interactions among the proteins that
are&lt;br/&gt;produced by genes is complex; the projects associated with
this&lt;br/&gt;topic involve the design and construction of artificial
gene&lt;br/&gt;regulatory networks, and techniques to better
understand&lt;br/&gt;naturally occurring gene regulatory networks. The third
major&lt;br/&gt;topic is the dynamics of patterns and waves, occuring in
a&lt;br/&gt;variety of applications. Training activities include two
weekly&lt;br/&gt;working seminars, regular sessions to read scientific
journals,&lt;br/&gt;seminars to educate the CBD members in the research going
on&lt;br/&gt;within the Center, and a CBD-initiated team-taught course.
The&lt;br/&gt;project is supported by the Computational Mathematics,
Applied&lt;br/&gt;Mathematics, Computational Neuroscience, and Biological
Databases&lt;br/&gt;and Informatics programs and by the MPS Office
of&lt;br/&gt;Multidisciplinary Activities.&lt;br/&gt;