* 0109006
* Putting the 'New Open Economy Macroeconomics' to a Test
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* Paul Bergin, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2003
* USD 91,110.00

This project develops and implements a means of testing recent theories of
current account and exchange rate determination. Recent years have witnessed a
significant shift in international macroeconomic theory, with the development of
an approach that combines the nominal rigidities essential to evaluating
monetary policy, along with the analytical rigor of intertemporal microeconomic
foundations. Widely known as the "New Open Economy Macroeconomics," these models
offer greater insight into sources of current account and exchange rate
fluctuations, and permit a means to judge their welfare implications. This
analytical approach might eventually provide a rigorous framework for analyzing
macroeconomic policy, and thereby replace the more traditional Keynesian models
that have long been useful but flawed workhorses for policy makers. While the
theoretical literature on New Open Economy Macroeconomics has proliferated, the
empirical literature has lagged far behind. The econometric techniques used for
previous generations of international models cannot accommodate the more complex
models of the new generation. Without empirical testing, it is difficult to know
which of the many versions considered in the theoretical literature is
preferable, or if the general approach is accurate enough to eventually be used
for policy analysis. This project proposes and implements an empirical
methodology that could facilitate the development of an empirical literature in
the New Open Economy Macroeconomics. The research estimates by maximum
likelihood a series of structural general equilibrium models of open economies.
The research also develops and estimates an unrestricted counterpart model, so
that a comparison of likelihood values can indicate if the data are generally
consistent with the restrictions implied by the theory. Further, horseraces
between competing theoretical models can help guide the direction of future
theoretical work.

Preliminary work by the investigator has tested the methodology on a benchmark
open economy model with wage and price stickiness. Results are surprisingly
supportive of the New Open Economy approach, in that a likelihood ratio test is
unable to reject the theoretical restrictions implied by the model for two of
three countries considered. Nominal rigidities appear to be an essential element
in this success, since a version that assumes no such rigidities is rejected
strongly for all three countries. However, the presence of rigidities is more
important for explaining some variables in the data set than others. Finally,
the estimated model offers some additional insight into the source of
fluctuations in real and nominal exchange rates, finding a larger role for
monetary policy than was uncovered in past studies. Further work is needed to
apply the methodology to a wider variety of models proposed in the burgeoning
theoretical literature.