* 0109821
* SBIR  Phase I:  A Near-Instantaneous, Whole Blood Immunoassay
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2001,12/31/2001
* Daniel Watkins, NANOSPECTRA BIOSCIENCES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 12/31/2001
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase 1 Project (SBIR) will contribute
towards the development of a near-instantaneous, all-optical biosensing
technology to replace ELISA-type (enzyme-linked immunoadsorbant assay) assays.
Utilizing the unique optical properties of Metal Nanoshells, a new type of
nanoparticle containing a dielectric core coated with a thin metal layer,
immunoassays can be performed in the near-infrared region of high physiological
transmissivity (wavelengths between 800 and 1300 nm) using Surface Enhanced
Raman Scattering techniques. The equipment required to perform this immunoassay
will be both highly portable and inexpensive. Initial research with a model
antigen has shown that the nanoshell-based assay can produce results on whole-
blood samples in 20 seconds. This is quantitatively equivalent to ELISA results
requiring 24 to 48 hours. The proposed research will investigate the effects of
bioconjugation of clinically important antibodies onto the nanoshell surface and
examination of multiple Raman dyes for multi-antigen/analyte assays .

The primary commercial application of the technology being developed in this
project is in the $20 billion immunoassay market. The proposed research could
lead to rapid immunoassay devices for ambulances, military and civilian health
agencies, point-of-care analysis and high volume pharmaceutical testing. The
core technology may have additional commercial applications in the area of
biochips, in genomics and proteomics research, and in animal biology