* 0109844
* Diffusion Studies and Defect Spectroscopy with Isotopically Controlled Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2001,10/31/2004
* Eugene Haller, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 10/31/2004
* USD 300,000.00

This individual investigator award will fund research focussing on self- and
dopant atom transport in crystalline elemental and compound semiconductors at
the atomic level. Multilayer structures consisting of different stable isotopes
(e.g., 28Si and 30Si) will be doped such that the equilibrium native defect
concentrations remain undisturbed by the doping process. Secondary ion mass
spectrometry (SIMS) will be used to measure directly and simultaneously the
concentration profiles of the host crystal isotopes and the dopant atoms as a
function of depth after thermal treatment for specific times. Analysis of these
concentration profiles leads to a quantitative understanding of matter transport
properties. Specifically, the charge states and the diffusivity of the native
defects controlling the matter transport will be determined as a function of
temperature and the position of the Fermi level. The knowledge gained from these
studies will be used in the formation and the study of isotopically controlled
semiconductor nanostructures. Neutron transmutation will allow the doping of
these crystalline nano particles at ambient temperature. The basic parameters to
be determined in this research effort will benefit directly the understanding of
the stability of semiconductor nano particles and the advanced modeling of
future generations of semiconductor devices. Graduate and undergraduate students
will be intimately involved in all aspects of this research. %%% The ever
increasing performance of semiconductor devices is, in large part, due to the
reduction in device dimensions and the concomitant possibility to place more
functions on a chip. Introducing the dopant atoms which give semiconductor
devices their functionality, is reaching limits which can only be overcome by a
fundamental study of dopant atom transport at atomic dimensions. Because dopant
atoms move assisted by native defects such as vacancies and/or self-
interstitials, it is crucial for the understanding of the atomic transport to
measure simultaneously the motion of the dopant and of the host lattice atoms.
This can be achieved for the first time through the use of crystalline
multilayer structures consisting of different isotopes of the host semiconductor
crystal. This individual investigator award will support research using
secondary ion mass spectrometry to measure dopant and isotope concentration
profiles after exposure of the semiconductor structures to elevated temperatures
for specific times. The results of these studies will form the basis for the
advanced understanding of both matter transport parameters required for
processing of future semiconductor devices and the stability of semiconductor
nano particles. The graduate and undergraduate students performing this research
will obtain the training required for challenging positions in the semiconductor
industry and in academia. ***

