* 0109094
* Synthesis and Characterization of Organic-Based Molecular Magnetic Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2001,02/28/2005
* Paul Lahti, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Joseph L. Templeton
* 02/28/2005
* USD 354,000.00

The Advanced Materials Program in the Division of Chemistry makes this award to
University of Massachusetts Amherst. With the award, Professor Paul Lahti will
study the synthesis and characterization of new stable radicals that
incorporates hydrogen bonding groups and coordination groups such as
carboxylates, pyridines, imidazoles and fluoroarenes. This interdisciplinary
research will use organic, physical and inorganic chemistry as well as physics
for crystal engineering to induce ferromagnetic spin-spin interactions and
alignments. As part of this award, international collaborations will be carried
out with University of Zaragoza in Spain and Osaka University in Japan to study
molecular magnetism in organic polymers and materials. Training and education of
students in organic synthesis and characterization of novel materials for
molecular magnetic applications will be greatly enhanced by this award.

Hydrogen bonding, partial fluorination, co-crystallization and transition metal
complexation will be used in crystal engineering to induce and enhance
ferromagnetic spin-spin interactions and alignments. This interdisciplinary
study will have a broad impact on different field such as physical and organic
chemistry, and solid state physics. These studies will provide information about
the higher critical temperatures required for ferromagnetic and ferromagnetic
applications. In addition, this award will provide education and training
opportunities to graduate and undergraduate students.