* 0109944
* SGER:  Adaptive Beamforming for Spatial and Temporal Sampled Coherent Aperture Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 04/15/2001,09/30/2003
* Seth Silverstein, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 09/30/2003
* USD 109,256.00

This proposal requests support to develop, test, and optimize a new approach to
adaptive beamfroming in coherent imaging that was recently developed by the PI
[1]. The fundamental approach is based upon the physics of imaging with signals
that are scattered from targets consisting of many randomly distributed
scatters. The resulting alogrithmic methodology which will be refered to as the
scaled Cross-Corelation Function (SCCF) algorithm provides a robust adaptive
auto-focusing phase aberration correction algorithm for digitally sampled
coherent imaging systems. The underlying fundamental ideas forming the basis of
this discovery are far more reaching and should have broad application to
inverse problems in coherent imaging such as coherent optics, Synthetic Aperture
Radar (SAR), ultrasonics, somar, etc. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The initial effort
will be directed towards medical ultrasound. Here extensive simulations will be
performed for 1.5 and 2D dimensional transducer arrays to further develop, test
and optimize the new adaptive beamforming methodolgy. These simulations require
computer power beyond the capabilities of a single CPU workstation running
MATLAB code. Code, either in C++ or Fortran 90, wil be developed to run these
simulations on available multiprocessor super computing
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The full implementation of the new methodology,
which has been shown in limited simulation tests to be substantially more robust
than the Flax-O'Donnell [2,3] and the Rigby [4] beamsum algorithms, is
computationally intensive as it requires the computation of N (N-1)=2 signal
correlations for all focused cell in the ensemble of cells used to compute the
covariance matrix. Here N represents the number of channels. This computation
load is too extensive for today's existing ultrasound machines, although future
generations systems will undoubtedly have these capabilities. The project effort
will involve extensively testing of the suboptimal, less computationally
intensive versions of the SCCF methodology that may be implementable with
today's hardware. The project efforts will also consider conceptual extensions
of the SCCF methodology to microwave, sonar, and optical imaging. Computer
simulation testbeds will be developed for these different modalities for the
purpose of developing and optimizing suitable adaptive algorithms for these
disciplines. Adaptive beamforming in SAR is needed to equalize phase errors
caused by unknown positioning errors of the transmit/receive points (synthetic
elements) in the synthetically generated array. The current techniques such as
the phase gradient algorithm [23] searches for the brighest cell, and then
solves for the aberrant phase using phase gradient based upon the nearest
neighbor cross-correlation functions. This method is susceptible to image
artifacts, persumanly caused by a combination of the instabilities inherent in a
phase gradient method and the errors made using the approximation that the good
phase in the brightest pixel can be neglected.