* 0109462
* SBIR Phase I:  Precision-Biodegradable Microspheres for Sustained-Release of Bioactive Substances
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2001,12/31/2001
* Andres Romero, MicroFab Technologies Inc
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 12/31/2001
* USD 100,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I (SBIR) project will
use ink-jet printing technology to fabricate precision biodegradable
microspheres, 20-200m in diameter, for sustained-release of bioactive
substances. The microspheres will be fabricated at specific diameters, as
determined by the application, thereby producing an excellent platform for
delivery of drugs, hormones, growth factor, DNA vectors / plasmids, cytokines,
and enzymes. For the initial application, the microspheres will incorporate
antineoplastic agents, such as taxol, for the treatment of head and neck cancer.
The physical parameters of the microspheres will be verified with a scanning
electron microscope. Release kinetics profiles of the taxol loaded microspheres
will be determined by in vitro pharmacokinetic modeling. Quantification of
antineoplastic agent release will be performed by High Performance Liquid
Chromatography. Retention of efficacy will be tested by first fabricating the
taxol microspheres and then extracting and testing the antineoplastic agent in a
cell culture model of squamous cell carcinoma. The intact microspheres will also
be tested in a nude mouse model of human squamous cell
carcinoma.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The commercial applications of this project will
be in human therapeutics as an alternative to conventional administration of
those drugs that have a short half-life or that cause considerable systemic
effects.&lt;br/&gt;