* 0109362
* Asymptotic Geometric Analysis:  Matrices, Operators and Noncommutative Phenomena
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2005
* Stanislaw Szarek, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2005
* USD 241,501.00

This project involves continued research on the geometric, probabilistic and
combinatorial aspects of functional analysis and convexity theory, with
particular attention to noncommutative objects and phenomena. While most of the
problems considered in the project have motivation in other fields of
mathematical sciences, they are typically expressed in the language of local or
finite dimensional geometry of Banach spaces and/or analyzed using the methods
prevalent in that area. Sample research topics include: entropy of linear
operators and duality of such entropy, structural properties of high-dimensional
convex bodies, various analytic and geometric questions related to random
matrices, some problems in the "local" operator theory, Gaussian correlation of
convex sets, concentration phenomenon in the noncommutative context and some
geometric questions related to free and quantum information theories.

On an elementary level, Analysis is a study of functions, or relationships
between quantities and the parameters on which they depend. As it happens, very
many naturally appearing relationships are linear or at least convex. Thus, a
good understanding of convex functions and, consequently, of convex sets is a
prerequisite for understanding those relationships. The number of free
parameters in the underlying problem can often be related to the dimension of
sets in the corresponding mathematical model. Since real-life problems usually
do depend on very many parameters, the high-dimensional setting is of particular
interest. This is exactly the domain of Asymptotic Geometric Analysis, which
studies quantitative properties of convex sets as the dimension goes to
infinity. It constitutes a fertile middle ground between the classical
Functional Analysis and the classical Geometry. Functional Analysis is usually
concerned with the infinite-dimensional setting (which frequently is an
idealization of a very large dimension), but it often provides only qualitative
information. On the other hand, Geometry typically yields very precise
information for a specific not-too-large dimension. For the last two decades or
so the asymptotic theory has been quite successful in identifying and exploiting
"approximate" symmetries of various problems that escaped the earlier "too
qualitative" or "too rigid" methods. (This led, among others, to the discovery
of many links to Computer Science.) Finally, to explain our interest in
noncommutativity we point out that it simply reflects the fact that the final
outcome of a process may depend on the order of operations involved; the best
known, but by far not the only manifestation of that principle is quantum
mechanics.