* 0109908
* 2001 CSHL Conference on Eukaryotic mRNA Processing to be held August 22-26, 2001,  Cold Spring Harbor New York
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2002
* David Stewart, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Tornow
* 06/30/2002
* USD 3,000.00

The Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Conference "Eukaryotic mRNA Processing", to
be held August 22 - 26, 2001, will convene scientists studying various aspects
of mRNA processing, transport and turn-over. Major advances have recently been
made in these areas, and the conference will be a timely event for discussing
the latest unpublished results and exchanging ideas, thereby fostering new
developments in this rapidly moving field. The 2001 conference is the third
meeting of this conference, which is held every other year at Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory. The most recent meeting was held on August 25-29, 1999, and
attracted internationally 277 scientists who are actively investigating various
aspects of messenger RNA maturation in eukaryotic cells, using genetic,
biochemical, molecular, and cell biological approaches. As in the previous
meetings, a major focus will be on nuclear events in mRNA maturation,
particularly mRNA splicing and polyadenylation, but the scope will now be
expanded to encompass the impact of the history of an mRNA on its ultimate
biological fate. The meeting format will consist of seven plenary sessions and
three poster sessions. Speakers in the plenary sessions will be selected on the
basis of the submitted abstracts, which will encourage active participation by
junior scientists. The main topics covered will include catalytic mechanisms of
mRNA splicing and 3'-end processing; developmental and cell-type specific
regulation of gene expression by alternative splicing and polyadenylation;
structure and function of snRNP and hnRNP particles; assembly of the processing
machineries; mRNA transport and turnover; and localization and dynamics of RNA
processing reactions.

A messenger RNA (mRNA) is a molecule that carries the information encoded by a
gene in a form that is useable by the cell. Various types of processing of
mRNA's enable cells to regulate their use according to the cells' needs. Proper
processing of mRNA's is essential for their functioning. This meeting will help
disseminate current research findings on this vital topic and will stimulate and
facilitate further advances. This award will enable graduate students,
postdoctoral fellows, and young investigators working in the United States to
attend the meeting.

