* 0109250
* Using Scientific Materials to Compare Disaggregated Versus Holistic Ratings
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* Hal Arkes, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2003
* USD 84,350.00

The National Institutes of Health (NIH), the National Science Foundation (NSF),
and other agencies spend billions of dollars each year evaluating scientific
proposals. Only the most meritorious should receive taxpayer dollars. But how
should these agencies decide which proposals are the most
meritorious?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are two general ways to evaluate
proposals, candidates, strategies, and nearly any other entity. The first way is
called "holistic." Holistic ratings are characterized by a single overall number
which reflects one's opinion. The second way is called "disaggregated."
Disaggregated ratings are characterized by one rating being given to each of
several criteria. The criteria's ratings are then summed or averaged to obtain a
single number, which reflects one's opinion. Some research suggests that
disaggregated ratings are superior to holistic ones. However in the late 1990s,
both NIH and NSF refused to adopt disaggregated ratings in their own proposal
evaluation procedures, because no prior research comparing holistic and
disaggregated ratings used materials such as scientific proposals. The proposed
research will fill that gap. Attendees at a scientific convention will be asked
to rate oral presentations in either a holistic or disaggregated fashion. Two
holistic panels of five persons each and two disaggregated panels of five
persons each will rate every presentation. The correlation between the two
holistic panels' ratings of the presentations will be compared to the
correlation between the two disaggregated panels' ratings of the presentations.
If prior research applies to scientific presentations, then the correlation
between the disaggregated panels' ratings should be higher than the correlation
between the holistic panels' ratings. This will provide evidence that
disaggregated ratings of scientific materials yields evaluations of higher
reliability than do holistic ratings. This result should in turn provide
guidance to the scientific agencies as to one way in which their evaluation
processes might be improved.&lt;br/&gt;