* 0109607
* Dissertation Research: Modern Law, Traditional Marriage: The Relationship between Islamicization and Marriage Practices in Sudan
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Talal Asad, Research Foundation of the City University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 08/31/2002
* USD 12,000.00

0109607&lt;br/&gt;Asad / Jolin&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation project is a study of
the relationship between law and marriage practices in Khartoum, Sudan, focusing
on cases in Islamic law which involve the husband's responsibility to provide
for his wife and her duty to obey him. Through an examination of legal codes,
marriage contracts and archives, observations of courtroom proceedings and
interviews with men and women involved in divorce proceedings in two different
communities, this project will provide answers to two distinct but interrelated
questions: Is the Islamic law promulgated recently in Sudan substantially
different from the secular law previously applied there, or is there a
continuity in modern Sudanese law that distinguishes it from Sudan's' pre-
colonial Islamic past? If the law practiced in Sudan today is distinctively
modern, how has the Islamic legal tradition evolved? The information from this
study will contribute to understanding on law, tradition and the relationship
between religion and the state. The data to be collected will provide
information that can be compared with studies of law and marriage in other
Islamic states, and will address studies of Islamic movements in secular states.
It will advance our understanding of the transformation of traditional into
modern societies, will advance the education of a young social scientists, and
will improve our understanding of this important region of the world.
&lt;br/&gt;