* 0109027
* Landscape Successions and Traces of Oldowan Hominid Land Use at Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2001,12/31/2003
* Charles Peters, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2003
* USD 247,097.00

With primary support from the National Science Foundation, Drs. Robert
Blumenschine, Fidelis Masao, and Charles Peters will lead an international and
multidisciplinary team to continue their long-term research on ancestral human
(hominid) behavior at Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania. Olduvai Gorge preserves among the
world's richest records of the earliest, Oldowan, stone tool industry and
abundant vertebrate fossils in geological deposits dated between 1.9 and 1.6
million years ago. The stone artifacts, and fossil bones bearing butchery marks
made by the stone tools, provide evidence for the diet, foraging tactics and
technological activities of hominids in the lake basin that occupied the Olduvai
area during Oldowan times. These archaeological traces of hominid activity are
distributed patchily within an area of ca. 400 km2, providing an unusual
opportunity to understand the nature of hominid adaptations to different
environmental conditions within the lake basin. When fully developed, this
understanding will allow us to assess the ecological factors that initially
selected for humankind's unusual dependence on technology and carnivory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to accomplish this goal, we require a more
detailed reconstruction of the landscapes occupied by Oldowan hominids in the
prehistoric Olduvai lake basin. The reconstruction will be made by a team with
individual expertise in geochronology, stratigraphy, sedimentology, palynology,
plant phytoliths, marcro-plant fossils, stable isotopic geochemistry and small
mammal taphonomy. Samples will be collected during two seven-week field seasons
for analysis in specialized laboratories in the U.S., Europe, Tanzania, and
South Africa. Landscape reconstructions will focus initially on the alluvial fan
and lake margin settings of the eastern portion of the lake basin, in which we
have already produced a large landscape archaeological sample and diverse
paleoenvironmental indicators. These techniques of landscape reconstruction and
additional archaeological excavations will be extended to the western portion of
paleo-Olduvai Basin after we have established stratigraphic and age controls.
Precise three-dimensional locational control of the archaeological and
paleoenvironmental samples will be maintained using state-of-the-art mapping-
level and survey-level global positioning system and optoelectronic total
station equipment. Our work is designed to understand the ecological contrasts
between the eastern and western portions of the basin in landscapes and hominid
land use related to the repeated catastrophic volcanism that appears to have
affected the eastern basin most severely, and in many cases exclusively.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A small but important portion of NSF support for the
project will be used to help Tanzania continue to develop its facilities and
scientific personnel for archaeological and paleontological research.
Improvements will be made to the laboratory and permanent research camp at
Olduvai Gorge in cooperation with the Tanzanian Antiquities Unit. The storage
capacity for fossil and artifact remains in the laboratory established by the
researchers in Arusha in cooperation with the Tanzania National Museums.
Tanzanian students and field assistants will continue to receive training in
field and laboratory techniques. These efforts are critical to the long-term
research viability and conservation of Olduvai Gorge, for which Tanzanians
require facilities and well-trained staff to lead archaeological research and to
manage archaeological collections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;