* 0109801
* SBIR Phase I: Hypertension Treatment Responder Prediction
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2001,12/31/2001
* Albert Man, PREDICTION SCIENCES, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 12/31/2001
* USD 99,189.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop the
software platform, GeneRx, to incorporate pharmacogenetics and nonlinear
adaptive algorithms toward optimizing anti-hypertension therapy on a patient
specific basis. Preliminary studies on the psychotropic drug, olanzapine, show a
40% patient-by-patient error between predicted starting dose and optimal
therapeutic dose, using a prototype trained only with patient chart information.
This is a significant reduction from the range of starting doses for olanzapine
currently used, which is from 1 to 80 mg/day. Anti-hypertensive drugs, like
psychotropic drugs, have a large window of therapeutic options, including
significant variation in dosages, medications, and combinations of therapies
used. Using patient information and blood samples from a hypertension study done
elsewhere, this Phase I project proposes to apply GeneRx to include genetic data
in the modeling of hypertension treatment in combination with patient chart
data. Genetic data for each patient will be acquired by genotyping DNA from the
blood samples, scored as single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) present or
absent in key hypertension-related genes. GeneRx will take a patient's
individual genetic, demographic, and environmental variables and predict if
initial diuretic medication or initial beta-blocker medication will be
effective. A more efficient method to prescribe effective anti-hypertension
therapy would expedite recovery, minimize side effects, and reduce medical
costs.

The commercial application of this project will be in the field of healthcare
management.