* 0109719
* SBIR Phase I:  Rubbed Protein Substrates for Low Cost Biochips Based on Liquid Crystals
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2001,12/31/2001
* Barbara Israel, PLATYPUS TECHNOLOGIES L L C
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 12/31/2001
* USD 98,041.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will initiate the
development of an entirely new class of biochips, with a particular focus on
biochips designed to track the expression, activation and post-translational
modification of proteins involved in cell signaling processes. These biochips
will be widely applicable to the field of proteomics. The technology is based on
the use of liquid crystals to image biomolecular interactions at structured
surfaces. The goal of this project is to demonstrate that substrates for liquid
crystal-based biochips can be prepared from mechanically rubbed films of protein
that are covalently attached to glass substrates. The important issues of non-
specific adsorption, binding of specific target proteins and stability of rubbed
protein films will be addressed. This approach to fabrication of biochips aims
to leverage the manufacturing knowledge generated over past decades for liquid
crystal display technology and thereby provide low cost biochips with potential
for broad impact.This class of biochip has the potential to be extremely rapid
(minutes), to be highly sensitive (magnitudes more sensitive than gels and
ELISA), to be inexpensive (less than $0.20/determination) and when combined with
microfluidics, to make possible the imaging of large numbers of proteins
simultaneously .

The commercial applications of the technology and the products to be developed
in this project will be in well defined markets, ranging from biotechnology and
pharmaceutical companies to general scientific research laboratories that are
conducting research in cellular signalling pathways.