* 0109201
* Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowship: The effect of home literacy factors on English and Spanish linguistic proficiency and pre-literacy skills for Spanish-speaking children
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Lisa Lopez, Lopez, Lisa M
* Fellowship Award
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 08/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

Literacy development is one of the most important components of a child's
education. Both oral language skills and pre-literacy skills are strong
predictors of young children's future reading ability. The child's home
experiences are considered the foundation for the development of these skills.
The purpose of this postdoctoral research and training project is to determine a
relationship between home literacy factors and the development of language and
literacy skills in young low income Hispanic children, during two major
transitional periods. These transitions include moving from home into a
preschool program followed by moving from preschool into a kindergarten
classroom. The sample will be divided into clusters based on English and Spanish
proficiency levels, determined at the beginning of pre-k. Pre-literacy skills
will be assessed for the entire sample at the beginning and end of pre-k as well
as once during kindergarten. Home visits to collect information on home literacy
factors will occur for a subset of the sample during three time points. Analyses
will be conducted to test the hypotheses that home literacy factors shape
language proficiency, jointly influencing pre-literacy skills between and across
languages. Additionally, changes in home literacy practices during transition
will be investigated.

