* 0109141
* SBIR Phase II:   Battery Design by Using an Electronic Interface (ENTERFACE)
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2004
* Robert Spotnitz, Battery Design Co.
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 05/31/2004
* USD 645,742.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop
prototype software for designing batteries based on user requirements. A user
will specify an objective (such as maximize runtime) and use conditions (such as
the electrical current), and the software determines, based on first
principles(trade mark) models, the optimal design. The Phase I project
successfully yielded, based on optimization of capacity, significant
improvements in runtime for devices such as personal digital assistants (PDAs).
The Phase II project will develop a user-friendly, prototype system that can
handle multiple battery chemistries, simulate abuse testing, and predict battery
life. The software serves as an intermediary between battery developers and
users by capturing expertise from both groups, allowing them to accrue benefits
of simulation. Aligning development cycles of batteries to devices leads to
better products (with concomitant market penetration, share growth, and lower
costs). The software protects confidential information of all parties, creating
opportunities for broader partnerships.

The commercial benefits will come from the development of the software, which
provides a ready outlet for academic research and a rational basis for product
specifications. It is anticipated that if this project is successful it will
open up the battery industry to innovation and will help to create new
partnerships.