* 0109885
* DOCTORAL DISSERTATION IMPROVEMENT GRANT: IDENTITY, RITUAL, AND EXCHANGE ALONG THE LOWER RIO  PUERCO DRAINAGE NEW MEXICO
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2001,10/31/2002
* Keith Kintigh, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2002
* USD 4,610.00

Under the direction of Dr. Keith Kintigh, Ms Suzanne Eckert will collect data
for her doctoral dissertation. She will analyze large series of ceramics
recovered from two archaeological sites, Hummingbird Pueblo and Pottery Mound
located in the lower Rio Puerco drainage of New Mexico. These large multi-room
sites are typical of the late prehistoric period of the region and date to
approximately 1150 to 1400 AD. Within the Southwest the centuries immediately
before Spanish contact are characterized by population movements from multiple
widely dispersed small sites into a more limited number of larger entities. This
of necessity required the development of social mechanisms which integrated
previously distinct social groups. In addition to such local aggregation, long
distance migration which characterized early historic Southwest groups also
occurred in prehistoric times and evidence indicates that people from well
outside the local region also lived at both the Hummingbird Pueblo and Pottery
Mound sites. Ms Eckert wishes to understand how integrating mechanisms
developed, the extent to which distinctive social identities were retained and
the degree and nature of ties beyond the local Rio Puerco region. She will also
examine how these factors changed over time&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address
these questions, she will focus on the large well controlled ceramic material
excavated at both sites. Because they reflect different aspects of social
interaction she will: 1. analyze pottery designs and overt stylistic attributes;
2. examine the technology, such as paste manipulation, by which pottery is
produced; 3. use petrographic analysis to identify and determine source location
of raw materials to determine whether specific pottery types were imported or
locally made; 4. reconstruct vessel size to provide insight into function. Ms
Eckert has developed a model which, through the interplay of these variables,
will allow her to examine such issues as retained ethnicity and trade and the
potential importance of ritual feasting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is
important for several reasons. It will increase understanding of the complex
interactions which characterize social group formation and how these develop
over time. It will provide important data of interest to many archaeologists
about a relatively poorly known region of the Southwest and will also contribute
to training a promising young scientist.&lt;br/&gt;