* 0109610
* Segregation in Multicomponent Macromolecular Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2005
* Monica Olvera, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 06/30/2005
* USD 195,000.00

0109610&lt;br/&gt;Olvera&lt;br/&gt;This theoretical research grant will model
self-organization in certain classes of incompatible multicomponent
macromolecular systems. Analytical and numerical models will be developed to
determine the conformation of self-organized aggregates of charged and/or
multiblock macromolecules. Both, charged chains and multiblock molecules, are
capable of forming highly organized self-assembled structures with specific
functions. This is evident in the biological world, since nucleic acids and most
proteins are charged and/or heterogeneous macromolecules. We will determine the
structure of simpler self-organized macromolecules designed for specific
functions. In particular, we will determine the structure and thermodynamics of
dilute and semidilute charged polymer solutions in various ionic media. Flexible
polyelectrolytes, such as single strand DNA and polysterene sulphonate, for
example, can undergo reversible expanded to compacted transformations where the
size of the chains changes by orders of magnitude with the addition of
multivalent particles of opposite charge. This suggests their application as
sensors. Polyelectrolyte semidilute solutions, on the other hand, form physical
gels in the presence of multivalent particles. We will study the self-
organization of these polyelectrolytes and of other complex multiblock
molecules, such as triblocks of asymmetric crystallizable rigid rods, spacer and
bulky oil chains. These triblock molecules, self-organized into mushroom shaped
nano-aggregates, are the first examples of achiral pure (non-mixture)
longitudinal ferroelectric liquid crystals. Models to explain this organization
will be developed, and the possibility of supramolecular polar order in other
complex chemical structures, including charged coil units, will be determined.
Finally, the project on hydrodynamic flow in multicomponent incompatible fluids,
initiated during the last funding period, will be completed. We will analyze the
effect of flow in ternary fluids where the minority component segregates at
interfaces forming vesicle-like droplets (wetting case) or forming a liquid
droplet at the interfaces (non-wetting case) by using the code developed to
study flow in multicomponent liquids of different viscosities.&lt;br/&gt;%%%
&lt;br/&gt;