* 0109426
* The Economic Foundations of Mayapan
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Marilyn Masson, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2005
* USD 260,525.00

This project will document the political economy of Mayapan, the largest and
most influential city in the Maya realm during the Postclassic period. Although
the influence of this center throughout the Maya world achieves considerable
notoriety in later retrospective mythic/historical accounts, the economic
foundations of this city have never been investigated with empirical
archaeological data. Without this data, the comparative analysis of complex
societies in the pre-capitalist world is severely hindered. Precolumbian Maya
society represents one of the most innovative civilizations of the New World.
Hundreds of Maya city state centers and associated territories extended across
southeast Mexico, Guatemala, Belize, and western Honduras over a period of 2000
years and this society invented the most elaborate set of writing, calendrical,
and astronomical notation found in the Americas.

Does the degree of political centralization and scale of monument building
represent the primary criteria for measuring a civilization's complexity? While
these traits are a characteristic of many early states and empires, maturing
complex societies often culminate in vast geographic tracts of more
decentralized polities that are extensively integrated through mercantile
exchange. The growth in the number of literati and merchant factions in maturing
old world societies and their increase in power often eroded centralized
political institutions in favor of more extensive economic interaction networks
that were heavily focused on long-distance trade.

This pattern points to the second important issue about Postclassic Maya society
that will be addressed from the investigation of Mayapan's economy. This period
has been characterized as a mercantile era, and many decentralized polities
across the Yucatan peninsula relied heavily on long distance maritime trade for
items used in everyday life. This pattern is documented from Spanish Colonial
accounts of Maya trade at the time of European contact, as well as from
archaeological investigations of small sites along the Caribbean coast that
yield evidence of participation in extensive exchange. After the rise of Mayapan
to power in the 13th century A.D., an amplification of local production
activities geared toward this exchange is observed at distant coastal
settlements. An increase in their reliance on long distance household items is
also observed, along with an increase in population, ritual activities, and
political hierarchical development in areas outside of Mayapan's domain. Ritual
and utilitarian artifact and architectural styles at sites throughout the Maya
lowlands resemble those observed at Mayapan.

What is the meaning of these trends? Did the activities of Mayapan's mercantile
elites stimulate this trade network and political development? A greater degree
of economic and ideological integration is inferred across the lowland Maya
world during Mayapan's reign than during the earlier Classic period. While most
of this region was organized into modest political hierarchies, Mayapan stands
out as a striking anomaly for the size and elaboration of its urban settlement.
It is not possible to understand the political economy of the Postclassic period
without evaluating the organization and scale of production and exchange
activities at the great center itself, which was governed by merchant elites.
Investigations planned by this project will document the variation of production
and exchange activities within house groups of different social status across
the city. This work will facilitate core-hinterland comparisons and a full
reconstruction of economic relationships among Postclassic settlements across
the lowlands. These investigations will contribute to the cross-cultural
analysis of the development of civilizations by providing critical data from a
primate city at the nucleus of a New World mercantile society.

This project will document the political economy of Mayapan, the largest and
most influential city in the Maya realm during the Postclassic period. Although
the influence of this center throughout the Maya world achieves considerable
notoriety in later retrospective mythic/historical accounts, the economic
foundations of this city have never been investigated with empirical
archaeological data. Without this data, the comparative analysis of complex
societies in the pre-capitalist world is severely hindered. Precolumbian Maya
society represents one of the most innovative civilizations of the New World.
Hundreds of Maya city state centers and associated territories extended across
southeast Mexico, Guatemala, Belize, and western Honduras over a period of 2000
years and this society invented the most elaborate set of writing, calendrical,
and astronomical notation found in the Americas.

Two issues underscore the importance of reconstructing the economic systems of
production and exchange at Mayapan. First, Postclassic Maya society was long
interpreted by scholars as a "devolved" era, as monumental construction and
hieroglyphic writing was performed on a smaller scale and of less-enduring
materials than in the earlier Classic period. For this reason, little research
has focused on this period. Such a deflation in monumental scale suggests that
political hierarchies collapsed in many portions of the Maya area, although
Mayapan stands out as an important exception.

Does the degree of political centralization and scale of monument building
represent the primary criteria for measuring a civilization's complexity? While
these traits are a characteristic of many early states and empires, maturing
complex societies often culminate in vast geographic tracts of more
decentralized polities that are extensively integrated through mercantile
exchange. The growth in the number of literati and merchant factions in maturing
old world societies and their increase in power often eroded centralized
political institutions in favor of more extensive economic interaction networks
that were heavily focused on long-distance trade.

This pattern points to the second important issue about Postclassic Maya society
that will be addressed from the investigation of Mayapan's economy. This period
has been characterized as a mercantile era, and many decentralized polities
across the Yucatan peninsula relied heavily on long distance maritime trade for
items used in everyday life. This pattern is documented from Spanish Colonial
accounts of Maya trade at the time of European contact, as well as from
archaeological investigations of small sites along the Caribbean coast that
yield evidence of participation in extensive exchange. After the rise of Mayapan
to power in the 13th century A.D., an amplification of local production
activities geared toward this exchange is observed at distant coastal
settlements. An increase in their reliance on long distance household items is
also observed, along with an increase in population, ritual activities, and
political hierarchical development in areas outside of Mayapan's domain. Ritual
and utilitarian artifact and architectural styles at sites throughout the Maya
lowlands resemble those observed at Mayapan.

What is the meaning of these trends? Did the activities of Mayapan's mercantile
elites stimulate this trade network and political development? A greater degree
of economi













