* 0109738
* Graph Theory: Confluences in Molecular Biology and the Physical Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2003
* Andrew Solow, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2003
* USD 9,957.00

Solow&lt;br/&gt;0109738&lt;br/&gt; There are certain confluences involving
graphs in physics,&lt;br/&gt;molecular biology, number theory, Teichmueller
theory, dynamical&lt;br/&gt;systems, fluid dynamics, and 3-manifold invariants,
which in turn&lt;br/&gt;reflect possibly deeper relations among their
theoretical&lt;br/&gt;foundations which have yet to be developed. The
investigators&lt;br/&gt;organize a workshop to consider mathematical structures
with&lt;br/&gt;application to specific problems in fields increasingly
connected&lt;br/&gt;to mathematics, for example the global geometry of
macromolecular&lt;br/&gt;folding, including both proteins and RNA. Recent
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;results allow for a treatment of the full spatial
folding&lt;br/&gt;problem: how do the physico-chemical properties of
macromolecules&lt;br/&gt;determine their spatial folding characteristics?
Roughly,&lt;br/&gt;folding can be modeled as a family of weighted arcs, each
arc&lt;br/&gt;corresponding to a chemical bond, the weight the
Boltzmann&lt;br/&gt;strength of the bond. The graphs formed from combining
these&lt;br/&gt;weighted ars give a space of weghted graphs representing
all&lt;br/&gt;possible foldings. Can an appropriate energy functional be
found&lt;br/&gt;on such a space to study the gradient flow minimizing the
total&lt;br/&gt;energy? Several participants use this approach to
understand&lt;br/&gt;dynamic folding. Related spaces of graphs in biology are
those of&lt;br/&gt;phylogenetic trees formed by speciation. Though the
global&lt;br/&gt;geometry of these spaces is understood, the nature of the
local&lt;br/&gt;geometry is not known; some of the participants study
these&lt;br/&gt;questions. A recent discovery in string theory is the
exotic&lt;br/&gt;structure of an "operad" associated with spaces of graphs.
Some&lt;br/&gt;of the researchers at the workshop investigate these higher
order&lt;br/&gt;structures, and their possible use in biology.&lt;br/&gt; Graph
theory is a branch of mathematics dealing with objects&lt;br/&gt;called graphs.
A graph consists of a set of points or vertices&lt;br/&gt;that are connected by
links or edges. An ordinary map, for&lt;br/&gt;example, is a graph whose
vertices are towns and whose edges are&lt;br/&gt;roads. Although graphs are
abstract objects, they have been used&lt;br/&gt;to represent a wide variety of
real objects or processes. A&lt;br/&gt;familiar use of graphs is to represent
the evolutionary&lt;br/&gt;relationships between a group of organisms -- family
trees. It is&lt;br/&gt;a testimony to their great versatility and usefulness
that graphs&lt;br/&gt;have been used in fields as diverse as biology, economics,
and&lt;br/&gt;computer science. In the field of biotechnology, there has
been&lt;br/&gt;an explosion in the use of graphs to represent the
complex&lt;br/&gt;physical structure of the basic proteins produced by DNA.
This&lt;br/&gt;work has important applications in understanding genetic
diseases&lt;br/&gt;and in designing medicines to cure them. Because methods
based on&lt;br/&gt;graph theory have been developed independently in many
fields, it&lt;br/&gt;is extremely likely that sharing problems and results
between&lt;br/&gt;fields will lead to advances. The purpose of this workshop is
to&lt;br/&gt;bring together mathematicians and biologists working on
problems&lt;br/&gt;involving graph theory to describe and discuss their work in
an&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary setting.&lt;br/&gt;