* 0109020
* FASEB Conference on "Transport ATPases: from Genomics to Mechanism" to be held July 14-19, 2001 in Snowmass, Colorado
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2002
* Peter Pedersen, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 06/30/2002
* USD 2,000.00

The major goal of the FASEB summer research conference entitled "Transport
ATPases: From Genomics to Mechanism" is to bring together about 150 scientists
throughout the world working on transport ATPases in order to share new
information and ideas about this increasingly important area. Specifically, this
conference, via about 50 talks, 100 posters, and both informal and organized
discussions, will disseminate new information about transport ATPases ranging
from genomics to mechanism as implied by the title. The conference includes 7
session with topics as follows: l) Genomics of transport ATPases; 2) P-type
ATPases I (Calcium ATPases); 3) P-type ATPases II (proton, proton/potassium, and
sodium /potassium ATPases); 4) F-type ATPases; 5) V-type ATPases; 6) ABC
transporters; and 7) new, or relatively unique, ATPase-dependent transporters or
channels. This is the only established conference in the world focused entirely
on transport ATPases. The new information that will be discussed at this meeting
is directly relevant to how a wide variety of ions, metabolites, and drugs move
across biological membranes of animals, plants, and bacteria, and how the energy
of ATP hydrolysis is coupled to this movement. This conference will capitalize
on a number of recent achievements including the completion of the sequencing of
the human genome, the resolution of several transport ATPase structures at
atomic resolution, and the discovery of several new transport ATPases of
considerable significance.