* 0109519
* SBIR Phase I:  A Novel, Non-Toxic, General Purpose Oxygen Activated Disinfectant
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2001,12/31/2001
* G. Duncan Hitchens, Lynntech, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 12/31/2001
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project seeks to develop a novel
potent class of biocides for use in the food and medical industries. Over the
last decade, the emergence of pathogenic microbes that resist conventional
treatment, such as antibiotics and chemical disinfectants, has caused great
concern to officials in the food and medical industries. Each year nearly two
million patients contract an infection while&lt;br/&gt;hospitalized. During the
last two decades the rate of nosocomial infections per 1,000 patient days has
increased 36 percent, while in 1995 nosocomial infections cost 4.5 billion
dollars and contributed to more than 88,000 deaths. These "super bugs" have also
reeked havoc in the food industry as foodborne disease causes approximately 76
million illnesses, 325,000 hospitalizations, and 5,000 deaths in the United
States each year. The novel class of biocides proposed in this project will be
generated on-site and on-demand and will contain the beneficial characteristics
of ozone and carboxylic acid or alcohol-based disinfectants while eliminating
their respective weaknesses. This new armamentarium of biocides will meet the
criteria for an ideal disinfectant that can be recommended by public health
officials for food and medical uses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary commercial
applications of this project will be in the food and healthcare industries.