* 0109952
* Power, Craft Production, and Exchange in Southern Mesoamerica
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2003
* Patricia Urban, Kenyon College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2003
* USD 41,739.00

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Patricia Urban,
Edward&lt;br/&gt;Schortman, and Ms. Marne Ausec have worked to describe and
explain changes in&lt;br/&gt;prehistoric power relations within the adjoining
Naco and lower Cacaulapa&lt;br/&gt;valleys, Northwestern Honduras. The basic
question has been, and remains,&lt;br/&gt;"How did a few come to rule the many?"
Answering this deceptively&lt;br/&gt;straightforward query requires examining
the ways in which local rulers&lt;br/&gt;marshaled political and economic forces
within their societies and forged&lt;br/&gt;alliances with peers in neighboring
realms. The hypothesis guiding this&lt;br/&gt;research proposes that: 1. Rulers
exercised dominion by monopolizing local&lt;br/&gt;access to imported
commodities valued and needed by the general populace, as&lt;br/&gt;well as
locally produced items, such as ceramic vessels and stone tools;
2.&lt;br/&gt;Commoners surrendered their labor and loyalty to local notables in
return for&lt;br/&gt;access to these goods; 3. Unwilling to go gently into
dependence, commoners&lt;br/&gt;also used their skills and immediately available
resources to make as many&lt;br/&gt;items for their own use and trade as
possible, thereby minimizing reliance on&lt;br/&gt;local lords; 4. This
competition resulted in a population divided by the&lt;br/&gt;power ndividuals,
families, or factions could wield and the wealth they
&lt;br/&gt;enjoyed.&lt;br/&gt;Work funded by the National Science Foundation in
Naco, from 1990-1996, was&lt;br/&gt;instrumental in establishing this model;
investigations pursued in the lower&lt;br/&gt;Cacaulapa valley from 1999-2000,
also funded by the NSF, are crucial to&lt;br/&gt;testing these ideas. Survey of
7km2 in the lower Cacaulapa drainage&lt;br/&gt;identified a major political
capital, El Coyote, with over 340 prehistoric&lt;br/&gt;structures covering
0.7km2. Excavation of 2,850m2 on and around 40 buildings&lt;br/&gt;at El Coyote
and in five rural sites revealed a history of occupation that&lt;br/&gt;diverged
markedly from the expected. Specifically, emerging data
patterns&lt;br/&gt;suggest that first, El Coyote came to prominence during the
Late Classic&lt;br/&gt;period (AD 600-950; the site was founded as early as
AD200), possibly as an&lt;br/&gt;outpost of its larger Naco Valley contemporary,
La Sierra. Second, rather&lt;br/&gt;than staying within La Sierra's shadow, El
Coyote's rulers established their&lt;br/&gt;independence by AD 1000. Third,
building on their new-found autonomy, lower&lt;br/&gt;Cacaulapa notables went on
to fashion a realm that was growing in size and&lt;br/&gt;complexity, and
acquiring goods from as far away as central Mexico and&lt;br/&gt;Guatemala's
Pacific coast, between AD 1000-1300, when neighboring
societies,&lt;br/&gt;including those in Naco, suffered profound declines.
Assessing these &lt;br/&gt;preliminary interpretations requires further analyses
of ceramics, stone &lt;br/&gt;tools, faunal and floral remains, as well as human
skeletons, to be conducted &lt;br/&gt;with National Science Foundation support
during May through December, 2001. &lt;br/&gt;These studies will focus on: 1.
stylistic studies of artifacts, particularly &lt;br/&gt;ceramics, designed to
help date deposits, and infer the external connections &lt;br/&gt;enjoyed by
lower Cacaulapa residents through time; 2. technological analyses
&lt;br/&gt;aimed at identifying the range and scale of specialized production
activities &lt;br/&gt;in which residents of El Coyote and its hinterland
engaged; 3. functional &lt;br/&gt;studies aimed at reconstructing changes in
patterns of consumption and &lt;br/&gt;production across time and space; 4.
distributional assessments, to test for &lt;br/&gt;artifact patterns suggestive
of wealth and power differences; 5. examination &lt;br/&gt;of skeletal remains
to describe demographic processes as well as stresses (for &lt;br/&gt;example,
dietary deficiencies, injuries, physical changes from movements
&lt;br/&gt;unique to certain occupations) to which lower Cacaulapa populations
were heir.&lt;br/&gt; The planned work is crucial to writing lower Cacaulapa
valley prehistory and &lt;br/&gt;comparing the ways in which political and
economic processes were manipulated &lt;br/&gt;there and within other ancient
states. The research applies not just to &lt;br/&gt;Honduras, or even the
ancient New World, but to any society in which those &lt;br/&gt;seeking power
tried to alter their societies, while others resisted
&lt;br/&gt;domination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;