* 0109957
* Mathematical Models of Moving Boundary Problems in Developmental Biology and Cell Motility
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2005
* Robert Dillon, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael H. Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2005
* USD 82,171.00

Dillon 0109957 The principal investigator and his colleagues develop
mathematical models and computational methods for analyzing the motion of
eucaryotic cilia and flagella, the growth and development of the vertebrate limb
bud and tumor growth. The objective of the cilia modeling is to develop three-
dimensional models for an individual cilium or flagellum and for three-
dimensional arrays of cilia. These models incorporate discrete representations
of the axoneme's ultrastructure including the individual dyneins and
microtubules, as well as a continuous description of the fluid mechanics using
the immersed boundary method. Vertebrate limb development is a widely-used model
system for the study of development. The investigator and his collaborators have
developed a 2D model for vertebrate limb development that describes limb bud
outgrowth and predicts the spatio-temporal distribution of growth factors and
morphogens. The major goals of the limb development modeling are to further
validate the 2D model, to extend it to three dimensions in order to determine
what signals cells see as a function of their position in the three-dimensional
limb bud and developmental history and, from this, to suggest how the signals
can be integrated by cells to produce the observed spatial patterning. Limb
development and tumor growth are moving boundary problems that involve tissue
growth, the transport of growth factors and control of gene activity. The
investigators are developing an immersed boundary model for tumor growth along
with the limb development model. These mathematical models focus on the complex
biological systems involved in cell motility, vertebrate development, and tumor
growth. An important aspect is the development of computational tools for the
study of these processes. Thus, the ciliary model is used for the computational
study of dynein activation mechanisms in cilia and flagella and the multiciliary
model for the study of mucociliary interaction. The vertebrate limb development
model may be used as an aid in interpreting experimental results, to help
identify new experiments, and to test hypotheses that may be difficult to test
experimentally. Because each of the models described in this proposal includes a
fluid-mechanical representation, there is a unifying element in their
mathematical description. The computational methods are based in part on the
immersed boundary method, and the computer codes share many of the major
subroutines. An important aspect of this proposal is the development of parallel
numerical methods for the solution of these problems; advances in this area can
be used in a variety of problems in the field of computational biofluids.