* 0109227
* Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowships and Supporting Activities:  Racial/Ethnic Subjectivity and Grassroots Community Organizing
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2003
* Miguel Gomez, Gomez, Miguel A
* Fellowship Award
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 12/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

The purpose of this post-doctoral fellowship research project is to conduct a
comparative analysis of how African American and Mexican American grassroots
organizations in Austin, Texas struggle against institutional racism manifested
in various levels of the education system. Through an ethnographic approach, the
fellow will conduct a series of interviews with community activists to outline
the political tactics and strategies created by working-class people of color in
order to secure equal access to education. The fellow will also carry out
participant-observation in particular school settings and interview school
officials. He will work within a theoretical framework that illuminates the
impetus for transformative social change to be rooted in social movements that
overtime induce policy responses by the State and institutional change. The
fellow will benefit from further training in policy analysis and institutional
practices, and, for this reason has planned the research project in close
collaboration with several interdisciplinary senior scholars working at the
School of Social Work and the Dana Center at the University of Texas at Austin.
The project can increase minority representation in the social sciences by
enhancing understanding of the mutually productive relationship that can develop
between researchers and activists of color who share similar concerns and
objectives. This project will hopefully not only draw researchers into minority
communities in a collaborative role, but also draw minority activists towards
the university and the important contributions that formal education can make to
community-based struggles.

