* 0109535
* Cooperative Grain Boundary Sliding and Heterogeneities of Grain Boundary Character Distribution in Superplastic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2003
* Hamid Garmestani, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 06/30/2003
* USD 202,342.00

0109535&lt;br/&gt;Garmastani&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is aimed at
greater understanding of fundamental mechanisms of structural superplastic
deformation in different aluminum alloys using the most current digital imaging
and insitu microscopy techniques. It has been established that grain boundary
sliding during micrograin superplasticity operates heterogeneously and in a
cooperative manner. The nature of heterogeneity of cooperative grain boundary
sliding remains unclear. Fundamental understanding of the origin of this
important deformation mode can be fruitful for the improvement of theoretical
models of superplasticity as well as for the design of advanced materials with
improved superplastic properties. The main goals of this study are: (1) to
determine the relationship between cooperative grain boundary sliding and grain
boundary disorientation (mesotexture) in three fine-grained aluminum alloys
(AA7475, AA5083 and D19) that manifest different micro-mechanical behavior; (2)
to study topological modes of grain boundary sliding in these alloys; (3) to
investigate accommodation mechanisms for cooperative grain boundary sliding. To
reach these goals two different micro-characterization techniques are combined
together: Orientation Imaging Microscopy (OIM) in Scanning Electron Microscope
and Nanoscratching with Scanning Probe Microscope. The work is based on insitu
micro-tensile stage capability that will be used in conjunction with real time
OIM analysis to provide important information on the nature of the grain
boundary sliding. The funding for this research provides a first hand exposure
to research in forefront of science and technology to minority students at FAMU-
FSU College of Engineering. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This research develops new
understanding of the mechanisms involved with superplasticity beyond the present
state of the art. The results are applicable for cost savings for metal
fabrication through near net shaping. The research will make significant
contributions to minority education and research.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;