* 0109057
* Adsorption Dynamics on Different Time Scales
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Haskell Taub, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 08/31/2004
* USD 300,000.00

This individual investigator award will provide funds to a senior scientist for
a project investigating the adsorption of polymers from a fluid mixture onto a
solid surface. Whereas considerable progress has been made in understanding the
structure and thermodynamics of such polymer films near interfaces, little is
known of the microscopic dynamics of these systems. This project will
investigate how polymer chains move so as to anchor, diffuse, and eventually
desorb from a solid surface. The particular systems to be studied are linear and
branched alkane molecules of intermediate size (20 and 40 carbon atoms) on
graphite and Ag(111) substrates that serve both as interesting prototype systems
and which contain the principal constituents of commercial lubricants.
Quasielastic neutron scattering will be used to investigate the diffusive motion
within the alkane films on time scales from picoseconds to tens of nanoseconds,
while their static structure will be determined by neutron diffraction and
synchrotron x-ray scattering. These experiments on alkane films will provide
important tests of computer simulations of selective adsorption dynamics and may
ultimately lead to the development of better engine oils. Graduate students will
be trained in fundamental aspects of polymer science, preparing them for careers
in the petroleum and rubber industries as well as at national facilities for
neutron and synchrotron x-ray scattering. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;Processes in
which one chemical component in a fluid mixture preferentially sticks to a solid
surface occur widely in materials science. Of particular interest is the
selective adsorption from solution of long flexible-chain molecules, a process
that is important in technological applications such as lubrication and
adhesion. Whereas considerable progress has been made in understanding their
structure and thermal properties, little is known about motion within these
polymer films at the molecular level. This individual investigator award will
provide funds to a senior scientist for a project investigating this issue. This
project will investigate how polymer chains move so as to anchor, crawl about,
and eventually depart from a solid surface. The particular systems to be studied
are linear and branched alkane molecules of intermediate size (20 and 40 carbon
atoms) on graphite and silver substrates that serve both as interesting
prototype systems and contain the molecules that are the principal constituents
of commercial lubricants. Quasielastic neutron scattering will be used to
investigate the molecular motion within the alkane films on a wide range of time
scales at the atomic level, while positions of the molecules will be determined
by neutron diffraction and synchrotron x-ray scattering. These experiments on
alkane films will provide important tests of computer simulations of selective
adsorption dynamics and may ultimately lead to the development of better engine
oils. Graduate students will be trained in fundamental aspects of polymer
science, preparing them for careers in the petroleum and rubber industries as
well as at national facilities for neutron and synchrotron x-ray scattering.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;