* 0109940
* Regulation of the Heat Shock Response in Yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* James Bonner, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 09/30/2005
* USD 360,000.00

The heat shock response is characterized by the induction of transcription of
genes encoding protein chaperones. Many stresses induce this response, foremost
among them oxygen stresses. Most stresses that activate the heat shock response
cause the unfolding and aggregation of proteins (as well as producing the oxygen
radical, superoxide anion). Hence, the current paradigm suggests that regulation
of the response in eukaryotes occurs through competition for chaperones between
unfolded protein and the Heat Shock Transcription Factor, HSF. However, recent
data indicate that HSF responds to superoxide anion in vitro, and suggest that
superoxide may be critical for the heat shock response in whole cells of yeast,
Drosophila, and humans. Thus, the heat shock response may be more properly
characterized as a response to superoxide, with protein unfolding being a
consequence of the stress but not the direct trigger of HSF activation. The
purpose of this project is to distinguish whether unfolded protein or superoxide
is the functional, in vivo, trigger of the response. The experiments to achieve
this goal include comparing kinetics of production of superoxide and unfolded
protein, examining complexes between chaperones and unfolded protein as well as
chaperones and HSF, examining oxidative damage to protein, and determining the
effects of stresses in yeast cells that are grown anaerobically. The project
will also begin the pursuit of cellular components that counteract the effect of
superoxide via biochemical activity that is dependent on reduced glutathione. To
complement these biochemical approaches, genetic analyses will be performed to
seek genes that, when overexpressed, interact with the heat shock system. In
addition to providing genetic confirmation of the biochemistry, these
experiments will provide an inroad into future
analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;a