* 0109022
* Cheap Sturm-Liouville Spectral Functions
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2006
* Steven Pruess, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2006
* USD 85,000.00

The software package SLEDGE (Sturm-Liouville Estimates Determined by Global
Error-control) is currently the only Sturm- Liouville code that can compute
approximations to the singular spectral function of singular problems having a
simple continuous spectrum. The present research will greatly reduce the amount
of computation required, and thereby the computer time, by making use of a new
real-variable formula for the spectral function. The new formula requires only
that the zeros of the one solution that comes into the expansion formula, and
its quasi-derivative at these zeros, be computed. The new code produced will be
able to handle the following two cases of singular Sturm-Liouville problems
having simple spectrum: (1) left endpoint regular and right endpoint OSC-NONOSC
with finite cut-off value and (2) left endpoint of NONOSC type (Limit Circle or
Limit Point) and a Regular Singular Point and right endpoint OSC-NONOSC with
finite cut-off value.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The continuing development of
software for Sturm-Liouville problems to be done under this project will yield
much more rapid routines for the spectral density functions for Sturm-Liouville
problems that have a continuous spectrum. The existence of such a rapid
computational capability is bound to stimulate activity and aid research in a
wide range of disciplines where such problems arise: (1) Problems of the above
type frequently arise in the Schroedinger wave mechanics which physicists
developed to study the nature of atoms and atomic particles. (2) Similarly, in
the study of more complicated molecules quantum chemists make use of quantum
mechanical theory to describe the nature of energy exchange in molecules. (3) In
the area of ocean dynamics the theory of acoustic waves in the ocean gives rise
for some very interesting applications of Sturm-Liouville problems. (4) Certain
types of nozzles for spraying water involve fluid flow problems for high speed
jets from the nozzle which involve the above type of Sturm-Liouville problem
over a finite range. In addition to a wide variety of applications in
disciplines outside of mathematics, the current research can also be expected to
stimulate the activity of pure and applied mathematicians and theoretical
physicists who work on various related topics such as "Inverse Spectral Theory"
(the attempt to reconstruct potential functions from scattering data),
"Resonance Problems" in quantum theory (the problems of identifying and
modelling positive energy bound states), and "Periodic Potentials and Band
Spectra" which arise in the theory of crystals. The ability to run spectral
function calculations quickly on small to medium size computers will greatly aid
in the teaching and training of mathematicians, physicists and computer
scientists interested in the theoretical and computational aspects of Sturm-
Liouville problems and their applications. &lt;br/&gt;