* 0109070
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Method for Class Switching IgM Secretors to IgG
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2001,12/31/2001
* Yevgenya Akselband, ONE CELL SYSTEMS, INC
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 12/31/2001
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a
rapid and reliable method for inducing, detecting and recovering isotypic switch
variants in hybridoma cell lines using in-vitro switching media, gel microdrop
(GMD) technology and fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS). Antibodies are
widely used in research and clinical applications. Antibodies of the IgM
subclass are generally considered the least useful due to their pentameric
structure and lack of affinity for protein A and protein G which makes
purification and modification of IgM antibodies difficult, and enzymatic
digestion for Fab fragment production almost impossible. Many of the hybridomas
produced, however, are of the IgM subclass. IgM producing hybridomas do,
however, spontaneously switch the subclass of antibody they produce to IgG,
although at very low frequencies. Currently there is no simple method for
controlling class switching and isolating class switch variants. Several
protocols have been developed to effect class switching of IgM producing
hybridomas and to isolate class switch variants, but these procedures are
lengthy and very labor-intensive involving multiple screening cycles. By
providing a rapid method for isolating IgG switch variants, the GMD method will
significantly improve bioprocessing of monoclonal antibodies for research and
therapeutic use.

The commercial application of this project will be in the development of
monoclonal antibody products for research, therapeutic, diagnostic and imaging
purposes.