* 0109942
* A Drosophila Juvenile Hormone Receptor
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2001,01/31/2003
* Thomas Wilson, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 01/31/2003
* USD 216,000.00

The proposed work will investigate the hormonal control of development and
reproduction in insects by probing the molecular action of juvenile hormone (JH)
in the model insect Drosophila melanogaster. Important roles for JH in insects
have been identified, but the action of this hormone remains an enigma because a
JH receptor has not been identified in any insect. A genetic approach identified
the Methoprene-tolerant (Met) gene, and found that the protein that it encodes
(MET) is involved in the action of JH in this insect, probably as a component of
a JH receptor. In the proposed work Met will serve as a focus for understanding
this receptor. The proposed work consists of two objectives: (1) Identification
of the partner protein of MET. Met+ in D. melanogaster is a member of the bHLH-
PAS family of transcriptional regulators. PAS proteins function with a partner
protein in a heterodimeric complex, and there is no reason to believe that MET
is an exception. An understanding of JH binding and reception must include an
identification of the partner protein. One promising candidate is a homologous
gene, Met-like (Met-l), recently cloned from D. melanogaster. Yeast two-hybrid
technology using Met+ as bait will be employed to directly test MET-L as the
partner of MET as well as search for other proteins that interact with MET. In
this proven technology candidate genes are expressed together in yeast cells.
Physical interaction between their gene products will drive transcription of one
or more reporter genes engineered into the yeast strain, allowing ready
visualization of this interaction. Interaction of each protein will be verified
in vitro using antibody to MET. Any novel gene(s) will be identified, possibly
by function, from the D. melanogaster sequence database, for further
characterization. (2) Identification and characterization of the JH binding
protein. Previous binding studies demonstrated that JH III binding affinity was
much poorer in tissue extracts from Met mutants, accounting for the resistance
to methoprene, and implicating MET as a receptor component. To identify the JH-
binding protein and establish its binding characteristics, JH III binding to the
individual proteins and to the MET: PARTNER heterodimeric complex will be
measured. Additionally, a photoaffinity analog of JH III, epoxyfarnesyl
diazoacetate, will be used to photoaffinity label and establish/confirm which
protein is the high-affinity binding protein in the heterodimeric complex.
Results from these studies will define the components of the putative JH
receptor and any associated proteins that physically interact with MET. The JH-
binding protein will also be identified, thus clarifying the poorly understood
molecular basis for JH action. These results will provide the necessary
knowledge and molecular tools for further analysis of transcriptional control by
JH.



