* 0109060
* Dissertation Research: Fostering Family in Rural and Urban Ayacucho
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2003
* Bruce Mannheim, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 06/30/2003
* USD 7,895.00

0109060&lt;br/&gt;Mannheim / Leinaweaver&lt;br/&gt; Many societies in the world
have flexible customs of child-rearing involving adoption and fosterage to match
children to adults in specific situations. This dissertation research by a
cultural anthropology student will investigate the role of adoption and
fosterage in rural and urban highland Peru. Internal migrants from rural to
urban areas who seek education, employment, or safety have used flexible child
rearing methods for years. The Peruvian government has recently begun a system
of regulating and bureaucratizing domestic and international adoptions which
transformed the ability of urban Andeans to develop their kinship networks
through fosterage. Over a period of 12 months of research with Quechua speakers
in the Ayacucho region, the student will study how Andeans respond to the
content of state discourse and policy about kinship ideologies. Through
participant observation, oral history and semi-structured interviews as well as
a survey of 400 residents of the rural community studied, she will examine the
relationship between the content of official, state discourse about proper forms
of family-construction and the understandings and practices of fosterage among
rural community dwellers and internal migrants to the city of Ayacucho. The
general issue to be studied is whether rural models of kinship are amenable to
change when they are confronted with state discourse, or whether models of
kinship are so deeply embedded in Andean life that they resist changes
encouraged by state discourse. This project will produce valuable new knowledge
for those interested in issues surrounding both domestic and international
adoption, will advance our familiarity with this important region of the world,
and will contribute to the training of a young social scientist.