* 0109898
* Collaborative Research:  The Effect of Emotions on Automatic Intergroup Evaluation, Goals, and Behavior
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* David DeSteno, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2002
* USD 32,550.00

This project brings together two areas of research: intergroup cognition and
emotion. The goal is to investigate how social perceivers' emotional states
shape their attitudes of specific social targets in ways outside of their
awareness and control. Although the past two decades have witnessed new and
important insights into psychological processes underlying the form and function
of stereotypes and prejudice, the role of the emotional system in shaping these
phenomena has only recently been explored systematically. For example, research
on the interplay between emotion and social cognition has revealed that specific
emotional states (e.g., anger, sadness, happiness) have distinct effects on
consciously reported beliefs and attitudes toward social groups, but it is
silent about whether and how emotions shape nonconscious expressions of
intergroup perception and behavior. Given that emotions exist to promote
adaptive responses to important environmental challenges, it seems reasonable to
expect that they should influence people's ability to appraise stimuli quickly
and automatically as well as slowly and carefully. Moreover, given that
membership in social groups, and the benefits and conflicts inherent in such
affiliations, play a central role in human life, it is expected that appraisals
of social groups are likely to be influenced by emotional states via both
automatic and controlled mental processes. This project represents an initial
attempt to examine the role of discrete emotions in shaping automatic and
controlled intergroup cognition by examining whether specific negative emotions
(e.g., anger, sadness) produce different effects on automatic intergroup
attitudes and, if so, how such attitudes contrast with self-reported judgments
generated after thoughtful consideration.&lt;br/&gt;