* 0109593
* SBIR Phase I:  Analysis of Combinatorial Bioproducts using Absorbance-Based, Multiplexed CE (Capillary Electrophoresis)
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2001,12/31/2001
* Ho-ming Pang, CombiSep, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 12/31/2001
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I (SBIR) project will develop high
sample throughput methodologies via multiplexed capillary electrophoresis (CE)
for applications in the areas of combinatorial synthesis and proteomics. CE has
the potential to function as a platform for a high- throughput analysis system,
but suffers from unacceptable variations in migration times and injection
volumes. Furthermore, today's multiplexed CE systems use fluorescence detection
only, which without labeling is ineffective in detecting ~90% of all known
compounds. This project proposes the fabrication and validation of a
96-capillary array CE system that employs 1) absorbance-based detection, and 2)
current measurement in each capillary. The former eliminates the need and
problems with fluorescence, significantly expanding the scope of multiplexed CE.
The latter uses the collected current to reduce migration time and injection
volume variability to the levels required for routine analytical work. Success
in Phase I will lead to a Phase II program in which the analysis system will be
optimized and protocols for peptide mapping and combinatorial synthesis will be
developed and standardized.

Potential commercial applications of this project are in markets needing high
throughput screening methods. Target customers for the technology include fine
chemical makers that use combinatorial techniques to develop new catalysts and
other materials, pharmaceutical firms that conduct high-throughput screening in
drug discovery for the development of pharmaceutical compounds, biotechnology
companies that utilize peptide mapping for the rapid fingerprinting of proteins,
and clinical and forensic laboratories that require high-throughput screening to
analyze samples and develop evidence in criminal investigations