* 0109912
* Sulfolipid and Betaine Lipid Head Group Biosynthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Christoph Benning, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 08/31/2004
* USD 330,000.00

Non-phosphorous polar lipids are very abundant in membranes of photosynthetic
organisms. In plants and bacteria, phosphate limitation increases the ratio of
non-phosphorous lipids to phospholipids and a functional substitution of
phospholipids by non-phosphorous lipids has been proposed. Examples are the
sulfolipid sulfoquinovosyldiacylglycerol (SQDG) substituting for
phosphatidylglycerol and the betaine lipid
diacylglycerol-N,N,N-trimethylhomoserine (DGTS) replacing phosphatidylcholine.
The sulfolipid is present in all plants and most photosynthetic bacteria while
betaine lipids are abundant in non-seed plants, bacteria and fungi. The SQDG
head group is a sulfonic acid derivative of glucose (sulfoquinovose). The SQD1
protein of Arabidopsis is the key enzyme involved in the formation of the
sulfolipid head group from UDP-glucose and sulfite. The crystal structure for
the protein has been solved and an in vitro assay is available. These are the
prerequisites for a detailed analysis of the SQD1 reaction mechanism pursued in
this project. Furthermore, the interaction of SQD1 with other proteins and its
true activity in vivo are under investigation. Two genes essential for betaine
lipid biosynthesis in the purple bacterium Rhodobacter sphaeroides have been
isolated. Based on preliminary analysis, one gene, btaA, is proposed to encode
an S-adenosylmethionine:diacylglycerol 3-amino-3-carboxypropyl transferase
catalyzing the first reaction of betaine lipid biosynthesis. The second enzyme
presumably encodes an S-adenosylmethionine:diacylgycerolhomoserine
N-methyltransferase converting diacylglycerol-homoserine to DGTS. Experiments
are underway to test this hypothesis and to understand the reaction mechanism of
these two enzymes in greater detail. The chemical synthesis of sulfonic acids is
well known, giving rise to numerous compounds encountered by humans during daily
life. The sulfolipid of plants is a prominent example of a naturally occurring
sulfonic acid. Carbohydrate and sulfur metabolism meet in the biosynthesis of
sulfolipid. Understanding the biosynthesis of the sulfolipid head group will
provide a model for the de novo formation of sulfonates in nature. This project
focuses on the detailed analysis of the function of the Arabidopsis SQD1 protein
in the test tube and inside the plant chloroplast. This protein is responsible
for the introduction of the sulfonic acid into a precursor of sulfolipid
biosynthesis. Betaine lipid biosynthesis is mediated by two interesting
proteins. The first makes an unusual use of a common metabolite,
S-adenosylmethionine. A similar reaction occurs in the biosynthesis of the
antibiotic nocardicin. Elucidating the basic reaction mechanism of this enzyme
is one of the goals and may provide clues for the synthesis of useful compounds.
The second enzyme methylates the amino group of a lipid substrate. Experiments
planned to understand the mechanism of this enzyme will provide fundamental
insights into the general mechanism of lipid-linked
N-methylation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;