* 0109001
* Nonlinear Dynamics of Electrophysiological Neural Models
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2005
* Eugene Izhikevich, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2005
* USD 150,000.00

Hoppensteadt&lt;br/&gt;0109001&lt;br/&gt; The investigator and his colleague
study the relation&lt;br/&gt;between bifurcations in neural dynamics and
electrophysiological&lt;br/&gt;features of neurons. There is growing
understanding of the role&lt;br/&gt;of bifurcations in neuron dynamics. Indeed,
knowledge of all&lt;br/&gt;bifurcations in a neuron model can explain some
features of&lt;br/&gt;neuron activity, such as the existence of oscillatory
potentials,&lt;br/&gt;synchronization, bursting, excitability, etc., without
knowing&lt;br/&gt;electrophysiological details. However, there is
little&lt;br/&gt;understanding of the relationship between electrophysiology
and&lt;br/&gt;bifurcations in neural dynamics. For example, why do
certain&lt;br/&gt;ionic currents or combinations of them result in an Andronov-
Hopf&lt;br/&gt;bifurcation but not a saddle-node on limit cycle
bifurcation?&lt;br/&gt;(These two types of bifurcations describe
Hodgkin's&lt;br/&gt;classification of excitable neurons.) Over 100 different
kinds&lt;br/&gt;of recognizable bifurcations result in bursting patterns
of&lt;br/&gt;activity. A key question is whether or not one can determine
for&lt;br/&gt;a given type of bursting activity what combinations of
ionic&lt;br/&gt;currents must (or must not) be involved. The investigator and
his&lt;br/&gt;colleague introduce here a notion of minimal
electrophysiological&lt;br/&gt;models classified by voltage gated, second
messenger gated, and&lt;br/&gt;variable Nernst potentials. They map this
classification onto the&lt;br/&gt;existing classification of bifurcation
mechanisms in neuron&lt;br/&gt;dynamics. This yields a deeper understanding of
nonlinear&lt;br/&gt;dynamics of electrophysiological systems.&lt;br/&gt; How
does a brain encode and process information?&lt;br/&gt;Mathematics has played an
important role in studies of this&lt;br/&gt;problem to date by creating methods
for analyzing results&lt;br/&gt;obtained by life science and medical
researchers. There is a&lt;br/&gt;well-developed electrophysiological theory of
how neural tissue&lt;br/&gt;can sustain and propagate electrical activity using
ionic&lt;br/&gt;currents. At the same time there is an emerging
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;theory based on canonical models of bifurcations, which
are&lt;br/&gt;observable changes in a biological preparation in response
to&lt;br/&gt;stimulation. This project brings these two lines of
inquiry&lt;br/&gt;together by classifying dynamical systems
(mathematical&lt;br/&gt;structures) in terms that are consistent with
electrophysiology.&lt;br/&gt;The result is a deeper understanding of nonlinear
phenomena in&lt;br/&gt;electrophysiological systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;