* 0109473
* SBIR/STTR Phase I: New Magnetoelastic Force/Corrosion Sensor for Cable-Stays in Bridges Using Measurement of Anhysteresis Curve
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2001,12/31/2001
* Gui-Zhong Qi, InfraTech Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 12/31/2001
* USD 99,786.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will investigate
the feasibility of direct measurement of live forces in civil infrastructures
such as the cables of cable-stayed bridges, using a new magnetoelastic sensor.
Knowledge of stress conditions is essential for detection of stress changes due
to fatigue, overload, or corrosion and thereby, to prolong a structure's service
life and/or to improve its performance. Knowledge of the stress state is also
valuable for evaluating the structural integrity of cables during and after
natural disasters such as earthquakes or severe winds. These measurements should
be made rapidly and cost-effectively. Conventional sensors, such as strain gages
and accelerometers, do not respond to stress directly. The new magnetoelastic
sensor depends on the magnetic properties of structural steels in a stressed
state. The sensing circuit is external to the steel, simple to install, and
sensitive to in-situ stress with an error less than 3%. A magnetic property
called the anhysteresis curve is measured.

The commercial application of the new magnetoelastic force/corrosion sensor is
in maintenance and repair of cable-stays in bridge structures and numerous other
steel and metal-based infrastructural elements. The end-users include
infrastructure managers, bridge engineers, and officials of transportation
authorities of Federal and local governments.