* 0109999
* Dissertation:  The Impact of Hunting by Chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) on Demography and Behavior of Red Colobus Monkeys (Procolobus badius) in the Kibale National Park, Uganda.
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2002,02/29/2004
* David Watts, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 02/29/2004
* USD 7,300.00

Predation strongly affects primate social evolution, and chimpanzees and red
colobus monkeys have a particularly intriguing predator-prey relationship.
Chimpanzees regularly prey on various mammals, but red colobus are their
preferred prey wherever these two species co-occur. There are extensive data on
hunting frequency and prey offtake for several sites, but few on the impact of
predation on red colobus social structure and population density and on their
responses to chimpanzees. This research will provide data on red colobus
behavioral ecology and the impact of chimpanzee predation on red colobus group
size, group composition, and population density at Ngogo, Kibale National Park,
Uganda. These data will address questions about primate social evolution, red
colobus anti-predation strategies, and the sustainability of predation by
chimpanzee. Ngogo has the largest known chimpanzee community; predation there is
unusually intense and might have caused a long-term decline in the red colobus
population, but demographic data are inadequate to be sure.&lt;br/&gt;Monthly
censuses along four transects, conducted for 21 months, will provide data on
population density and group size and composition. These data, plus previous
census data and data on the chimpanzees, can assess the relationship of group
size to predation pressure and whether the population has declined. Data on
group composition will test hypotheses about anti-predation strategies (e.g.,
infant and juveniles survive better in groups with many adult males). Data on
ecology will examine tradeoffs between foraging efficiency and protection (e.g.,
feeding competition increases with group size, but individuals are safer in
larger groups). Experimental playbacks of chimpanzee vocalizations to red
colobus, plus observations of responses to naturally occurring vocalizations and
to chimpanzee proximity, will address hypotheses about anti-predation
strategies. This research will improve our understanding of how predation
influences primate behavior and of the implications of hunting by chimpanzees
for human evolution.&lt;br/&gt;