* 0109774
* SBIR Phase I:  Polymeric Amplification for Rapid Listeria Monocytogenes Detection
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2001,12/31/2001
* Jean Clarke, NOMADICS, INC
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 12/31/2001
* USD 99,976.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to
demonstrate how a radically new technology can be applied to real-time detection
of food-borne pathogens. Current ready-to-eat food inspection test methods
require 3-6 days due to the need to enrich the pathogenic population to the
point to make them detectable. During this time, the food is stored, awaiting
the results of the tests. This method necessitates additional expenses and
resources to store and track the tested lots and reduces the market shelf-life
by as much as a week. With the proposed approach, detection of pathogens can be
done in real-time as part of the food processing work flow. This is possible
because of an innovative technology involving the use of a proprietary
amplifying polymer that greatly amplifies detection events. This polymer has
been shown to detect subfemtogram masses of inorganic compounds. In the proposed
research, proven methods of identifying Listeria will be coupled to the
amplifying polymer, resulting in a highly sensitive detection mechanism that
will eliminate the need to grow enriched cultures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
immediate commercial application of this project will be for the inspection of
ready-to-eat foods that are subject to Listeria contamination. The low cost and
convenience of the system will be attractive to in-plant quality control
inspectors, government regulators and institutional users. The broader
applications of the basic sensor platform would be for detection of other food
borne pathogens and of pathogenic releases in laboratories and in the general
environment.&lt;br/&gt;