* 0109546
* Conference:  Mechanisms of Eukaryotic Transcription Conference to be held August 29-September 2, 2001, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, New York
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2002
* Nouria Hernandez, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Tornow
* 06/30/2002
* USD 3,000.00

The Mechanisms of Eucaryotic Transcription conference will be an open
international meeting devoted to the most recent advances in the rapidly
evolving field of eucaryotic transcription. This meeting follows six highly
successful meetings on the same topic held in Cold Spring Harbor in 1989, 1991,
1993, 1995, 1997, and 1999, and will be organized according to the same basic
format. The meeting will be open with attendance limited only by the facilities
available to a maximum of 450 participants. Oral presentations will consist of a
combination of invited presentations and selected presentations from submitted
abstracts. This ensures the participation of junior and senior leaders in the
field and the presentation of the most exciting results emerging at the time of
the meeting. The oral presentations will be complemented by poster presentations
in three poster sessions, also selected from submitted abstracts. The areas
covered by the meeting include studies on 1) central components, 2) persistent
effects on the template, 3) chromatin, 4) regulatory complexes I, 5) regulatory
complexes II, 6) activation mechanisms, 7) regulatory pathways, and 8) promoter
opening, clearance and elongation. A number of eucaryotic systems including
mammalian systems, Drosophila, nematode, and yeast will be represented.

Gene transcription, the process by which the information in a gene is converted
into a mobile form for use by the cell, is an essential process in all living
things. This meeting will help disseminate current research findings on this
vital topic and will stimulate and facilitate further advances.