* 0109187
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Participation in Community-Based Timber Projects in Brazil
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2001,12/31/2002
* Marianne Schmink, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 12/31/2002
* USD 3,938.00

This dissertation research by a cultural anthropology student asks how
demographic, cultural, economic and political structures affect which community
members participate in timber development projects in Acre, Brazil. Two projects
involving the descendents of migrant rubber tappers will be studied. The
benefits and costs of various project activities will be assessed, and the role
of individual choice in the project activities will be studied. Multiple sources
of data will be gathered, including informal interviews, observations, censuses,
and formal reports. Hypotheses will be tested relating individual level
variables to project participation. The student and her Brazilian colleagues
will advance our understanding of participatory development by revealing the
structural relations which give rise to variations in community members'
participation in projects, and will illustrate how social actors interpret,
negotiate, resist and transform projects through their involvement. By looking
at the heterogeneous ways in which individuals participate and derive benefits
and costs, the research will move beyond community -level measure and provide
important insight to planners and local development organizations concerns with
promoting participatory timber management. In addition the project advances our
knowledge of this important region of the world, and contributes to the training
of a young social scientist.