* 0109869
* Organization of Novel Marine Bacterial Structures Involved in the Degradation of Agar
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Steven Hutcheson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2005
* USD 329,689.00

DEB-0109869&lt;br/&gt;Ronald M. Weiner&lt;br/&gt;Steven W.
Hutcheson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to Drs. Weiner and
Hutcheson of the University of Maryland to investigate the genetics and cell
biology of insoluble complex carbohydrate (ICP) degradation by an unusual marine
bacterium, Microbulbifer degradans. This bacterium was isolated from the
Chesapeake Bay watershed and has the ability to degrade almost all known
biological polymers, including ICP's, by forming unusual surface structures.
These surface structures appear to be organized consortia of enzymes that allow
the bacterium to efficiently degrade and process these very stable polymers. The
degradation of such ICP's is not governed by conventional enzymology; the most
efficient degradation involves contact with organized consortia of enzymes.
Never before has any single organism been reported to have the capability to
degrade such a broad spectrum of ICP's. It is also the only microorganism shown
to degrade an ICP other than cellulose by this mechanism and the first
observation of this degradative mechanism in an aerobic bacterium. This grant
will fund research to understand what genes and proteins are involved in the
degradation of the ICP, agar, and to determine how the agar-degrading structure
is assembled on the bacterial surface. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge of the
genetics of this system should provide new tools for the processing of complex
carbohydrates into useful byproducts and for bioremediation of the billions of
tons of agricultural, aquacultural and algalcultural waste generated each year
that contain very stable ICP's. In addition, little is known about how the
annual production of the more than 25 billion tons of ICP's produced in the
world's oceans are recycled into the biosphere. Thus, this research has
potential applications in bioremediation and/or processing of waste products and
could provide valuable insights into evolution of bacteria and the ecological
role of this marine bacterium in the carbon cycle. &lt;br/&gt;