* 0109203
* Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowships and Supporting Activities: Nupe Phonology and Phonological Theory
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2003
* Ahmadu Kawu, Kawu, Ahmadu N
* Fellowship Award
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 09/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This post-doctoral research fellowships focuses on the phonology and morphology
of Nupe, a Nupoid language spoken in Central Nigeria and its contribution to
phonological theory. It follows up on research, which examined intralinguistic
variation in different domains of Nupe phonology and morphology and the
implications for Optimality Theory, and it will focus on various aspects of its
phonology and morphology in the light of recent developments in phonological
theory. The research will involve a comprehensive description of the sound
system of Nupe. A reanalysis of various controversial aspects of its phonology
will be undertaken. This includes the distribution of segments, and the best
analysis of /Cwa/ and /Cja/ sequences in such forms as /egwa/ 'hand' and /egja/
`blood'. These sequences are open to different analyses in different languages,
depending on the phonotactics, morphological distribution, and prosodic
considerations of the language in question. The sequences will be experimentally
investigated with a view to determining their true phonetic characteristics in
Nupe. The study of the morphology of the language will be concerned with
describing its word structure, namely the structure of formatives, phonotactics,
prosody, and word formation processes such as nominalization and reduplication
in the context of recent developments in morphological theory. These facets of
its morphology have implications for phonological and morphological theory that
have not been previously explored. This research will explore these
implications, and the dimensions that they bring to linguistic theory. The
phonetic basis of such phonological processes as palatalization, labialization,
nasalization, assimilation, and glide formation will be experimentally
investigated in order to discover their interaction with Nupe prosody. Such
other processes as consonant and vowel elision that interact with the prosody
will be studied, and their implications for phonological theory identified and
explained. The tonal system of Nupe will be studied with particular focus on its
complexities, which include consonant-tone interaction in noun and verb phrases,
and the interaction of tone and intonation. The experimental investigation of
tone will reveal the similarities and differences between Nupe and other tone
languages that have been reported to exhibit intonation features. The aim is to
discover whether all three tone systems have similar intonational systems. The
results of this research will be of interest not only to researchers and
scholars in descriptive and theoretical linguistics, but also to those in
experimental linguistics, computational linguistics, philosophy of language,
psycholinguistics, language acquisition, and cognitive science.