* 0109732
* An Integrated Approach to Funtional Genomics and Bioinformatics in a Model Legume
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2007
* Pedro Mendes, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2007
* USD 3,686,432.00

Medicago truncatula is a close relative of the world's most important forage
legume, alfalfa (Medicago sativa). It is a rich source of natural products, such
as flavonoids, isoflavonoids and triterpenes, which impact its properties as a
forage legume. The main experimental approach of this project is to perturb the
expression of these natural products, and other areas of metabolism, by exposing
cell cultures to biotic and abiotic elicitors. Use of cell suspension cultures
will allow sufficient material to be collected and analyzed in parallel. Three
experimental conditions have been chosen that mimic natural environmental
challenges. The ultimate goal of this project is to generate a truly functional
genomics data set for control and elicited cell cultures. Such data will
encompass expressed sequence information and the associated mRNA, protein and
metabolite identities and concentrations. This project will produce a variety of
data so it becomes imperative to establish integrative models and software to
facilitate relational analysis of the data to each other and to previous
knowledge on sequences and pathways. Software is a facilitator of the discovery
process when it enables the user to "navigate" the biological data in a dynamic
and transparent way, requiring only the most basic computational skills. The
bioinformatics component of this project will: i) construct a relational
database to store all data; ii) construct an expandable analysis server that
will facilitate processing the data with several statistical and numerical
algorithms; and iii) integrate the above components through a web interface. The
data as well as the software will be made available publicly.&lt;br/&gt;The data
generated by this project will be used to construct a quantitative predictive
model of the time courses after elicitation, which is required to interpret the
regulation of the underlying complex biological processes. The data will provide
information about the extent and nature of gene expression reprogramming in
response to biotic and abiotic signals at the transcription, translation and
metabolic levels. There will also be practical applications in directed gene
discovery for important agronomic traits involving plant natural products.
Finally, this project will make available to the scientific community a
bioinformatics system capable of supporting functional genomics ranging from the
transcriptome to the metabolome.&lt;br/&gt;