* 0109394
* Travel Support for Young Scientists to Participate in the Fifth ISHMT-ASME Heat and Mass Transfer Conference (India) and Expand Global Research Perspectives
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2001,11/30/2002
* Vishwanath Prasad, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Richard N. Smith
* 11/30/2002
* USD 10,000.00

International research interaction and exchange of ideas, particularly in the
field of emerging technologies, is in the best interest of United States.
Several NSF-sponsored workshops have concluded that thermal issues play an
important role in many of the critical areas. NSF support is requested to
partially support a team of US young scientists to visit India in January 2002
to participate in the Fifth ISHMT-ASME Heat and Mass Transfer Conference
(Calcutta), jointly sponsored by the Indian Society of Heat and Mass Transfer
and the American Society of Mechanical Engineers. The US scientists will also
visit several premier institutions including the recently-established Indian
Institute of Technology, Guwahati, and Bangladesh. It will help in developing
new ties with Bangladesh Society of Mechanical Engineers. A diversified group of
US researchers including graduate students, post-doctoral fellows, and non-
tenured faculty, will be partially supported from this grant, with special
preference to under-represented groups. The visit will expand research
interactions between the US and Indian scientists, build new contacts, improve
our understanding of thermal science research and education in South Asia, and
provide our young scientists with global perspectives of heat and mass transfer
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;