* 0109385
* SBIR Phase I:  Microencapsulation of a Biocontrol Agent to Improve Control of Soilborne Pathogens
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2001,12/31/2001
* D Cartwright, Agricultural Research Initiatives Inc
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 12/31/2001
* USD 94,207.00

This Small Business Phase Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase I project will
investigate microencapsulation technology, including microencapsulated phase
change materials (microPCMs), to improve biological control of soilborne plant
diseases. Success in this program would enhance the potential of using this
technology in a broad range of biocontrol arenas. Previous research has
demonstrated that microPCM(s) can significantly improve bioherbicide efficacy
through microclimate regulation. Biocontrol organisms for plant diseases have
environmental constraints (moisture and temperature) to practical application.
Additionally, many of these organisms also lack a suitable carrier or delivery
system. The technology proposed in this program will address these constraints
by providing supplemental moisture, supplemental nutrients and temperature
regulation to a viable biocontrol bacterium that is encapsulated inside a
protective capsule. Innovative microencapsulation techniques will combine water,
microPCMs and nutrients in a form that can be delivered to seeds or vegetative
cuttings. The key objectives of the Phase I project are as follows : (1) to
evaluate compatibility of microencapsulated materials, (2) to design and to
fabricate water microcapsules and microPCMs, (3) to encapsulate a test
biocontrol bacterium, and 4) to evaluate these formulations individually or in
combination with the test bacterium to control soilborne diseases in selected
crops.

The commercial applications of this project will be in the huge, multibillion
dollar market for materials needed to control soilborne diseases in flowers and
in crops such as corn, soybeans, cotton, grain sorghum and rice.

