* 0109798
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Silyl Ether Protecting Groups for RNA/DNA Synthesis
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2001,12/31/2001
* Stephen Scaringe, DHARMACON INC
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2001
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Research Phase I project will develop novel silyl protecting
groups for RNA/DNA oligonucleotide synthesis. The synthesis of RNA is more
difficult than DNA because a more complex protection scheme for nucleoside
monomers is required. The 5-silyl-2-orthoester (2-ACE) strategy addresses this
problem and provides RNA of excellent purity and yield. This achievement is
invaluable to RNA scientists studying molecular biology or developing
therapeutic strategies. Such research absolutely requires synthetic
oligonucleotides that often incorporate modifications and are made by no other
means. The goal of this SBIR Phase I proposal is to reduce the cost and increase
the reliability of RNA synthesis so that amidites can be provided to the
scientific community. The new silyl groups to be developed will facilitate
nucleoside monomer preparation by improving selectivity for 5-protection and
will promote economical purification strategies including crystallization.
Nucleosides 5-protected with potential silyl candidates will be examined for
their stability, ease of deprotection during solid phase synthesis, and
amenability to incorporation of chromophores for real-time assays of coupling
efficiency&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The commercial application of this project will
be in the rapidly growing RNA synthesis market to support research endeavors in
molecular biology and drug design.