* 0109997
* Barriers to Counterstereotypical Behavior
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Laurie Rudman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 08/31/2004
* USD 204,983.00

Impression formation theories suggest that stereotypes automatically influence
judgments unless perceivers undergo the cognitive effort of individuating
targets. Targets can promote this process by engaging in actions that disconfirm
the stereotype (i.e., counterstereotypical behaviors). Ideally, these behaviors
should promote positive impressions of targets that accurately reflect
individual attributes rather than category-based judgments. However, current
person perception frameworks do not acknowledge that individuation can have
negative consequences for men and women. Because gender stereotypes are not only
descriptive (reflecting what people "are") but also prescriptive (reflecting
what people "should be"), disconfirming them can lead to sanctions for atypical
behavior. For example, confident and competitive female job applicants are
perceived as highly knowledgeable and qualified for high status positions, but
they are also viewed as socially deficient and unlikable, which results in
hiring discrimination. Similarly, modest and communal men are perceived as
likable, but they are also viewed as less competent and hirable than are
competitive men. Past research has identified numerous ways in which
counterstereotypical men and women are sanctioned. These sanctions represent
social barriers to gender-atypical behaviors and are, therefore, an effective
means by which sex stereotypes are maintained. Moreover, they suggest an
important gap in current thinking about person perception. Several experiments
will examine the processes that underlie these barriers. The mechanisms to be
investigated stem from expectancy-violation, system-justification, and social
comparison theories. Because each of these frameworks relies on involuntary
processes, implicit as well as explicit methods will be employed. In concert,
the research should afford answers to why perceivers sanction atypical targets,
and thereby contribute to the development of a theory of motivated implicit
social cognition. The research will also provide insight into the social
psychological obstacles that prevent people from successfully counteracting
group-based expectancies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;