* 0109933
* Sexual Development in Phytophthora
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Howard Judelson, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 12/31/2005
* USD 370,000.00

This research will elucidate the developmental biology and genetics of mating
and sexual spore development in oomycete fungi, using the plant pathogenic genus
Phytophthora as a model. Oomycetes are an important but understudied group of
lower eukaryotes that include many economically and environmentally significant
pathogens of plants and animals, biocontrol agents of other pathogens, and
saprophytes. In oomycetes as in many other microbes, mating is an important
element of the life cycle. Mating results in the formation of oospores, which
are durable structures that can survive season-to-season to initiate disease
epidemics. The sexual cycle also enables gene flow through populations, yielding
strains that may be more fit due to new combinations of loci determining
pathogenicity, host preference, fungicide resistance, and other traits. Much of
this proposal focuses on P. infestans, which is a devastating plant pathogen
(potato late blight) that causes many billions of dollars of damage per year. It
is also a good model system for studying oomycete biology. P. infestans is
heterothallic, and oospores are normally induced when isolates of different
mating types interact through hormones. In previous work, nine genes induced
during mating were identified. In this project a multidisciplinary approach will
be used to address the function and regulation of such mating-regulated genes.
This will entail identifying additional regulated genes, and for a subset of the
genes studying their structure, cellular localization of their protein products,
and the effects of silencing and forced expression. In addition to studies of P.
infestans, the expression of the genes will also be characterized in a
homothallic species, P. phaseoli, which produces oospores in single culture.
Preliminary studies of novel chemicals secreted during mating will also be
performed. Results from this investigation will have conceptual as well as
practical impacts. A better understanding will be obtained of the diverse
strategies used to direct eukaryotic cell differentiation, to respond to stress,
and to form survival structures. Important issues in development will be
addressed such as cellular communication, self/nonself recognition, cell type
determination, gene regulation, and signal transduction. The basis of
homothallic and heterothallic mating systems will also be illuminated. It is
likely that mating in oomycetes is regulated differently than in other lower
eukaryotes such as ascomycetes and basidiomycetes, which lack taxonomic affinity
to oomycetes. In the long term, if the factors which control mating can be
identified, it might be possible to control plant diseases by manipulating the
life cycles of pathogens using rational mechanism-based inhibitors instead of
environmentally harmful chemicals.