* 0109366
* Cytochrome c  and Apoptosis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Gary Pielak, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 08/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

Cytochrome c and apoptosis activating factor-1 (apaf-1) are the judge
and&lt;br/&gt;jury of mitochondrially-mediated programmed cell death
(apoptosis). Their&lt;br/&gt;interaction seals a cell's fate by launching a
tightly controlled program that ends&lt;br/&gt;in cellular disintegration, and
imbalances in this regulation are associated with&lt;br/&gt;cancer, neurological
diseases, and heart disease. Given the biological and&lt;br/&gt;medical
relevance of this protein-protein reaction, it is surprising that
its&lt;br/&gt;molecular basis is unknown. The broad long-term goal of this
project is to&lt;br/&gt;determine the molecular basis for the interaction
between cytochrome c and&lt;br/&gt;apaf-1. The main hypotheses are: a)
Cytochrome c uses the same cationic&lt;br/&gt;patch to interact with apaf-1 and
its redox partners. b) Apaf-1 uses specific&lt;br/&gt;anionic patches to
interact with cytochrome c.&lt;br/&gt;The specific aims are 1) Quantify apaf-1 /
cytochrome c binding, 2) Identify&lt;br/&gt;probable binding sites on apaf-1 and
cytochrome c, 3) Test the binding sites.&lt;br/&gt;Sedimentation equilibrium
methods will be used to quantify binding, but&lt;br/&gt;alternative methods are
also discussed. Probable binding sites on the WD repeat&lt;br/&gt;domain of
apaf-1 have been identified in modeling studies, and the redox-
partner&lt;br/&gt;binding site on cytochrome c has been known for many years.
The sites&lt;br/&gt;will be tested by using site directed mutagenesis. To ensure
that biologically&lt;br/&gt;significant data are obtained, the variants will
first be assessed by using a quick&lt;br/&gt;and biologically relevant caspase
activation assay. Once the biologically&lt;br/&gt;relevant residues have been
identified, the biophysics of the variants will be&lt;br/&gt;characterized.
Circular dichroism spectropolarimetry will be used to assess
their&lt;br/&gt;integrity. Sedimentation velocity experiments on apaf-1 variants
will be used to&lt;br/&gt;assess their effects on intraprotein interactions.
Sedimentation equilibrium&lt;br/&gt;techniques from aim 1 will be used to
quantify their effects on the free energy&lt;br/&gt;and stoichiometry of complex
formation.