* 0109985
* SBIR Phase II:   Revenue Management in a Dynamic and Stochastic Network Environment
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2003
* Georgia Mourtzinou, DYNAMIC IDEAS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 08/31/2003
* USD 378,101.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop a
state-of-the-art Revenue Management (RM) application suite that addresses
inventory allocation and supply-chain management issues. RM, a new way of
approaching the supply/demand concept, is best understood as the set of actions
leading to revenue maximization by efficiently utilizing the available
perishable resources. In Phase I a software prototype was developed based on
highly optimized inventory allocation algorithms that produced 2-5% revenue
improvements over algorithms used in practice. Phase II has a two-fold
objective: to advance the software and produce a state-of-the-art RM application
suite to be used in the airlines, hospitality and equipment rental industries;
and, to add new components that address supply management decisions
interconnected with the inventory allocation decisions addressed in Phase
I.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RM is currently applied primarily to the airlines and
(to different degrees) to cruise lines, hotels, car rental companies, energy,
entertainment industry and telecommunications. It is widely acknowledged that
companies that neglect to implement RM techniques to maximize their revenue will
risk becoming uncompetitive. Therefore, there is a large potential market for a
flexible state-of-the-art RM suite built on highly sophisticated
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;