* 0109447
* SBIR Phase I:  Ferroelectric Thin Films on Low-Cost Substrates for Wireless Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2001,12/31/2001
* David Stollberg, NGIMAT CO.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2001
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is aimed at
producing high-quality BaxSr1-xTiO3 (BST) films with low dielectric losses and
high tunability on low-cost substrates (sapphire and metal). These ferroelectric
thin films are of great interest for advanced tunable microwave devices that are
being used in, for example, wireless telecommunication hardware. To date, there
are only two process technologies (PLD and MOCVD) that allow depositing BST onto
sapphire and none exists for depositing BST onto metallic substrates. Hence,
there is a compelling technical and commercial need to develop an advanced
deposition process that can overcome these apparent shortcomings. In related
work we have shown that the proprietary Combustion Chemical Vapor Deposition
(CCVD) process can deposit high-quality, epitaxial BST thin films onto a variety
of substrates. The goal of this Phase I program is to demonstrate the capability
of the CCVD process to produce tunable microwave devices using CCVD-grown thin
films of ferroelectric BaxSr1-xTiO3 (BST). The effect of systematically varying
film composition and substrate on thin-film properties will be investigated with
a special focus towards the intended wireless
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The market for low cost, tunable microwave
devices continues to grow every year as the world untethers itself from the
telephone lines. Over $300 million worth wireless handsets were sold this past
year and that number is projected to rise to over $1.5 billion by the year 2005.
Tunable devices also benefit the manufacturers of RF radios, satellite
communication equipment, and active antennas. There is a tremendous interest in
low-cost phase shifters with a price target of approx. $5. This goal is
achievable with the right combination of advanced thin films, low-cost substrate
and high-volume deposition technology.&lt;br/&gt;