* 0109331
* Experimental Studies on Primate Locomotion
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2007
* Jack Stern, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna E. Lambert
* 07/31/2007
* USD 423,291.00

Over the past forty years, many studies have collected empirical data
documenting aspects of the locomotor behavior of anthropoid primates (monkeys
and apes). The results of some of this research have revealed unusual
characteristics of the form of quadrupedalism that primates display. This has in
turn led to suggestions of distinctiveness in primates among mammals in such
things as patterns of neural control of movement. However, based largely on data
for anthropoids only, such conclusions are premature without comparable data on
prosimian primates. The goals of the proposed study, therefore, are to undertake
a set of laboratory based studies concerning aspects of locomotor behavior among
prosimian primates in order to supplement the currently sparse empirical data
base, and allow comparisons with the better-documented locomotor behavior of
anthropoid primates as well as nonprimate mammals. The specific questions this
study will address include documentation of patterns of muscle recruitment
during quadrupedal locomotion in a variety of prosimian species including Lemur
catta, Eulemur. fulvus, and E. rubriventer using the technique of
electromyography (EMG); analysis of issues associated with the mechanics of
leaping, a locomotor behavior that displays its most specialized development
among certain prosimian species such as Propithecus coquereli using force-plate
recordings; and examination of the locomotor behavior of Daubentonia
madagascariensis, the Aye-aye, one of the most enigmatic of prosimian species,
using a combination of motion analysis, EMG and force-plate recordings to
attempt to interpret some of its many unusual postcranial morphological
features. The results of this research will significantly expand our empirical
data base on primate locomotor behavior, permitting legitimate conclusions
regarding what is or isn't characteristic of the Order. Such information will
contribute to a more precise definition of what it means to be a primate, and
what factors were involved in the origins of the Order and its eventual
dispersal and diversification. &lt;br/&gt;