* 0109311
* Dissertation Research: K'iche' Mayan Men's Influences on Maternal and Child Health in Guatemala
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2001,04/30/2003
* Carol Worthman, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 04/30/2003
* USD 9,120.00

0109311&lt;br/&gt;Worthman / Dudgeon&lt;br/&gt; Men in traditional communities
are often thought to be less concerned about maternal health and mortality than
women, the difference stemming from the traditional division of labor of men
focusing outside the household, and women relating more towards inside the
household events. This dissertation research project by an anthropology student
from Emory University will study the role of men in maternal health and
mortality in the Mayan community of Cantel, Guatemala. The study will examine
patterns of men's influences on health in the context of Guatemala's recent
civil violence and subsequent Mayan ethnic activism. The student will
investigate men's beliefs, attitudes, and contributions to household health
status through a combination of health surveys, anthropometric health
indicators, and qualitative interviews and observations. Hypotheses will be
tested relating maternal morbidity and mortality with household access to health
care, maternal health, socioeconomic indicators, ethnic identity, and an array
of men's activities. The results from this study will be valuable correctives to
the relative paucity of information on men's' household health contributions;
will inform health interventions directed towards improving maternal and infant
health; will contribute to the training of a young social scientists, and will
advance our knowledge of this important region of the world. &lt;br/&gt;