* 0109733
* SBIR Phase I:  No Preparation, Flexible, Dry Physiological Recording Electrodes
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2001,12/31/2001
* Frederick Lisy, ORBITAL RESEARCH INC
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 12/31/2001
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
novel and flexible, dry, physiological recording electrode that conforms to non-
planar surfaces and does not require extensive surface preparation or conductive
gels to achieve a low impedance interface with the body. This innovative
electrode will be fabricated inexpensively using microfabrication techniques and
priced competitively with existing commercial electrodes despite its enhanced
performance and features. The proposed dry electrode will provide substantial
improvement in all areas of biomedical research and medicine that involve use of
electro- physiological potentials such as EEG, EMG, EOG, and ECG signals. This
unique electrode is particularly well suited for long-term and multiple
electrode physiological monitoring as compared to existing commercial
electrodes,since multiple electrodes can be easily fabricated into a single
array with a common connector, thereby simplifying application. Additionally, by
providing a low impedance interface with the body, this electrode will eliminate
the need for an electrolytic gel or the need to abrade the skin prior to
applying the electrode. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The commercial applications of
this project will follow directly from the development of the novel electrode
(Orbital Research Dry Physiological Recording Electrode) that seeks to improve
electro-physiological signal quality (for EEGs, EMGs, ECGs or EOGs), eliminates
the harsh side effects and signal deterioration common with existing electrodes
and is competitively priced. By enhancing quality of life at no additional cost,
this biomedical innovation is expected to lead to new long-term monitoring
applications.