* 0109080
* SGER: Distributed Measurements of Temperature, Moisture and Strain for Civil Engineering Applications in Subsurgace Using a Fiber Optic Sensor
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2001,04/30/2003
* Jean Toulouse, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 04/30/2003
* USD 71,920.00

This SGER project is for the development of a new fiber optic sensor assembly
for continuous monitoring of temperature, moisture and strain over extended
subsurface environments, such as road embankments, wall back-fills, and
landfills. At present, the cost of fiber optic sensors is prohibitively
expensive for large-scale applications in such Civil Engineering facilities. The
proposed sensor is based on Stimulated Brillouin Scattering (SBS) phenomenon to
achieve spatially distributed measurements. It meets the necessary requirements
of subsurface monitoring by measuring selected parameters at different locations
with only a single fiber, rendering it a relatively low cost tool.

The objectives of this project are to construct a prototype SBS sensor system,
and evaluate its functions in the laboratory. The system will consist of a
sensing element and a signal generator/analyzer. The signal generator uses a
single laser source that is modulated through an electro-optical modulator to
generate both pump- and probe- lightwaves. The sensing element will be developed
using standard optical fibers. Two bare fibers will be used to measure strain
and temperature as calibrated to their signal variation. For moisture sensing, a
third fiber will be coated intermittently with a hydrogel material along its
length. A semi-rigid and permeable composite polymeric fiber braid jacket will
be used to encase the hydrogel-coated optical fiber. The jacket will provide
protection to the fiber as well as a constrained space for the hydrogel. The
swelling of the hydrogel in a constrained space around the optical fiber is
expected to induce axial strain on the encapsulated fiber. The magnitude of the
axial strain will be dependent upon the degree of swelling and, in turn, to the
degree of available moisture in the surrounding.

Bench-scale laboratory tests will be conducted to test and verify the spatially
distributed sensing capability of the SBS sensors. The strain sensing
experiments will be conducted by using simple pulley and weight assemblies. The
moisture and temperature sensing will be tested using test chambers instrumented
with heating elements, thermocouples, humidifiers and humidity sensors to
control and measure the temperature and humidity. In all the experiments, the
variation of the sensor signals will be mapped to the variation of the actual
measurements. The prototype sensors will be tested and evaluated for coupling
effects of temperature, moisture and strain when all three parameters may induce
signal variation at the same time. The final set of tests will be conducted by
embedding the prototype sensors into a bench-scale test box filled with layers
of soil at different moisture contents, representing near real subsurface
environments.

The proposed sensor assembly and its methodology is envisioned to significantly
advance the state-of-art in monitoring of civil infrastructure systems in the
subsurface with highly precise measurement capability over extended area and
depth at a relatively low cost. This project will involve the collaboration of
investigators with diverse expertise from two institutions. The graduate
students will be exposed to multi-discipline subjects and research experience.