* 0109063
* 2001 International Conference on Strongly Correlated Electron Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2002
* James Allen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 06/30/2002
* USD 40,000.00

The past 20 years have seen the discovery of strongly correlated electron
phenomena such as unconventional superconductivity, exotic non-Fermi liquid
metals, intrinsically inhomogeneous electronic and magnetic phases, and novel
moment configurations in a broad array of seemingly distinct material families.
This award provides support for the International Conference on Strongly
Correlated Electron Systems (SCES 2001), to be held August 6-10,2001 in Ann
Arbor, MI. The conference will explore the most recent experimental and
theoretical developments, in addition there will be overview talks assessing the
current status of the field. The topics for the conference include: heavy
fermions, Kondo physics, and mixed valence, the interplay of superconductivity
and magnetism, non-Fermi liquid phenomena and quantum criticality, correlations
in low dimensional metals, novel f- and d- electron materials, and low carrier
density systems. Additionally, the conference includes emerging topics such as
time resolved spectroscopies of correlated materials, hidden and orbital
ordering, and spin-charge separation. The NSF support will help ensure the
continued vitality of this field by providing financial assistance to graduate
students, postdocs, and young faculty who are attending the conference for the
first time. In addition, it will foster new collaborations among established
researchers from India and Eastern Europe with other conference participants by
providing travel support. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;Strong electron correlations
are the origin of such technologically important phenomena as superconductivity
and magnetism, and can even render a material to be electrically insulating when
it would otherwise be a metal. By its nature, the strongly correlated electron
problem is a central intellectual theme that cuts across traditional physics,
chemistry, and materials science boundaries. The pre-eminent international
conference in this area is Strongly Correlated Electron Systems (SCES), and for
the first time in almost 10 years it will convene in the United States in Ann
Arbor, MI from August 6-10, 2001. It is the aim of this conference to identify
and explore common issues of both experimental and theoretical importance in a
variety of different classes of correlated electron materials. This award
provides support to the conference to help ensure the continued vitality of this
core research field in the United States by supporting the participation of
young scientists - graduate students, postdocs, and new faculty. In addition,
the conference will foster new collaborations between established US scientists
and their counterparts in India and Eastern Europe through a satellite workshop.
This award will also supplement the travel funds of these participants.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;