* 0109961
* Promoting Applications of R&amp;D to Advance State Educational Policymakers
* EDU,DRL
* 04/15/2001,09/30/2001
* Arthur Sheekey, Council of Chief State School Officers
* Standard Grant
* Bernice Anderson
* 09/30/2001
* USD 29,493.00

The State Leadership Center (SLC) is proposing to move forward with its
collaborative venture fto foster the use of research in support of state
policies that aim to advance systemic educational reform and improvement. Dr.
Arthur Sheekey, the principal investigator, will continue to work with a team of
state educational technology directors and a team of highly-qualified
researchers to achieve the goals as stated in the original proposal to the
National Science Foundation (REC 0000509). As a member of the SLC's professional
staff, he will assume responsibility for developing and field-testing an
instrument process for helping states in examining statewide policies for
educational technology and determining whether or not the respective state
poloicies complement and reinforce the state's goals to achieve standards-based
reform and improvement. The principal objectives for the initial phase of this
project (December 1999 - December 2000) involved the identification of a set of
critical related to state educational technology decision-making and to engage a
cadre of researchers that could communicate efrectively on what states need to
know about what works and under what conditions. The product of out efforts to
date is to draft assessment instrument - a CCSSO State Policy Chart, which is
designed to assist teams of state officials to determine the extent to which
state policies and investment strategies for technologies and telecommunications
are strengthening curriculum officers and student achievement. The objective for
the next or upcoming phase of the project, January 2001 - April 2001, will
involve a critique and validation of the proposed Policy Chart [See Attachment]
and assessment process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A long-term goal for this proiect
is to incorporate and customize technology assessments into the
ongoingStandard/Benchmarking reviews that are conducted by the Council's State
Leadership Center. The SLC presently works with all states involved in the
processes of changing and upgrading performance statards for teachers. Recent
reports from states indicate that virtually all states are attempting to broaden
and deepen the disciplanary and pedagogical knowledge of teachers, ijmproving
their ability to deliver more challenging and difficult courses of instruction,
paraticularly, courses in science, mathematics, and technology that are
available to all students. Recent reviews of the states' five-year plans to
attest to the fact that states recognize the integration of technology as a
critical element for achieving higher performance standards. However, state
officials need statewide practices and investment strategies. State policymakers
want to know what legislative mandates, regulatory requirements and
administrative directives are most likely to stimulate institutional reform and
renewal. As advanced telecommunications infrastructures emerge and as virtually
all schools and classrooms are "wired," state officials increasingly are
directing their attention to human issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By concentrating
on policies and programs relating to teachers, the SLC is responding to one of
the most pressing concerns of states: ensuring the quality of the next
generation of classroom teachers. The SLC is committed to helping state
officials to learn and share information on how a state, region or school system
can develop collaborative and constructive relationships with institutions of
higher education or other partners to ensure that teachers will operate
effectively in new and different learning environments. The upcoming State
Educational Technology Leadershipe Conference, as in the past, provides an
excellent opportunity to promote a dialog between key state decision-makers and
a group of researchers that are familiar with states and their role in setting
and achieving higher standards for all students. Several of participants will
work directly the principal invest8igator for this project, and all attendees at
the conference will receive a progress report and plans for moving forward.