* 0109286
* Exchange Rates and Prices
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2005
* Charles Engel, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2005
* USD 251,575.00

This project investigates the behavior of foreign exchange rates and goods
prices. It provides a new time-series analysis of aggregate consumer prices and
exchange rates. It offers a framework for extending "new open-economy
macroeconomic" models. The structure proposed incorporates a local sector for
distribution of imported goods. The project pursues how the volatility of the
exchange rate depends on the amount of "exchange-rate pass-through" to importers
and to consumers, and the elasticity of demand for imported goods by consumers
and the derived elasticity of demand by importer/distributors. There is further
study of the pass-through question, taking into account the separate roles of
consumers and importer/distributors. Finally, empirical measures of pass-through
to consumers and importers, along with other parameters are derived and used to
simulate these new models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first phase of the project
proposes a new way of looking at the "purchasing power parity" puzzle. Real
exchange rates among advanced countries have been very volatile and extremely
persistent since the collapse of Bretton Woods. The extreme volatility of the
real rates seems to point to a monetary or financial force driving the exchange
rate, as opposed to real productivity or taste shocks. But the standard monetary
model requires that real exchange rate persistence be determined by the
persistence of nominal price adjustment. This project breaks the link between
the speed of adjustment of nominal exchange rates and the speed of adjustment of
nominal prices implicit in such models. A new approach is developed that allows
measurement of the speed of adjustment of prices and exchange rates to the
equilibrium levels, using an unobserved components model. The key identifying
assumption of the equilibrium levels is the long-run purchasing power parity
assumption. The approach does not require that the equilibrium levels follow
random walks, nor is it necessary to restrict the correlation of innovations to
the equilibrium component and the transitory
components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The next part of the proposal advances a
framework for extending recent dynamic stochastic general-equilibrium optimizing
models of open economies with sticky nominal prices. It seeks to extend the
analysis, and build models that reconcile the very low levels of exchange-rate
pass-through to consumers with the greater degree of pass-through to import
prices. Under this framework, it should be possible to understand the
implications of empirical results that find expenditure- switching effects of
exchange rates at the producer level, but little expenditure switching in final
goods prices. One disappointment of the new open economy macro literature is its
lack of progress on understanding nominal exchange rate determination. This
project pursues potential avenues for understanding the high degree of nominal
exchange rate volatility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The framework for generalizing
open-economy models takes pass-through parameters and elasticities of demand as
given. The next part of the project develops some ideas for extending the
theoretical literature on pass-through and menu-cost pricing in the context of
models with importer/distributors that are distinct from final buyers. Finally,
the project proposes uses disaggregated data on consumer prices in conjunction
with industry-level price and import data to produce estimates of pass-through
and elasticities that will help calibrate the general equilibrium
models.&lt;br/&gt;