* 0109504
* SBIR Phase I:  Optical Fiber Chloride Sensor for Concrete Structures
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2001,12/31/2001
* Claudio Egalon, INTELLIGENT OPTICAL SYSTEMS, INC
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Crowley
* 12/31/2001
* USD 99,997.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes an
optical fiber sensor to determine concentrations of chloride ions in composite
concrete structures such as buildings and bridges. Maintaining the integrity of
this nation's infrastructure is a major challenge, and the incursion of chloride
ions into concrete is a major cause of structure failure in the U.S. To solve
this problem, Intelligent Optical Systems (IOS) will develop an innovative
distributed intrinsic fiber optic sensor (DIFOS) that will consist of an optical
fiber coated with a cladding that contains an indicator sensitive to chloride
ions. The cladding changes its spectral properties in the presence of chloride,
causing the fiber's optical properties to reflect chloride ion concentration.
The sensor will detect chloride along its entire length, reliably indicating
when structures need repair or replacement. Embedded or retrofit in a concrete
structure, the sensor will detect the incursion of chloride ions and provide
real-time monitoring of chloride diffusion within the structure. This sensor can
be used to prevent structure degradation and potential catastrophic
failures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed system will be a valuable tool for
safeguarding concrete structures. It will be used by civil engineering and
construction companies. This sensor can be embedded into new structures during
fabrication and into old structures that are being repaired. In addition, the
concept of an optical fiber cladding that is sensitive to different analytes can
be extended to smart structures such as aircraft, ships, and buildings to
increase the safety of these structures and to decrease maintenance and
inspection costs.&lt;br/&gt;