* 0109736
* SBIR Phase I:  Trait-Targeted Activation Tagging in Rice
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2001,12/31/2001
* Venkat Bommineni, Exelixis Plant Sciences, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 12/31/2001
* USD 95,416.00

This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop an
innovative approach for targeting genes involved in a specific trait or pathway
using the model cereal plant, rice. Rice is known to have highly conserved
disease resistance signal transduction pathways and yet so far a very few
signaling molecules have been studied. Application of Activation Tagging methods
may allow for the discovery mechanisms involved in disease and other defense-
related signal transduction pathways. Therefore, instead of using the common
activation tagging vector, this project proposes to use a rice chitinase gene
promoter RCH10 and luciferase reporter gene fusion expression cassette in
activation tagging T-DNA binary vector to activate genes in defense-responsive
pathways. This approach will allow the identification of chitinase or chitinase-
related genes or transcription factors in luc+ expressed rice tissues and plants
both at earlier and in later stages of the experiment. The RCH10 gene promoter
is highly inducible during pathogen response both in plants and in cell culture
and therefore, transformed and non-transformed in vitro tissues and leaf discs
can easily be subjected to high throughput screening. This trait-targeted
activation tagging approach will enable collection of only chitinase or
chitinase-related overexpressed phenotypes and thereby expedite the process of
gene isolation and recapitulation of potential disease resistance phenotypes in
rice.

The commercial applications of this project will be in agriculture for screening
and isolation of agronomically important genes in major crops.