* 0109216
* NSF Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowship: Modeling Traditional Southwestern Water Control Technologies: Flood Water and Seepage Fields
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2003
* Steven Dominguez, Dominguez, Steven
* Fellowship Award
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 09/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

Settlement distributions of prehistoric and historic agriculturists in the arid
to semiarid Southwest have changed often over the past 2500 years. Resettlements
may result from associated decreases in precipitation, although the mechanisms
involved are unclear and not all climate changes resulted in resettlement.
Determination of the causes of resettlements will require clarification of
relationships between precipitation changes and productivity of traditional
Southwestern agricultural technologies. This postdoctoral research and training
project will address that problem by physically modeling two of the three types
of agricultural fields responsible for most traditional agricultural production.
Physical modeling will estimate quantities of soil moisture across a landscape
based on precipitation, soil distribution, soil hydrologic parameters and land
form. The field types to be modeled are flood water and seepage fields which are
still in common use by the Hopi of northern Arizona. These fields will provide
excellent test cases for modeling and will allow testing of the hypothesis that
fields will form at the boundaries between individual soil units. Research will
involve mapping of fields, soil units and associated catchments, as well as
recording and analysis of soil hydrologic parameters. A digital model of each
catchment will be constructed and simulations will be run using physical
hydrologic modeling software.