* 0109132
* Support of The Interface Of Three Areas OF Biomedical Science With The Mathematical Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2002
* Michelle Schwalbe, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 05/31/2002
* USD 25,000.00

Weidman&lt;br/&gt;0109132&lt;br/&gt; There are tremendous opportunities to
increase our&lt;br/&gt;understanding of biological and biomedical research
challenges&lt;br/&gt;through mathematical and statistical methods. But it is not
easy&lt;br/&gt;for researchers to collaborate on these topics because of
a&lt;br/&gt;historical gulf that separates the disciplines. In order
to&lt;br/&gt;overcome that gulf, the Board on Mathematical Sciences of
the&lt;br/&gt;National Research Council, in collaboration with the NRC's
Board&lt;br/&gt;on Life Sciences, holds a workshop, involving some 70
people&lt;br/&gt;across the disciplines, to (1) stimulate some new
collaborations&lt;br/&gt;and insights on the spot and (2) provide an
introduction for&lt;br/&gt;mathematical scientists (disseminated via print and
the Internet)&lt;br/&gt;of some mathematical research directions that contribute
to&lt;br/&gt;important ongoing research in the biological and
biomedical&lt;br/&gt;sciences.&lt;br/&gt; At the workshop, leading researchers
in dynamical modeling&lt;br/&gt;of cellular functions, in modeling of disease
states, and in&lt;br/&gt;neuroscience describe some of the major research
challenges in&lt;br/&gt;their fields. They do not limit themselves to
"mathematical"&lt;br/&gt;challenges; workshop discussions are focused on
identifying the&lt;br/&gt;mathematical and statistical research that should be
undertaken&lt;br/&gt;in order to advance the biological and biomedical
research&lt;br/&gt;agendas. By involving a broad range of mathematical
scientists,&lt;br/&gt;the workshop brings a number of different perspectives and
ideas&lt;br/&gt;to bear on the open questions raised by the presentations.
The&lt;br/&gt;aim is to stimulate a wide-ranging discussion and distill out
the&lt;br/&gt;best ideas. The workshop's summary will be widely
disseminated&lt;br/&gt;in order to give many more mathematical scientists the
basic&lt;br/&gt;understanding needed to become engaged in biological
and&lt;br/&gt;biomedical research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;