* 0109038
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Grid Computing for Authentication of Arabic Text
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Tarek El-Ghazawi, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2004
* USD 25,000.00

0109038&lt;br/&gt;Elghazawi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a collaborative project between Dr. Tarek El-Ghazawi, Department of
Computer Science, George Washington University, Washington, DC and Dr. Mohamed
F. Tolba, Department of Computer and Information Sciences, Ain Shams University,
Cairo, Egypt. Dr. Nadia Hegazi of the Electronics Research Institute (ERI) in
Cairo, Egypt will also be involved in the project. The project deals with two
problems simultaneously. One is machine recognition of Arabic handwritten text,
and the other is utilizing distributed systems to solve problems that normally
require massive supercomputing facilities. The goal of the research is to
develop a grid computing methodology to recognize Arabic handwritten text, using
advanced techniques based on neural nets and wavelets. The project will produce
results in Arabic text recognition, and in grid computing, and will provide the
necessary computational resources to solve a complex problem.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The project supports collaboration between two
experienced investigators. El-Ghazawi has extensive experience with high
performance computing which would cover the grid computing aspects of the work.
The Egyptian scientists have experience in various areas, including Arabic text
recognition. The involvement of the ERI is important because of the technical
rescues available at that institute. The success of research will benefit
research on other problems that are computationally intensive. It also will
provide the foundation for practical prototypes for Arabic character recognition
applications, which is a unique problem due to the complexities of the written
Arabic language. The project will include exchange of students between the two
countries. The proposal meets the INT objective of supporting collaborative
research in areas of mutual interest. This project is being supported under the
US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers
in both countries to carry out these cooperative activities.