* 0109241
* Sensitivity of Deterministic Prediction to Model Configuration and Initial Uncertainty
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Jan Paegle, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 08/31/2005
* USD 257,709.00

This research addresses predictability of short to medium range weather
evolution. The first research component will examine reasons for the relatively
small benefits of high resolution limited area models compared to more crudely
resolved global models revealed in the Principal Investigator's (PI) recent
studies. These studies suggest that high resolution limited area models are
superior to more coarse resolution global models at 12 and 24 hours, but lose
their superiority by 36 hours. The PI hypothesizes that this short period of
higher accuracy may be explained by incompatibilities between the global model
and limited area model that are coupled at one-way imposed lateral boundaries of
the latter, and by dynamical inconsistencies between these models particularly
in regard to orographic flow-blocking. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is also
hypothesized that the proximity of the validation domain to the data sparse
Pacific may limit accuracy of all models. The relevance of these hypotheses will
be examined by repeating prior limited area experiments with a global, variable
resolution model that focuses its high-resolution window upon the entire
conterminous United States. This approach allows two-way global interaction
between the highly resolved domain and the rest of the world and will be
validated over both the western and eastern United States.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second portion the research will examine fundamental
predictability issues regarding saturation of uncertainty growth, the spectral
distribution of uncertainty evolution, and possible inferences for the spacing
of atmospheric observations. This work follows recent studies in which initial
state uncertainty is determined from the difference of two separate, equally
credible atmospheric analyses obtained from the United States and European
operational numerical forecast models. Those results indicate that initial state
uncertainty from the larger scales contribute more to error growth than do
uncertainties at the smaller scales. These results, however, were based upon
studies that used relatively coarse simulations of only five days duration that
did not attain uncertainty saturation. The PI will extend these investigations
to higher resolution models with integrations up to two weeks in order to obtain
more complete estimates of saturation of uncertainty, the spectral distribution
of uncertainty evolution, and observation/analysis
requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful completion of this research could
lead to improved weather forecasts and provide guidance for optimal siting of
observational instruments.&lt;br/&gt;