* 0109277
* 'Earth Story' -- A Planning Grant for a Large-format Film
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Irwin Shapiro, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 08/31/2002
* USD 49,902.00

Irwin Shapiro, Director of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, is
conducting a planning phase to develop a large format film about the formation,
evolution and future of the earth. The goal of the film will be to convey to the
public that the Earth is a dynamic body and to examine the current evidence that
scientists have about the origin and possible future of the Earth. By presenting
the current state of knowledge and by demonstrating the dynamic nature of
science, the film will try to disabuse the beliefs held by many of the lay
public that the Earth was created in the Big Bang and is virtually unchanging
and that science is a collection of static facts that followed a series of
"discoveries" by a few brilliant individuals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the
planning phase, Dr. Shapiro, the PI for the grant, will work closely with Bayley
Silleck, Producer of the large format films "Cosmic Voyage" and "Lost Worlds:
Life in the Balance" to develop both the science content and the cinemagraphic
aspects of the film. They will call upon the expertise of a group of advisors
that includes among others: David Baum, Assistant Professor of Biology, Harvard
University; Alastair G. W. Cameron, Donald H. Menzel Research Professor of
Astrophysics, Harvard University; Howard Dimmick, Earth Science Teacher and
Chairman of the Science Department at Stoneham High School; Janice Gobert,
cognitive scientist from Western Michigan University; Jim Head, Professor of
Geological Sciences, Brown University; and Thomas Herring, Department of Earth,
Atmospheric and Planetary Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific activities to be conducted during the
planning phase include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Convene three meetings of the
advisors to develop an outline for the film that will assure that it maintains
substantive science while, at the same time, presenting the subject in a
dynamic, visual, and educationally provocative manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Engage a third party evaluator to conduct focus groups to determine the audience
reaction to the topic of the film.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Form alliances with
museum theaters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Develop a plan for ancillary material to
support the film.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;