* 0109425
* Cryptanalytic study of the AES finalist and its variants
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2001,03/31/2003
* Yvo Desmedt, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Julia Abrahams
* 03/31/2003
* USD 49,974.00

The AES (Advanced Encryption Standard) is to become the new encryption standard.
In contrast with the development of the DES (Data Encryption Standard) and the
EES (Escrow Encryption Standard), the development process of AES was open. The
motivation was that a new scheme would be easily accepted by the community and
widely used by the government and by industry. The outdated DES has been used
extensively to protect industrial secrets, protect financial transactions in the
billions of dollars, to protect internet security, etc. It is therefore expected
that the new AES will also be used in such applications and new ones. After 3
years, a finalist for the AES has recently been chosen. Seeing the critical
application of AES an analysis of the security of the AES finalist before it
becomes a standard is primordial.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;After DES was developed,
scientific research lead to new cryptanalytic techniques (such as Differential
Cryptanalysis and Linear Cryptanalysis). These techniques are currently used
when evaluating new cryptosystems. The goal of the research on the AES finalist
is to develop new cryptanalytic techniques that can be used in the future to
analyze the AES finalist, its variants, and other future cryptographic
algorithms. The ultimate goal is to attempt to break the AES finalist. If this
goal would be unachievable, the new techniques may contribute to the scientific
understanding of the design of secure ciphers.&lt;br/&gt;