* 0109650
* Market Selection; Ethics and Voting Turnout: Theory and Applications
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2001,10/31/2003
* Alvaro Sandroni, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 10/31/2003
* USD 192,345.00

This project is divided into two parts. The objective of the first part is to
develop a theory of market selection, which would determine the methods of
forecasting and information gathering that are conducive to survival in a market
setting. The objective of the second part is to develop a descriptive ethical
theory that may be used to explain contribution to public goods, voting turnout
in large elections and anomalies observed in experiments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the objectives of the theory of market selection is
to examine influential ideas in economics such as that agents with correct
beliefs will drive agents with incorrect beliefs out of the market. The results
obtained so far motivate a study of this claim in different market settings.
They also motivate an analysis of apparently similar (but, in fact, quite
different) ideas such as that better informed agents will drive out of the
market poorly informed agents.&lt;br/&gt;This project also seeks to determine
the forecasting methods that, if employed, would tend to dominate the market.
The idea is to assume that agents use dif-ferent forecasting methods to predict
the probabilities of future events and then determine which agents would
accumulate more wealth. So, instead of evaluating forecasting methods from an
axiomatic viewpoint as usual in econometric theory, it is proposed to determine
which forecasting methods should become predomi-nant in the market in the sense
that the agents who adopted these methods would influence
prices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second part of this proposal constructs a model
of voting turnout in large elections which should provide comparative statics
that are consistent with observation and an explanation of vote choice as a
function of factors like uncertainty about the distribution of preference types,
costs of voting, asymmetric information and electoral rules. In a large
election, voters cannot be motivated solely by the consequences of their vote
because a single vote is not likely to change the outcome of the election. A
motivation for voting may be the desire to act ethically. The project develops
an ethical theory that would explain significant turnout in elections, but that
could also be tested and applied outside the realm of elections. A starting
point for this theory is rule utilitarianism. &lt;br/&gt;