* 0109700
* SBIR Phase I:  Cluster Ion Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization (MALDI) - MS/MS by Coincidence
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2001,12/31/2001
* J. Albert Schultz, IONWERKS, INC
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 12/31/2001
* USD 99,647.00

&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I (SBIR) project will
test Cesium Iodide cluster ion beams as an alternative to lasers for desorbing
bioions from a MALDI ((Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization) matrix. This
offers the possiblity of performing the post source decay tandem mass
spectrometry on an event by event basis, making possible the application of
coincidence techniques which allow specific correlations to be made between
metastable parent ions and their ionic fragments. This is an anaolgy to what has
already been demonstrated for 252Cf fission fragment plasma desorption mass
spectroscopy of bioions. Thus post source decay becomes a true MS/MS technique.
There is also the possiblity that the use of cluster ions can increase the
fragmentation and the degree of metastability of the desorbed bioions compared
to using a laser. If so, the cluster deorption technique may be more suitable
than lasers for imaging biomolecules on materials such as polymers or tissue
slices. This Phase I project proposes to develop a cheap and reliable cluster
ion source for MALDI. At the conclusion of Phase II, this ion source could be
combined with a curve field reflector TOF mass spectrometer and marketed as a
new approach to post source decay measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
commercial applications of this project will be in the area of biomolecular mass
spectrometry.&lt;br/&gt;