* 0109146
* Dissertation Research: Religion and the Politics of Ethnic Identity in Bahia, Brazil
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Liliana Goldin, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 08/31/2002
* USD 8,800.00

0109146 Goldin / Selka Brazilians of African descent can choose among several
religious alternatives to express their faith. These alternatives range from
traditional Catholicism to local variants of a global proselytizing religion
such as Pentecostalism, and include many African-derived religions such as
Candomble. This project involves the dissertation research of a cultural
anthropology student from the University at Albany, SUNY, studying the relation
between religious affiliation and ethnic identity in the state of Bahia, Brazil.
The research will focus on two sites, the rural town of Cachoeira and the nearby
capital city of Salvador, to analyze how Brazilians of African descent construct
their ethnic and religious identities. Using a discourse-centered ethnographic
approach as well as local surveys, the student will focus on twelve religious
organizations: two Pentecostal churches, Catholic devotional associations, and
Candomble centers in each place. Three hundred questionnaires will be
administered to the twelve organizations and an additional 100 will be divided
between local communities in the two locations. The data collected will be used
to assess general demographic information, the ways in which people view and
express their identities as Brazilians of African descent, and their personal
opinions about cultural and racial issues of concern to the Afro-Brazilian
community. The project will show how cultural tourism in Bahia, transnational
movements for racial equality (of which Brazil's Movimento Negro is one
expression), and international religious movements like Pentecostalism affect
Brazilian's ethnic self-identity and perceptions of issues such as racism. The
results should advance our understanding of Brazilian religious culture and the
interaction of race, ethnicity and religious identity, as well as contribute to
the training of a young social scientist and advance our knowledge of this
important region of the world.