* 0109164
* Phases and Dynamics of Disordered Condensed Matter Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* A. Alan Middleton, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 06/30/2005
* USD 225,000.00

0109164&lt;br/&gt;Middleton&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research,
algorithm development, numerical simulations and analyses on a wide range of
models for physical systems with quenched disorder. Sample systems modeled using
classical degrees of freedom include random magnets, such as spin glasses, type-
II superconductors, where magnetic flux is pinned by disorder, and even
biologically important polymers, such as proteins and RNA.
&lt;br/&gt;Optimization algorithms developed over the past few years have
broadened the number of model systems with ground state and equilibrium behavior
that can be studied with precision. In many cases, exact ground states or
partition functions can be found in time polynomial in the system size. The PI
will extend the number of models that can be studied using such algorithms and
develop new algorithms to generate excitations and to study nonequilibrium
behavior. One application will be to determine critical exponents more
accurately, for studying scaling pictures for these models. In addition, recent
work has directly addressed some of the more subtle, qualitative questions about
disordered systems, such as the number of nearly degenerate optima, the nature
of the thermodynamic limit, and the nature of large, lowest energy excitations.
These questions will be studied for more models, with the goal of unifying the
description of disordered models. In addition, the details of thermal activation
and equilibration will be studied using new approaches. These will enable the
study how memory effects take place in disordered magnets.&lt;br/&gt;Collective
transport through quenched disorder occurs in a number of physical systems,
including solid-on-solid friction, fluid flowing over rough surfaces, moving
colloidal crystals in disordered backgrounds, and magnetic flux motion in
superconductors. Some types of motion, e.g., overdamped elastic media driven
through disorder, are well understood. There are many simulations and
experiments for which a general understanding of plastic flow, where particles
can slide by each other and the transport is inhomogeneous, is lacking. The PI
plans to continue to explore a model for such flow. This model, which
interpolates between well understood elastic flow and plastic flow, can be
solved exactly at the mean field level. This model will be extended to more
realistic applications in finite dimensions, where potentially universal
critical behavior, at the transition from hysteretic to non-hysteretic flow, is
amenable to experimental study in a number of systems. The PI will extend work
on charge transport in arrays of metallic dots, which is a useful model for
studying channel-like flow and questions of universality. The research activity
supports the training of students in state of the art computational and
statistical mechanical methods.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
theoretical and computational research, and education on the statistical
mechanics and driven dynamics of extended physical systems with quenched
disorder. The work encompasses a wide range of physical systems, for example,
random magnets, such as spin glasses, type-II superconductors, where magnetic
flux is pinned by disorder, and even biologically important polymers, such as
proteins and RNA. The research is interdisciplinary, involving algorithmic
development that impacts both computer science and computational condensed
matter and materials physics, and activities at the interface between
statistical physics and computational complexity. Specific research activities
lie in two general areas: (1) equilibrium and near equilibrium behavior,
including memory effects, in disordered statistical mechanical systems, and (2)
models for plastic flow, which are applicable to flux flow in superconductors
and to transport in charge density wave materials, and a novel model for charge
transport. The thrust of the work is fundamental, intended to discover universal
properties of, and physical connections among, diverse disordered systems, as
well as, specific physical properties of a large number of models which can be
compared with experiments, many of which involve phenomena important to everyday
uses of materials.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;