* 0109588
* Isomeric Selectivity in Hydrocarbon Radical Reactions and Electronic Nonadiabaticity in Competing Bond Fission and Molecular Elimination Product Channels
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2005
* Laurie Butler, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 06/30/2005
* USD 449,498.00

In this proposal funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Laurie Butler of the University of Chicago will pursue a
program of research to continue studies of electronic effects on photochemical
reaction-product channels. Two sets of experiments are described. The first will
probe the competing unimolecular dissociation channels of isomerically selected
hydrocarbon radicals as a function of internal energy in the radical. The second
set continues prior work to understand the product branching in chemical
reactions in which there is a large required change in electronic wavefunction
in evolving from reactant to one or more of the product channels. The Chemical
Dynamics Beam Line at the Advanced Light Source (ALS) in Berkeley, California
will be used for many of these experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Radical
intermediates play a key role in a wide range of chemical processes, yet even
after decades of research the reactions of many key radical intermediates elude
direct experimental study. The current state of knowledge can be described as
crude. This project addresses the basic principles of chemical reactivity,
identifying the conditions under which different products are produced from a
given reaction. The results of this work will ultimately contribute to
understanding of processes as diverse as combustion, photochemical smog
production, and chemical vapor deposition.&lt;br/&gt;