* 0109895
* Quantitative Insight into Responses of Cell Populations to Radiation Exposure
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Leonid Hanin, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2005
* USD 132,000.00

Hanin&lt;br/&gt;0109895&lt;br/&gt; The goal of the project is to gain a new
quantitative&lt;br/&gt;insight, on the basis of advanced mathematical methods,
into&lt;br/&gt;kinetics of biological processes in irradiated cell
populations.&lt;br/&gt;The investigator formulates and analyzes a
comprehensive&lt;br/&gt;mechanistic mathematical model of these processes,
including&lt;br/&gt;formation of radiation-induced lesions and their
repair,&lt;br/&gt;misrepair and fixation, cell cycling and cell death.
Mathematical&lt;br/&gt;modeling techniques include general age-dependent
branching&lt;br/&gt;stochastic processes, queueing systems, stochastic
simulation,&lt;br/&gt;and modern methods of statistical inference. Parameters of
the&lt;br/&gt;model are estimated from experimental data on kinetics
and&lt;br/&gt;survival of cells in synchronized cultures of S3 HeLa and
V79&lt;br/&gt;cells exposed to continuous irradiation at various dose
rates.&lt;br/&gt;Parameter estimation is based on a comprehensive
stochastic&lt;br/&gt;simulation model of the underlying biological processes and
on&lt;br/&gt;methods of stochastic optimization in the maximum
likelihood&lt;br/&gt;setting. The model is applied to stationary and exponential
cell&lt;br/&gt;cultures that serve as experimental counterparts of tumor
cell&lt;br/&gt;populations at different stages of tumor development.
The&lt;br/&gt;distribution of the number of surviving clonogenic cells at
the&lt;br/&gt;end of radiation exposure, obtained from the
comprehensive&lt;br/&gt;simulation model of cell population kinetics, is
compared with&lt;br/&gt;explicit formulas for this distribution within simpler
birth and&lt;br/&gt;death Markov models that resulted from the preliminary
studies.&lt;br/&gt;The most important biological outcome of this work consists
of&lt;br/&gt;the set of estimates of unobservable model parameters, which
are&lt;br/&gt;interpretable in biologically appealing terms of repair
processes&lt;br/&gt;and cell kinetics. The project has a significant impact
on&lt;br/&gt;evaluation, prediction and optimization of the efficacy
of&lt;br/&gt;radiation cancer treatment and associated methods of cure
rate&lt;br/&gt;estimation.&lt;br/&gt; A remarkable progress in cell biology and
radiation biology&lt;br/&gt;since the 1920's has resulted in a prodigious amount
of&lt;br/&gt;experimental data comprising all aspects of cell responses
to&lt;br/&gt;ionizing radiation. These data represent an invaluable source
of&lt;br/&gt;information for furthering our knowledge about
intracellular&lt;br/&gt;processes in normal and irradiated cells. However, to a
large&lt;br/&gt;extent, this gold mine of experimental findings amassed
over&lt;br/&gt;years remains unclaimed. The investigator and his
collaborators&lt;br/&gt;attempt to understand and describe mathematically the
most basic&lt;br/&gt;processes in normal and irradiated cells. This is
accomplished on&lt;br/&gt;the basis of advanced mathematical, statistical and
computational&lt;br/&gt;methods applied to the original experimental data
describing&lt;br/&gt;responses of several cell lines to radiation exposure at
variable&lt;br/&gt;dose rate. The project was triggered by and has far-
reaching&lt;br/&gt;implications for cancer radiotherapy.&lt;br/&gt;