* 0109262
* Dissertation Research: Made in America: Globalization and the Construction of a Multi-Cultural Religious Community
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2002
* Augutus Norton, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 06/30/2002
* USD 11,969.00

Norton / Walters The image of Islam in contemporary American media is negative,
portraying a monolithic, fundamentalist, fanatical ideology hostile to ideas of
adaptation and change. However, at this time Muslim immigrants from diverse
cultures are creating multi-cultural ethnic, national and linguistic religious
communities in the US. The Muslim religion is this nation's fastest growing
religion. This dissertation research project by a student of cultural
anthropology studies the process of creating a religious community where
adaptation and similarities of belief and custom are emphasized over significant
differences. The research will be conducted in the Islamic Society of Vermont,
in northern Vermont, where immigrants from the Middle East, Bosnia-Herzegovina,
India/Pakistan, Southeast Asia, North America and elsewhere are creating a
Muslim center. Using ethnographic techniques of participant observation and
structured in-depth interviews the student will examine how immigrants manage
their significant internal differences in order to construct a cohesive
religious community. Focusing on religious law, parenting strategies, community
leadership and conflict management, the student will examine how a uniquely
American vision of Islam is being created. The results of the study will be
valuable to society at large, as a corrective to the prevalent image. In
addition the new information will be valuable to policy makers dealing with
immigration from Muslim regions. The project also contributes to the training of
a young social scientist.