* 0110497
* Geographies of Occupational Attainment
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,09/30/2004
* James Harrington, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory H. Chu
* 09/30/2004
* USD 129,986.00

How a worker comes to claim a particular occupation in a particular place, or
how a place comes to contain a cadre of workers with a particular occupation,
are vitally important economic and social questions. This research takes an
institutional approach to the individual's gaining and using occupation-specific
skills and to the local availability of occupation-specific labor. The objective
of the research project is to compare the sources (by type and location) of
computer programmers' training across regions, industrial sectors, and personal
characteristics. The research will first use secondary data such as censuses to
investigate the relationships between rates of occupational attainment and
various institutional factors for all Metropolitan Statistical Areas in the
United States. Case studies of five mid-sized metropolitan areas with a high
proportion of programmers will be made via phone and in-person interviews with
key employers and institutional leaders. The key questions to be investigated
are: sex and race; current employment arrangement and tenure; approximate age
and location at which the individual gained original training as a programmer;
motivations for occupational and locational choices; earlier careers and
parents' occupations; and incidence and sponsorship of further training. The
information from both types of interviews will be used to relate local
characteristics of labor-force size, employer size, employment practices, and
growth rates to the locations and ways in which programmers gained and
maintained their skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For anyone in the labor force,
one's occupation and one's location largely determine one's employment outcomes.
For the region, the local availability of trained workers is key to local
economic well-being. This project provides an understanding of the general
process between location and occupational attainment. In addition, the proposed
project selects one particular occupation, computer programmer, that has been
the object of much interest and debate. The contribution of the proposed
research lies in its combination of: recognition of institutional influences on
individual behavior and regional outcomes; attention to training and migration
decisions; attention to the paths of women and minorities within an occupation
dominated by white men; and secondary data for all metropolitan regions as well
as exploratory, interview data in five specific regions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;