* 0110400
* Mechanism and Macromolecular Organization in Photosynthetic Reaction Centers and Membranes
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2001,01/31/2005
* Steven Boxer, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/2005
* USD 447,500.00

This proposal requests continued support for biophysical studies of the
mechanism of the charge separation and recombination steps in photosynthetic
reaction centers (RCs) and the higher-order organization of photosynthetic
membranes. An important part of our work involves the development of new
experimental and theoretical methods that can have a broad impact in other areas
of science and biotechnology. Understanding the mechanisms of energy and
electron transfer in photosynthetic systems has proven to be an exceptionally
fertile area for such developments and for training scientists. In this project,
research will be performed in the following specific areas that relate to the
mechanism of charge separation in the reaction center: (i) determination of the
fundamental parameters that control alternative electron transfer pathways
initiated by excitation of the monomeric bacteriochlorophyll on the functional
side using resonance Stark spectroscopy; (ii) application of the resonance Stark
method to other pathways created by engineering the RC; (iii) measurements of
the activation energy and magnetic field dependence of the decay of the special
pair triplet state to determine the energetics of the primary charge separation
in RC mutants; (iv) attachment of spectator dye molecules near the functional
components to probe the dynamics of charge motion during the first electron
transfer step(s); (v) organization of components in the photosynthetic membrane
in supported bilayers. By integrating this range of approaches, our
understanding of the mechanism of initial electron transfer and the related
phenomenon of unidirectional electron transfer can be advanced and brought into
the larger context of structure-function relationships in complex biological
assemblies.