* 0110834
* The Roles of eIF4G and Associated Factors in Ribosomal Attachment and Scanning During Translation Initiation
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* William McAllister, SUNY Health Science Center at Brooklyn
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 08/31/2004
* USD 270,000.00

Eukaryotic initiation factor (eIF) 4G coordinates ribosomal binding and
subsequent ribosomal&lt;br/&gt;scanning on the 5'NTR of an mRNA by binding to
factors that are required for both steps. eIF4G is a&lt;br/&gt;subunit of eIF4F,
which also has eIF4E (cap-binding protein) and eIF4A (helicase) subunits. This
project&lt;br/&gt;will characterize the roles of eIF4G and associated factors in
these two stages of initiation using mRNAs&lt;br/&gt;that depend on either the
5'-terminal cap or an internal ribosomal entry site (IRES) for
ribosomal&lt;br/&gt;binding. Loading of the 40S ribosomal subunit onto mRNA may
involve local unwinding of mRNA by&lt;br/&gt;bound eIF4F and interaction between
eIF4G and ribosome-associated eIF3. The roles of eIF4G's&lt;br/&gt;interactions
with RNA, eIF4A and eIF3 in ribosomal attachment and scanning will be
characterized by&lt;br/&gt;integrating biochemical assays (such as eIF4G's
influence on eIF4A's helicase activity) with&lt;br/&gt;reconstitution of
initiation on model mRNAs. The role of Ded1p, another RNA helicase that has
been&lt;br/&gt;implicated in scanning will also be characterized. Initiation on
the encephalomyocarditis virus (EMCV)&lt;br/&gt;IRES requires specific binding
by eIF4G/4A. The mechanisms of recognition of this IRES by eIF4G/4A,
of&lt;br/&gt;enhancement of binding of eIF4G/4A to related IRESs by specific
IRES trans-acting factors, and of&lt;br/&gt;promotion of ribosomal attachment by
the eIF4G/4A/IRES complex will be determined. The cap-binding&lt;br/&gt;activity
of eIF4F is down-regulated during mitosis and apoptosis when some cellular IRES-
containing&lt;br/&gt;mRNAs remain active. The hypothesis that these IRESs
resemble EMCV in interacting with eIF4G/4A to&lt;br/&gt;promote ribosomal
binding when eIF4E is inactive will be tested. These studies will provide
insights&lt;br/&gt;into mechanisms for selective translation of specific mRNAs.