* 0110399
* SBIR Phase II:  Fabrication of Photonic Band Gap Structures Embedded in Low Temperature Co-fired Ceramic for Millimeter Wave Applications
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2004
* Danny Eliyahu, WAVEBAND CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 09/30/2004
* USD 761,828.00

&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will
develop new materials engineered for microwave electronics. As microwave
applications expand, including portable wireless devices, and as digital
integrated circuit speeds and clock rates increase to the millimeter wave (MMW)
range, the need arises for low-loss elements of microwave/MMW interconnects
(EMIs) with properties uniform over a broad range of frequencies and
environmental conditions. A new technique is now sought to embed EMIs based on
Photonic Band Gap Structures (PBSs) in ceramic substrates at an early stage of
fabrication. PBSs will reduce radiative losses in devices fabricated using the
Low Temperature Co-fired Ceramic On Metal technique by preventing radiation
leakage and by minimizing undesired scattering. The result will be improved
performance, without increasing manufacturing costs. Phase I designed,
fabricated, and tested PBS-based EMIs, wherein, cross waveguides with low cross
talk were successfully tested. Phase II will automate the design and production
of devices that include PBS EMIs. The technology will be demonstrated through
the design and fabrication of a MMW antenna based on PBS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
PBS will lead to quite new applications: frequency-band controlled filters,
perfect channel-drop filters, point-defect resonant cavities, line-defect
ninety-degree waveguide bends, waveguide intersections with low crosstalk, and
others. The new technique will be employed in high-volume production items for
applications such as automotive radars, avionics, as well as in a variety of
broadband wireless communication devices.&lt;br/&gt;