* 0110506
* QEIB: A Comprehensive Theory of Mating Systems
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Suzanne Alonzo, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Jerry  O. Wolff
* 08/31/2003
* USD 84,788.00

A general theory of reproductive behavior is imperative both to our basic
understanding of evolutionary processes as well as our ability to manage
threatened species. Although recent developments have greatly increased our
understanding of mating systems, it has left us without a comprehensive theory
for predicting and explaining general patterns of reproduction. A variety of
important biological factors have been treated in isolation from one another,
although we know that each one is critical to our understanding of evolution. A
more comprehensive approach is necessary if we wish to explain such varied
observations as females mating with multiple males in the absence of sperm
limitation and a skewed mating distribution where no known male or territory
trait explains success. Interactions within and between the sexes, spatial and
temporal dynamics of reproduction, environmental variation are all be essential
components of a comprehensive theory of mating systems. Although each of these
elements has been addressed to some degree in isolation, we have not examined
the connections between each of these factors to the evolution of specific
mating behaviors. For example, resource dispersion and variability in social
conditions will affect interactions between individuals. Concurrently
stochasticity in critical resources will influence both the interactions between
individuals as well as their spatial dispersion. Furthermore, although we are
interested in population-level consequences, interactions only occur between
individuals that encounter one another in space and time. To create a general
theory, we need a framework which allows us to examine multiple interactions
within and between the sexes as well as consider the importance of environmental
conditions and spatial dynamics. The complexity of these interactions demand
mathematical modeling. Dynamic programming games make it possible to consider
the effect of an individual's social and ecological environment on reproductive
behavior. I propose a new approach which makes it possible to simultaneously
study a variety of phenomena that interact to create mating systems and
determine reproductive strategies. This method will be used to study general
models examining the interactions between stochasticity, space, and conflict on
specific mating behaviors. Yet, theory is not better simply because it is more
complex. Instead, the approach I am advocating will also be verified by its
ability to increase our understanding of observed variation. Their ability to
explain observed behavior will not only increase our understanding of a single
species but also have general implications for our understanding of mating
systems.