* 0110762
* Methanosarcina Genomics
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2008
* James Ferry, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 06/30/2008
* USD 1,402,417.00

This project will exploit the recently completed genomic sequence of
Methanosarcina acetivorans to identify novel genes/proteins for two key
physiological processes. A functional genomics approach will be taken to further
the understanding of (i) the fermentation of acetate to methane (the pathway by
which two-thirds of the global output of methane is produced) by M. acetivorans,
and (ii) the response to environmental stress by M. acetivorans and the Archaea
in general. A large percentage of the open reading frames of sequenced microbial
genomes have no significant deduced identity to any known proteins; thus it is
expected that novel proteins and enzymes will be discovered and that their
characterization will uncover new biochemical principles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Whole genome DNA microarray and two-dimensional gel
electrophoresis methods will be employed to identify genes that are
differentially expressed during growth on acetate versus methanol or
methylamines, and in media containing high and low salt. The results are
expected to (i) identify genes specific for methane formation from acetate and
(ii) uncover general principles of Archaeal adaptation to changing environmental
conditions. The differentially expressed genes will be characterized by
transcriptional mapping and the gene sequences will be analyzed for information
regarding their potential function. Gene knockout experiments will be performed
to validate their role in the acetate fermentation pathway or osmotic stress,
and also to aid in the determination of their specific function. Selected genes
will be over-expressed and the gene products characterized to determine their
biochemical properties and specific physiological
function&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By elucidating physiological processes in greater
detail, the project is expected to increase the understanding of biocomplexity
by revealing how M. acetivorans reacts to changing environmental conditions and
how it interacts with other members in microbial consortia that comprise the
anaerobic link in the global carbon cycle. In addition, students from each
academic institution will be exposed to a wide variety of experimental
approaches and methods from each of the collaborating academic institutions .
The fundamental interactive nature of the research will provide participating
students with broad exposure to genetics, genomics, fermentation, microbial
physiology, and enzyme characterization. This type of broad training is designed
to provide personnel for future research that will be based on the plethora of
genomic information expected in the next decade and beyond&lt;br/&gt;