* 0110832
* RUI: Neural Regulation of Metamorphosis in a Gastropod Mollusc
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Anthony Pires, Dickinson College
* Standard Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 07/31/2005
* USD 151,010.00

Pires 0110832

Abstract Metamorphosis is a profoundly important transition in the life history
of most animals. The passage from a larval to juvenile form entails destruction
of some tissues, respecification of others and generation of new structures. In
larvae of gastropod molluscs and in a diverse range of larvae from other phyla,
metamorphosis is initiated by a chemical signal from the environment. The
chemosensory induction of gastropod metamorphosis, its stereotyped behavioral
context and the neuromuscular nature of some morphogenic movements, and the
rapidity of morphological change all suggest pervasive control by the larval
nervous system. However, very little is known of the mechanisms by which the
nervous system can direct dramatic morphological change at the level of the
entire organism. Dr. Pires will investigate the neural control of metamorphosis
in the gastropod, Crepidula fornicata, focusing on neural signaling in the
destruction of the larval velum. This ciliated swimming and feeding organ is
precipitously shed by loss of adhesion among and between several types of velar
cells within minutes after competent larvae come in contact with the natural cue
that induces metamorphosis. The large ciliated cells that line the margin of the
velum are the first to detach in metamorphosis, are electrically excitable, and
have been shown in other gastropods to carry a synaptically-driven calcium-
mediated action potential that causes arrest of ciliary beating. These cilia are
arrested in C. fornicata and other gastropods in the moments before destruction
of the velum visibly begins, yet no studies have investigated the mechanistic
relationship between electrical activity in the velum and the loss of cell
adhesion that occurs in metamorphosis. Previous work by Dr. Pires and others has
implicated endogenous dopamine as a neuromodulator that potentiates
metamorphosis, but its effects on signaling in the velum are unexplored. There
is also evidence that hydrogen peroxide or other reactive oxygen species are
generated in the metamophosing velum and can induce velar destruction if
exogenously applied, but it is not known if reactive oxygen species have a
necessary signaling role in a neural mechanism that mediates velar destruction
in natural metamorphosis. Dr. Pires will exploit the large size and predictably
fast metamorphosis of C. fornicata larvae, and take advantage of microsurgical
methods that he developed for working with isolated velar tissues. Dr. Pires and
his students will apply intracellular and extracellular electrophysiological
techniques as well as pharmacological, histochemical and high-performance liquid
chromatographic methods to analyze how neural signals effect a rapid loss of
cell adhesion in the metamorphosing velum. This project affords undergraduate
research students an unusual opportunity to engage in developmental neuroscience
that cuts across several levels of biological organization. An important further
training dimension of this project is that summer work will take place at the
University of Washington's Friday Harbor Laboratories, where undergraduates will
be immersed in a rich and exhilarating scientific community at a time when they
will be making decisions about future research careers.

