* 0110741
* Aminoglycoside-Antibiotic Modifying Enzymes
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Engin Serpersu, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 08/31/2005
* USD 340,000.00

Enzyme-substrate interactions between the aminoglycoside antibiotics and
aminoglycoside modifying enzymes are very interesting and challenging targets
for basic research. Aminoglycoside antibiotics constitute a large group of
clinically important drugs, and today, there are more than fifty known enzymes
that chemically modify aminoglycosides and render them useless against
pathogenic bacteria. These enzymes fall into three groups based on the type of
chemical modification they catalyze. These reactions are N-acetylation,
O-adenylation, and O-phosphorylation. Most notably, each enzyme can use many
aminoglycosides as substrates; conversely a single aminoglycoside can be
modified by a large number of enzymes. This situation makes the structural and
functional studies quite challenging and currently neither a solution structure
of an aminoglycoside-modifying enzyme, nor a crystal structure of an enzyme that
yields information on the conformation of a bound aminoglycoside is available.
This research will determine the first solution structures of aminoglycoside-
modifying enzymes by NMR. The enzymes are the
aminoglycoside-2'-nucleotidyltransferase-Ia, and the
aminoglycoside-3-acetyltransferase-IIIb. NMR and other biochemical and
biophysical methods will be used to study enzyme-antibiotic interactions in
detail. The specific aims include kinetic and binding studies, determination of
structures of both enzymes with and without substrates, substrate titrations
using isotope-enriched enzymes or substrates, site specific mutations of the
critical residues, measurement of amide exchange rates with and without
substrates. It is expected that the solution structures of an aminoglycoside
2'-adenyltransferase, and an aminoglycoside 3-acetyltransferase will be
determined. It is also expected that kinetic and thermodynamic properties of
enzyme-substrate complexes, the residues involved in substrate binding and
catalysis, conformations of tightly bound aminoglycosides, and aminoglycoside-
enzyme contact site(s)will be studied. It is expected that these studies will
reveal the types of interactions that occur between enzymes and aminoglycosides,
thus allowing the determination of shared characteristic features of the active
sites of these enzymes that allow binding of aminoglycosides in a similar
conformation. This can be significant since the homology between some of the
aminoglycoside-modifying enzymes can be very little or none. In general, this
type of a system allows one to compare conformations of many ligands bound to
the same target site as well as the comparison of active site structures of
different targets (enzymes) that have no homology to each other but provide the
same complementary groups to bind the same ligands in the same conformation.
Data obtained in such comparisons should be helpful to determine the essential
principles that affect ligand-macromolecule interactions. Furthermore, it should
also lead to predictions on the expected binding modes of structurally related
compounds and change in their affinities as a result of mutations at the active
site(s). Results of this work should yield a better understanding of enzyme-
ligand interactions and may have far reaching impact on studies of many ligand-
receptor interactions.