* 0110073
* IRCEB:  Evolutionary Ecology of the Attine Ant-Microbe Mutualism: Experimental and Molecular Approaches to Understanding Symbiosis and Coevolution
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2007
* Ulrich Mueller, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2007
* USD 2,670,000.00

Ant agriculture, exemplified by the symbiosis between fungus-growing (attine)
ants and their fungal cultivars, is intensively studied as a model system for
understanding the general ecological and coevolutionary mechanisms that shape
highly integrated symbioses. The attine ant agricultural symbiosis encompasses
both mutualistic and parasitic interactions between (1) ant farmers, (2) fungal
cultivars, (3) parasitic fungal "weeds" that infest ant gardens, and (4)
antibiotic-producing bacteria that control the garden parasites and are cultured
on the bodies of ants. This project specifically explores the ecological
complexity of the attine ant-fungus-bacterium symbiosis and elucidates its
50-million-year coevolutionary history by testing hypotheses posed at multiple
ecological and evolutionary levels, including: (1) the local ecological level
within ant colonies; (2) the population and community levels; (3) the
biogeographic level; and the phylogenetic level, including (4) coevolutionary
processes and historical ecology; (5) symbiont-mediated speciation; and (6) the
effects of symbiotic life histories on rates of evolutionary change. Because
symbiosis is a major recurring theme in the history of life, this research is
expected to generate general insights into the broad mechanisms that drive
biological complexity and diversity. Such insights could in some cases impact
issues directly relevant to human welfare, including the evolution of antibiotic
resistance and the practice of sustainable agriculture.