* 0110915
* Outer Membrane-Targeted Secretion of Respiration-Linked Fe(III) Terminal Reductases
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Thomas DiChristina, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 08/31/2005
* USD 296,306.00

Dissimilatory Fe(III) reduction is a relatively recent addition to the suite of
anaerobic respiratory processes carried out by microorganisms. Compared to the
wealth of knowledge existing on the molecular details of aerobic respiration,
denitrification, sulfate reduction and methanogenesis, little is known about
dissimilatory Fe(III) reduction. Ironically, recent microbiological and
geological evidence indicates that dissimilatory Fe(III) reduction may have been
one of the first respiratory processes to have evolved on early Earth. In the
modern biosphere, dissimilatory Fe(III) reduction is central to a variety of
globally significant processes. Recent genetic studies have indicated that Type
II protein secretion is required for Fe(III) respiration activity by Shewanella
putrefaciens. In Type II secretion mutants, a 91 kDa heme-containing, Fe(III)
reductase is missing from the set of proteins loosely attached to the outside
face of the S. putrefaciens outer membrane. S. putrefaciens may therefore
overcome the physiological problem of respiring on insoluble Fe(III) substrates
by using the Type II secretion system to target the 91 kDa heme-containing
Fe(III) reductase to the outside face of the outer membrane where it acts as a
respiration-linked, Fe(III) terminal reductase. A set of molecular cloning and
biochemical analyses will be carried out to address this hypothesis. Anaerobic
bacteria that respire (breathe) particulate iron (solid rust) may have been the
first organisms to "breathe" on early Earth. Ironically, little is known about
the details of this process. The respiratory system of aerobic bacteria (and
humans) is located inside the cell because oxygen is able to diffuse through the
cell wall and contact the respiratory system. Anaerobic bacteria that breathe on
solid rust are therefore presented with a unique problem: the solid rust is
unable to enter the cell and contact the respiratory system. The project will
demonstrate that "rust breathing" bacteria overcome this problem by putting
their respiratory system on the cell outer surface where it is able to contact
the solid rust and generate energy.