* 0110730
* Analysis of Vascular Pattern Formation in Leaves of Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2004
* Timothy Nelson, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan J. Lolle
* 06/30/2004
* USD 390,000.00

0110370&lt;br/&gt;Nelson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The components of leaf vascular
pattern formation will be analyzed, using a molecular genetic approach in
Arabidopsis. The formation of the leaf vascular pattern has developmental
consequences beyond the simple siting of veins. Provascular sites in the leaf
primordium, where the precursors of vein cells are formed, appear to serve as
morphogenetic centers that regulate the location and specialization of vascular
and other leaf cell types. This makes functional sense, since many of the cell
types must function in cooperation with the veins, requiring a defined spatial
relationship. Using forward and reverse genetic approaches, potential components
of this process have been identified, including likely members of provascular
signaling pathways. Their roles will be analyzed and additional candidates will
be characterized. These are the aims:&lt;br/&gt;1) To identify the immediate
signaling pathway partners of the VH1 provascular receptor-like kinase, which is
a candidate for a key role in organizing vascular regions. &lt;br/&gt;2) To
determine the role of the cvp1 sterol methyl transferase (SMT2) in provascular
cell siting or differentiation. These processes are defective in cvp1 mutants.
&lt;br/&gt;3) To determine the role of the SAUR gene represented by the thick
vein mutant. This may represent a direct link between auxin signals and vein
formation.&lt;br/&gt;4) To characterize the vein patterning roles of additional
genes identified by mutants with vein pattern defects.&lt;br/&gt;