* 0110462
* Role of AGL11 in Ovule and Seed Development
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Martin Yanofsky, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Susan J. Lolle
* 07/31/2005
* USD 507,423.00

0110462&lt;br/&gt;Yanofsky&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant reproductive development
has been the subject of intensive investigation in recent years, and members of
the MADS-box family of regulatory genes have been shown to control key aspects
of this complex process. The carpels and resulting fruit are arguably the most
complex plant organs, and the AGAMOUS (AG) clade of MADS-box genes is necessary
for carpel and fruit development. There are four closely related genes within
this monophyletic clade, including AG, SHATTERPROOF1 (SHP1), SHP2 and AGL11. The
AG gene, which encodes the C function of the widely-recognized ABC model of
flower organ identity, is necessary for carpel identity. The SHP genes act
redundantly during fruit development to specify differentiation of the
dehiscence zone, a process that is required for seed dispersal. Mutant alleles
for AGL11, the final member of this important clade of genes have been isolated.
The initial analyses of agl11 mutants demonstrate that AGL11 is required for
normal ovule and seed development, and for the normal process of seed dispersal.
Moreover, when mutations in AGL11 are combined with mutations in both SHP1 and
SHP2, ovule development is completely abolished. These studies indicate that
AGL11, SHP1 and SHP2 act redundantly to specify ovule identity. With
agl11-mutant alleles in hand, the next step is not only to define the roles of
AGL11 during ovule/carpel/seed/fruit development, but to fully dissect the
individual and redundant activities of the AG clade of genes. These studies
should have far-reaching implications for the study of similar developmental
processes in diverse plant species. Initial studies will focus on a detailed
description of the agl11 and agl11 shp1 shp2 mutant phenotypes. Unstable alleles
of AG will be made in order to fully explore the individual and overlapping
activities of AG with the other members of this gene clade. Interactions will be
explored between AGL11 and the other AG-clade genes with the many known genes
involved in ovule and carpel development. These studies will involve the
introduction of mutant alleles for these ovule/carpel development genes into the
agl11 and agl11 shp1 shp2 mutant backgrounds. In parallel with these genetic
studies, the expression of AGL11 RNA will be monitored in each of these mutants
and we will monitor the expression of each of the ovule/carpel development genes
in the agl11 and agl11 shp1 shp2 backgrounds. Together these studies should
provide a conceptual framework for understanding the genetic and molecular
interactions that underlie ovule/carpel/seed/fruit development in Arabidopsis.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;