* 0110899
* Role of the Dynamin-Related GTPase, Mgm1p, in Mitochondrial Morphology
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2003
* Jodi Nunnari, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 09/30/2003
* USD 200,000.00

Mitochondria are semiautonomous intracellular organelles evolutionarily derived
from endosymbiont prokaryotes. They are the primary site in eukaryotic cells
where the energy of chemical bonds is oxidatively converted to a metabolically
useful form. Mitochondria are therefore often referred to as the "powerhouses"
of the eukaryotic cell. Like chloroplasts, mitochondria are separated from the
cytoplasm of the cell by a double membrane system. The long term goal of this
research project is to understand in molecular detail how the structure of the
double-membraned mitochondrion is controlled. This is a complex problem because
the chemical and physical structures of the outer membrane and inner membrane
are different. In contrast to the outer membrane, the mitochondrial inner
membrane is typically convoluted. These convolutions, referred to as cristae,
form as a consequence of the greater surface area of the inner membrane, and
presumably function to increase the organelle's ability to make energy.
Interestingly, despite their distinct structures, current data suggest that
fission and fusion of both membranes occur in tandem and that the molecular
components that regulate these events are exclusively associated with the outer
membrane. However, the range of cristae morphologies observed in cells suggests
that the inner membrane is dynamic and that dedicated mechanisms and components
exist to maintain its unique structure and perhaps to coordinate the behaviors
of the two membranes. Virtually nothing is known about the mechanisms that
regulate inner membrane structure in mitochondria. In addition to the outer
membrane-associated dynamin-related GTPase, Dnm1p, analyses from Dr. Nunnari's
laboratory indicate that a second dynamin-related GTPase, Mgm1p, is localized to
the mitochondrial inner membrane and that inner membrane structure in mgm1
mutant cells is specifically aberrant. Members of the dynamin GTPase family
share the common function to regulate the structure of various biological
membranes. Thus, based on these findings, Dr. Nunnari hypothesizes that Mgm1p
regulates the structure of mitochondria in cells by functioning to remodel the
inner membranes. The experiments that will be done with support from this award
will test this hypothesis utilizing a combination of genetic, biochemical, and
cytological techniques.