* 0110864
* Regulation of Insulin-Like Growth Factor (IGF) Actions by IGF Binding Proteins in Fish
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2001,01/31/2006
* Cunming Duan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Dona Boggs
* 01/31/2006
* USD 544,500.00

The insulin-like growth factor (IGF) signaling system is essential for normal
growth and development in vertebrates. The proposed project involves studying
the molecular mechanisms by which the IGF signaling system acts to control cell
proliferation, differentiation and cell death (apoptosis) in developing
vertebrate embryos in vivo. There are three components to the vertebrate IGF
signaling system: the IGF ligands, IGF receptors, and IGF binding proteins
(IGFBPs). While it is clear that the IGF ligands and receptors transduce signals
that positively regulate growth, the specific role of each of the IGFBPs and
their interactions with the IGF ligands and receptors in vivo is not well
understood. Our laboratory has been utilizing a model teleost fish, the
zebrafish (Danio rerio) to investigate the IGFs/IGFBP interactions and their
functional importance. We use zebrafish because of their accessible, transparent
and fast-developing embryos. In addition, numerous genetic mutants are available
for our studies. We have characterized the IGF signaling system in zebrafish and
shown that IGFBP-2 inhibits IGF actions in developing zebrafish embryos. Our
further studies have revealed the presence of several other IGFBPs in zebrafish.
These IGFBPs show different structural characteristics and distinct expression
patterns. The goal of this project is to understand how each of these IGFBPs
interact with IGF ligands and receptors to regulate cell proliferation,
differentiation, and apoptosis in developing zebrafish embryos. The overall
hypothesis to be tested is that different IGFBPs are differentially regulated,
and they each play a distinct role in specifying the IGF actions in defined
embryonic tissues. The specific aims of the project are: 1) to determine the
actions of IGFBP-2 in regulating cell proliferation, differentiation, and
apoptosis in vivo by targeted expression of IGFBP-2 in the developing eyes; 2)
to determine the structure of zebrafish IGFBP-1 and IGFBP-3, produce the
corresponding proteins, and analyze these fish IGFBPs biochemically and
functionally; 3) to determine the spatial and temporal expression patterns of
these fish IGFBPs; 4) to determine the specific effects of IGFBP-1 and IGFBP-3
in controlling IGF actions in vivo by targeted expression in the developing
eyes; and 5) to elucidate the physiological functions of the endogenous IGFBPs
in vivo using a novel targeted gene "knockdown" approach. The expected results
should provide novel insights for the roles of various IGFBPs in controlling IGF
actions in a vertebrate embryo and will further our understanding of how the IGF
signaling system acts in vivo to control growth and development in fish
specifically and in vertebrates generally. Determination of the structures of
fish IGFBPs and development of the corresponding protein, cDNA probe and
antisera will make available valuable tools for investigation of IGFBP actions
in fish. A comparison of the structure and function of IGFBPs from different
vertebrate species will provide novel insight to our understanding of the
evolution of this important gene family. Information gained from these studies
may prove to be valuable to aquaculture for efficient production of animal
protein to meet the needs of a continually growing human population.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;