* 0110810
* The Role of Two Novel cGMP Binding Proteins in Dictyostelium
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2001,06/30/2003
* Janet Smith, Boston Biomedical Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 06/30/2003
* USD 205,008.00

Chemotaxis is the movement of cells up a chemical gradient. In Dictyostelium
discoideum, chemotaxis is used under growth conditions to find bacteria as a
food source, and under starvation conditions to promote aggregation of cells so
that fruiting bodies may be formed. The basic mechanisms by which cells detect
chemoattractants are conserved between Dictyostelium and mammalian cells, and
the cellular machinery that drives cell migration is also conserved. Migration
up a gradient involves the asymmetric remodeling of the cytoskeleton during the
first minute after stimulation, and therefore requires that the activities and
localization of key cytoskeletal components be tightly regulated in time and
space. The long-term goal of this project is to understand the signaling
pathways that control remodeling of the cytoskeleton during processes such as
chemotaxis. The experimental tractability of Dictyostelium, coupled with its
relative simplicity, make it an excellent model organism in which these
fundamental signal transduction pathways can be worked out in detail. The
general strategy is to focus on the observation that formation of an
intracellular peak of cGMP is essential for chemotaxis in Dictyostelium cells.
The hypothesis is that key cGMP-binding proteins in the cell directly or
indirectly activate cytoskeletal components after treatment with
chemoattractants. Despite the well-established importance of cGMP in signaling
in chemotaxis, to date no cGMP-binding proteins have been purified or cloned in
Dictyostelium. Two candidate cGMP-binding proteins have recently been identified
by analyzing data from the Dictyostelium genomic database. Single and double
gene disruption strains for these cGMP binding proteins will be engineered by
homologous recombination, and the hypothesis that they play a central role in
chemotaxis will be tested by filming cells as they respond to a micropipet
filled with chemoattractant. The identification of cGMP binding proteins in
Dictyostelium and determination of their role in chemotaxis will be a major
advance in understanding how signaling during this process works. The project
also provides the opportunity for undergraduate students to participate in
independent research.