* 0110499
* SBIR Phase II:   Spinning Performance of Melt-Spun Fibers Containing Microencapsulated Phase Change Material
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2003
* Yvonne Bryant, Triangle Research and Development Corporation
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 09/30/2003
* USD 499,991.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project continues the
development of the spinning performance of melt spun fibers containing
microencapsulated phase change materials (microPCMs). In Phase I, polypropylene
fibers less then 3 denier per filament were demonstrated with a good balance of
physical properties (tenacity, percent breaking elongation, modulus, etc.) and
thermal energy storage capability (latent heat content). Phase II will focus on
process and materials variables that affect, in particular, the structure and
properties of the as-spun fiber, and in general, the overall spinning process. A
key objective is to convert the microcapsule wet cake into a well-dispersed
microPCM/polymer concentrate devoid of volatilizing components for adding to
virgin polymer and extruding into fiber. Innovative spinning concepts will be
employed to improve the capture of microPCMs to maximize thermal energy storage
properties.

The commercial availability of melt spun fibers and resulting fabrics with
enhanced thermal energy storage capabilities will enable products with superior
performance for use in situations where comfort, endurance, or survivability in
cold or hot environments is demanded. Thus, the perfection of this technology
for the production of good quality fabric could be a major breakthrough in the
textile industry.