* 0110275
* Evolution of Eye Regression in Cavefish
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* William Jeffery, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 08/31/2005
* USD 390,000.00

0110275&lt;br/&gt;Jeffery&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Little is known about the
remarkable evolutionary changes that have occurred in cave animals. This
proposal continues Dr. Jeffery's research on the evolution of eye degeneration
in Astyanax mexicanus, a teleost consisting of an eyed surface form (surface
fish) and numerous conspecific eyeless cave forms (cavefish). Although cavefish
lack eyes as adults, they form small eye primordia during embryogenesis, which
later arrest in development and degenerate. In concert with eye degeneration,
more elaborate feeding and gustatory systems have evolved in cavefish. His
previous grant resulted in three new discoveries. First, he showed that eye
degeneration has evolved independently in some cavefish populations. Second, he
showed that lens apoptosis plays a major role in eye degeneration. Accordingly,
the cavefish eye can be restored by transplantation of a surface fish lens
primordium into the optic cup of a cavefish embryo. Third, he showed that Pax6,
a gene required for eye development, is downregulated at the anterior midline in
cavefish embryos. This discovery led to the hypothesis that cavefish exhibit
enhanced midline signaling, the major focus of this proposal. He now plan to
test this hypothesis and the possibility that degeneration of eyes and
elaboration of feeding and gustatory organs have evolved repeatedly in cavefish
due to hyperactive midline signaling during embryogenesis. The first objective
is to determine whether cavefish embryos show hyperactive (hedgehog and/or
nodal/TGFB) signaling at the anterior midline. Preliminary evidence shows that
sonic hedgehog (Shh) gene expression is enhanced at the anterior midline in a
single cavefish population. The second objective is to determine whether
hyperactive midline signaling and Pax6 downregulation also occur in
independently evolved cavefish populations. This will indicate whether the same
or different developmental mechanisms have been changed during cavefish
evolution. The third objective is to determine the effect of perturbing midline
signaling on Pax6 expression and eye degeneration. He will test the possibility
that surface fish and cavefish eye phenotypes are interchangeable by altering
the levels of midline signaling gene expression in surface fish and cavefish
embryos. Preliminary results show that changes in the level of Shh expression
can phenocopy surface and cavefish. Time permitting, he will also determine
whether eye degeneration involves changes in the organizer of cavefish embryos
and whether there is a "developmental tradeoff" eye development and enhancement
of feeding and gustatory systems, thus explaining evolutionary forces resulting
in the cavefish phenotype. He expects the results of this investigation to
provide new insights into the mechanisms underlying an evolutionary change in
morphology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;