* 0110877
* Collaborative Research:  Evolution In Vitro: Structures of DAHPSynthase * KDOPSynthase Chimeras
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Robert Kretsinger, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 08/31/2004
* USD 240,000.00

0110877 &lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on structural studies designed to reveal
the mechanisms of action and of regulation of 3-deoxy-D-arabino-
heptulosonate-7-phosphate synthase (DAHPS) and 3-deoxy-D-
manno-2-octulosonate-8-phosphate synthase (KDOPS) from E. coli. This work will
complement mutational and biochemical analysis of the enzymes carried out
collaboratively in the laboratory of departmental colleague and co-PI, Ronald
Bauerle. DAHPS catalyzes the first step of aromatic&lt;br/&gt;biosynthesis, the
condensation of phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) and D-erythrose-4-phosphate (E4P).
KDOPS catalyzes the condensation of PEP and D-arabinose-5-phosphate, an
essential step in lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis. The two enzymes are distant
homologs, possessing similar (beta/alpha)8 barrel folds. However, the three
DAHPS isozymes differ from KDOPS in that they require a divalent metal for
activation and are regulated by feedback inhibition, each being sensitive to a
different one of the three aromatic amino acids. The following goals will be
pursued during the project period: (1) to refine and analyze the crystal
structure of DAHPS(Phe) complexed with Mn 2+, PEP and its feedback inhibitor,
phenylalanine, and to compare the structure of this complex with those of
structures already determined - [Mn*PEP], [Mn*PEP], [Mn*PGL], [Pb*PEP], and
[Cd*PEP]; (2) to determine and refine the crystal structure of
DAHPS(Trp)*Mn*PEP, which has already been crystallized; (3) to determine the
crystal structures of DAHPS(Phe)*Mn complexed with analogs of PEP and of E4P, as
indicated by the modeling studies of collaborator, M. Krauss; (4) to crystallize
and determine the crystal structure(s) of mutant DAHPS(Phe) enzymes generated in
Bauerle's lab whose characterictics are not consistent with our model of action
and regulation; and (5) to crystallize and determine the crystal structure(s) of
DAHPS/KDOPS chimeras generated in Bauerle's lab that have enzymatic activity.
&lt;br/&gt;