* 0110979
* Metabolomic Profiling of Membrane Lipids and their Compositional Dynamics in Plant Stress Responses
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2001,04/30/2005
* Ruth Welti, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 04/30/2005
* USD 488,689.00

Membrane lipids comprise diverse molecular species, and their composition
differs from membrane to membrane. In addition, membrane lipid composition
changes in response to internal and external cues. Furthermore, within a
membrane, there may be microdomains with distinct lipid constituents and
particular functions. However, it is not understood how these distinct
compositions and their dynamics are generated and what their functions are in
the cell. The objectives of this project are to use a metabolomic approach to
determine cellular membrane lipid composition and to understand the regulation
and role of membrane lipid compositional dynamics in plant responses to
stresses. A highly sensitive approach based on electrospray ionization tandem
mass spectrometry (ESI-MS/MS) will be established. ESI-MS/MS will be employed to
profile membrane lipid molecular species and to determine the compositional
dynamics in Arabidopsis plants undergoing temperature and drought stresses. To
understand how lipid changes are regulated, this project will investigate
enzymes involved in generating the membrane lipid compositional dynamics.
Arabidopsis lines, abrogated of various isoforms of phospholipase D, the major
lipolytic enzyme family, will be instrumental in the analysis. In addition,
lipid molecular species of the defense mutant ssi2 that is defective in
stearoyl-ACP desaturase and its suppressor lines will be profiled to determine
the relationship between lipid composition and alterations in defense responses.
The capability to combine full lipid profiling with cellular analysis of the
machinery that generates compositional changes should yield new information on
how cellular machinery and metabolites interact in a dynamic manner in the
cellular response to changing environments. Membrane lipids are vital biological
constituents, providing structural backbones for biological membranes and
crucial resources for producing second messengers in regulating cellular and
organismal functions. Membrane lipids comprise diverse molecular species, and
the composition differs from membrane to membrane. The lipid composition changes
in response to internal and external cues. However, it is not understood how
these distinct compositions and their dynamics are generated and what their
functions are in the cell. This project will establish a highly effective
approach based on electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry and use it to
determine cellular membrane lipid composition and the role of membrane lipid
compositional changes in plant responses to stresses. Extensive profiling of
membrane lipids and their metabolites will yield unprecedented information on
how cellular machinery and metabolites interact in a dynamic manner in the
cellular response to changing environments.