* 0110214
* SBIR Phase II:   Digital Machine Shop -  An Immersive Two-Handed Precision 3D Modeling Environment
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2004
* Paul Mlyniec, Digital ArtForms
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 09/30/2004
* USD 551,985.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project, The Digital
Machine Shop, is a practical immersive precision modeling system. With the aid
of Digital Jigs, Digital Blades, and other innovative techniques, the user
sculpts and assembles precision objects in a natural fashion with his or her own
two hands. Real users from many backgrounds have validated the approach, showing
these new paradigms to be easy to learn and easy to use. They have achieved
comfort and productivity in a fraction of the time required by conventional
modeling products because natural dexterity and real-world strategies apply. The
apparent absence of Repetitive Stress Injury (RSI) in the Digital Machine Shop's
two-handed interface promises to be a bonus of immeasurable value. The ease of
use of the Digital Machine Shop will serve to tap the talent, creativity, and
expertise of a large segment of society that has been discouraged by the
complexity and tedium of conventional interfaces. Those comfortable with digital
methods will benefit from enhanced productivity and
creativity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Digital Machine Shop embodies enabling
technologies whose impact far exceeds the scope of this project. It is through
the example of practical innovation that the industry will adopt new and
improved methods. The potential commercial applications include: architectural
design, visual simulation modeling, game modeling, industrial design, automotive
design, education, fine arts, and medicine.&lt;br/&gt;