* 0110925
* Temporal Regulation of Baculovirus Gene Expression
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2001,12/31/2004
* Linda Guarino, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Joanne Tornow
* 12/31/2004
* USD 381,870.00

Baculoviruses are unique among eukaryotic DNA viruses because the early genes
are transcribed by the host RNA polymerase II, while late and very late genes
are transcribed by a viral-encoded RNA polymerase. The viral RNA polymerase is a
four subunit complex with intrinsic promoter recognition, mRNA capping,
termination, and polyadenylation activities. The first goal of this project is
to identity the cap methyltransferase that participates in the formation of 5'
caps on viral RNAs. Two complementary approaches will be used; one is to purify
cap methyltransferase from infected cells; the other is to test orf69 protein
for cap methyltransferase activity. This protein, which is a homolog of the rRNA
methyltransferase FtzJ, is the only viral protein with an S-adenosyl-methionine
binding motif. The second aim of this project is to define the mechanisms that
allow RNA polymerase to discriminate between late and very late templates.
Again, two approaches to this problem will be used. First, a targeted analysis
of the in vitro activity of VLF-1, which stimulates very late gene expression in
vivo, will be conducted. Then, factors that alter the promoter specificity of
RNA polymerase will be purified from infected cells. The third aim of this
project is to characterize the baculovirus protein LEF-5, which has homology
with transcription elongation factor TFIIS. To test whether LEF-5 functions as
an elongation factor, experiments will be performed to determine whether LEF-5
binds RNApol and whether it stimulates the RNA cleavage activity of RNApol;
these two activities are characteristic of TFIIS and are required for its
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will elucidate the mechanisms that
regulate temporal expression of baculovirus genes, and should also have
practical impacts on biotechnology. The baculovirus expression system has been
used to produce thousands of different proteins used for basic research and
commercial projects. The baculovirus RNA polymerase is central to this
expression system, and an understanding of its unique properties will lead to
improvements to this technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;