* 0110294
* Dissertation Research: Common Property-Uncommon Interests: Pastoral resource management and eco-tourism in the Reserva de Huascaran, Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2002
* Bruce Winterhalder, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 07/31/2002
* USD 12,000.00

This dissertation research in ecological anthropology studies the factors
affecting traditional pasture use and common property management in a highland
biosphere reserve in Ancash, Peru. The project studies the interaction of
ecotourism and pastoral land use among subsistence-based agro-pastoral
households. The theories explored in the research contribute to our
understanding of individual decision-making, common property resource
management, and conservation in mixed subsistence-market economies. Hypotheses
will be tested that link changes in herd size and composition to incentives
generated by the ecotourism industry; specifically that household earnings are
being invested in livestock and that the preference is shifting toward animals
suited for the portering and transport services demanded by visiting tourists.
Household surveys of market participation, monetary income and livestock
ownership will help to track recent changes in herd size and composition
associated with recent changes in household economic activity. The study will
extend the analysis of subsistence-market articulation by considering how the
socio-economic changes associated with market involvement affect the use of
common property pastures located in the core-protected area of the reserve.
Hypotheses will be tested that link decisions regarding the use of common
property pastures to differences in household wealth and labor, and will
additionally explore how existing common property institutions manage the
resource use of diverse households. The spatial and temporal herding behaviors
of sample households will be assessed by participant observation and time
allocation data, which will be linked to an existing geographic information
system. Observations of spatial and temporal herding behaviors will be
supplemented by vegetation/soil analyses of common property pastures. This
research will contribute to an understanding of the ecology of resource use at
different scales of the household, community, and landscape; as well as further
ongoing debates about the sustainability of development options common to many
biosphere reserves. It will also contribute to the training of a young social
scientist and advance our knowledge about this important highland
region.&lt;br/&gt;