* 0110532
* Specification and Patterning of the Animal-Vegetal Axis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Athula Wikramanayake, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 07/31/2005
* USD 375,000.00

0110532&lt;br/&gt;Wikramanayake&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Depletion of nuclear beta-
catenin in early sea urchin embryos affects the&lt;br/&gt;fates of multiple cell
lineages along the animal-vegetal (A/V) axis. It is&lt;br/&gt;known that the
micromeres, which form the early signaling center that&lt;br/&gt;specifies
mesendoderm, require nuclear beta-catenin to become competent to&lt;br/&gt;carry
out their inductive functions. Beta-catenin signaling is also&lt;br/&gt;required
in the veg2 lineage for these cells to respond to micromere&lt;br/&gt;signals
and to become specified as mesendoderm. Identifying&lt;br/&gt;transcriptional
targets of beta-catenin and elucidating their functions&lt;br/&gt;would be a
critical step in defining the molecular basis of
mesendoderm&lt;br/&gt;specification. This proposal will focus on SUWnt8, a
nuclear&lt;br/&gt;beta-catenin-sensitive Wnt gene that is activated in the
micromeres&lt;br/&gt;coincident with the entry of beta-catenin into the nuclei
of these cells&lt;br/&gt;and in the veg2 tier shortly after transit of beta-
catenin into the nuclei&lt;br/&gt;of this cell tier. Four proposed specific aims
will define the function of&lt;br/&gt;SUWnt8 in these cell lineages and will
further the understanding of&lt;br/&gt;mesendoderm specification in the sea
urchin embryo. These aims are: (1) To&lt;br/&gt;determine the role of cell
interactions in regulating early SUWnt8&lt;br/&gt;expression in the mesendoderm
domain. This will provide insight into the&lt;br/&gt;relative roles of cell
autonomous and non cell-autonomous mechanisms in&lt;br/&gt;early mesendoderm
specification. (2) To determine how SUWnt8 participates&lt;br/&gt;in early
mesendoderm specification by elucidating its role in the&lt;br/&gt;micromeres
and the veg2 tier by blocking its activity using morpholino&lt;br/&gt;antisense
oligonucleotide-mediated translational inhibition. Additionally,&lt;br/&gt;a
possible role for SUWnt8 in maintaining nuclear beta-catenin levels
in&lt;br/&gt;vegetal cells and in suppressing the activity of animalizing
transcription&lt;br/&gt;factors in vegetal cells will be determined. (3) While
nuclear&lt;br/&gt;beta-catenin is required for normal mesendoderm specification,
there is&lt;br/&gt;evidence that micromeres can induce mesendoderm in animal
half blastomeres&lt;br/&gt;in the absence of detectable nuclear beta-catenin. It
will be determined&lt;br/&gt;if SUWnt8 can signal through the planar cell
polarity pathway via the&lt;br/&gt;Disheveled protein to participate in
mesendoderm specification in parallel&lt;br/&gt;with the beta-catenin pathway.
(4) The unique expression pattern of SUWnt8&lt;br/&gt;makes it a powerful
reagent for studying the transcriptional basis of&lt;br/&gt;mesendoderm
specification. The trans-acting factors that mediate SUWnt8&lt;br/&gt;expression
in the micromeres and the veg2 tier will be identified.&lt;br/&gt;Together,
these studies will further our understanding of how the sea&lt;br/&gt;urchin A/V
axis is specified and patterned and may provide insight into&lt;br/&gt;the
evolution of the A/V axis in
bilaterians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;