* 0110090
* Morphological Differentiation in a Filamentous Bacterium
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2006
* Richard Losick, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 08/31/2006
* USD 490,000.00

One of the most fascinating and dramatic examples of morphological
differentiation among prokaryotes is the formation of an aerial mycelium by
Streptomyces coelicolor and other streptomycetes. These filamentous bacteria
grow by the formation of a mold-like, branching network of multinucleoid hyphae
called the substrate mycelium. The aerial mycelium consists of hyphae that grow
into the air away from the colony surface to form a luxuriant lawn of hair-like
filaments that eventually metamorphose into chains of pigmented spores. The
formation of the aerial mycelium depends on so-called bld (i.e., "bald") genes,
mutants of which produce smooth, hairless colonies. A striking property of bld
mutants is their capacity to regain the ability to form an aerial mycelium when
grown near, but not in contact with, certain other bld mutants. This phenotypic
rescue, which is called extracellular complementation, is characteristically
unidirectional, with one mutant acting as a donor and the other as a recipient.
The conversion of aerial hyphae into chains of pigmented spores depends on so-
called whi ("white") genes, mutants of which produce an aerial mycelium that
lacks the gray pigment characteristic of mature spores. Some bld and whi genes
have been cloned and characterized, but it is not yet possible to assemble
developmental genes into pathways or to construct an integrated picture for the
control of morphological differentiation in this organism. The principal goal of
this project is to carry out a genome wide screen for additional Streptomyces
genes involved in aerial mycelium and spore formation by transposon tagging so
that developmental genes can be conveniently cloned and characterized. A
procedure for carrying out transposon-mediated mutagenesis in S. coelicolor was
devised and applied to the discovery of seven developmental genes and gene
clusters. One such cluster in which an insertion causes a whi mutant phenotype
consists of three genes of unknown function. Each gene is a founding member of a
large family of paralogous genes located at widely scattered sites in the
chromosome. Insertional inactivation of another newly discovered gene causes a
profound switch in polyketide pigment production, from the synthesis of the blue
pigment (actinhorodin) characteristic of the substrate mycelium to the
mislocalized synthesis of the gray pigment characteristic of spores. Yet another
insertional mutation in a previously uncharacterized gene causes a severe block
in aerial mycelium formation. The regulation and function of these and other
newly discovered genes will be investigated. Further, additional genes involved
in morphological differentiation will be sought by carrying out insertional
mutagenesis on a large scale. Also, as a complementary strategy, a transposon
derivative will be created that generates fusions to the gene for the Green
Fluorescent Protein. Such a fusion-generating transposon should make it possible
to discover developmental genes on the basis of the timing and localization of
their expression.