* 0110612
* Dissertation Research: Analysis of Ancient mtDNA from California's Central Valley
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* David Smith, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 07/31/2003
* USD 11,625.00

Ancient DNA is a valuable tool with which to test hypotheses relating to
population movements and expansions in prehistoric times. Advances in molecular
biological techniques, including the automation of the Polymerase Chain Reaction
(PCR), has made it possible to examine mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) extracted from
ancient human remains. This provides an opportunity to directly investigate
genetic material from prehistoric peoples.

Archaeological and linguistic evidence suggest that prehistoric population
movements in North America were widespread and common. Consequently, many
contemporary Native American populations occupy a different geographical region
from their ancestors and assessing relationships between ancient and modern
populations is difficult without genetic information. In this project, ancient
and modern DNA from populations in the Central Valley of California will be used
to test specific hypotheses regarding the peopling and population structure of
the region. Linguistic evidence suggests that a Penutian speaking population
began replacing Hokan speaking populations in California Central Valley
approximately 4000ybp. While archaeological and linguistic data suggest
substantial interaction among the peoples of California, the Great Basin, and
the Columbia Plateau, the genetic data obtained through ancient DNA studies in
these regions will provide insight into the association between cultural
similarities and biological relatedness.

Migrations in prehistoric California have also been tied to the spread of
technology in the last 3000 years. DNA extracted from these prehistoric human
remains can be used to model the speed and timing of migrations of hunter-
gatherer populations, and to examine the demographic consequences of a shift in
resource acquisition practices. This information bears directly on modeling the
timing and mode of the initial peopling of the Americas.



