* 0110731
* Functional Analyses of APETALA3-Like Genes
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Vivian Irish, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan J. Lolle
* 06/30/2005
* USD 385,000.00

0110731&lt;br/&gt;Irish&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Flowers are a defining
characteristic of the angiosperms, yet there is wide variation in floral form.
Based on results from Arabidopsis and several other higher eudicot species, it
has been proposed that, despite the wide variation in floral architecture, the
molecular mechanisms controlling floral development are conserved across all
angiosperms. This hypothesis, however, has not been critically tested. One key
regulatory gene, the floral homeotic APETALA3 (AP3) gene, has been shown to be
required for specifying petals and stamens in the higher eudicot Arabidopsis.
The experiments described will address the larger question of whether the
molecular mechanisms controlling floral development are conserved or have
diverged by investigating the functions of AP3-like genes in other angiosperm
species. These studies will be carried out in tomato and in opium
poppy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phylogenetic analyses indicate that a duplication
event in the AP3 lineage occurred at the base of the higher eudicots, leading to
two AP3-like lineages in these species: the euAP3 lineage and the TM6 lineage.
To date, all functional analyses have focussed on the role of the euAP3 lineage
genes, of which the Arabidopsis AP3 gene is a member. The roles of the
paralogous TM6 lineage genes are currently unknown and will be addressed by
carrying out functional studies in tomato, a species for which a number of
genetic and molecular tools exist. These investigations will include screening
for insertional mutations in the TM6 gene, transgenic manipulation of the TM6
gene, and genetic experiments utilizing a previously identified tomato AP3
insertional mutation. The lower eudicots and basal angiosperms contain only one
AP3-like lineage. These genes are more similar in sequence to the higher eudicot
TM6 genes and are termed the paleoAP3 lineage genes. The function of a paleoAP3
lineage member will be investigated using opium poppy as a model system. These
studies will include cloning and characterizing the opium poppy paleoAP3 gene
and determining whether any of the previously identified poppy floral homeotic
mutations correspond to lesions in this gene. In addition, expression studies
will be carried out in order to characterize the processes controlling floral
development in this species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results obtained from
these studies will be valuable in shedding light on how gene duplication and
diversification are related to changes in gene function. They will also provide
a basis for developing new and more rigorous hypotheses to explain, at the
molecular genetic level, how morphological innovations in floral form have
arisen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;