* 0110588
* C-3'-Nucleic Acid Radicals:  Generation and Mechanistic Investigations
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2001,11/30/2002
* Amanda Bryant-Friedrich, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Robin L. Polt
* 11/30/2002
* USD 17,962.00

With this Minority Research Planning Grant Professor Bryant-Friedrich will gain
knowledge and know-how related to the field of oxidative nucleic acid damage.
She will also develop methodologies for the synthesis of modified nucleosides
and nucleotides that function as C-3'-radical precursors in oligonucleotide
systems. A foundation for the proposed research will be built by attending
several conferences on radiation damage to DNA and on the biology of aging.
These conferences will bring together practitioners in the field with expertise
in chemistry, physics, biology and medicine. This will allow interaction with US
and foreign researchers who investigate not only the mechanism of DNA damage but
also those who study the actual induction process, the nature, structure, and
distribution of DNA damage, as well as cellular effects and repair processes.
The above interactions will be used as background information to establish a
research program which focuses on the use of synthetic organic, physical
organic, ahd bioorganic techniques for the independent generation of nucleoside
radicals and the identification of the products that result from the degradation
of these radical species. It will be necessary to synthesize precursors
containing a wide variety of naturally occurring nucleobases as well as modified
bases. These modified derivatives will be used in monomer experiments to
determine the conditions necessary for efficient generation of the desired
radicals, focusing on reaction times, solvents, proper derivatives, etc. When
these details are established, further modification of the monomers will be
carried out to facilitate their use in automated DNA synthesis. The work
proposed by Professor Amanda Bryant-Friedrich in her proposal entitled
"C-3'-Nucleic Acid Radicals: Generation and Mechanistic Investigations" is
enthusiastically supported.