* 0110334
* Symposium:  Society for Developmental Biology 60th Annual Meeting; Seattle, WA; July 18-22, 2001
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2002
* Brigid Hogan, Society For Developmental Biol
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 06/30/2002
* USD 20,000.00

0110334 Hogan

Funds are requested for partial support of the 60th Annual Meeting of the
Society for Developmental Biology, to be held July 18-22, 2001 at the University
of Washington in Seattle. The Society has held this meeting since its founding
in 1939, missing only two years during World War II. This is an indication of
its commitment and succeeding in holding meetings of the highest scientific
quality, as well as a reflection of the community's interest on the field of
developmental biology. In all the scientific sessions work on diverse organisms
including plants, invertebrates and vertebrates will be presented. Sixty-nine
speakers have been invited to tell us about some of their latest findings in the
following areas: Gamete Formation and Function, Organ Building, Patterning of
the Nervous System, Diversity of Form, Color Patterns, Analysis of Complex
Systems, Cell Interactions and Signaling Pathways (2 session), Cell Motility and
Guidance, Regulation of Proliferation and Cell Growth, Cell Fate Determination,
Plasticity of the Differentiated State, and Developmental Biology and Medicine.
An additional thirty speakers have been chosen from submitted abstracts for
platform presentations, allowing the inclusion of the latest results and
providing an opportunity for postdoctoral fellows and graduate students to talk
about their works. Special interest workshops on Stem Cells, Left-Right
Asymmetry, Developmental Biology and Disease Vectors, and Imaging and Cell
Marking will be held. The Education Symposium will center on the very current
topic of Ethics and it will include a discussion period with audience
participation. Local teachers and high school students will be invited to attend
this session. We expect an attendance of about 700 people, and most of them will
present their new data in the two dedicated poster sessions, one after lunch and
the other in the evening. We are certain that this format allows us to continue
to emphasize the best science and to provide a forum to bring together junior
and senior investigators, and to allow them to exchange ideas on science,
education and the role of science in today's society. Merit-based travel awards
will be available to students and junior postdoctoral fellows, as well as Latin
American faculty and students to attend the meeting.