* 0110134
* A Radiation Hybrid System for the Genetic and Physical Mapping of the Corn Genome
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2007
* Ronald Phillips, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 09/30/2007
* USD 3,208,737.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
large and complex genome of corn has impeded integrated mapping and sequencing
efforts. The anticipated isolation of all the corn genes, however, indicates the
pressing need for efficient mapping systems and/or a reduction in genome
complexity. This research addresses the need by developing multifunctional
genetic materials that include the ability to rapidly physically map DNA
sequences to chromosomes and chromosome segments of 1 Mbp or less. These
materials coupled with microarray technology will allow the mapping of thousands
of sequences in a single set of experiments. The complete set of oat-corn
chromosome addition lines has been recovered. Hybridization of sequences to DNA
of the 10 additions allows placement of sequences to chromosome including
duplicated sequences or multigene families. Radiation hybrid (RH) lines are then
produced by gamma irradiation of the addition lines. The research will focus on
obtaining fertile lines for all 10 addition plants and on creating RH mapping
panels for all 10 chromosomes. Preliminary data indicates the feasibility for
efficient physical mapping of genes (ESTs and known genes) to chromosome and
chromosome segment, and the identification and mapping of duplicated sequences.
The ESTs isolated at Stanford University will initially be mapped. An RH
physical map will complement other corn physical mapping systems by providing a
scaffold at the subchromosomal fragment level. The specific objectives of this
renewal are to (1) recover a complete set of fertile oat-corn addition lines and
characterize the phenotype, cytology, chromosome stability and transmission of
the addition and RH lines; (2) produce RH mapping panels for all 10 individual
chromosomes for both low and high resolution mapping; (3) enable high-throughput
mapping of ESTs to chromosomal regions for candidate gene discovery and
comparative genome studies.&lt;br/&gt;Deliverables:&lt;br/&gt;1. Fertile oat-
corn addition lines for each corn chromosome; seed, tissue or DNA of the
addition lines for distribution. &lt;br/&gt;2. DNA panels of radiation hybrid
lines for low and high-resolution mapping of each chromosome.&lt;br/&gt;3.
Radiation hybrid mapping panels for each chromosome, along with appropriate
resources that will allow other researchers to physically map genes to within
one to five megabases.&lt;br/&gt;4. A database of sequences mapped to chromosome
and to radiation hybrid lines as the lines become available. Data to be provided
to existing web resources.&lt;br/&gt;5. Data about relative quantities of
repetitive sequences per chromosome measured using microarray technology with
genomic DNA from the oat-corn addition lines.&lt;br/&gt;6. Web resources
describing genetic materials, radiation hybrid mapping, and sequences
mapped.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project address: &lt;br/&gt;University of
Minnesota, Dept. of Agronomy and Plant Genetics 411 Borlaug Hall, 1991 Upper
Buford Circle, St. Paul, MN 55108 &lt;br/&gt;Internet Addresses (Web and E-mail)
for Project Information:
&lt;br/&gt;http://agronomy.coafes.umn.edu/cornpep/nsf/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;