* 0110676
* Seri Dictionary and Texts
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Stephen Marlett, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2005
* USD 94,441.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Stephen Marlett and his colleague
Mary Moser will conduct two years of linguistic research on Seri, an indigenous
language in northwestern Mexico used by under 700 people. One goal of this
research is to complete the first comprehensive dictionary of Seri. The
dictionary will include a brief description of the Seri grammar for both native-
speaker and outsider use. The project will also produce a corpus of
interlinearized texts. These texts will be based on materials edited by Seri
associates and published for the language community as a contribution to the
preservation of culturally-important literature. They will be presented with
practical spelling, phonological spelling, interlinear Spanish and English word
glosses, and free translation in Spanish and English. They complement the
dictionary and grammar by showing the words in literary context. The groundwork
for this research includes extensive fieldwork, circulation of drafts of the
work, and personal interaction with three generations of members of the Seri
people. Researchers will now verify thousands of lexical entries and their
accompanying illustrative sentences. Experts will be consulted in the areas of
ichthyology, ornithology, herpetology, and botany. The dictionary and
interlinearized texts will be in Seri, Spanish, and English. The inclusion of
Spanish will make the work useful to Seri speakers, as well as to non-Seri
Spanish speakers in Mexico. The inclusion of English expands the audience to
international linguists and anthropologists doing research on the area's
ecology. The researchers have worked closely with native Seri authorities and
other members of the Seri nation at all stages of the dictionary and grammar
preparation, to ensure completeness, usefulness, appropriateness, and
accessibility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The significance of this research is
twofold. First, the Seri language is the sole surviving language of a linguistic
family within the putative Hokan stock. Little information is available about
other now-extinct languages that may have been closely related to it. The
dictionary will support more historical and comparative linguistic research. The
Seri people were still living by traditional hunting and gathering in the mid-
twentieth century. Therefore, study of their language is as significant for the
field of anthropology as it is for the field of linguistics. Second, this
project's dictionary, grammar, and translated texts will be available to the
Seri community in a format that is supportive of language maintenance efforts
and bilingual education. These works will also aid (English- and Spanish-
speaking) researchers who increasingly work with Seri associates in ecology and
related fields, but who are handicapped by the language barrier. An important
additional result of the project is the training that some key Seri men and
women will receive in editing and processing Seri language materials. This will
benefit the Seri people for years into the future.&lt;br/&gt;