* 0110654
* Role of Semaphorin in Axon Guidance
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2005
* Mary Halloran, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 06/30/2005
* USD 345,685.00

IBN 0110654 PI: Halloran

Abstract

During nervous system development, individual axons navigate through an
extremely complex environment to find their target cells. The motile growth cone
at the axon tip senses guidance cues in the environment and directs growth of
the axon. Although considerable work has focused recently on guidance molecule
activity, the mechanisms by which these molecules function in vivo to coordinate
axon pathfinding are largely unknown. Dr. Halloran's research focuses on one
family of potential axon guidance molecules, the semaphorins. The semaphorin
gene family is highly conserved from invertebrates to humans. This suggests that
semaphorins have crucial functions for embryonic development and survival.
Semaphorins have been implicated in the regulation of axon pathfinding,
sometimes acting as inhibitory guidance molecules, and other times attractive.
The semaphorin gene family is very large and diverse, however little is known
about the in vivo function of most family members. The aim of this proposal is
to understand the in vivo function of one semaphorin of unknown function,
sema3D, and to determine how it directs the growth of axons during nervous
system development. The potential role of sema3D in guiding growth cones of two
neuronal types will be investigated. Dr. Halloran's strategy is to manipulate
sema3D gene expression in the developing zebrafish and analyze the resultant
effects on axon growth by time-lapse video microscopy of living axons in vivo.
The examination of the effects of altered sema3D expression on growing axons
should reveal how the axons are normally guided by sema3D. The proposed
experiments will likely provide novel insights into how semaphorins regulate
growth cone motile behaviors within the complex in vivo environment. The
ultimate goal is to better understand how the wiring of the nervous system is
established during embryonic development.

