* 0110555
* RUI:  Investigation of Copine Function in Dictyostelium
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Cynthia Damer, Vassar College
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 08/31/2005
* USD 164,352.00

In the past 10 years, great strides have been made in the identification of
proteins that mediate and regulate membrane vesicle trafficking in eukaryotic
cells. Different proteins function in distinct steps of vesicular trafficking
such as budding, transport, targeting, and fusion of vesicles. Most of these
proteins are well conserved with homologs found in organisms from yeast to
mammals. However, the exact roles of many of these proteins remain unclear.
Furthermore, it is likely that not all proteins involved in these processes have
been identified. One new candidate for a role in vesicle membrane trafficking is
a family of recently discovered proteins called copines. Copines were first
isolated from Paramecium in 1997 by their ability to bind phospholipids in a
calcium-dependent manner. Paramecium have two closely related copine genes and
analysis of current sequence databases indicates that multiple copine homologs
exist not only in ciliates, but also in slime molds, green plants, nematodes,
mice, and humans. The high degree of conservation of copines among diverse
organisms suggests they play a fundamental role in eukaryotic cells.
Structurally, copines have two C2 domains at the N-terminus and a region similar
to the A domain found in integrins at the C-terminus. The C2 domain is a
calcium-/phospholipid- binding motif originally identified in protein kinase C.
The A domain in an intracellular soluble protein is a unique characteristic of
copines because this domain is typically found in extracellular proteins or
extracellular portions of membrane proteins. Following the A domain, copines
have a variable length C-terminal domain that is relatively rich in prolines.
This domain may confer unique characteristics to the different copine family
members and a site for protein-protein interactions. Several lines of evidence
suggest that copines may function in vesicular trafficking. First, antibodies
raised against a human copine recognize a protein that binds to chromaffin
granules indicating that copines bind secretory vesicles. In addition, several
proteins thought to be involved in membrane trafficking, such as synaptotagmin,
rabphilin, DOC2, and munc13, contain multiple C2 domains that confer
calcium/phospholipid binding properties. The long-term research objective is to
define in molecular terms the mechanisms underlying membrane vesicle
trafficking. In the short term, the research goal is to determine the general
role of copines in eukaryotic cells using the model genetic organism,
Dictyostelium discoideum. Genetic studies in yeast have been fundamental to the
identification and characterization of proteins involved in vesicular membrane
trafficking. However, no copine homologs exist in yeast. Dictyostelium provides
the same genetic advantages as yeast and preliminary research demonstrates the
existence of two copine homologs in Dictyostelium. The two main objectives of
the research are: 1. Determine the localization of copines in live cells by
expressing green fluorescent protein tagged copines in Dictyostelium and
examining the cells by fluorescence microscopy. This experimental approach will
be used to determine transient changes in localization during different cellular
behaviors. 2. Create copine gene knockout mutants in Dictyostelium with gene
replacement by homologous recombination and analyze the mutant phenotypes. This
experimental approach will be used to determine loss of function in membrane
trafficking pathways due to loss of copine gene function. Once these two
objectives are met, it will be possible to correlate the intracellular location
of copines with loss-of-function phenotypes in copine mutants and produce a more
specific hypothesis about the function of copines in eukaryotic cells.