* 0110464
* Molecular Genetic Analysis of Actin-interacting Protein 1 During Myofibril Assembly
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2006
* Shoichiro Ono, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 09/30/2006
* USD 531,193.00

Actin is a ubiquitous and conserved protein among eukaryotes, but the structure
and function of the actin cytoskeleton is remarkably diverse among cell types.
This differentiation occurs by specific regulation of dynamic assembly and
maintenance of actin filaments, a process mediated by a number of actin-
regulatory proteins. Myofibrils in striated muscles are highly differentiated
forms of actin cytoskeleton that are specialized for muscle contraction. The
mechanisms by which the actin cytoskeleton is reorganized and assembled into
sarcomeric structures during muscle development are largely unknown. The
objective of this project is to understand the functional significance of
regulators of actin polymerization and polymerization during myofibril assembly
in body wall muscle of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. This project will
focus on the function of the unc-78 gene that encodes a homolog of actin-
interacting protein 1 (AIP1). AIP1 has been identified in a variety of
eukaryotes and shown to be involved in dynamic reorganization of actin
cytoskeleton. However, its role in multicellular organisms has not been clear
due to lack of an AIP1 mutation in genetic model systems. Mutations recently
isolated in unc-78 now make possible analysis of the role of AIP1 in muscle
differentiation. In C. elegans, mutations in unc-78 cause slow-moving nematodes
that have large accumulations of actin filament in body wall muscle cells. This
phenotype suggests that the unc-78 gene is important for the regulation of actin
filament dynamics in muscle cells. Therefore, this system provides a unique
opportunity to study the in vivo function of AIP1 during myofibril
assembly.&lt;br/&gt; In this project, the function of the unc-78 gene will be
analyzed by the following five approaches: (a) Phenotypic consequences of unc-78
mutations will be characterized with respect to motility and the organization of
myofibrillar components. (b) The expression pattern and subcellular localization
of UNC-78 protein will be determined. (c) Biochemical interactions of wild-type
or mutant UNC-78 proteins with actin and UNC-78 with unc-60 (the gene coding for
ADF/cofilin) and other muscle genes will be tested. (e) The second AIP1 isoform
in C. elegans will be examined for functional redundancy and specificity. These
molecular genetic and biochemical analyses of the unc-78 gene and its related
gene will potentially reveal an important aspect of actin filament dynamics in
muscle cells and provide insight into the function of the evolutionarily
conserved AIP1 family of proteins. &lt;br/&gt;