* 0110984
* Collaborative Research:  Structural Determinants of Catalysis and Allosteric Regulation in DAHP Synthase
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2001,12/31/2005
* Ronald Bauerle, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 12/31/2005
* USD 324,771.00

0110984&lt;br/&gt;Mutational and biochemical studies will be combined to define
the structural basis for&lt;br/&gt;catalytic activity and feedback regulation in
the 3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptulosonate-7-phosphate&lt;br/&gt;synthase (DAHPS)
isozyme family in Escherichia coli. This work will be complemented
by&lt;br/&gt;structural studies of the enzyme by x-ray crystallography, carried
out in the laboratory of&lt;br/&gt;departmental colleague and co-PI, Robert
Kretsinger. DAHPS catalyzes the first step of aromatic&lt;br/&gt;biosynthesis,
the condensation of phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) and D-erythrose-4-phosphate
(E4P).&lt;br/&gt;The three DAHPS isozymes in E. coli have similar catalytic
properties, but differ in that each is&lt;br/&gt;specifically feedback regulated
by one of the three aromatic amino acid end products. The
crystal&lt;br/&gt;structure of DAHPS(Phe) complexed with PEP and metal cofactor
has established that the enzyme&lt;br/&gt;has an embellished (beta /alpha)8
barrel fold. In order to define the role of the required metal in catalysis, a
strategy will be implemented to engineer metal-independent derivatives of
DAHPS(Phe) by site-directed changes, loop transplantation and DNA shuffling. The
strategy was derived from the superpositional analysis of the structures of
DAHPS(Phe) and its metal-independent homologue, KDOP synthase. A model for the
DAHPS reaction mechanism will be tested that involves the formation of a
covalent Schiff's base intermediate between PEP and an active site lysine. An
intramolecular signal transduction pathway responsible for the allosteric
transition from R state to T state, based on changes in the three dimensional
structure of the enzyme complexed with Phe, will be dissected by combined
mutational, kinetic and crystallographic analysis. The organization of the
regulatory site of the enzyme will also be confirmed by assessing the effects of
mutations targeted to critical residues in the structural model. Lastly,
rational design will be used to restructure the regulatory site such that
inhibitor specificity is switched from phenylalanine to tryptophan or tyrosine.
&lt;br/&gt;