* 0110840
* Acquisition of Basic Environmental Magnetics Laboratory Equipment
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2003
* John Peck, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2003
* USD 106,107.00

0110840&lt;br/&gt;Peck&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This equipment grant provides
partial support to enhance an environmental magnetics laboratory at the
University of Akron, Ohio. The existing environmental magnetics laboratory
contains a Molspin spinner magnetometer, ASC Impulse magnetizer and Bartington
susceptibility equipment. This proposal and cost sharing from the University of
Akron will be used to establish a fully-functional laboratory through the
acquisition of a D-Tech Model D-2000 AF demagnetizer, 2.5 m3 fluxgate-controlled
field-free cage, Micromag alternating gradient magnetometer, and additional
Bartington susceptibility sensors. The addition of this equipment will allow the
full suite of environmental magnetic parameters of wet sediment to be measured.
The rock-magnetic component of environmental magnetism involves the measurement
of the concentration, grain-size, and mineralogy of the magnetic portion of the
sediment and is used to interpret past environmental change. The paleomagnetic
component of environmental magnetism involves the study of the natural remanent
magnetization of the sediment and provides a means of global stratigraphic
correlation, dating, and insight on geodynamo processes. Current NSF-funded
projects in Mongolia, Africa, Russia and Turkey will make effective use of this
equipment. Ongoing NSF research projects directed by PI, John Peck involve the
study of past environmental change as recorded in the sediments of Mongolian
lakes, Lake Bosumtwi, Ghana and Lake Baikal, Russia. Drs. Lisa Park, Ira Sasosky
and Tim Matney from the University of Akron will use this equipment in their
research of paleolimnology in Africa, archaeology in Turkey and clastic cave
deposits in the U.S., respectively. Researchers and students from nearby
Universities will have free-access to this new equipment thereby allowing them
to readily utilize this equipment in their research. Geologists at nearby Kent
State University, Case Western Reserve University and Oberlin College have all
expressed their interest in using this equipment that is new to the region. In
addition, the new equipment will serve educational goals and be used extensively
in a new Geology course titled Environmental Magnetism taught by PI,
Peck.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;