* 0110985
* Cleavage in Xenopus Development
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Michael Danilchik, Oregon Health & Science University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 07/31/2005
* USD 402,000.00

0110985&lt;br/&gt;Danilchik&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most critical phases
in the life of a new organism is cleavage, a series of rapid, synchronous cell
divisions that populates the fertilized egg's volume with zygotic nuclei,
clonally segregates its developmental potential, and reduces cell volume to that
of somatic cells. Cleavage has long served as a favorite model for the study of
animal-cell cytokinesis, since the egg's large size permits a variety of
experimental manipulations and opportunities for observation unavailable in
smaller cells. Nevertheless, cleavage is known to differ in several fundamental
ways from somatic-cell mitosis, particularly by its synchrony, rapidity, lack of
transcriptional activity, and reliance on maternally synthesized components. In
amphibian embryos, cleavage is accompanied by the insertion of a new domain of
plasma membrane between each new pair of cells. This membrane deposition has
potential significance in events of early development, such as establishment of
the body plan, since all receptor-mediated, cell-cell interactions depend on the
composition of the membrane deposited between cells. Our discovery of a unique
array of microtubules underlying the advancing cleavage furrow led to an
investigation of the role of microtubules in the cleavage process. We now have
evidence that the furrow microtubule array may be involved in delivery of
vesicles to the site of new membrane expansion at the base of the cleavage
furrow. Furthermore, we have detected novel membrane protrusive activity on
either side of the expanding cleavage membrane domain that may be critical for
pulling the new cells into close apposition as cleavage progresses. Our goal in
this proposed project is to understand the function and integration of these
processes in Xenopus cleavage. Specifically, our aims are to 1) learn the role
of the furrow microtubule array in directing exocytotic vesicles to the growing
cleavage plane, 2 ) analyze cytoskeletal assembly in furrows of living embryos,
and 3) study the relationship between furrowing and membrane protrusive activity
along the furrow margins. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;