* 0110278
* SBIR Phase II:   Workflows to Enable Agile Virtual Enterprises (WEAVE)
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2004
* Robert Pokorny, XSB, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2004
* USD 730,566.00

This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase II project, Workflows to
Enable Agile Virtual Enterprises (WEAVE), is envisioned as an on-line service to
manage workflow for virtual enterprises. Phase I feasibility was undertaken in
the context of virtual enterprises that arise in supply chain management. Phase
II will do full-scale implementation of WEAVE to efficiently establish and
manage supply chains in an e-commerce environment. Traditional supply chains are
built with a small number of long-term suppliers because of the high cost of
finding and establishing new supply sources. The Web and a variety of legacy
data sources provide abundant information about possible supply sources. But
this information is often dynamic and unstructured requiring manual effort to
discover. XSB, Inc has developed technology to infer supplier capabilities,
giving manufacturers an instant view of 'who makes what' across their own supply
chain as well as thousands of potential suppliers across the web.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;WEAVE will implement this technology to locate sources of
supply. This ability to locate sources for parts will be integrated with a
system to plan and manage purchasing strategies for a user's complete bill-of-
materials. Using WEAVE small-to-medium manufacturers can quickly create supply
chains that is relevant for their enterprise. In the long-term WEAVE will serve
as the infrastructure for establishing a peer-to-peer supply
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;