* 0110875
* Exopolymer Production by Benthic Diatoms: Rhythms, Responses and Acclimation to Environmental Stress
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Graham Underwood, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Winner
* 08/31/2005
* USD 386,500.00

0110875&lt;br/&gt;Michael Gretz &amp; Graham Underwood&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
diatoms are among the most important primary producers in the global
environment. These single-cell algae are exceedingly abundant and among the most
numerous aquatic organisms. The diatoms are major contributors to the base of
the marine food chain, upon which economically important marine fisheries and
ecologically significant marine mammal and bird populations are dependent.
Oceans occupy approximately 70% of our planet and marine microalgae, of which
diatoms are a predominant component, exert a powerful influence on today's
atmospheric chemistry (they are the primary oxygen producers on earth) and the
biogeochemical cycling of carbon and other elements. Hundreds of millions of
years of past algal growth has contributed to the important petroleum deposits
upon which our modern society depends. Diatoms, both in terms of the organisms
themselves and the material they secrete, are of fundamental importance to
overall aquatic ecology. Much of the carbon that diatoms fix is secreted in the
form of extracellular polymers. These exopolymeric substances (EPS) strongly
influence biogeochemical cycling in ecosystems, as they are contributors to the
sediment carbon pool, important in food chains and the biostabilization of
sediments. This research will characterize the production rates, composition and
characteristics of diatom EPS produced by benthic diatoms under various
environmental conditions (nutrient limitation, damaging irradiance levels,
salinity stress). The composition and structure of different EPS will influence
the role such molecules play in the environment. EPS characteristics will be
correlated with the changing microenvironment within estuarine diatom biofilms,
and with the response of the organisms to important environmental stresses. This
information is required to define how diatoms acclimate to the changing
conditions within intertidal biofilms and to determine the nature of the
different EPS produced, which will lead to further studies of the role of EPS
within intertidal biofilms. This work will greatly advance our knowledge of EPS
and the physiological conditions in nature that trigger production of different
types and may lead to advances in stabilizing sediments or identifying new
polymers of commercial interest. In addition, this project will provide a
valuable contribution to student training by engaging students in a
multidisciplinary effort that involves integrated international cooperation
between laboratories in the U.S. and the U.K. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;