* 0110322
* Physiological Mechanisms of Hypoxia Tolerance
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Donald Jackson, Brown University
* Continuing grant
* Dona Boggs
* 08/31/2006
* USD 444,050.00

This project will investigate adaptations to severe oxygen lack in the
freshwater turtle, Chrysemys picta bellii, generally regarded as the air-
breathing vertebrate most tolerant to oxygen lack. Specific objectives are to
understand the role of the turtle's shell in lactic acid buffering, to clarify
the fate of lactic acid and its rate of removal during recovery from a period of
anoxia, to explore further the response of the turtle's heart and heart muscle
to oxygen lack, and to define the mechanisms and limitations of oxygen uptake
directly from the water. A broad objective is to test the hypothesis that this
animal possesses no extraordinary resistance to anoxia per se, but that its
effective shell buffering and its metabolic depression slow the secondary
effects of hypoxia and thereby greatly extend its tolerance duration.

To achieve these specific objectives, the following approaches will be used. 1)
Shell function: Shell blood supply will be established using corrosion casts.
Shell blood flow will be measured using proton-activated microspheres that trap
in the capillaries, and the importance of shell blood flow to exchange processes
evaluated by tying off selected blood vessels. The kinetics and limits of
shell/blood Ca2+ and lactate exchange will be tested by incubating shell samples
in acid media, and the mechanical consequences of demineralization of shell
following anoxia determined. 2) Lactic acid metabolism: Lactic acid removal from
the system during recovery from anoxic submergence will be compared in turtles
at rest and while engaged in moderate aerobic activity swimming in a flume.
Lactate metabolism by skeletal muscle will be tested using radioactively-labeled
lactate, and by measuring lactate uptake by isolated muscle strips. Excretion of
lactate during recovery will be tested at different plasma lactate
concentrations using labeled lactate. 3) Heart function: Cardiac responses to
graded hypoxia will be observed in isolated ventricular strips, in perfused
hearts in vitro, and in intact surgically cannulated turtles with ECG
electrodes. 4) Oxygen uptake from water: Oxygen consumption of turtles submerged
in aerated water at 3 and 10oC will be measured, and the effect of blocking
possible avenues of oxygen uptake will be assessed. The importance of hemoglobin
to aquatic O2 uptake at low temperature will be evaluated by comparing turtles
with normal and experimentally-reduced hemoglobin levels in their blood.

To achieve the general objective, the comparative approach will be utilized.
Shell and cardiac muscle characteristics of selected species of turtles, both
aquatic and terrestrial, representing various lineages will be studied, and
compared to the painted turtle. If possible, these will be animals whose anoxic
tolerance has already been studied. Shell size, shell mechanical properties,
mineral concentrations, and in vitro ion exchange capacities will be measured
for each species. In addition, resistance to oxygen lack by ventricular muscle
strips will be studied on each animal. For the latter protocol, two outgroup
reptiles, an aquatic snake and a terrestrial lizard will also be studied.

Hypoxia is a fundamental environmental stress experienced by many organisms.
Understanding the particular adaptations that permit a specialized animal such
as the freshwater turtle to resist this stress has considerable general
significance. This project therefore can contribute to knowledge on a particular
animal specialist, and can also reveal principles that may apply to other less-
adapted species. Because the project consists of a variety of individual
projects, it also lends itself well to student involvement and will provide
opportunities for research experience and training to both undergraduate and
graduate students.