* 0110217
* SBIR Phase II:   Robotic Systems for Network Interrogation of Smart Civil Structures
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Steven Arms, MICROSTRAIN INC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 08/31/2004
* USD 733,285.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II, project is aimed at the
continued development and field testing of an autonomous robotic structural
inspection system capable of remote powering and data collection from a network
of embedded sensing nodes with remote data access via the internet. The system
will utilize existing microminiature, multichannel, wireless, programmable
Addressable Sensing Modules (ASM's) to sample data from a variety of sensors.
These inductively powered nodes do not require batteries or interconnecting
wires, which greatly enhances reliability and reduces installation cost.
Networks of sensing nodes can be embedded, interrogated, and remotely accessed
in applications where visual inspection by people is not practical due to:
physical space constraints, remote geographic locations, high inspection costs,
and high risks involved for those performing the inspections. The sensors can
indicate the need for repair, replacement, or reinforcement, which will reduce
the risk of catastrophic failure and will be useful after natural disasters,
such as earthquakes, hurricanes, tornadoes, and floods. The availability of
critical structural health data on the internet would greatly assist highway
engineers and scientists to acquire information about these structures, which
will improve our understanding of the safety of civil structures and their
requisite maintenance.

Market potential is significant, as various task specific robots can be employed
(with our systems) for remote inspection and internet data delivery from a broad
spectrum of structures, such as: bridges, bridge footings, dams, offshore oil
rigs, buildings, hazardous waste sites, and nuclear power plants. This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project is aimed at the continued
development and field testing of an autonomous robotic structural inspection
system capable of remote powering and data collection from a network of embedded
sensing nodes with remote data access via the internet. The system will utilize
existing microminiature, multichannel, wireless, programmable Addressable
Sensing Modules (ASM's) to sample data from a variety of sensors. These
inductively powered nodes do not require batteries or interconnecting wires,
which greatly enhances reliability and reduces installation cost. Networks of
sensing nodes can be embedded, interrogated, and remotely accessed in
applications where visual inspection by people is not practical due to: physical
space constraints, remote geographic locations, high inspection costs, and high
risks involved for those performing the inspections. The sensors can indicate
the need for repair, replacement, or reinforcement, which will reduce the risk
of catastrophic failure and will be useful after natural disasters, such as
earthquakes, hurricanes, tornadoes, and floods. The availability of critical
structural health data on the internet would greatly assist highway engineers
and scientists to acquire information about these structures, which will improve
our understanding of the safety of civil structures and their requisite
maintenance.

Market potential is significant, as various task specific robots can be employed
(with our systems) for remote inspection and internet data delivery from a broad
spectrum of structures, such as: bridges, bridge footings, dams, offshore oil
rigs, buildings, hazardous waste sites, and nuclear power plants.

