* 0110842
* Fine-Scale Genetic Mapping and Sequence Analysis of Genes Involved in Honey Bee Stinging Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Greg Hunt, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Jerry  O. Wolff
* 08/31/2005
* USD 529,306.00

Fine-scale mapping and genetic analysis of genes involved in honey bee stinging
behavior.

ABSTRACT

The genetic architecture (numbers of genes and their effects) of behavioral
traits is an important consideration for the field of behavioral ecology, yet
little is known on this topic. The honey bee may be useful in this regard
because it is becoming recognized as a model organism for behavioral and
behavioral genetic studies. As a behavioral genetic model, the bee has the
advantages of ease of culture, social behavior, haploid males, and the highest
recombination rate ever reported for a metazoan. The high meiotic recombination
rate facilitates the construction of detailed genetic maps and cloning genes
based on their positions on genetic maps because genetic distance is directly
related to crossover rates. The proposed project seeks to study the role of
specific genes and pheromonal communication in honey bee defensive behavior.
Previous studies identified and mapped quantitative trait loci (QTL) that mark
the positions of genes that influence a colony-level behavioral trait, the
numbers of stings that bees deposited in a behavioral assay. QTL that influence
alarm pheromone production were also identified. Two of the "stinging" QTL were
subsequently found to influence the guarding and stinging behavior of individual
bees, thus confirming the QTL effects on behavior. One of the two confirmed QTL
also may have an influence on alarm pheromone production. A QTL that influences
levels of an unknown alarm pheromone component that correlated with colony
stinging response mapped close to this defensive-behavior QTL. The proposed
research would further characterize QTL effects on individual and colony
behavioral phenotypes and seek to identify specific components of behavior that
are influenced by each gene. In addition, crosses with haploid males would allow
for further genetic dissection to pinpoint the location of genes more precisely
and ultimately obtain the sequence of these genes. These crosses would generate
lines of bees, each of which is descended from a different haploid male. The
haploid fathers will differ from each other in key regions near the QTL. The
next step in the proposed research is to identify large bacterial artificial
chromosome (BAC) clones of honey bee DNA that span the region containing the
QTL. For example, if the gene influencing the behavioral trait can be pinpointed
to 5 centimorgans of genetic distance, this represents about 250 kilobases (Kb)
of honey bee DNA. This 250 Kb region can be spanned by just a few BAC clones
because the current honey bee BAC library has average clone sizes of 113 Kb.
Sequencing and bio-informatic analyses would then be used to identify candidate
genes for these QTL.