* 0110550
* Characterization of Chemosensory Pathways in Cnidarians
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Peter A. V. Anderson, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 08/31/2005
* USD 336,350.00

Characterization of Chemosensory Pathways in Cnidarians P. Anderson, IBN 0110550

ABSTRACT

The ability to detect and respond to chemical stimuli is a fundamental property
of all organisms, and in metazoan animals, specialized sensory structures
(chemosensory cells) and intercellular pathways have evolved to detect and
transmit information about the chemosensory environment of the animal. Although
different organisms may employ slightly different mechanisms in chemosensory
pathways, the general picture that has emerged from research with a limited
number of albeit widely separated groups (particularly arthropods and
vertebrates) is that the underlying principles that govern chemosensory systems
are remarkably similar. However, very little attention has been paid to the
earliest metazoans, the "first" animals to bear specialized sensory cells.
Cnidarians (sea anemones, corals and jellyfish) represent some of the earliest
metazoans, and they are the first extant organisms to possess a recognizable
nervous system. Thus, they are ideal animals with which to examine the
properties of early metazoan chemosensory systems and, in particular, to
determine whether the common mechanisms of chemosensory function apply to all
metazoans. This proposal seeks to examine chemosensory transduction in
cnidarians, by studying a system that, in and of itself, is both fascinating and
remarkable, the stinging cells of jellyfish. The sting cells or cnidocytes of
jellyfish and other cnidarians discharge in response to near simultaneous
applications of the chemical and mechanical stimuli that signal the presence of
potential prey. However, this discharge is very tightly regulated by a variety
of processes, including chemoreceptors and mechanoreceptors. This proposal will
examine chemoreceptors associated with cnidocytes in the tentacles of two
species, the Portugese Man-of-War (Physalia physalis) and sea nettle (Chrysaora
quinquecirrha), two species that are, at the very least, serious nuisances for
bathers and fishermen. The broad goals of this project are to understand the
mechanisms used by those receptors to detect and transduce chemical stimuli, to
convey that information to the cnidocytes, and identify and characterize the
cellular events that information triggers in the cnidocytes, making them
receptive to the subsequent mechanical stimuli that trigger discharge. As such,
this project will obtain basic information about chemosensory systems in early
organisms. The project also has very applied goals inasmuch as information about
the pathways and mechanisms that regulate cnidocyte discharge may provide useful
insights into ways to inhibit cnidocyte discharge. Such information could
ultimately be used to develop ways to protect bathers and fishermen from the
painful and sometimes dihabilitating stings these animals can produce. The
project will provide training to at least one postdoctoral fellow, and to
several undergraduates through the Whitney Laboratory's very active and
successful Research Experience for Undergraduates Program. This program has an
excellent record of including minorities, and at least one minority student is
expected to be trained through this project.

