* 0110748
* Molecular Mechanisms of Inositol and Inositolhexakisphosphate Metabolism in Barley and Wheat Seed
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Edward Souza, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 08/31/2005
* USD 450,000.00

The objective of this project is to improve the understanding of phosphorous
storage and use in wheat and barley seeds. Approximately 75% of the phosphorous
in wheat and barley seeds is in the form of phytic acid, which makes the
phosphorous unavailable in diets of humans, poultry, swine, and fish. As a
consequence, much of the phosphorous consumed is excreted, which creates a
significant environmental problem in animal waste management. Moreover, humans
consuming a primarily grain-based diet may suffer mineral&lt;br/&gt;deficiencies
because of the ability of phytic acid to form tightly-bound complexes with
minerals. The enzymes involved in phytic acid accumulation in seeds are not
fully characterized. Low phytic acid wheat and barley selections have been
identified. Using these mutants and techniques of genetic analysis, this project
will further the understanding of this important metabolic process in cereal
seeds. The goal is to identify, clone, and characterize genes associated with
the synthesis of phytic acid and related phosphorous biochemical pathways
(specifically inositol monophosphatase and inositol kinase), to better
understand this pathway's role in plant biology, and ultimately to improve world
grain crops to reduce animal-derived phosphorous pollution and improve mineral
nutrition of humans and domesticated livestock.