* 0110168
* Sequence, Evolution and Expression of Mitochondrial Genomes in the Genus Zea
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Kathleen Newton, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2006
* USD 2,515,090.00

Mitochondria help to turn food into chemical energy in cells of plants and
animals. Although the nucleus contains the vast majority of the cell's genes,
mitochondria have their own DNA, coding for proteins vital for the survival of
cells. In animals and most plants, mitochondrial genes are inherited only
through the female (egg) parent. Plant mitochondrial genomes are generally much
larger and more variable than those of animals. Plant mitochondria code for more
proteins, including ones that can interfere with the development of pollen. This
type of infertility (which does not affect female parts of flowers) is called
cytoplasmic male sterility (CMS). The CMS trait can be exploited in the
production of stronger and higher-yielding hybrid plants. Despite their
relatively small sizes and importance, very few plant mitochondrial genomes have
been sequenced. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mitochondrial protein-coding genes appear
to be very similar in different types of plants; however, most of the
mitochondrial DNA lies between genes and its function and origin is unknown.
Furthermore, it appears that these "intergenic" DNA sequences have little in
common in different plants. Therefore, in order to understand how rapid changes
occur in plant mitochondrial DNA, we need to analyze mitochondrial genomes from
very closely related species. We will sequence the mitochondrial genomes from
four types of cultivated maize and one of its close wild relatives, as well as
from two other more distantly related monocot crop species, Tripsacum
dactyloides (eastern gamma grass) and sorghum. We will identify all the
potential genes and look at how they are expressed in different tissues and
stages of development. The project will contribute to an understanding of the
content, organization, expression and evolution of mitochondrial genomes
i&lt;br/&gt;