* 0110140
* Functional Analysis of the Sorghum Transcriptome
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2001,11/30/2006
* Lee Pratt, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 11/30/2006
* USD 3,677,642.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Initial NSF PGRP funding has permitted the
development of a public sorghum unigene resource that will approach 14,000
members during the coming year. This renewal proposal is designed to augment the
size, and thus value, of this resource while simultaneously using it to explore
the genomic/genetic/biochemical basis of sorghum's special adaptation to adverse
environments. The results of this research effort will reveal potential
strategies for improvement of the productivity of not only this, but other,
cereals that do not have sorghum's ability to withstand environmental extremes
such as drought. Fusion of the differing strengths of two research groups will
lead to a synergistic outcome. The University of Georgia (UGA) group has
developed substantial expertise in construction of a comprehensive unigene
resource and in development and mining of a secure and versatile Oracle-based
relational database management system (RDBMS). The Texas A &amp; M University
and USDA/ARS group has extensive experience with the experimental system
(sorghum), its physiology, genetics, and genome characteristics, and has
recently developed a powerful new tool for identifying on a combined
physical/genetic sorghum map the location of many of the ESTs that already have
been, and will continue to be, developed at UGA. &lt;br/&gt; We propose to
increase the sorghum unigene set to ~20,000 members by selective sequencing of
50,000 cDNAs from ~20 new libraries. Libraries will be enriched in full-length
cDNAs through a no-cost collaboration with Dr. Sumio Sugano. The UGA RDBMS will
be enhanced so that we can mine 5' and 3' UTRs to explore their participation in
regulation of genome expression in this monocot. The RDBMS has already been
modified to incorporate all returned BLAST data in readily mined tables. We will
use this information to investigate as well the potential role of alternative
splicing in regulation of genome expression. The unigene set will be maintained
and distributed as a public resource, and the UGA web site will be enhanced to
make this information available to the scientific community. Data will also be
made available to the developing Gramene database resource.&lt;br/&gt; Sorghum
genome function will be explored by coordinated microarray experiments designed
to permit the construction of a compendium of gene expression profiles. While
conducting assays that will answer specific biological questions, we will
simultaneously design experimental protocols with this objective in mind.
Specific immediate objectives include examination of well-characterized
genotypes to explore relationships between genome expression, light perception
and flowering time and to characterize pre- and post-flowering responses
(drought tolerance) in contrasting genotypes. The UGA RDBMS will be expanded to
include all relevant information, not only array data, but also experimental
parameters, phenotype, and so on. Microarray experiments will be designed around
a common core set of parameters such that variations in abiotic factors within a
single genotype or between different genotypes and a standard reference genotype
can inasmuch as possible be related always to this core. Such experimental
design will permit the development of a true compendium that will be available
for extensive mining beginning during this project period, but also extending
well beyond it. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deliverables&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1.
sorghum ESTs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ESTs are available from GenBank (dbEST) and
from http://fungen.botany.uga.edu/Projects/Sorghum/Sorghum.htm&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/
&gt;ESTs have been mapped to the rice genome at
http://www.gramene.org&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. sorghum unigene set
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;information about sorghum unigenes is available at http://
fungen.botany.uga.edu/Projects/Sorghum/Sorghum.htm&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;unigenes
have been mapped to the rice genome at
http://www.gramene.org&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. sorghum cDNA clones
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;clones are available by directing email to Dr. Marie-
Michele Cordonnier-Pratt at mmpratt@uga.edu (full instructions are at
http://fungen.botany.uga.edu/Projects/Sorghum/Sorghum.htm&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;