* 0110856
* Drosophila Even-Skipped Regulation and Function
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* James Jaynes, Thomas Jefferson University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 07/31/2005
* USD 448,247.00

0110856&lt;br/&gt;Jaynes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is to investigate
two aspects of transcriptional&lt;br/&gt;regulation in developing Drosophila
embryos. The first is a novel&lt;br/&gt;long-range activity that occurs at the
even-skipped (eve) locus at the&lt;br/&gt;blastoderm stage of development,
earlier than similar long-range activities&lt;br/&gt;are thought to be active at
other genes. The second is the mechanism of&lt;br/&gt;repression by the eve
protein product, Eve.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Long-range regulation is thought to
underlie such phenomena as&lt;br/&gt;epigenetic control of gene expression.
Epigenetic mechanisms are known to&lt;br/&gt;be important for maintaining the
correct spatial domains of expression of&lt;br/&gt;HOX and other genes, mediated
by genes of the Polycomb and trithorax&lt;br/&gt;groups. This and other
epigenetic phenomena, such as position effect&lt;br/&gt;variegation and
repression at the mating type locus in yeast, are mediated&lt;br/&gt;in part by
the regulation of chromatin structure. In contrast to the&lt;br/&gt;well-studied
examples of these phenomena in Drosophila, long-range&lt;br/&gt;regulation at
eve occurs at very early stages of development, so that its&lt;br/&gt;analysis
may provide a novel perspective on the mechanisms involved.
This&lt;br/&gt;proposal uses an integrated biochemical and genetic approach to
investigate&lt;br/&gt;these mechanisms, to identify specific DNA sequences that
mediate the&lt;br/&gt;effects, to identify and study the functions of proteins
that bind to those&lt;br/&gt;sequences, and to identify genes that contribute to
long-range regulation&lt;br/&gt;of eve.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transcriptional
repression is a crucial activity in the function of&lt;br/&gt;many DNA binding
proteins. Through work on this project, Eve has been&lt;br/&gt;shown to interact
functionally with the corepressor Groucho. Eve has also&lt;br/&gt;been shown to
contain a Groucho-independent repression activity. This&lt;br/&gt;proposal will
investigate the mechanisms of each of these activities using&lt;br/&gt;a genetic
approach. Fusion proteins between Eve repression domains and the Gal4 DNA
binding protein repress reporter transgenes both early and late in embryonic
development, providing an efficient means of screening for&lt;br/&gt;genetic
modifiers of this repression activity. This proposal will
screen&lt;br/&gt;simultaneously for modifiers of Groucho-dependent and
-independent&lt;br/&gt;repression activity. This work should provide novel
insights into the&lt;br/&gt;mechanisms of
repression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;