* 0110253
* Operation of the National Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory (NSCL) at Michigan State University as a National User Facility and Support for its Research Program
* MPS,PHY
* 11/01/2001,10/31/2006
* Richard York, Michigan State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Bradley D. Keister
* 10/31/2006
* USD 80,585,000.00

This award provides funds for operating the National
Superconducting&lt;br/&gt;Cyclotron Laboratory (NSCL) at Michigan State
University as a national&lt;br/&gt;user facility; for supporting the MSU faculty
and staff to conduct&lt;br/&gt;research in nuclear science, nuclear
astrophysics, and accelerator and&lt;br/&gt;instrumentation physics; and for
serving as a center dedicated to&lt;br/&gt;training the next generation of
scientists.&lt;br/&gt; Since its inception, the National Superconducting
Cyclotron Laboratory&lt;br/&gt;(NSCL) at Michigan State University has played a
significant role in&lt;br/&gt;nuclear and accelerator physics research, both in
the U.S. and&lt;br/&gt;worldwide. This role will continue at an enhanced level
with the&lt;br/&gt;Coupled Cyclotron Upgrade now nearing completion. In the
1996&lt;br/&gt;Long-Range Plan of the NSF/DOE Nuclear Science Advisory
Committee, this&lt;br/&gt;upgrade project was recommended to be the highest
priority for new&lt;br/&gt;construction.&lt;br/&gt; Large intensity gains of
intermediate-energy primary heavy-ion beams are&lt;br/&gt;made possible with the
coupled cyclotron operation. Together with the&lt;br/&gt;increased acceptance of
the new fragment separator, it will be possible&lt;br/&gt;to produce fast beams
of rare isotopes typically more intense by factors&lt;br/&gt;of 100 - 10,000
than available at the previous facility, providing&lt;br/&gt;luminosities in the
light-to-midrange mass region (A&lt;50) that will be&lt;br/&gt;unsurpassed
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt; A versatile array of new experimental devices will be
brought on-line&lt;br/&gt;that will significantly enhance the ability of users
to conduct cutting&lt;br/&gt;edge research with a broad range of rare isotope
beams. Three of these&lt;br/&gt;new instruments are funded by the NSF: (1) a set
of eighteen segmented&lt;br/&gt;germanium detectors for studies of intermediate
energy coulomb&lt;br/&gt;excitation and knockout reactions; (2) a 4-Tesla-meter
high-acceptance&lt;br/&gt;spectrometer that can be combined with large-area
neutron time-of-flight&lt;br/&gt;detectors for neutron and charged-particle
spectroscopy at very small&lt;br/&gt;angles; (3) a high-resolution silicon-strip
CsI detector array that&lt;br/&gt;permits measurements of isotopic abundances,
excited state populations,&lt;br/&gt;and isotopically resolved correlation
functions with a high precision&lt;br/&gt;and efficiency that cannot be matched
by any existing detector array. &lt;br/&gt;Other new equipment under development
include a stopped-beam facility&lt;br/&gt;(DOE funded) and a 9.4-Tesla precision
Penning ion trap (MSU funded) for&lt;br/&gt;precision mass measurements, weak
interaction studies, and atomic&lt;br/&gt;spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt; For the next
decade, the NSCL will be the premier rare isotope research&lt;br/&gt;facility in
the U.S., with a research focus on three major areas of&lt;br/&gt;forefront
scientific interest:&lt;br/&gt; 1. exploration of the nuclear processes that
occur in explosive stellar&lt;br/&gt;environments and that are responsible for
the ongoing synthesis of the&lt;br/&gt;elements in the cosmos;&lt;br/&gt; 2.
exploration of the properties of hot nuclear matter at sub- and&lt;br/&gt;supra-
normal densities (such as those found in neutron stars);&lt;br/&gt; 3.
exploration of exotic nuclei with unusual ratios of protons
to&lt;br/&gt;neutrons and the determination of their
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;