* 0110318
* Mode-Selective Differential Scattering Studies of Ion-Molecule Reaction Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2006
* Scott Anderson, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 07/31/2006
* USD 754,000.00

Dr. Scott L. Anderson of the University of Utah is funded for his research on
mode-selective differential scattering studies of ion-molecule reaction dynamics
by the Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division. This scattering
technique will be used, in conjunction with theory, to elucidate the detailed
mechnisms for reaction of polyatomic cations. Reactions of formaldehyde cation
will be used to probe the effects of collisional energy and vibrations on
resulting chemistry, and direct-dynamics simulations of the reaction dynamics
will be done in collaboration with Dr. William Hase. Synchrotron radiation
studies of reactions of water with other small cations, not amenable to
laboratory state-selection, will be made in collaboration with Dr. Cheuk Ng and
Dr. Rainer Dressler. REMPI photoelectron spectroscopy probing Rydberg state
properties and developing new cation state-selection routes will be done, and
the reactions of these ions will be studied. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reaction
dynamics among polyatomic molecules generally depend on kinetic energy and upon
how internal energy is partitioned among internal degrees of freedom. Laser
excitation and ion scattering methods will be used to tune selected reactants to
various states of excitation and the resulting collision and reaction dynamics
will be experimentally measured and theoretically calculated and simulated.
These studies will provide critically important advances in our understanding of
important gas-phase reactions important in combustion and interstellar
chemistries.&lt;br/&gt;