* 0110103
* Development of a New Ion-Molecule Reaction Dynamics Imaging Apparatus for Chemistry Research
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2006
* Kent Ervin, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Robert Kuczkowski
* 09/30/2006
* USD 355,520.00

With support from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF) Programs, Prof. Kent M. Ervin of
the University of Nevada in Reno will develop an ion-molecule reaction dynamics
imaging apparatus for chemistry research. This new analytical tool will
falicitate investigations of the dynamics and energetics of ion-molecule
reactions. In particular, it will allow the measurement of total reaction cross
sections and product velocity and angular distributions for ion-molecule
reactions with both high sensitivity and high energy and angular resolution. The
design calls for crossed ion and molecular pulsed beams with three major
components: a quadrupole ion trap source; a reflectron time-of-flight mass
spectrometer; and a velocity mapped ion imaging detector.

Applications include fundamental investigations of reaction dynamics as well as
ion and neutral thermochemistry. Greater accuracy and precision in energetics
measurements will be possible compared with traditional instruments because of
the high-resolution measurement of the kinetic energies of products. The
instrumentation design is potentially attractive for future analytical chemistry
applications - for example, for on-the-fly energy-selective collision-induced
dissociation analysis in gas chromatography/mass spectrometry or from
electrosprayed ions in liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry.

