* 0110301
* FASEB Summer Research Conference on "Chromatin and Transcription to be held on July 7-12, 2001, at the Conference Center in Snowmass Village, Colorado.
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2002
* Lorraine Pillus, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Tornow
* 05/31/2002
* USD 6,900.00

This grant will provide partial support for the sixth consecutive FASEB Summer
Research Conference on "Chromatin and Transcription," to be held on July 7-12,
2001, at the Conference Center in Snowmass Village, Colorado. The goal of this
highly successful series of meetings is to foster interactions between
researchers who study DNA-templated processes with individuals who study
chromatin structure and organization. These disciplines are moving together at a
rapid pace and are providing much new information for the basic biological
sciences. The meeting's central topic is the relationship between chromatin and
transcription. The regulation of chromatin impacts other critical biological
areas; for instance, there are important links between chromatin and nuclear
structure, chromosome organization, and the cell cycle, particularly relating to
recent discoveries about histone modification. Moreover, questions of genomic
stability and instability, which are relevant to genetic disease, will be
addressed in a session on developmental/epigenetic regulation. The timing and
location of the 2001 conference are ideal for productive and interactive
discussions about data in these rapidly evolving areas. NSF support will be used
to help new and young investigators to attend the meeting and present their
results in an oral format.&lt;br/&gt;