* 0110342
* Function of an Unconventional Myosin in Tetrahymena
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2002
* Ray Gavin, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 07/31/2002
* USD 70,001.00

Dr. Gavin's laboratory has identified a novel unconventional myosin, Myo1p, in
the model organism Tetrahymena thermophila, a ciliated protozoan. Approximately
2.7 kb of MYO1 have been cloned and sequenced thus far. To uncover the functions
of Myo1p, targeted gene disruption was used to create a Tetrahymena strain that
lacked a functional MYO1 gene. Transformed MYO1 cells had a reduced rate of food
vacuole formation, and the macronucleus frequently failed to elongate properly
during amitotic cell division resulting in grossly unequal segregation of DNA to
progeny. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to test additional hypotheses for Myo1p
function in endocytosis and nuclear segregation, a full-length MYO1 sequence
will have to be acquired and new reagents developed. This one-year project
involves the completion of MYO1 cloning and sequencing and the creation of
expression constructs for GFP-actin, GFP-tubulin, and GFP-Myo1p fusion proteins.
PCR-based library screening of both genomic DNA and cDNA libraries will be used
to complete the cloning and sequencing of MYO1. Screening is in progress and
will be continued over the next year. In addition, RACE will be used to confirm
the 5' and 3' ends of the cloned MYO1. Two different approaches involving
standard recombinant protocols will be used to create GFP constructs for
expression in Tetrahymena. In one approach, GFP-tagged genes (MYO1, actin, or
tubulin) will be linked to pVGF-1, a rDNA-based replicative vector. Another
approach for creating GFP constructs that will be used is to insert a GFP
tagging construct at the 5' end of the gene sequence of
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The functions and structure-function
relationships of conventional myosins, such as skeletal muscle myosin, have been
the subject of intense study for many years, and are reasonably well understood.
In contrast, the various unconventional non-muscle myosins have only recently
begun to attract serious research attention, and our understanding of the roles
they play in the life and functionality of different types of cells is only
slowly beginning to emerge. This project is expected to add to both the
knowledge base of unconventional myosins and to our understanding of the biology
of single-celled organisms such as the ciliated protozoan used in these studies.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;