* 0110920
* QEIB: Spatially-distributed Population Models with External Forcing and Spatial Control
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2001,02/28/2006
* Louis Gross, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 02/28/2006
* USD 842,492.00

Gross&lt;br/&gt;0110920&lt;br/&gt; The investigators develop methods to carry
out spatially&lt;br/&gt;explicit control to link natural and anthropogenic
forces that&lt;br/&gt;influence the demand for biological resources with the
dynamics&lt;br/&gt;of those resources. While there have been numerous
alternative&lt;br/&gt;approaches taken to add spatial components to population
models,&lt;br/&gt;few of these have attempted to deal with spatial control.
The&lt;br/&gt;investigators evaluate extensions of optimal control methods
for&lt;br/&gt;dynamical systems to spatial problems, with a focus on
general&lt;br/&gt;mathematical and computational issues for spatial control
linked&lt;br/&gt;with abiotic forcing of populations. The effort is motivated
by&lt;br/&gt;two specific examples. The first concerns black bears in
the&lt;br/&gt;southern Appalachians, a population with explicit
environmental&lt;br/&gt;forcing associated with acorn mast production, which
varies&lt;br/&gt;considerably in time and space. This interacts with
hunting,&lt;br/&gt;which is spatially restricted. The second example involves
an&lt;br/&gt;invasive exotic plant species, Lygodium microphyllum (Old
World&lt;br/&gt;Climbing Fern), in the Everglades of South Florida. This
species&lt;br/&gt;can completely cover the native tree islands of the region
and&lt;br/&gt;spatial control of hydrology may be applied to limit its
growth.&lt;br/&gt; Many of the current problems in regional management
involve&lt;br/&gt;issues of spatial control -- what to do, where to do it and
for&lt;br/&gt;what time periods. Examples include alternative plans for
land&lt;br/&gt;use, forest harvesting, location of dams, and water control.
A&lt;br/&gt;wide variety of the major environmental public policy issues
in&lt;br/&gt;the US require scientific assessments of the impacts
of&lt;br/&gt;alternative management. The investigators develop
new&lt;br/&gt;mathematical and computational approaches that can aid
managers&lt;br/&gt;and the public to compare alternative management plans of
land&lt;br/&gt;and regional resources. The objective also is to allow
for&lt;br/&gt;comparisons of alternative criteria, arising from
different&lt;br/&gt;stakeholders, to judge the public utility of different
spatial&lt;br/&gt;management plans. The project is supported by the
Applied&lt;br/&gt;Mathematics, Computational Mathematics, and Population
Biology&lt;br/&gt;programs and by the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;