* 0110402
* FASEB 2001 Conference on the Biology &amp; Chemistry of Vision
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2001,12/31/2001
* Edward Pugh, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Linda M. Kennedy
* 12/31/2001
* USD 6,000.00

Lay Abstract for Pugh (0110402)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
biology and chemistry of the photoreceptor cells of the retina has been one of
the most exciting and productive areas in basic and clinically relevant visual
science. This field includes fundamental research on the structure and function
of the molecules of biological photoreceptors cells and their G-protein cascade
signaling, including the details of the generation and modulation of the
electrical responses. The binannual FASEB conference on this topic has been
since its beginning in 1985 a premier meeting in which scientists with different
approaches, different preparations (ranging from mouse to frog to fruit flies),
and overlapping goals interact productively, sharing their most recent results
in a highly congenial and interactive environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
2001 FASEB meeting on the Biology and Chemistry of Vision well represents the
best science in the field, including sessions on classic but nonetheless current
topics (Phototransduction: Protein Structure and Function; Regulatory Proteins
of Transduction; Phototransduction in Single Rods and Cones), topics that are
very "hot" (The cone and rod retinoid cycles in health and disease), and topics
of burning interest in the application of fundamental science to eye disease
therapeutics (Animal Models and Gene Transfer to the Retina). The meeting also
is strongly catholic in its view of fundamental vision processes, incorporating
for example, a session on Phototransduction in Invertebrates, and a session in
which non-mammalian model systems (Xenopus; zebrafish) are
featured.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;National Science Foundation funding for the
conference will be used to support travel fellowships to the meeting for young
scientists, graduate students and post-doctoral fellows, who are making
presentations at the meeting, and for some travel support for speakers. NSF
support has played an important role in developing the careers of the young
scientists in this field, by providing them the opportunity to interact
personally with the leaders in the field over a five day period in an informal
setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;