* 0110206
* Towards the Complete Gene Inventory and Function of the Medicago Truncatula Genome
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2006
* Douglas Cook, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 11/30/2006
* USD 6,828,875.00

The legume family is one of the most important groups of plants worldwide
because they have been fundamental to development of modern agricultural
systems. Agronomically important members include soybean and rice in Asia, and
maize and beans in the Americas. Legumes are also the third largest family of
flowering plants. On a worldwide basis, this plant family contributes 33% of
humankind's protein intake, while also serving as an important source of fodder
and forage for animals, and of edible and industrial oils. Legumes are also
distinguished by their unique property of symbiotic nitrogen fixation, providing
one of the major sources of available nitrogen in the biosphere. In the US
alone, legumes are grown on over 80 million acres, where they fix approximately
6 million metric tons of nitrogen worth an estimated $4.5 billion.

In response to the need for a tractable genetic system in legumes, scientists
have developed Medicago truncatula as a model species for study of biological
and agronomic issues important to legumes. Of particular significance, Medicago
is amenable to efficient molecular, genetic and reverse-genetic analyses, unlike
the major crop legumes.

This project involves the large-scale analysis of the genome of Medicago. A map
of the organization of genes (comparative genomics), of their functions in
legume biology (functional genomics), and analysis and public distribution of
the data by means of computational tools (bioinformatics), are the emphases of
this project. Recent results from this research team document the first
indications of conserved genome structure between Medicago and crop legumes, and
between Medicago and the well-characterized model plant Arabidopsis thaliana. We
have described the genomic architecture of resistance gene analogs and
discovered new lineages of legume resistance genes. We have contributed to the
development of a public Expressed Sequence Tag (EST) resource containing in
excess of 127,000 sequences, and created publicly accessible databases to relate
this information to other scientists and to the public. Already this information
has accelerated the pace of discovery and characterization of agronomically
important legume genes and traits, in both Medicago and crop legume species.

The goal of this research is to extend these analyses by contributing to a
multi-institutional, international effort to develop a complete gene inventory
and functional analysis of the Medicago genome. The specific objectives of this
research include (1) creating a comprehensive physical map of the genome, (2)
assaying the coordinate expression of thousands of genes under conditions of (a)
plant development, (b) interactions with microorganisms, and (c) nutrient
stress, and (3) continuing to implement and improve publicly accessible database
activities.

The long-term impact of this research will be to integrate genetic and
functional information across legumes, and thereby expand opportunities for
basic and applied research in economically important legume species. This
research will allow scientists to compare genes of agronomic and scientific
interest in Medicago and the related crop legumes. This knowledge will enable
more efficient cloning and characterization of valuable genes and traits, such
as disease resistance and crop productivity, and it will ultimately facilitate
the development of improved crop varieties. The database of expressed genes
generated by this research will enable the detailed analysis of the role of
specific genes in plant growth and development. Many of the genes identified in
the course of this research will become the focus of crop improvement strategies
and of continued scientific investigation by legume biologists. The proposed
work benefits enormously from previous NSF-sponsored research on the model plant
Arabidopsis. Likewise, completion of the project will benefit not only research
on legumes, but the broader scientific community as well.