* 0110269
* Structural and Biochemical Investigations on Fe-Only Hydrogenases
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2001,06/30/2003
* John Peters, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/2003
* USD 245,000.00

The main objective of this projectl is to investigate the structural and
catalytic&lt;br/&gt;properties of Fe-Only hydrogenases. Hydrogenases catalyze
reversible hydrogen&lt;br/&gt;oxidation and function physiologically to either
recycle the reduced electron carriers that&lt;br/&gt;accumulate during a
fermentative metabolism or couple the oxidation of hydrogen to
the&lt;br/&gt;generation of reduced electron carriers that can be utilized in
energy yielding processes.&lt;br/&gt;The metal-containing hydrogenases are
classified according to their metal content and&lt;br/&gt;include those that
contain both Ni and Fe (NiFe-hydrogenases) and those that contain
just&lt;br/&gt;Fe (Fe-Only hydrogenases). These enzymes are of paramount
importance in the&lt;br/&gt;metabolism of numerous microorganisms. In addition,
since hydrogen is being explored&lt;br/&gt;as a future alternative fuel source,
there is considerable interest in the details of these&lt;br/&gt;hydrogen
producing biological catalysts. The studies will focus primarily on testing
hypotheses that&lt;br/&gt;were developed as a result of the detailed structural
analysis of the Fe-Only hydrogenase&lt;br/&gt;(CpI) isolated from the anaerobic
soil microorganism Clostridium pasteurianum. The specific objectives are (1)
additional structural and biochemical studies on CpI probing a number of
remaining key questions with respect to the H Cluster structure and the role of
the accessory [FeS] clusters; (2) site-specific&lt;br/&gt;amino acid
substitution experiments on CpI to examine the role of the
polypeptide&lt;br/&gt;environment of the H Cluster in catalysis and stability;
(3) structural characterization of&lt;br/&gt;the second Fe-Only hydrogenase
(CpII) from C. pasteurianum to ascertain its primary&lt;br/&gt;sequence and
structural relationship to other Fe-Only hydrogenases and to probe
the&lt;br/&gt;contributions of the environment of the H Cluster and the
accessory FeS clusters in&lt;br/&gt;defining hydrogen oxidation versus proton
reduction activities in the Fe-Only&lt;br/&gt;hydrogenases. The above objectives
will be pursued by a multidisciplinary approach combining&lt;br/&gt;biochemical
methods, spectroscopic methods and structure determination by
X-ray&lt;br/&gt;diffraction methods to answer some of the key remaining
questions with respect to the&lt;br/&gt;structure and function of Fe-Only
hydrogenases.