* 0110595
* Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP): Alabama Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation Phase III
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2001,12/31/2008
* Mary Braswell, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Cooperative Agreement
* A.  Hicks
* 12/31/2008
* USD 5,194,516.00

The underrepresentation of minorities in the science, mathematics, engineering,
and technology&lt;br/&gt;workforce is still a national problem, ten years after
the National Science Foundation (NFS) initiated&lt;br/&gt;the Louis Stokes
Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) Program. By all accounts
great&lt;br/&gt;progress has been made, but not enough to turn the problem
around. As one of the six oldest National&lt;br/&gt;Science Foundation (NSF)
Alliances in the nation, Alabama has been in the forefront of efforts
to&lt;br/&gt;increase the quantity and the quality of underrepresented
minorities receiving baccalaureate degrees in&lt;br/&gt;science, mathematics,
engineering, and technology (SMET) fields. Many of the Alabama
Alliance's&lt;br/&gt;programs have been replicated by other alliances. The
Alabama Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority&lt;br/&gt;Participation (ALSAMP)
began in 1991 with a baseline of 431 minority SEM undergraduate
degrees&lt;br/&gt;and reached a peak of 979 in 1999, a 127% increase. The
baseline minority SEM enrollment for&lt;br/&gt;ALSAMP is 3,301. The minority SEM
enrollment for the 1999-2000 academic year is 5,876, a 78%&lt;br/&gt;increase.
These are indicators of success for ALSAMP Phase I and Phase
II.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ALSAMP Phase III proposal is designed to a) sustain
the B.S. Degree production levels&lt;br/&gt;and student retention rates
specified as Phase II goals and b) define a baseline level of and
commitment&lt;br/&gt;to a significant increase in the number of previous,
current, and future baccalaureate recipients entering&lt;br/&gt;either a SMET
graduate program or a graduate program in teacher education. Thus, the
project&lt;br/&gt;approach for LSAMP will involve sustaining and
institutionalizing current LSAMP Phase II activities&lt;br/&gt;and the
implementation of new LSAMP Phase III activities as given
below.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Programs to be Sustained and Institutionalized New
LSAMP Phase III Programs&lt;br/&gt;LSAMP Summer Bridge Program GRE Preparation
for All Students&lt;br/&gt;LSAMP Scholars Program Undergraduate Research for All
Students&lt;br/&gt;Summer Research Internship Program GRE Required for All LSAMP
Students&lt;br/&gt;LSAMP Graduate Bridge Program&lt;br/&gt;SEM Student Mentoring
Program Increase Number of SMET Students Entering Graduate School through
Tracking Effort&lt;br/&gt;Drop-In Centers/Cooperative Learning Intensify
Recruitment of Technology Students&lt;br/&gt;Summer Research Conference Increase
Collaboration with Other Programs&lt;br/&gt;Publication of The National LSAMP
Magazine National LSAMP Publication in Phase III Budget&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
major portion of the Phase III budget will support these new programs.
Consequently, the&lt;br/&gt;Phase II programs will be sustained by cost sharing
from participating institutions, support from&lt;br/&gt;private sources, and
institutionalization. During the next five years, LSAMP will define a
baseline&lt;br/&gt;level of and commit to a significant increase in the number
of baccalaureate degree recipients entering&lt;br/&gt;either a SMET graduate
program or a graduate program in teacher education. This effort will
involve&lt;br/&gt;preparing students for success in graduate school and
placement in a graduate school of choice.&lt;br/&gt;Students will be tracked
through graduate school by means of the LSAMP Success Link Program&lt;br/&gt;and
a graduate student database will be maintained by the
Alliance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaboration with other NSF programs will be
increased substantially, particularly with the&lt;br/&gt;NSF Alliances for
Graduate Education and the Professoriate Program and the NSF Urban
Systemic&lt;br/&gt;Program. Program activities will be disseminated through the
publication of the National LSAMP&lt;br/&gt;Magazine and a full-time program
evaluator will be appointed to oversee assessment and
evaluation&lt;br/&gt;activities.