* 0110385
* Collaborative Research: Biochemical and Biophysical Characterization of Cytochrome b5 from Outer Mitochondrial Membrane
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2001,07/31/2003
* Mario Rivera, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2003
* USD 220,000.00

Membrane-anchored, mammalian cytochromes b5 are located in the endoplasmic
reticulum (microsomal or Mc cyt b5) and the outer membranes of mitochondria (OM
cyt b5). Although Mc cytochromes b5 have been identified from a number of
mammalian sources, the only OM cyt b5 that has been positively identified to
date originates from rat liver. The three-dimensional structures of rat OM cyt
b5 and the Mc cytochromes b5 are very similar. Nonetheless, rat OM cyt b5 has a
much lower reduction potential and much higher stability toward chemical and
thermal denaturation than the Mc cytochromes b5. Furthermore, hemin in rat OM
cyt b5 is kinetically trapped at physiological temperatures. From amino acid
sequence alignments, crystal structure comparisons, and molecular dynamics
simulations, several amino acid residues can be identified as potential
determinants of the unusual biophysical properties of rat OM cyt b5.
Consequently, a systematic study will be conducted in which these residues in
the rat OM protein are replaced with the corresponding residues in the bovine Mc
isoform. These studies will be performed with the expectation of decreasing the
stability and kinetic barriers for hemin release of rat OM cyt b5. A
complementary study will be carried out in which the stability of bovine Mc cyt
b5 will be increased by incorporating the stabilizing features found in the rat
OM protein. It is also important to establish whether the biophysical properties
of rat OM cyt b5 are restricted to this protein, or rather are common to
mitochondrial cytochromes b5. Consequently, the gene coding for human testis cyt
b5, a protein very likely to be the human analogue of rat OM cyt b5, will be
synthesized, placed in a vector suitable for high level expression and
characterized for its biophysical properties.