* 0110396
* Experimental and Theoretical Studies of Charge-Charge Interactions in Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2001,11/30/2004
* George Makhatadze, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 11/30/2004
* USD 360,000.00

Understanding the mechanisms of stabilization of protein structure represents
one of the major&lt;br/&gt;aspects of the protein folding problem. The
contributions of various short-range interactions,&lt;br/&gt;such as hydrogen
bonding, the hydrophobic effect, and configurational entropy, to
protein&lt;br/&gt;stability have been well documented. However, it is becoming
more and more evident that the&lt;br/&gt;long-range electrostatic interactions
between charged protein groups are also important&lt;br/&gt;contributors to
protein structure and stability. The proposed work has an overall goal to
explore&lt;br/&gt;the relation between the charge-charge interactions on the
protein surface and the protein&lt;br/&gt;stability by engineering a
thermostable protein by redesigning the charge-charge interactions on
the&lt;br/&gt;protein surface, and analyzing the optimized charge-charge
interactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theoretical part of the work is based on
the calculation of the charge-charge&lt;br/&gt;interactions in proteins using
Tanford-Kirkwood approach with Bashford-Karplus approximation&lt;br/&gt;(TK-BK
procedure). The experimental measurement of the stabilities of the protein
variants&lt;br/&gt;designed using TK-BK predictions will be done using
differential scanning calorimetry, or using&lt;br/&gt;chemical (urea) induced
denaturation monitored by the changes in the circular dichroism
or&lt;br/&gt;fluorescence intensity properties. The fundamental importance of
this research is that&lt;br/&gt;using a combination of theoretical calculations
and experimental measurements the relationship&lt;br/&gt;between charge-charge
interactions and the protein stability will be explored. From the
practical&lt;br/&gt;point this research will provide the foundation for the
design of proteins stable at extreme&lt;br/&gt;temperatures. This will benefit
the industrial use of proteins where thermostability of enzymes is&lt;br/&gt;in
many cases the largest obstacle.