* 0110289
* ITR/AP: Forward and Inverse Conditional Moment Algorithms for Flow and Transport in Multiscale, Randomly Heterogeneous Hydrogeologic Environments Under Uncertainty
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Shlomo Neuman, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/2006
* USD 400,000.00

0110289&lt;br/&gt;Neuman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To efficiently utilize and protect
subsurface water supplies, one must quantify fluid flow and solute transport in
complex hydrogeologic environments. Such environments exhibit random spatial
variations in hydraulic and transport properties on a multiplicity of scales.
The trend has been to describe this variability geostatistically and to analyze
subsurface fluid flow and solute transport stochastically. The common method of
stochastic analysis is computational Monte Carlo simulation. We propose an
alternative, which allows one to compute leading multiscale conditional ensemble
moments of groundwater flow and transport directly on the basis of nonlocal
(integro-differential) equations that are distribution free. The approach rests
on a body of work published by the PI, his students and coworkers over the last
few years. It provides forward predictions of flow but not transport,
conditioned on measurements of hydraulic conductivity but not head or
concentration. We propose to fill these gaps by developing a forward
computational algorithm for transport and inverse algorithms for both flow and
transport, within a multiscale framework proposed by us recently. No such
inverse or multiscale algorithms presently exist, and their development would
constitute an important conceptual and algorithmic breakthrough. In particular,
our objectives are to develop, within a multiscale stochastic framework, (1) an
inverse algorithm that allows conditioning moments equations of steady state
groundwater flow on measured hydraulic head and conductivity; (2) a high-
accuracy forward conditional moment algorithm to predict advective solute
transport in random steady state velocity fields, and to assess prediction
errors; and (3) an inverse algorithm that allows conditioning moments equations
of advective solute transport on measured concentration, hydraulic head and
conductivity.&lt;br/&gt;