* 0110363
* SBIR Phase II:   Interactive Tools for Active Learning (ITAL)
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Yakov Cherner, ATEL, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 08/31/2004
* USD 499,855.00

&lt;br/&gt; This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project,
ITAL-2 (Interactive Tools for Active Learning) will develop comprehensive
e-Learning solution for conventional academic Science, Mathematics, and
Educational Technology (SMET) education and for corporate training. The project
product, 'Active Learning Suites' (ALS), is a highly interactive online learning
content delivery and management system. It includes an Active Shell, Simulations
and Virtual Experiments interactive lessons, a Problem Solving Tutor, a
scriptable Instructor's Agent, an Assessment system, Authoring tools, and more.
ALS uses real-life objects and situations, such as those related to home,
telecommunications and sports, as the context for science investigations.
Immersion in these contexts that are populated with appropriate sets of objects
enables learners to discover the connections between the scientific theory and
its practical applications in technology. Authoring tools helps instructors to
easily assemble a single e-learning environment from heterogeneous educational
resources and the WWW. ALS can facilitate both problem-based learning and more
conventional learning strategies. It can be used on a campus or in a school
equipped with either stand-alone computers or a local network, at home (self-
learning), in a corporate setting, or via distance learning over the Intranet
and Internet. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; Active Learning Suites (ALS) offer a wide
variety of lessons that can be designed to address many different audiences: (1)
two-year college students enrolled in science, technology and engineering
programs; (2) non-science majors; (3) high school students taking science and
technology courses; and (4) instructors and technicians of telecommunications
companies. The approach of immersing students or technicians in practical
problems has great potential for facilitating understanding of
science.&lt;br/&gt;