* 0110893
* The Wnt Pathway and Inductive Competence in Early Xenopus Development
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Paul Wilson, Joan and Sanford I. Weill Medical College of Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 07/31/2005
* USD 50,898.00

0110893 Wilson

Inductive signals between cell populations govern much of embryonic development.
A central feature of these interactions is changing competence: the response of
cells to particular signaling ligands evolves in a complex and precisely
regulated manner. The long-term goal of the proposed research is to understand
the molecular basis of competence, using changing responses to Wnt signaling in
early Xenopus development as a model. In the first hours of Xenopus development,
activation of the Wnt signaling pathway drives formation of the dorsal axis;
only a few hours later, this response is lost, and the pathway instead functions
in mesodermal and neural patterning. The objectives of the current project are
to understand why an important target gene, siamois, is activated by early but
not by late Wnt signaling, and to tie competence of the Wnt pathway to induce
this gene to the broader embryological response, dorsal axis formation. Using a
simple promoter-reporter assay, the siamois promoter will be analyzed to
identify sequence elements important in the loss of Wnt responsiveness at later
stages. Competence of siamois itself to induce a dorsal axis will then be
examined using inducible activated and inhibitory versions of siamois, thus
linking the regulation of this gene to axis induction competence. Both aims will
make use of a newly developed tool for inducible stimulation of Wnt responses,
consisting of a dexamethasone-inducible, activated form of XTCF3, a DNA-binding
protein known to mediate transcriptional responses to Wnt signaling. This work
will contribute to elucidating the mechanism of inductive competence, an
important and long-standing problem in developmental biology.