* 0110839
* Molecular Determinants of G Protein Signaling Selectivity
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2002
* Stephen Graber, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 07/31/2002
* USD 45,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;On the order of a thousand different G protein coupled receptors
(GPCR) exist in mammals to mediate a diverse array of physiological responses
initiated by hormones, neurotransmitters, sensory stimuli, and other signaling
molecules. Each GPCR is coupled to a heterotrimeric G protein that is critical
for transmitting the signal initiated by receptor binding to the intracellular
environment. A large number of distinct G protein heterotrimers are capable of
forming from some 20 alpha, 6 beta and 12 gamma subunits. The abundance of
distinct subtypes identified for each component is a striking feature of G
protein coupled signaling pathways. The functional significance of such closely
related molecules remains to be appreciated, and more importantly, the molecular
basis for selective interactions among the components is largely unknown. At the
biochemical level, significant contributions in this area can be made by
developing the ability to employ components of signaling pathways in
reconstitution paradigms. The ability to functionally couple receptors expressed
in Sf9 cell membranes with exogenous G proteins has been developed and will be
used to examine the G protein coupling behavior of distinct subtypes of
muscarinic receptors capable of functionally distinguishing among individual G
alpha subunits. The molecular basis of this selectivity will be defined by
comparing the abilities of G protein heterotrimers containing chimeric alpha
subunits, comprised of various regions of the alpha q subunit, to interact with
the muscarinic M1 receptors. Functional interactions will be assessed by
examining both the ability of the G protein to induce the high affinity state of
the receptor and the ability of the agonist occupied receptor to catalyze
guanine nucleotide exchange on the G protein. The unique feature of this project
is the ability to examine interactions of defined molecular species in a single
eukaryotic membrane environment using a reconstitution paradigm where the
stoichiometries can be controlled with some precision. Identification of the
individual amino acids on G alpha subunits involved in functional interactions
with muscarinic receptors will be required to understand the selective
interaction of these GPCRs with particular G alpha subunits and is likely to
reveal the precise molecular mechanism underlying receptor mediation of the
guanine nucleotide exchange process, the initial intracellular step in a
profusion of signal transduction cascades. &lt;br/&gt;