* 0110807
* Collaborative Research: The Evolutionary Interplay between Life Histories, Morphologies, Performance, and Behavior in Trinidad Guppies
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2004
* Jeffrey Walker, University of Southern Maine
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 06/30/2004
* USD 70,000.00

Evolution by natural selection, or the principle of adaptation, was Charles
Darwin's proposed mechanism for evolution. Darwin viewed an adaptation as any
feature of an organism that arose as consequence of natural selection and
enhanced the survival and reproductive potential of the individual. Yet,
understanding and empirically documenting the relationship between a particular
trait that appears to be adaptive and the factors that selected for the
evolution of the trait remains a challenging and controversial task. In the time
since Darwin, the main lessons learned from empirical studies of natural
selection are that adaptations rarely occur in isolation, but rather are
constrained by the function of other interacting traits, and are a ultimately a
compromise between integrated aspects of the organism. Accordingly, the study of
adaptation requires an understanding of how different traits constrain each
other and how they are integrated to produce locally adapted phenotypes. There
is only limited empirical evidence for how such constraints are manifested in
real organisms. The proposed work will examine how selection acts on the
integration of reproductive strategies, body shape, swimming performance, and
behavior in natural populations of the guppy, Poecilia reticulata. The guppy is
a model organism for the proposed work because it is one of the few organisms
where adaptation has been documented. This previous work shows rapid adaptive
changes in the reproductive traits of guppies in response to predatory fish. The
work proposed here will first document the correlations among reproductive
traits, body morphology, habitat use, foraging behavior, and stream type with
field observations on female and male guppies from populations that are subject
to different selection pressures. It will focus on the combined influences of
stream current and predation. Because the reproductive traits of guppies are
already known from these sites, the morphological and behavioral results
obtained will provide the first data on whether body morphology, foraging
behavior, habitat use, and reproductive strategies predictably covary with each
other, or whether they vary independently in response to different selection
pressures. Guppies will then be reared in the lab under different environments
to test the degree to which these trait differences between populations
represent fixed genetic differences or phenotypic plasticity. Finally, the
proposed work will examine for the first time the consequences of pregnancy on
body morphology and locomotion in an aquatic species by measuring how body
profile and swimming performance change over the course of the reproductive
cycle. Steady and escape swimming performance of gravid females from high and
low predation localities will test the consequences of different reproductive
allotments on locomotion and how adaptive changes in offspring number may
compromise locomotion. By studying how reproductive strategies, morphology,
locomotor performance, and behavior interact with each other and collectively
respond to different selection pressures, the proposed work will provide a
better understanding of the trade-offs faced by live-bearing fish adapting to
their local environments.