* 0110622
* Transcriptional and Post-Translational Regulation of Plant Vacuolar Na+/H+ Antiports
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2005
* Eduardo Blumwald, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Gavin Thompson
* 06/30/2005
* USD 360,000.00

Environmental stress due to salinity is one of the most serious factors limiting
the productivity of agricultural crops, which are predominantly sensitive to the
presence of high concentrations of salts in the soil. A comparison of ion
distribution in cells and tissues of various plant species indicates that a
primary characteristic of salt tolerant plants is their ability to exclude
sodium out of the cell and to take up sodium and to sequester it in the cell
vacuoles. Dr. Blumwald's work has identified a family of vacuolar Na+/H+
antiports that play a paramount role in the ability of plants to grow in high
NaCl concentrations. These antiports actively move ions into the vacuole,
removing the potentially harmful ions from the cytosol. These ions, in turn, act
as an osmoticum within the vacuole, which then maintain water flow into the
cell, thus allowing plants to grow in soils containing high salinity. The
cloning of plant Na+/H+ antiports and the generation of transgenic Arabidopsis
thaliana plants with enhanced salt tolerance provides a unique opportunity to
study the role of these transporters in salt tolerance and ion homeostasis in
vivo. Dr. Blumwald's proposed research aims to identify and characterize
proteins regulating the vacuolar Na+/H+ antiport activity, providing insights on
the role of Ca2+-dependent transduction processes in the regulation of
intracellular ion balance. The second objective will serve to identify
mechanisms regulating the transcription of the antiports in salt tolerant plants
that could be used to design crops with enhanced salt tolerance. The third
objective, will use knockout mutants and RNA interference to determine the
physiological role of the vacuolar antiports in K+ nutrition.