* 0110594
* Protein Export in Escherichia coli
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2006
* Ann Flower, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 07/31/2006
* USD 498,023.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates a problem faced by all living
organisms: how are proteins transported across membranes? These studies will use
the model organism, Escherichia coli, which shares many aspects of the protein
export process with higher organisms. In particular, the process of bacterial
protein export is similar to that of eukaryotic endoplasmic reticulum targeting.
The wealth of genetic and biochemical tools available make the use of E. coli
ideal for these studies. This project combines bacterial genetics and
biochemical assays to create novel approaches to study the protein export
pathway.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most proteins are translocated across the
cytoplasmic membrane of E. coli by the multisubunit Sec translocase. The
essential components of the Sec system are SecA, SecE and SecY, while SecD, SecF
and SecG enhance the efficiency of translocation. Export of a secretory protein
requires sequential, productive, and seemingly complex interactions between the
Sec proteins. The long-term goals of Dr. Flower's laboratory are to understand
the functions of the Sec proteins and to elucidate the requirements for
productive interactions amongst them. Undergraduate and graduate students will
participate in the conduct of this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three specific
goals will be pursued in this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) The inter- and
intra-molecular interactions between proteins of the translocation complex will
be examined by genetic analyses, including synthetic lethality suppression and
multiple mutation experiments. Novel mutations are expected from these
experiments that will shed light on the interactions between SecE and SecY.
&lt;br/&gt;2) The mechanism of action of mutant forms of SecE and SecY,
including new mutants isolated from goal 1, will be investigated using in vitro
translocation and ATPase assays. The combination of new genetic screens and the
biochemical assays provides a unique approach to understanding the functions of
SecE and SecY. &lt;br/&gt;3) The role of membrane phospholipids in protein
export will be explored by examination of the effect of mutations in
phospholipid biosynthesis pathways on export and by determination of
phospholipid ratios in strains with specific export defects. Results obtained
previously indicate that SecG function is related to membrane phospholipid
content; this hypothesis will now be tested. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These
experiments will further our understanding of the formation and function of a
complex multisubunit nanoscale biological machine, and will contribute to the
training of the next generation of scientists and scientifically literate
citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;