* 0110113
* Developmental Polarity in Fucoid Zygotes
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Darryl Kropf, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Susan J. Lolle
* 07/31/2005
* USD 420,500.00

0110113&lt;br/&gt;Kropf&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Zygotes (fertilized eggs) of fucoid
brown algae are ideal for investigating the mechanisms that establish polarity
in developing organisms. Dr. Kropf's lab has for some time been investigating
the cellular and physiological mechanisms that establish a growth axis and
determine the division plane in these zygotes. From this work they have
formulated hypotheses to be tested during this award period. The working
hypotheses are as follows:&lt;br/&gt;Growth axis specification. Dr. Kropf
proposes that polarity is first set in place at fertilization with the site of
sperm entry specifying the rhizoid pole of the growth axis. This site is marked
by local assembly of a cytoskeletal element, F-actin. The fertilized egg then
settles onto the rocks in the intertidal zone, attaches and begins to monitor
its environment for spatial information to help determine the direction of the
rocky substratum. If relevant vectors are perceived, the sperm-induced axis is
abandoned and a new axis is generated such the new rhizoid pole is toward the
rock surface. Concomitantly, the actin patch at the sperm entry site is
disassembled and a new patch is assembled at the nascent rhizoid site.
Realignment of the axis can occur repeatedly over several hours. Finally, about
12 hours after fertilization, growth ensues at the current rhizoid pole; the
rhizoid formed attaches the zygote firmly to rocks and eventually forms the
holdfast of the alga.&lt;br/&gt;Division plane alignment. Dr. Kropf speculates
that division plane is determined at telophase of mitosis such that the new cell
wall is deposited transverse to the axis defined by the two telophase nuclei.
The orientation of the telophase nuclei is determined by centrosomal position.
Centrosomes are inherited paternally and separate to opposite sides of the
zygotic nucleus. Initially, the axis defined by the two centrosomes is randomly
aligned with the growth axis, but prior to cytokinesis the centrosomal axis
becomes aligned with the growth axis by a combination of nuclear rotation and
spindle elongation. &lt;br/&gt;Research in this proposal will test and extend
the most important aspects of the models. The primary objectives are to 1)
investigate the requirement for dynamic actin in specifying the growth axis, 2)
identify actin nucleating molecules, 3) determine the role of asymmetric cell
shape in division plane alignment, 4) assess whether telophase spindle position
determines division plane, and 5) investigate the role of microtubules in
defining the division plane.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;