* 0110847
* Free Energies in Biomolecular Systems: Development and Application of Computational Approaches
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Benoit Roux, Joan and Sanford I. Weill Medical College of Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2004
* USD 350,000.00

By and large, biological processes involving ligand binding specificity,
protein-protein association, protein-membrane association, protonation and
unprotonation of ionizable groups, and macromolecular conformational changes,
are given thermodynamically by a reversible work function, the free energy, or
more generally by its configuration-dependent equivalent. A quantitative
determination of free energies is, therefore, a problem of central importance in
theoretical biophysics. Computational approaches at different levels of
complexity and sophistication can be used to try and address this problem. Those
range from (relatively expensive) molecular dynamics free energy simulations
(MD/FES) based on all-atom models in which the solvent is treated explicitly to
(relative inexpensive) Poisson-Boltzmann (PB) continuum electrostatic models in
which the influence of the solvent is incorporated implicitly. The goal of this
research is to refine and extend current computational approaches used in the
modeling of biomolecular systems. More particularly, protocols that will provide
increased accuracy and reliability in estimating free energies while remaining
computationally tractable will be developed and tested. Progress in these
computational methodologies is expected to have a great impact on the rational
design of drugs and biomolecules.