* 0110432
* SBIR Phase II:  Revitalizing Spectrofluorimeters with Cryogenic Fiber Optic Probes, Fluorescence Lifetime Capability, and Tunable Laser Sources
* TIP,TI
* 11/15/2001,10/31/2004
* Greg Gillispie, DAKOTA TECHNOLOGIES INC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 10/31/2004
* USD 762,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop new
instrumentation for fluorescence and phosphorescence spectral measurements.
Phase I produced a customized spectrofluorimeter equipped with a tunable laser
source, fluorescence lifetime capability, and fiber optic probe for cryogenic
measurements. However, better methods are needed to analyze benzo[c]fluorene,
which researchers now believe may be an environmental concern comparable to
benzo[a]pyrene. Phase II will develop an upgraded new instrument, capable of
retrofitting the low temperature probe, fluorescence lifetime, and tunable laser
capabilities onto laboratory spectrofluorimeters. The emission monochromator,
photomultiplier tube detector, and control/analysis computer can be retained
from the spectrofluorimeter, and none of its functionality will be lost. Phase
II is expected to produce several models of commercial spectrofluorimeters, test
data for publication in technical journals and trade magazines, and instrument
upgrade options as a commercial service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The market for
these upgrades presently has an estimated 30,000-40,000 spectrofluorimeters in
service. An additional 4,000 individuals or institutions purchase new units each
year. The new instrument upgrades will be used in research and development,
analytical services, quality control, environmental studies and surveys, and
teaching and other applications. &lt;br/&gt;