* 0110235
* 2001 Gordon Research Conference on Organic Thin Films; Newport, RI; June 24-29, 2001
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2002
* Matthew Tirrell, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2002
* USD 6,000.00

This biennial conference focuses on the frontiers of science, and some of the
resulting technology, in the field of thin films of organic materials. The
principal themes of this year's conference are Single molecule phenomena, Thin
film properties, Self-assembled surfaces, Patterned surfaces, Polyelectrolyte
surfaces, Electroactive organic materials, Photonic band gap and reflective
polymers, Colloidal crystals and Biological thin films. There is a definite
emphasis on developing and exploiting the ability to build in a rich array of
functionality and to control inter-particle and inter-surface potentials using
organic materials. Advances in the science of thin films or organic materials
opening up new areas of biomolecular science and biomimetic materials, creating
new ways of displaying and communication information and developing new routes
to functional materials.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The structure of the conference
will allow substantial time for discussion in that approximately 22 speakers
have been invited, based on a plan to have 5 speakers per day Monday - Thursday,
with 2 speakers in the opening session on Sunday evening. There will also be a
poster session, given particular attention during the regular meeting time
(currently planned for Tuesday morning), so that these important contributions
get undivided attention early in the week to allow for substantial follow-up. A
final novel feature will be a free-form discussion of key research challenges in
organic thin film research, animated by a group of leaders in the field. There
will also be 7 invited discussion leaders, in addition to the chair and vice
chair, who will stimulate discussion at each of the sessions. The expectation is
that at least 25% of the group of 29 invited speakers and discussion leaders,
will be women or under-represented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;