* 0110831
* The Photon Counting Histogram - A Fluorescence Fluctuation Technique For Studying Protein-Protein Interactions
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2001,01/31/2005
* Joachim Mueller, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/2005
* USD 324,102.00

The photon counting histogram (PCH) is a recently introduced technique that
exploits&lt;br/&gt;fluorescence fluctuations to distinguish molecules by their
intrinsic fluorescence brightness. For&lt;br/&gt;example, a homodimer A2 will
appear twice as bright as its monomer A, if each protein A carries&lt;br/&gt;one
fluorescent label. The main focus of this proposal is the development of dual-
color PCH.&lt;br/&gt;Adding a second detection channel and splitting the photons
between both channels according to&lt;br/&gt;color will increase the sensitivity
and capability of the PCH technique tremendously. Dual-color&lt;br/&gt;PCH
combines the benefit of separating photons of different molecules by color with
the intrinsic&lt;br/&gt;ability of PCH to distinguish the brightness of
molecules. To illustrate this point, consider two&lt;br/&gt;proteins A and B
with differently colored labels. A mixture of their homodimers,
heterodimers&lt;br/&gt;and monomers (A2, B2, AB, A and B) is resolvable by dual-
color PCH. A single measurement&lt;br/&gt;will determine the brightness of each
component together with their concentrations. Currently,&lt;br/&gt;no other
technique promises to deliver comparable performance. The second goal of
this&lt;br/&gt;proposal is the application of dual-color PCH to study subunit
interactions of an oligomeric&lt;br/&gt;enzyme. The association and dissociation
of individual subunits is directly observed by dual-&lt;br/&gt;color PCH
analysis and allows the determination of protein assembly paths under
varying&lt;br/&gt;external conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The existing theory
of PCH for a single channel will be modified to describe dual-
channel&lt;br/&gt;detection. The algorithms and software programs to analyze the
data will be developed and the&lt;br/&gt;performance of the dual-channel
detection system will be characterized on a two-photon&lt;br/&gt;microscope. The
practical resolvability of a mixture by dual-color PCH is from an
experimental&lt;br/&gt;point of view of crucial importance. This project will
address and answer this question by&lt;br/&gt;analyzing the influence of the
photon count statistics on dual-color PCH. Another
important&lt;br/&gt;consideration is the emission spectrum of a fluorophore.
Most pairs of fluorophores have&lt;br/&gt;overlapping emission spectra and a
perfect separation of the two fluorophores by color is not&lt;br/&gt;possible.
Optical filter combinations that maximize the signal-to-noise ratio of dual-
color PCH&lt;br/&gt;for dyes with overlapping emission spectra will be
determined and tested. The experimental&lt;br/&gt;characterization of dual-color
PCH will start with binary mixtures and will continue with&lt;br/&gt;mixtures of
increasing complexity to determine the capability of dual-color PCH. In
addition,&lt;br/&gt;dual-color PCH with excitation at multiple wavelengths will
be implemented to further increase&lt;br/&gt;the performance of
PCH.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The subunit interactions of phosphofructokinase (PFK)
will be studied by dual-color PCH.&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the subunit exchange
between hybrid tetramers and the dissociation and association&lt;br/&gt;of the
oligomeric protein will be examined. Individual subunits of PFK will carry
specific&lt;br/&gt;fluorophores, which allow PCH to distinguish the subunit
composition and population of each&lt;br/&gt;fraction by color and absolute
brightness. It is important to stress that dual-color PCH will
have&lt;br/&gt;applications well beyond the study of oligomeric enzymes. The
impact of this new technique will&lt;br/&gt;be felt in many other biological
research fields. The association of proteins to form complexes is&lt;br/&gt;a
general concept encountered in most regulation processes of cells. Dual-color
PCH can detect&lt;br/&gt;and identify protein association on the single molecule
level. An important and pressing task of&lt;br/&gt;the post-genomic era is the
identification of the function of a large number of unknown
proteins.&lt;br/&gt;Dual-color PCH can assist in this task by mapping out their
protein-protein interactions.