* 0110972
* Piecemeal Microautophagy of the Nucleus
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* David Goldfarb, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 07/31/2005
* USD 453,872.00

Proteolysis plays fundamental roles in cell homeostasis, cell cycle control,
regulation of transcription, and development. Lysosomal/vacuolar autophagy and
the proteasome pathway handle the bulk of cellular proteolysis. Although
proteasome function has been characterized in considerable detail, very little
is known about the molecular mechanism of autophagy. Autophagy delivers
proteins, RNAs, lipids, carbohydrates, and entire organelles to the
lysosome/vacuole where they are degraded by soluble acid hydrolases. Autophagy
occurs by at least two morphologically distinct mechanisms that are conserved
between yeast and mammals. In macroautophagy, cytoplasm and organelles are
enveloped by double membrane vesicles called autophagosomes, which fuse with the
vacuole membrane to release autophagic bodies into the vacuole lumen for
degradation. During microautophagy, bulk cytoplasm and organelles are
sequestered into invaginations of the vacuole membrane which are released into
the lumen by homotypic membrane scission. &lt;br/&gt;It was recently discovered
that nonessential portions of the yeast nucleus are degraded in the vacuole by a
novel form of receptor-mediated microautophagy called Piecemeal Microautophagy
of the Nucleus (PMN). PMN occurs in the physical context of Nucleus-Vacuole (NV)
junctions, which are formed though physical interactions between Vac8p in the
vacuole membrane and Nvj1p in the nuclear envelope. The first morphologically
distinguishable phase of PMN is the development of convex bulges in NV
junctions. Bulges develop into blebs that become increasingly engulfed by the
vacuole until they remain attached to the nucleus by narrow tethers. PMN blebs
detach from the nucleus by scission of vacuolar and nuclear membranes and are
released as PMN vesicles into the vacuole lumen. Finally, PMN vesicles are
degraded by soluble vacuolar hydrolases and the products either stored in the
vacuole or recycled to the cytoplasm. &lt;br/&gt;PMN is gradually derepressed
during asynchronous growth as nutrients become limiting. The nutritional control
of PMN is mediated by the TOR signaling pathway and a recently described gene,
PMN1/Yih1 . Cells remain viable during PMN because chromosomal DNA is excluded
from blebs and vesicles. Nuclear components targeted for PMN, including nuclear
pore complexes and the pre-ribosome rich portion of the nucleolus, are packaged
into PMN blebs. PMN represents the first case of selective autophagy where both
the vacuole receptor (Vac8p) and the cargo ligand (Nvj1p) are known. These
findings provide a facile genetic, cellular, and biochemical model system for
elucidating the molecular mechanism of selective microautophagy. The aims of
this project focus on genes that are both conserved in humans and central to
elucidating the molecular mechanism and physiological control of
PMN:&lt;br/&gt;1. PMN-mediated degradation of nuclear pore complexes (NPCs).
This aim will test whether PMN functions to degrade and recycle excess or
dispensable nuclear components. The targeting and degradation of specific PMN
cargo and the rates of synthesis and degradation of NPCs in growing and starving
cells will be characterized. It will be determined whether specific nucleoporins
are removed from the NPC prior to their delivery into PMN blebs. For example,
Mlp1p and Mlp2p normally link yeast chromosomes to the nucleoplasmic face of the
NPC. Because chromatin is excluded from PMN vesicles, it will be determined
whether Mlp1p and Mlp2p remain associated with telomeres and do not accompany
the NPC into PMN blebs. &lt;br/&gt;2. Regulation of PMN by Pmn1p/Yih1p.
Pmn1p/Yih1p is a Nvj1p interacting protein as determined by two-hybrid assay.
Also, PMN1 is necessary for the repression of PMN in rich medium, where it is
likely to potentiate TOR kinase signaling. PMN1/Yih1 is conserved in mammals,
although its function is not known. Experiments will be performed to elucidate
the molecular mechanism by which Pmn1p/Yih1p controls PMN. These include
intracellular localization studies, analysis of how PMN1p/Yih1p levels are
controlled, determination of the physical basis by which Pmn1p/Yih1p interacts
with Nvj1p, and assays to determine how Pmn1p/Yih1p controls the degradation of
Nvj1p. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will contribute to the integration of
research and education through the participation of undergraduate, graduate, and
postdoctoral students, and through the utilization of the project as a
pedagogical organizing tool in a course taught by Dr.
Goldfarb.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;