* 0110544
* Regulation of Light Directed Movement in Cyanobacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/2001,11/30/2005
* Devaki Bhaya, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 11/30/2005
* USD 379,467.00

Cyanobacteria can survive and flourish in a broad range of environments, and
often dominate in marine habitats as well as in microbial mats and biofilms.
Their ubiquitous global distribution reflects, in part, their ability to cope
with wide fluctuations in temperature, nutrient, and light levels. Dr. Bhaya is
particularly interested in the ability of cyanobacteria to perceive and move
towards or away from a light source and thereby optimize conditions for
photosynthesis. This project will help the scientific community understand the
molecular basis of this critically important trait.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
phenomenon, termed phototaxis, is well-known but little understood. Recently
Dr.Bhaya and her colleagues have demonstrated that phototaxis in Synechocystis
is a surface-dependent phenomenon that requires type IV pili, surface appendages
implicated in both twitching and social motility and the association of
bacterial pathogens with their hosts. This investigator has taken advantage of
the fact that the Synechocystis genome has been entirely sequenced to generate a
library of tagged motility mutants. She will focus her work on a class of
mutants that map to chemotaxis-like (che) genes. While the role of chemotaxis
proteins is fairly well-understood in enteric bacteria, it is not clear whether
many of the paradigms that have been established extend to the operation of Che
proteins in other systems. Synechocystis has at least three che loci, two of
which are involved in motility responses. Furthermore, one of the mutants that
the investigator has isolated has a lesion in a gene encoding a protein with a
domain reminiscent of the chromophore-binding domain of phytochrome in vascular
plants. To elucidate the elements involved in generating and controlling
motility, Dr.Bhaya will use time-lapse video microscopy to record movement in
real time in both wild type and mutant strains. This will allow her to observe,
for the first time, movement of single cells and cell populations, and thus to
ask fundamental questions about the parameters that govern motility. The second
aspect of the work is to use molecular and biochemical tools to tag and/or
mutate specific proteins, such that the interactions among the proteins that
regulate phototaxis can be better understood. &lt;br/&gt;