* 0110416
* Coping with a Watery Diet:  Integration of Metabolic, Digestive, and Osmoregulatory Processes
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Carlos Martinez del Rio, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Ione Hunt Von Herbing
* 07/31/2004
* USD 241,774.00

The maintenance of water and electrolyte balance can pose a serious challenge
for terrestrial animals. Consequently, the strategies used by terrestrial
animals to conserve water have been well studied. This proposal emphasizes
another, much less studied, aspect of osmoregulation in land animals. Unlike
many animals living in dry environments, nectar feeding animals must cope with
excessive water ingestion. Nectar-feeding birds respond to variation in the
sugar concentration of floral nectar by modulating how much they eat. They
decrease ingestion as sugar concentration increases. The intake response of
nectar-feeding birds to sugar concentration has the consequence that at low to
moderate sugar concentrations the birds ingest phenomenal amounts of water. The
drinking rates exhibited by nectar-feeding birds would lead to pathological
consequences in other terrestrial vertebrates. This project investigates how
nectar-feeding birds cope with this apparent polydipsia (water over-ingestion).
Hummingbirds can cope with natural voluntary polydipsia through two non-
exclusive mechanisms: 1) They can avoid absorbing water in the intestine, and 2)
they can get rid of ingested and absorbed water by producing copious urine. A
primary objective of this project is to determine the relative importance of
these two mechanisms. Because birds mix urine and feces in the cloaca, achieving
this objective is not easy. A minimally invasive method that relies on a
pharmacokinetic mathematical model was designed to measure the fraction of
ingested water that is absorbed in the intestines of unrestrained birds.
Preliminary data suggests that in hummingbirds most of the water ingested is
absorbed in the intestine. Consequently, in these birds the task of disposing of
ingested water seems to be assigned to the kidneys. The rate at which the kidney
filters plasma is a good example of a trait whose magnitude is determined by
many potentially competing demands. The need to conserve water and the need to
eliminate metabolic by-products can be in discord. In this proposal another
potential conflict is identified: The need to dispose of absorbed water is
better served by high glomerular filtration rates, but these can be accompanied
by the loss of valuable, albeit easily filterable, metabolites like glucose.
Hummingbirds exhibit extremely high plasma glucose concentrations (several times
higher than those of a diabetic human), and presumably show high glomerular
filtration rates to get rid of absorbed dietary water. However, the
concentration of glucose in the excreta of these birds is extremely low. A goal
of this project is to elucidate how hummingbirds manage to avoid excreting
glucose in the face of high plasma glucose levels and high levels of filtration
by the kidney. The project is significant because it will allow development of
an integrated quantitative description of kidney function under the range of
water loads and hydration conditions that birds experience. Also, understanding
the limits to water processing will provide general insights into how animals
are designed, on how aspects of design constrain ecological performance of
animals, and into how aspects of design in one physiological system can impose
limits on other systems. The osmoregulatory processes of nectar feeding birds
highlight the relevance of understanding the impact that events taking place in
the gut can have for feeding behavior, and renal and metabolic function.
Comparative physiologists have emphasized low water availability as a constraint
on energy and microhabitat use. Our research will emphasize a novel aspect of
the water-energy interaction and fill a gap in our understanding of
osmoregulation in land animals.