* 0110321
* The Kahler Ricci flow and the extremal Kahler metrics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Xiuxiong Chen, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandre Freire
* 08/31/2003
* USD 105,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Abstract for DMS - 0110321&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This projects mainly
deals with some central issues&lt;br/&gt;in Kaehler geometry: the uniqueness and
existence of extremal Kaehler&lt;br/&gt;metrics and as well how to obtain such a
solution. On the Kaehler&lt;br/&gt;Ricci flow problem, I am working with G.
Tian. Our main results&lt;br/&gt;are: in any Kaehler-Einstein manifolds, if the
initial metric has positive&lt;br/&gt;bisectional curvature, then the flow
converges exponentially to a&lt;br/&gt;unique Kaehler-Einstein metric. I plan to
work with him to eliminate&lt;br/&gt;with the assumption of positive bisectional
curvature or the assumption&lt;br/&gt;of Kaehler Einstein metrics. On the
problem of geodesic, the main results&lt;br/&gt;of my research are: a) there
exists a geodesic with second derivatives&lt;br/&gt;uniformly bounded, between
any two Kaehler metrics in&lt;br/&gt;a Kaehler class. A direct consequence of
this result is that the constant&lt;br/&gt;scalar curvature metric is unique in
each Kaehler class if the first&lt;br/&gt;Chern class of the manifold is
negative. b) the space of Kaehler&lt;br/&gt;metrics is a metric space and it is
non-positively curved in the&lt;br/&gt;sense of Alexandrov. On the problem of
geodesic, I want to improve the&lt;br/&gt;regularity of geodesic to three
derivatives uniformly bounded&lt;br/&gt;(or to understand when this regularity
might fail). That will be a very&lt;br/&gt;important consequence in Kaehler
geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Kaehler Einstein metric arose
naturally from Physics, algebraic geometry and&lt;br/&gt;some other diverse
areas of mathematics. Extremal Kaehler metric is a&lt;br/&gt;natural
generalization of these concepts by E. Calabi. The method of finding
these&lt;br/&gt;metrics is by solving a totally nonlinear elliptic partial
differential equation on&lt;br/&gt;manifolds. Most of the time, one can not find
solution explicitly. Then one has to&lt;br/&gt;rely on various kind a priori
estimates to determined when there exists a solution&lt;br/&gt;and if the
solution metric should be unique. In this project, we will develop
some&lt;br/&gt;new techniques to handle these difficult estimates. And these
techniques will&lt;br/&gt;have impact in other related problems of
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;