* 0110520
* SBIR Phase II:   Reference Electrode with an Invariant Liquid Junction Potential
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2001,01/31/2005
* Scott Broadley, Broadley-James Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 01/31/2005
* USD 630,478.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop a
long-lived, stable reference electrode that dramatically improves potentiometric
measurements, such as pH, redox, and other ion-specific measurements. The new
reference electrode exploits recent developments in microfluidics and
nanotechnology to stabilize the liquid-junction potential, a source of error and
a cause of frequent sensor calibration and maintenance. Stabilizing the liquid-
junction potential of the reference electrode opens a new realm of
potentiometric sensor design and application. The technical feasibility of this
innovative electrode was demonstrated in the Phase I project. Testing in a
variety of environments showed variations less than 0.5 mV in the reference
electrode potential over an 8 hour period and response times less than 60
seconds, compared to potential variations up to 20 mV and response times of over
an hour for conventional reference electrodes. The flow of electrolyte through
the junction was less than 0.1 l per minute, or 50 ml per year of continuous
operation. The Phase II project will develop assembly processes, more robust
structures, and develop and build sensors for field-tests.

The potential commercial application reduction in sensor calibration and sensor
replacement which would save the US process industries approximately $240
million per year in sensor costs and labor expenses. Exports of US manufactured
sensors with this technology will significantly increase as foreign process
industries seek similar cost savings. Furthermore, this reference electrode can
serve as a basic building block in microfluidic sensors, estimated to be a
multi-billion dollar industry in the next decade.