* 0110456
* STTR Phase II:   Alignment of Low Cost, High Modulus, High Strength Carbon Nanofibers in Composites
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2004
* M. Khairul Alam, APPLIED SCIENCES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 07/31/2004
* USD 499,980.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase II project will
develop low-cost, composites reinforced with carbon nanofibers. Methods
demonstrated in Phase I will be further developed to generate alignment and
promote adhesion of nanofibers polymer systems. These efforts help to capture
the extraordinary intrinsic mechanical, electrical, and thermal properties of
carbon nanofibers in practical, affordable composites. One thrust of the program
seeks to align nanofiber in extruded and spun flows, in materials that include
polypropylene, polyester, and nylon. The composite filaments produced by these
means will then be formed into net-shape composite components for a variety of
applications. A second thrust focuses on fabrication of nanofiber papers for
applications that include fuel cell electrodes. Potential end users of the
technology and leaders in their respective markets, will evaluate materials and
prototypes produced during Phase II. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific commercial
applications targeted by the Phase II work include nanofiber reinforced
polyester and nylon tire cord, thermally conductive plastics for electronics
packaging, nanofiber paper for fuel cell components, and conductive, high
service temperature plastics for electrostatic precipitators needed to clean
exhaust streams from power and chemical production. Each of these applications
has an associated Phase II partner participating in the program. &lt;br/&gt;