* 0110482
* Coevolution Between Slavemaking Ants and Their Hosts
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2001,05/31/2003
* Joan Herbers, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Jerry  O. Wolff
* 05/31/2003
* USD 323,458.00

Coevolution between slavemaking ants and their hosts Joan M. Herbers

Slavemaking ants are "social parasites" that can survive only by capturing
worker pupae from another species. Those captured workers hatch out in the
slavemaker nest and start to forage, clean, feed the larvae, and so on. The
slavemaker ants do virtually nothing except find other colonies of host species.
When the slavemakers find a host colony, they stage a "slave raid" in which they
enter the host nest, injure or maim those defending their nest, and remove pupae
to return to their own slavemaking nest. We have uncovered geographic variation
in how these two species interact: in a site near Albany, New York, slavemakers
are extremely fierce and hosts resist raids strongly. By contrast, the
interaction in a site in mountainous West Virginia is more benign; slavemakers
kill few hosts during a raid, and the hosts themselves offer little resistance.
In a third site near Burlington, Vermont, the ants show characteristics
intermediate between these two extremes. The powerful tools of molecular ecology
will be used uncover how often slave raids end in death of the host, how many
slave raids a given slavemaker nest mounts in a year, and what the impact on
their host population is. Second, mounting slave raids between ants parasites
and hosts collected from the same site versus different sites will offer insight
to how localized interactions can be. Finally, the genetic, ecological, and
behavioral will be analyzed in terms of the "coevolutionary arms race" metaphor
that has proven useful in studies of other parasite-host relationships.