* 0110174
* US-Bangladesh Cooperative Research: Health-Seeking Behavior of Arsenic Patients in Rural Bangladesh
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2004
* Bimal Paul, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/2004
* USD 69,770.00

0110174&lt;br/&gt;Paul &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is for
support of a cooperative project by Professor Bimal K. Paul, Department of
Geography, Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas and Professor Shahanaz
Huq-Hussain, Department of Geography and Environment, University of Dhaka,
Dhaka, Bangladesh. The two plan to address the problem of arsenic poisoning due
to contaminated tubewell water and the way villagers in Bangladesh respond to
the incidence of poisoning and how they seek health services. The research is to
provide information about how arsenic patients perceive their illness, how they
respond in terms of health care utilization, and what determines their health-
seeking behavior. The information is intended to improve treatment compliance
and offer valuable insights for future action plans to combat the arsenic
problem in Bangladesh in a timely manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: In this
project the collaborators plan to combine their expertise in analytical and
field studies, including field surveys and interviews, participation
observation, and focus group discussions to collect primary data for this
research. They will employ qualified graduate students from Bangladesh to
conduct the field interviews. One graduate student from Kansas State University
will work with Dr. Paul using qualitative and quantitative approaches to analyze
field data. The results will be disseminated as early as possible to help policy
makers and others engaged in dealing with the arsenic problem in Bangladesh.
This project is supported by the Division of International Programs and the
Division of Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;