* 0110372
* Inhibitory Regulation of Behavior and Learning
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Thomas Fischer, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/2005
* USD 315,644.00

Neural networks are dynamic systems that enable organisms to adapt to and learn
about complex and variable environments. At the core of this adaptive process is
the phenomenon of synaptic plasticity, an alteration in the efficacy of a
synapse due either to intrinsic processes (e.g. activity of the neuron) or
extrinsic processes (e.g. neuromodulators released by other neurons). The
functional significance of synaptic plasticity will be examined by focusing upon
a specific set of identified inhibitory neurons within a well-defined neural
circuit in the marine mollusc Aplysia. Inhibitory processes can have profound
consequences on neural function, yet have received comparatively little
experimental emphasis. By focusing on a specific synaptic process in a specific
set of inhibitory neurons, these studies will allow for a simultaneous
exploration of the function of both synaptic plasticity and inhibition in
behavioral regulation. Two basic issues will be examined, integrating
experiments at the level of synapses with the level of behavior: (1) The role of
synaptic inhibition in behavioral regulation will be explored, examining the
hypothesis that plasticity of inhibition may serve as a dynamic gain control
mechanism that can regulate behavior across rapidly-changing environmental
conditions. (2) The role of inhibition in learning will be explored, by
examining the hypothesis that plasticity of inhibition may serve to dynamically
regulate the capacity for neural networks to express learning-related
changes.&lt;br/&gt;Information obtained from this project could help to
elucidate general computational principles utilized by a neural networks to
generate adaptive modifications, which can potentially be employed in algorithms
usable by other computational or information processing devices (e.g. smart
machines). From a theoretical perspective, it could address fundamental
questions concerning the nature of adaptive modifications within neural networks
that are required for the expression of different forms of learning and
memory.&lt;br/&gt;