* 0110241
* Role of the PhosphoCTD in Spliceosome Assembly-
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Arno Greenleaf, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Vicki B. Vance
* 08/31/2004
* USD 345,220.00

The goal of the project is to investigate the structural basis for and
functional consequences of tethering the splicing machinery to the transcription
apparatus. In particular, features of a model proposed by Morris and Greenleaf
(J. Biol. Chem. 275, 39935-39943 [2000]) will be pursued and tested. In this
model the splicing factor Prp40, which binds to the phosphoCTD of RNA polymerase
II, is postulated to recruit the U1snRNP to elongating RNAP II and to tether the
developing commitment complex to the transcription machinery. This coupling to
the transcriptase is proposed to cause early steps in the formation of
spliceosomes to be more proficient. In the current project, three objectives
will be pursued. One objective is to reveal a molecular basis for coupling
spliceosome formation to transcription. To achieve this objective, the identity
of the phosphoCTD-interacting domain of Prp40 will be ascertained. Then, the
binding affinity and specificity of the newly-defined phosphoCTD-interacting
domain will be measured. A second objective is to identify the steps in
spliceosome assembly that are accelerated when there is coupling to RNAP II
transcription. Toward this end, the rate of pre-commitment and commitment
complex formation will be measured in an in vitro system in which splicing can
be coupled to transcription (Ghosh, S., and Garcia-Blanco, M. A. (2000) RNA 6,
1325-1334). The third objective is to test a) whether phosphorylation of the CTD
is required to tether the splicing machinery to RNAP II, and b) whether the CTD
is sufficient for the tethering. The results of these experiments will
contribute to an increased understanding of gene expression pathways in
eukaryotes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The first step in gene expression
is called transcription, a process by which the information in a DNA strand is
copied into a long RNA strand. The second step is called RNA processing, wherein
the long RNA strand is modified so that it can function as a messenger RNA, to
direct the synthesis of a protein. A major event in RNA processing is that of
splicing, during which segments of the RNA strand not meant to be in the
messenger RNA are cut out and the flanking segments are spliced together.
Splicing has usually been studied independently of transcription, but in cells
the two processes are coupled. This project seeks to reveal how the two
processes are coupled physically and to disclose how the coupling affects
splicing events functionally. One objective is to characterize the molecular
components that couple splicing to transcription; this characterization is
necessary to understand how the two processes are physically linked. Another
main objective is to identify the steps in splicing that are accelerated when
splicing is linked to transcription. Defects in splicing can have severe
consequences for an organism. The work described here will contribute new
information that will lead to a better understanding of splicing
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;