* 0110142
* Collaborative Research: Developing Methods to Study Age-Related Changes in the Physiology of Forest Trees
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Barbara Bond, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Gavin Thompson
* 08/31/2005
* USD 89,948.00

0110021 Michael Greenwood, University of Maine 0110142 Barbara Bond, Oregon
State University Trees continue to increase in size and complexity over life
spans that may last many centuries, and each year the growing regions of their
shoots produce new foliage and reproductive structures. As they grow older and
larger, forest trees appear to grow more slowly, produce thicker foliage and
more reproductive structures. These changes are likely to be associated with
age-related declines in the growth rates of forest stands, which occur before
the mid-point of the lifespan of important timber species. Although similar
patterns of age- and size-related change in the morphology and physiology of
foliage have been described for numerous species, the mechanisms governing these
changes are virtually unknown. Possible explanations for these phenomena range
from decreased photosynthesis due to increased resistance of water flow to a
genetically controlled ageing process that slows growth and photosynthesis.
Processes regulating maturation, ageing and senescence are fundamental to
biology, and some of these processes are probably unique to large, long-lived
trees. A more complete understanding of the basis for this decline is necessary
to model and accurately predict the growth of forests over time.

Reciprocal grafting of shoots between trees of different ages offers great
potential as a tool to distinguish among explanations for changes in growth
behavior. In this approach, shoots from old growth trees are grafted onto
juvenile and young-mature trees, and shoots from juvenile and young-mature trees
are grafted into the crowns of old-growth trees. The extent, direction and time-
course of changes in the growth, morphology, and physiology of foliage produced
by the grafted shoots will provide insight into the mechanisms governing age-
related change. This study will attempt reciprocal grafting on two species of
long-lived trees, red spruce and Douglas fir. These species are adapted to
substantially different climatic regimes, so a comparative study will provide
insights into the universality or variability of processes associated with age-
related changes in tree growth.