* 0110666
* IRC-EB:  The Evolution of a Pheromone Signaling System:  From Molecules to Mating
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Lynne Houck, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Michael D. Beecher
* 08/31/2006
* USD 2,300,000.00

Lynne Houck - NSF 0110666 " IRC: The Evolution of a Pheromone Signaling System:
From Molecules to Mating"



LAY SUMMARY

Terrestrial salamanders have a unique system of chemical communication. This
system features non-volatile pheromones (chemical signals) that a male delivers
to the female during courtship. The male courtship pheromone is produced by an
enlarged gland under the male's chin, and the male taps this gland on the
female's nose in order to deliver his pheromone. In their subsequent
evolutionary history, plethodontids modified this pheromone delivery system in a
variety of ways, including delivery methods in which the pheromone is "injected"
into the female's circulatory system. This chemical communication system -unique
among vertebrates- has been retained by diverse groups of plethodontids
throughout their evolutionary radiation. Recently, it has been established that
the plethodontid pheromone increases female sexual receptivity, as indicated by
courtships that are completed more rapidly. It also has been determined that the
pheromone is a protein. The amino acid sequence of this protein has been
identified, as well as the nucleotide sequence of the gene that produces the
pheromone protein. Furthermore, it has been established that the pheromone
protein is in a cytokine family that includes interferons and interleukins. The
phylogenetic setting for these discoveries offers an outstanding opportunity to
investigate the evolution of the causal pathway from gene to protein to
behavior. This project embraces a conceptual framework that is generally
applicable to the study of evolutionary change in communication systems at
multiple levels of organization.

