* 0110513
* Role of the ResDE-Signal Transduction System in Anaerobic Gene Regulation of Bacillus subtilis
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Michiko Nakano, Oregon Health & Science University
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 07/31/2005
* USD 385,000.00

Bacteria can change their metabolism when they suddenly encounter an environment
devoid of oxygen. This ability allows bacteria to colonize and grow within
diverse environments. The genes necessary for bacteria to carry out anaerobic
growth are activated in response to oxygen depletion by a mechanism involving a
simple signal transduction system. In the soil bacterium, Bacillus subtilis,
this system is composed of the proteins ResE and ResD. The sensor kinase ResE,
through an as-yet-unknown mechanism, senses oxygen limitation and responds by
donating a high-energy phosphate to ResD, a response regulator, which, upon
phosphorylation, stimulates the expression of genes required for anaerobic
growth, such as the genes encoding an anaerobic gene regulator FNR and nitrite
reductase. ResD interacts directly with the promoter region to activate
transcription. Unlike the nitrite reductase genes, activation of fnr, while
requiring ResD, does not seem to require ResD in its phosphorylated form. The
presence of oxygen seems to stimulate removal of phosphate from ResD, a task
also carried out by ResE. Mutations in aa3 quinol oxidase genes cause
derepression of ResDE-controlled genes under aerobic conditions, indicating that
electron flow to oxygen has an inhibitory role on the signal transduction
pathway. In addition, aerobic gene activation is heightened by the presence of
nitric oxide (NO), which may stimulate the ResD-phosphorylating activity of
ResE. The major questions to be answered this project are: (1) How does ResD
activate gene expression? (2) What is the significance behind the fact that fnr
does not require phosphorylated ResD for its expression? (3) What parts of the
ResE protein are important for sensing and transducing signals to ResD in
response to stimuli derived from oxygen depletion? (4) How does NO result in
ResDE-dependent gene activation? Studies will be carried out to precisely
identify the target of ResD in the DNA that constitutes the genes under ResD
control. Particular attention will be paid to the architecture and the ResD-
binding characteristics of the fnr control region. The domains conserved in the
putative sensing domains of ResE will be altered by directed mutagenesis to
identify regions necessary for recognizing signals derived from oxygen
limitation and NO. This will provide a correlation between specific signals and
the functional domains of ResE and will give insight into how cells sense and
respond to oxygen depletion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;