* 0110137
* SGER: Molecular Analysis of Connexin pI Variants
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2002
* Elliot Hertzberg, Yeshiva University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald A. Berkowitz
* 06/30/2002
* USD 100,000.00

Covalent modification of proteins is a well-established mechanism by which
their structure and properties are altered to accommodate biological function.
Principals elucidated for soluble proteins apply to integral membrane proteins
as well, although many underlying molecular features in this class of proteins
are less well established than for soluble proteins. The vast majority of plasma
membrane integral membrane proteins are glycosylated and most are
phosphorylated, modifications that introduce anionic groups. Hence, even when
analyzed successfully by techniques such as isoelectric focusing and two-
dimensional electrophoresis, integral membrane proteins often exhibit pIs
significantly more acidic than those anticipated based upon their primary
structure, now mostly deduced from the sequence of their cDNAs. Recent evidence
from Dr. Hertzberg's laboratory has demonstrated that several connexins,
unglycosylated integral membrane proteins comprising gap junctions, have pI
variants far more acidic than can be accounted for by phosphorylation or other
known modifications. The modification altering the charge of these proteins does
not significantly alter their mass as detected by relatively inexact methods
such as SDS-PAGE. Furthermore, it appears as though connexin modification occurs
during its trafficking and is likely to occur at distinct cytoplasmic
compartments through which connexins pass on their way to assembly into gap
junctions in the plasma membrane. Establishing the underlying molecular
mechanism responsible for alteration of connexin pIs is the key focus of this
project. Mass spectrometry has emerged as the method of choice for elucidation
of the molecularbasis of protein covalent modification and determination the
modified residues. While notable progress has been made in recent years in the
biochemical analysis of membrane proteins, including crystallographic analysis
of a few, their manipulation for many types of analyses is limited by their
insolubility in organic solvents or requiring the use of detergents incompatible
with subsequent analyses. In the case of connexins, these difficulties are even
more profound: success in their initial isolation and characterization was
dependent on their insolubility in detergents. This property has compounded the
difficulty of their analysis by state of the art techniques such as mass
spectrometry. Preliminary experiments have established approaches to peptide
purification and mass spectroscopic analysis that will serve as the basis for
analysis of the modification(s) altering connexin pIs. This project is driven by
efforts to identify and characterize the (novel?) low molecular weight covalent
modification of connexins, a line of exploratory research that will have
significant implications for understanding of the structure and function of
membrane proteins. It may be that this modification, which preliminary
experiments indicate is not likely to be restricted to connexins, has been
overlooked because the presence of pI variants of other membrane proteins would
have been attributed to phosphorylation or the presence of acidic sugars (e.g.
sialic acid). Identification of the modification altering connexin pIs will
permit evaluation of its role in trafficking, assembly and function of gap
junction channels. Depending upon the position of the negative charges, models
of the structure and function of selectivity filters, regulatory sites and the
channels themselves may require rethinking. Hence, studies undertaken as part of
this project may prove to be of general significance in proteome analysis.