* 0110131
* Collaborative Research:  Human Capital and Income Inequality
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Andrea Moro, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2004
* USD 74,131.00

This proposal studies inequalities between "groups", broadly defined. Our
particular line of inquiry asks to what extent "informational externalities" can
provide a credible theory for such inequalities. We briefly mention a few other
potential applications, but the proposal is focused on: (1) Cross country income
differentials in a world with free trade; (2) Statistical discrimination in the
labor market.&lt;br/&gt;In the first part of the proposal we introduce
imperfectly observable human capital investments in an otherwise standard
competitive trade model. We are interested whether ex post inequalities can
arise between ex ante identical countries. We propose a model where this is
possible because of interactions between straightforward price effects and the
informational externality. Citizens in a nation specializing as a low human
capital country are worse off than citizens in the country specializing as a
high human capital country, but the situation is self-enforcing because
incentives to invest are lower in the low human capital country. Incentives are
bad because 1) with few investors someone who "looks good" is more likely an
individual with low human capital that got a "lucky draw", 2) the possibility to
import goods intensive in human capital from the other country makes human
capital less valuable compared to a situation where countries don't trade. In
our research we will investigate how these effects interact and whether the
model provides a rationale for specialization, as well as explore a number of
secondary implications of the model.&lt;br/&gt;The second part considers
statistical discrimination. Here, informational externalities belong to
mainstream theory, but there is reluctance in the empirical literature to take
the idea seriously. We believe there are two reasons for this. First, models of
statistical discrimination have been (fairly) criticized for assuming away most
any contractual solution to the information problem. We therefore propose to
investigate how a richer set of admissable contracts and/or possibilities of
learning affect an otherwise standard model of statistical discrimination. Our
preliminary analysis suggests that, in a competitive market with learning where
workers cannot commit to stay with a firm, there is an interesting free-riding
problem in information acquisition that may force the firms to use "proxies"
even if better information could be acquired. Hence, ex post learning is not
sufficient to dismiss statistical discrimination. We will also consider ex ante
contracts (without learning). Discrimination based on "irrelevant"
characteristics is still possible and the setup is in a sense more appealing
than the standard model, because discrimination can now arise in a unique
equilibrium. The second major reason for the skepticism is, we think, that it is
not clear what exactly would be evidence of statistical discrimination. We
propose to deal with this by designing a model that "nests" the two major
explanations for racial differences, statistical discrimination and
racism.&lt;br/&gt;