* 0110700
* RUI: Stereochemical Determinants in Elimination and Proton Transfer Reactions
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2001,06/30/2005
* Jerry Mohrig, Carleton College
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone D. Mitchell
* 06/30/2005
* USD 161,353.00

With this Research at Undergraduate Institutions award, the Organic and
Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting Professor Jerry R. Mohrig, of the
Department of Chemistry at Carleton College, for his studies of stereochemical
determinants in elimination and proton transfer reactions. These studies,
focused on the stereochemistry of addition and elimination reactions involving
beta-substituted esters and thioesters of butyric acid and the related aldehydes
and ketones, seek a comprehensive understanding of the stereochemical
consequences of the carbonyl group and substituents at C-3 on the
stereochemistry of addition-elimination and proton transfer reactions involving
acyclic beta-substituted carbonyl compounds. In research to be carried out by a
group of undergraduate chemistry majors, the importance of substrate acidity and
the leaving group in determining the stereoselectivity of base-catalyzed
1,2-elimination reactions producing conjugated carbonyl compounds will be
explored through a combination of synthetic and NMR spectroscopic studies.
Similarly, the stereochemistry of electrophilic attack at enolate anions will be
investigated.

Understanding and controlling the three-dimensional structure of noncyclic
molecules remains an inportant challenge in organic chemistry. Within this
context, the stereochemical details of reactions involving the addition to or
elimination of fragments from molecules are of both fundamental interest and
relevance to numerous biologically catalyzed processes. Professor Jerry R.
Mohrig, of the Department of Chemistry at Carleton College, is supported by a
Research at Undergraduate Institutions award from the Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program for his studies related to the stereochemistry of such
reactions. Through a combination of synthetic and spectroscopic studies, carried
out by undergraduate chemistry majors, Professor Mohrig is developing a detailed
understanding of these important chemical processes while simultaneously
providing undergraduates with the opportunity to carry out research on fore-
front, significant problems.