* 0110930
* Genomic Imprinting in Viviparous Fishes
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Rachel O'Neill, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 07/31/2005
* USD 360,358.00

Higher organisms contain two copies, or alleles, of every gene, one inherited
maternally and the other inherited paternally, and for most genes both copies
are expressed. Having two copies of every gene, known as diploidy, is thought to
protect organisms from the deleterious effects of recessive mutations. For
imprinted genes, however, only one copy is expressed. Which copy of an imprinted
gene pair is to be expressed is determined by which parent it was inherited
from. In other words, some genes are expressed only when inherited maternally
and some only when inherited paternally. About forty genes have been identified
in mice, humans and other mammals that show imprinted patterns of expression,
and there is evidence to suggest that there may be 200 or more imprinted genes
in the mammalian genome. Because silencing of one allele of a gene pair
abolishes the protection against recessive mutation, it is difficult to explain
why such a system of gene expression exists and how it evolved. Of several
evolutionary theories proposed to explain genomic imprinting, only one, the
conflict model, has been broadly supported by molecular genetic, population
genetic and embryological evidence. The conflict model posits that genomic
imprinting is the outcome of a conflict between parents over their relative
contributions to developing offspring. In mammals, the mother is the sole source
of nutrients to gestating young. In polygamous breeding animals, the genes
transmitted by fathers will evolve mechanisms, or imprints, to take advantage of
the mothers exclusive resource input to his genetic offspring. This puts the
mothers genes at a disadvantage since focussing resources on the offspring of
one father compromises her output to the offspring of her other mates and may
reduce her reproductive output altogether. Maternally transmitted genes have,
therefore, evolved mechanisms to counteract the imprinted genes transmitted
paternally. The conflict model predicts the general rule that growth-enhancing
genes are paternally active and maternally silent, and that growth-suppressing
genes are maternally active and paternally silent. This type of imprinted gene
expression is peculiar to mammals, which are all viviparous, and in all of which
developing embryos are supported by a placental connection with the mother. An
essential test of the conflict model is to search for imprinted genes in animals
that have evolved viviparity and placentation independent of mammals. This
project investigates whether a genus of viviparous fish, Poeciliopsis, has
evolved genomic imprinting in the context of parental conflict. This work
promises not only to test the evolutionary model, but also to provide a greater
insight into the molecular mechanisms underlying imprinted gene expression and
the function of imprinting in embryonic development.