* 0110114
* HRas C-Terminus in Membrane Trafficking and Targeting
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Janice Buss, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 08/31/2005
* USD 396,399.00

Membrane binding, a process initiated and sustained by lipid modifications,
controls the function of Ras proteins as potently as does GTP binding. Despite
this importance, very little is known of how membrane tethering affects
signaling. Recent studies indicate that HRas trafficking to the plasma membrane
proceeds through a previously unnoticed, and still uncharacterized, vesicular
endomembrane pathway that requires farnesyl modification and nearby C-terminal
amino acid residues. No specific proteins that might escort HRas from these
internal membranes to its working location, the plasma membrane, have been
identified. Upon reaching the plasma membrane, HRas is reported to localize into
cholesterol-and sphingolipid-rich subdomains ("rafts "). In vitro methods
predict that the different physical properties of the farnesyl and palmitoyl
lipids will give these lipids opposing roles in regulating HRas raft insertion,
but studies with HRas in intact cells have not yielded clear results. Raft
partitioning is proposed to increase signaling efficiency, but there is
conflicting information on whether partitioning limits or encourages access of
particular regulatory or effector proteins to HRas while it is associated with
the membrane. Novel variants of HRas have been made, and show that changes in
the lipids and residues of the C-terminus can alter HRas signaling pathways in
intact cells. This new evidence indicates that the C-terminal region and lipids
attached to HRas are more than a passive anchor domain, and are likely to play
much more active roles during trafficking and organizing of HRas in the plasma
membrane than current models envision. The objective of this project is to
examine how the C-terminal amino acids, farnesyl group, and palmitates of HRas
individually participate in both the trafficking and plasma membrane interaction
phases of HRas membrane binding . Three aims will be pursued. A. Variants of
HRas will be designed to characterize features of HRas that control its exit out
of endomembranes, and to identify the vesicular paths and proteins involved in
moving HRas to the cell surface. B. The influence of the farnesyl group,
palmitates and GTP binding on partitioning of HRas into subdomain sites of
plasma membrane will be established by expressing proteins with distinct and
novel combinations of these properties. C. The membrane locations in which
activation and termination of HRas signaling occurs will be identified by co-
localization or co-immunoprecipitation of HRas with regulatory proteins and
effectors. These studies will use biochemical co-immunoprecipitation and
membrane isolation techniques, as well as direct immunofluorescence imaging of
membrane fragments. The primary emphasis will be intact cells, as this is the
only currently available system where HRas palmitoylation can occur, and more
importantly, enables the functional impact of changes in molecular properties to
be gauged by monitoring the ability of variant proteins to cause focus formation
in NIH3T3 cells. The results will generate a clearer view of how HRas becomes
incorporated into cellular membranes and enable development of methods to
manipulate the interaction of HRas with membrane subdomains. This information
will also identify new subdomain-selective targeting sequences with which other
proteins, such as HRas effectors, can be re-directed to specific sites on the
cell surface. These studies will help us understand what properties of the
membrane-binding domain of HRas can influence biological activity and lead
towards the long-term goal of learning how to guide that interaction toward
beneficial outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;