* 0110297
* Molecular Genetic Dissection of Red/Far-Red Light Signaling Pathways in Maize
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Thomas Brutnell, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 08/31/2005
* USD 350,500.00

Recent studies in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana have greatly expanded our
understanding of the complex light signal transduction networks mediating a
range of developmental and environmental responses. However, as studies rapidly
progress in Arabidopsis, our knowledge of this complex pathway in the distantly
related monocots is far less complete. Differences in phytochrome gene family
organization, plant physiology and selection pressures have likely contributed
to the divergence of light signal transduction pathways between higher eudicots
such as Arabidopsis thaliana and monocotyledonous grasses such as Zea mays. The
goal of this project is to begin the detailed characterization of red/far-red
light signaling pathways in maize utilizing classical and reverse genetics
strategies, molecular genetic analyses and microarray technologies. A
comprehensive analysis of phytochrome gene family structure and expression in
maize will be conducted as an important first step in the analysis of light
signaling pathways in maize. Through tools developed by NSF- and government-
funding genomics initiatives, transposon-tagged alleles have been identified in
two of the three phytochrome gene family members in maize. Genetic and molecular
characterizations of these mutants will include the use of microarray technology
to compare nuclear and chloroplast gene expression profiles in wild type and
these phyA and phyB mutants under a range of light conditions. Finally, red/far-
red light responses will be examined in a core set of 80 US, Canadian, European,
and South American accessions that best represent diversity in the maize
germplasm pool. These studies should provide insights into the underlying
genetic diversity regulating light responses in maize.