* 0110667
* Analysis of Meristem Function and Floral Patterning in the Arabidopsis ULTRAPETALA Mutant
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Jennifer Fletcher, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Susan J. Lolle
* 07/31/2004
* USD 289,340.00

0110667 Fletcher

The control of stem cell activity is critical for the proper development of all
higher organisms, as stem cells are the precursors of the organs and tissues
that comprise the body. Plants make excellent model systems in which to study
and manipulate stem cells, because they maintain pools of such cells throughout
their life cycle at growing tips called apical meristems. The shoot apical
meristem continuously maintains a stem cell reservoir while simultaneously
generating organs such as leaves, stems and flowers. How the meristem keeps a
constant balance between stem cell production and organogenesis is poorly
understood, but studies by Dr. Fletcher and others using the model plant
Arabidopsis thaliana are uncovering genes that regulate this balance and thereby
affect shoot apical meristem activity.

The goal of this project is to understand how the Arabidopsis ULTRAPETALA (ULT)
locus controls the activity of shoot and floral meristems. We have isolated ult
mutant plants that generate extra flowers and floral organs from enlarged
meristems, and also have altered organ identity in the center of the flower. ULT
is therefore a candidate regulator of both shoot apical meristem function and
floral patterning. Our first objective is to identify the defect(s) underlying
the ult shoot and floral meristem phenotypes by analyzing the distribution of
region-specific molecular markers. We will also decipher the genetic
relationship between ULT and other known regulators of shoot and flower
development, which act in a number of different pathways. Our third goal is to
map and clone the ULT gene, and determine its mRNA expression pattern during
development as a prelude to functional analysis of the gene product. These
experiments will identify specific mechanisms through which ULT regulates
meristem size and floral patterning, and place ULT in context with other
Arabidopsis genes known to affect these processes. Analysis of ULT provides a
unique opportunity to investigate the mechanisms that balance life-long stem
cell production and organogenesis, and also to determine how a single molecule
functions both in growth control and pattern formation to coordinate these two
crucial processes during development.

