* 0110500
* STTR Phase II:   Development of an Autonomous Equilibrating pCO2 Sensor
* TIP,TI
* 11/15/2001,12/31/2004
* Regis Cook, GENERAL OCEANICS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2004
* USD 495,996.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project will develop and
test an autonomous, low cost, robust, precise, and miniaturized partial and
total carbon dioxide measurement system. This system will be able to
characterize the carbon dioxide exchange between ocean surface waters and the
atmosphere, thus helping to analyze the "greenhouse effect" and assess global
warming on a worldwide basis. The partial and total carbon dioxide systems are
miniaturized for deployment by the International SeaKeepers Society in ocean and
atmospheric monitoring modules on cargo ships, cruise ships, and super yachts
around the world as well as for use on piers, ocean buoys, and other platforms.
The prototype partial carbon dioxide system, developed in Phase I, measures
carbon dioxide in seawater that has been equilibrated with air using an infrared
detector. It is sensitive to five parts per million and responds to rapid
changes in carbon dioxide. The prototype miniaturized total carbon dioxide
system has a precision of three parts per million. Phase II will miniaturize and
test both systems in the laboratory and in the field. Based on these tests and
any modifications required, final commercial partial and total carbon dioxide
measurement systems will be produced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International
SeaKeepers Society is expected to deploy hundreds of these carbon dioxide sensor
systems. Other purchasers would include government agencies worldwide performing
research and monitoring on the global warming phenomenon.&lt;br/&gt;