* 0110791
* Collaborative Research:  Protein Quality Control in the Endoplasmic Reticulum
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2006
* Ardythe McCracken, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 07/31/2006
* USD 673,144.00

When cells make proteins for export (secretory proteins), it is critically
important that the proteins are as they should be. If not, there is a quality
control mechanism, termed Endoplasmic Reticulum-Associated Degradation (ERAD)
that detects aberrant proteins and destroys them. The importance of cleansing
the secretory pathway of aberrant proteins is underscored by the fact that if
mis-folded proteins accumulate in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), they induce
the "unfolded protein response" (UPR), a cellular response that can lead in
extreme cases to programmed cell death.

Drs. McCracken and Brodsky originally discovered that ERAD involves the
selection of aberrant proteins (ERAD substrates), transport of the substrate
proteins back across the ER membrane into the cytoplasm, and subsequent
proteolytic degradation of the substrate proteins via the proteasome. This
pathway has since been shown by several laboratories to be involved in the
degradation of at least 20 different substrate proteins and to be conserved
across eukaryotic species from yeast to humans. Subsequent work demonstrated
that at least two ER-lumenal chaperones, BiP (KAR2) and calnexin, are required
for ERAD export of soluble protein substrates. One of these, BiP, is also
required for protein import into the ER. Brodsky and McCracken have recently
identified mutations in BiP that are specific for ERAD, and as part of this
project they will biochemically characterize these mutations (plus others that
they plan to identify or create via site-directed mutagenesis) in order to
determine what aspects of BiP structure and activity are specifically required
for ERAD.

McCracken and Brodsky have also demonstrated that the ERAD pathway for an
integral membrane protein, CFTR, is substantially different from that for
soluble substrate proteins and involves a different set of chaperones. Neither
BiP nor calnexin are required for CFTR degradation, but a cytosolic Hsp70
chaperone, Ssa1p, is; conversely, Ssa1p is not required for ERAD of soluble
substrate proteins. As part of this project, the molecular basis for this
distinction will be explored. Specifically, two hypotheses will be examined
using genetic and biochemical techniques: (1) Ssa1p is required for CFTR
ubiquitination; and (2) Ssa1p is required to maintain an aggregation-prone
cytoplasmic domain of CFTR in solution.

A tabulation of the factors necessary and dispensable for the degradation of
multiple ERAD substrates indicates that the requirements for the degradation of
ERAD substrates may or may not utilize common factors. Thus, the continued
identification of genes required for the turnover of a given substrate is
essential. To this end, Brodsky and McCracken have isolated mutations in which
the degradation of the Z variant of Alpha1-Protease Inhibitor (A1PiZ) is
compromised in yeast. In addition, because the presence of mis-folded proteins
in the ER activate both ERAD and the UPR, known UPR-target genes that are
required for the degradation of A1PiZ have been identified. As part of this
project, McCracken and Brodsky will carry out a functional characterization of
both classes of genes necessary for the proteolysis of A1PiZ; results from this
study are expected to provide a better mechanistic understanding of the ERAD
selection and targeting process.

In sum, these studies represent a combination of genetic and biochemical methods
aimed toward understanding a recently discovered cellular pathway in cell
biology. The project will employ multiple approaches and will benefit from the
synergistic expertise of the two collaborating scientists, Drs. Ardythe
McCracken and Jeffrey Brodsky, who initially discovered the ERAD pathway. The
project will also continue to contribute to both classroom and laboratory
research instruction of undergraduate and graduate students.



