* 0110490
* SBIR Phase II:   Material Processing for Optimizing the Performance of an Embedded Bragg Grating
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Philip Battle, ADVR, INC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 08/31/2004
* USD 773,021.00

&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will
enable the fabrication of waveguides in potassium titanyl phosphate (KTP)
containing Bragg gratings with specified spectral and electro-optic
characteristics. These characteristics include reflectivity, bandwidth, central
wavelength, and electro-optic tuning range. To achieve this goal, the
relationship between the processing steps used to form the Bragg grating and its
resulting spectral and electro-optic properties will be fully quantified. The
ability to control the spectral characteristics and electro-optically tune these
gratings will enable a broad range of new and commercially useful devices. Using
the processing steps developed, an array of Bragg gratings will be fabricated
with each grating optimized for stabilizing the wavelength of a laser diode.
Translating the waveguide array with respect to the laser diode will tune its
wavelength. This novel tuning technique will have significant technical and cost
advantages over other tuning techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential
commercial applications include tunable filters for active dispersion
compensation, high-speed add/drop filters for wavelength division multiplexing
(WDM), and a broadly tunable source for test and evaluation of network
components. Other applications include stabilizing laser diodes for
spectroscopy, seeding high power lasers, and frequency doubled diode-based
replacement lasers for low power Argon-Ion and helium cadmium (HeCd)
lasers.&lt;br/&gt;