* 0110821
* 3D Structure and Function of the Mammalian Kinetochore
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Bruce McEwen, Health Research Incorporated/New York State Department of Health
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 08/31/2006
* USD 699,141.00

In eukaryotic cell division, the partitioning of daughter chromosomes into the
daughter cells is achieved by attachment of the chromosomes to microtubules
which then move the chromosomes apart prior to cytokinesis. The site of
attachment of the microtubules to the chromosomes is a morphologically and
biochemically distinctive chromosomal region called the kinetochore. Recent work
by Dr. McEwen, employing state-of-the-art preservation and high resolution
imaging technologies, has challenged the "trilaminar" morphological model of the
kinetochore that has been accepted in the field for the past thiry years, and
which was probably inaccurate due to fixation artifacts inherent in conventional
fixation protocols. Now,Dr. McEwen's long-range goal is to define a high-
resolution structural map of the mammalian kinetochore that explains and
predicts functional mechanisms. The research combines state-of-the-art methods
of light and electron microscopy with molecular approaches to compute the
structural map and obtain functional characterization of key kinetochore
components. The current project has four objectives, listed
below.&lt;br/&gt;Research Objective 1. Establish a prototype high-resolution 3D
structural map of the mammalian kinetochore. 1a: Identify key features of the
kinetochore and look for evidence of a subunit structure. 1b. Test the
hypothesis that the kinetochore has discrete structural domains that dynamically
respond to microtubule attachment and deprivation, and that an enlarged outer
domain is correlated with promiscuous microtubule capture and a high incidence
of aneuploidy.&lt;br/&gt;Research Objective 2. Test three hypotheses concerning
the molecular role of CENP-E in mitosis. 2a: CENP-E has a role in maintaining
the stability of kinetochore microtubule attachments. 2b: CENP-E prevents
monooriented chromosomes from over-traveling poleward into the spindle pole. 2c:
CENP-E is not required for release of the anaphase onset
checkpoint.&lt;br/&gt;Research objective 3. Test the hypotheses that CENP-E
function is redundant with ZW10/dynein in binding kinetochore microtubules, and
opposes dynein in poleward motion.&lt;br/&gt;Research objective 4. Test the
hypothesis that the kinetochore is sequentially assembled, with kinetochore
proteins CENP-C and BUB1 being required for complete
assembly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will provide important and
significant new information on the complexities of kinetochore structure and
function. It will fill a major gap in our present knowledge of how molecular
components of the kinetochore are arranged and how they interact with other
components of the cell division apparatus.&lt;br/&gt;