* 0110480
* Genetic Analysis of Cell Polarity in C. Elegans
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2004
* Craig Hunter, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 06/30/2004
* USD 360,000.00

0110480&lt;br/&gt;Hunter&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genetic analysis of asymmetric
cell division in C. elegans early embryos has identified a set of conserved PAR
proteins important for the establishment and/or maintenance of zygotic and
cellular polarity. The PAR proteins are localized asymmetrically in early
blastomeres and their mislocalization correlates with changes in the patterns of
cell cleavage and the distribution of cell fate determinants. Drosophila and
vertebrate PAR homologs are also asymmetrically localized and important for cell
polarity in these animals. Therefore, investigating how the C. elegans PAR
proteins become asymmetrically localized and how their activity controls
cellular architecture essential for asymmetric cell division is likely to reveal
universally important molecular mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biochemical
analysis in mammalian cells indicates that the highly conserved cell polarity
protein Cdc42 binds to and activates the mammalian PAR homologs. Genetic
analysis of cdc-42 function in C. elegans early embryos, performed in Dr.
Hunter's laboratory, is consistent with these results. Dr. Hunter proposes to
investigate how Cdc42 activity controls the localization and activity of the PAR
proteins during the establishment of embryonic polarity. A transgenic strain
expressing a PAR-6::GFP fusion protein will be constructed and PAR-6:GFP
localization followed in living embryos in response to changes in Cdc42
activity. Equally important to how the PAR proteins become asymmetrically
localized, is how the PAR proteins control cell polarity. Dr. Hunter proposes a
second set of experiments to investigate the function of and determine the
molecular identity of roc(qt1), a gene required to coordinate embryonic polarity
with cytoskeletal organization.&lt;br/&gt;