* 0110138
* Regulation of Cdc42-Dependent Signaling Pathways Throughout the Cell Cycle
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Douglas Johnson, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Jermelina Tupas
* 08/31/2005
* USD 385,275.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term objective of this project is to understand
the signal-transduction mechanisms that control cellular morphogenesis during
the eukaryotic cell cycle. Normal morphogenesis, the process by which the
complex, three-dimensional organization of the cell is developed and maintained,
is essential for the fidelity of cellular differentiation and reproduction. The
goal of this project is to decipher the signal-transduction mechanisms
controlling cell polarity process in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Polarized growth in response to different signals during the yeast cell cycle
can result in the generation of several different morphological structures, such
as buds, mating projections, and pseudohyphae. Two protein components of the
cell polarity apparatus in yeast; the Ras-related GTPase Cdc42p and its guanine-
nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) Cdc24p have previously been characterized in
this laboratory. These components are integral parts of a signal-transduction
pathway that leads to the generation of cell polarity during the cell cycle.
These components have conserved counterparts in other eukaryotes, suggesting
that common signal-transduction mechanisms controlling cell polarity may exist.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific aims of this project are directed at
understanding the regulation of the Cdc42p GTPase and how it interfaces with
different cell-cycle regulatory processes. The hypotheses that will be tested
with these experiments are: 1). Initiation of cell polarity signaling depends on
localized targeting of Cdc24p but not Cdc42p; and 2). Cdc42p is activated and
de-activated during the cell cycle. Cdc24p is targeted to the nucleus and sites
of polarized growth at specific times in the cell cycle. However, recent data
suggest a paradigm shift in which Cdc42p is localized around the entire
periphery of the cell throughout the cell cycle and enriched at sites of
polarized growth after activation. To better understand this critical regulatory
process, the targeting mechanisms for both Cdc24p and Cdc42p will be determined
using green fluorescent protein (GFP)-tagged wild-type and mutant proteins. S.
cerevisiae Cdc42p is activated by the Cdc24p GEF and de-activated through the
action of the Bem3p, Rga1p, and Rga2p GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs). Recent
studies from this laboratory suggest that Cdc24p activates Cdc42p at multiple
stages of the cell cycle, most probably prior to bud emergence in G 1 phase and
cytokinesis in M phase. If so, then Cdc42p is likely to be de-activated in the
intervening time frames by the action of its GAPs. The cell-cycle specific
localization of individual GAPs will be investigated using GFP-tagged proteins.
The answers to these questions will not only be relevant to the basic
understanding of signal-transduction mechanisms in cell biology, but also to the
understanding of the cellular morphogenesis process in yeast as well as in other
eukaryotes. &lt;br/&gt;