* 0110173
* Functional Genomics of Cellulose Synthesis in Economically Important Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2001,06/30/2003
* Deborah Delmer, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 06/30/2003
* USD 471,134.00



Senior personnel: Deborah P. Delmer, PI, Candace Haigler, Co-PI, Texas Tech
University; Andrew Spicer, Co-PI, Texas A&M Houston; Allan Zipf, Co-PI, Alabama
A&M University; Kanwarpal Dhugga, senior scientist and unfunded collaborator,
Pioneer HiBred

Cellulose (Beta-1,4-glucan) represents a major sink for carbon in plants where
it exists as a key cell wall polymer. The pattern and extent of cellulose
microfibril deposition contribute to patterns of morphogenesis, to the unique
characteristics of specialized cell types, and to the strength and flexibility
of plant stems. Cellulose is used extensively as fuel, timber, fiber, forage,
and chemical cellulose. Manipulation of the patterns and extent of cellulose
deposition, the dimensions and crystallinity of the microfibrils, or the ratio
of cellulose to other sinks such as lignin or starch, can be expected to improve
the quality of many economically important plants. This project continues work
initiated in a previous NSF Plant Genome award to study the functional genomics
of the CesA gene family proposed to encode the catalytic subunits of the
multicomponent cellulose synthase enzyme complex. The new project also extends
these objectives to include discovery and characterization of other genes that
are critical for the process. Research focuses on plants of economic importance
where modifications of this process could yield most benefit-on maize where stem
strength and carbon partitioning are important issues and on cotton for fiber
improvement. Arabidopsis and tracheary elements of Zinnia are also being used as
models to test new concepts. Specific goals include: 1) Studies of expression
patterns of all ten of the Arabidopsis CesA genes and their related ancestors,
the CslD genes. This work will define developmental patterns of expression for
all of these genes and also identify potential pairs or triplets of CesA that
are required as functional units within a single cell type, examine affects of
carbon status and light on gene expression, and test the hypothesis that the
related CslD genes are the cellulose synthases of tip-growing cells; 2) With
respect to maize, these studies will identify expression patterns for 4 key
ZmCesA genes, and relate these to any phenotypes generated in the 4 different
selected Mu insertion lines that are mutated in these respective genes; 3)
Further testing of the hypothesis that at least two distinct CesA proteins and
the Korrigan cellulase protein are all required for cellulose synthase complex
formation and function; this will be done by co-expressing and analyzing complex
formation and ability to make cellulose when combinations of these genes are
expressed in yeast and tobacco BY-2 cells; 3) Completion of characterization of
the first identified CesA gene from an alga ; 4) Determination of the
comparative topology of a plant CesA protein in the plasma membrane with its
related hyaluronan synthase ancestor of mammals in order to relate structure of
the proteins to their functions in synthesis of the glucan chains of cellulose ;
5) A description of the evolution, diversity, and map locations of CesA genes in
cotton, studies that should shed light on the evolution of tetraploid cotton and
also identify polymorphisms in these genes to contribute to the genome maps of
diploid and tertraploid cottons; 6) Microarray experiments to study global
expression patterns of large numbers of genes in Arabidopsis, maize and cotton
under conditions in which we know CesA gene expression is affected, with the
goal of identifying other genes that are important for cellulose synthesis in
plants.

Deliverables Deliverables have and will include publications in peer-reviewed
journals and sequences of cDNAs for novel CesA genes deposited in Genbank. In
the future: (a) seeds of transgenic Arabidopsis plants containing CesA promoter-
GUS fusions will be deposited in public seed banks; a