* 0110266
* SBIR Phase II:   Design of a True Three Dimensional (3-D) Information Display System
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2003
* Soma Chakrabarti, BioComp Systems
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 11/30/2003
* USD 503,325.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes the
development of a low-cost desktop true three dimensional (3-D) information
display system suitable for commercialization during Phase III. The proposed
video monitor will provide highly realistic static and dynamic 3-D images by
presenting information over a volumetric space, rather than a conventional
planar space. As a result, the displayed information neither suffers from the
loss of actual depth information as in a conventional monitor, nor requires the
use of specially designed eyeglasses needed for stereovision systems. Fullcolor
true 3-D views will be generated by projecting plane-by-plane image slices onto
a projection screen that moves backward and forward in synchronization with the
information generated on a CRT screen. By accessing these planes-of-view 30
times per second, flicker-free true 3-D views are generated over a volumetric
space that are viewable from multiple angles. The anticipated low cost of this
practical system should make it affordable for personal use since it will be
designed primarily with commercially available system components, aided by novel
digital imaging techniques and software approaches.

Thus, the proposed system is expected to find many diverse applications ranging
from scientific and industrial visualization to entertainment. Some of the
initial applications include biomedical image processing, scientific
visualization, protein structure determination, general-purpose 3-D computer
graphics, radar imaging, battlefield management, and aircraft design.