* 0110917
* Alpine Treeline Stability: Mechanisms of Conifer Tree Seedling Establishment
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Thomas Vogelmann, Wake Forest University
* Continuing grant
* William E. Winner
* 07/31/2005
* USD 277,434.00

If current projections of climate warming are accurate, future global change
will include the disappearance of a significant portion of the Earth's
biodiversity during the 21st century, e.g. alpine tundra ecosystems in temperate
and subtropical latitudes may be replaced by the subalpine forest below. Despite
these predictions, mechanistic explanations for the upper elevational limits of
subalpine forests across the globe have been pondered for over a century, and
are still controversial today. The stability of this alpine treeline will be
evaluated based on the ecophysiology of tree seedling establishment away from
the forest edge and into the subalpine-alpine ecotone by the two dominant
conifers, Abies lasiocarpa (subalpine fir) and Picea engelmannii (Engelmann
spruce). Paradoxically, sunlight exposure during the day and leaf warming can
enhance photosynthesis and growth in most plant species, while prior exposure to
a clear, cold night sky (longwave thermal radiation sink) leads to lower minimum
leaf temperatures, a major limiting factor at high elevation. In combination,
low leaf temperatures at night followed by high sunlight the following morning
can result in potentially severe low temperature photoinhibition of
photosynthesis (LTP) and substantial reductions in carbon assimilation. It is
hypothesized that this decrease in carbon assimilation is due primarily to
excessive sky exposure and LTP, resulting in inadequate carbon gain to support
the root growth necessary to survive rapidly drying soils following spring
runoff. In addition, the timing and degree of mycorrhizal infection of fine
roots may also play a vital role in preventing lethal water stress. Three
primary venues for adaptation are proposed for seedling establishment under such
a multiple stress regime: (i) microsite facilitation, (ii) seedling
architecture, and (iii) photosynthetic physiology. The relative effectiveness of
each of these adaptive venues for seedling establishment will be evaluated
quantitatively from field measurements on photosynthesis, growth, and survival.
If the hypotheses linking greater sky exposure to lower minimums in leaf
temperature, greater LTP, less carbon gain and root growth, and lower seedling
survival (desiccation death) are correct, conifer tree seedling establishment in
this treeline ecotone could flourish under current scenarios of global warming
and, thus, lead to the encroachment of subalpine forest and the potential loss
of alpine tundra ecosystems.