* 0110311
* Regulation of Competence for Genetic Transformation in Streptococcus pneumoniae
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Donald Morrison, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 08/31/2006
* USD 590,000.00

Genetic transformation is a naturally occurring, inducible gene replacement
process that is relatively simple and very efficient; yet the mechanism of this
natural bacterial system for 'gene therapy' is not understood. Competence for
genetic transformation in pneumococcus (Streptococcus pneumoniae) occurs during
a brief period of highly specialized protein synthesis, coordinated among all
cells of an actively growing culture. During a period of approximately 10-20
minutes, the competent cells can transport DNA strands into the cytoplasm and
direct them so as to replace homologous genes in the chromosome very
efficiently. Central elements of the coordination mechanism are a secreted
17-amino-acid peptide pheromone, a two-component regulatory system that senses
the peptide pheromone signal, and a putative accessory sigma factor. To identify
genes involved in the pheromone sensing and DNA-processing mechanisms and to
determine their roles, this project relies on standard genetic techniques and
the efficient gene replacement provided by the natural transformation process
itself, in combination with molecular methods in vitro, recombinant DNA cloning
using new vectors in pneumococcus, and DNA microarray gene expression analysis.
To establish the genetics of the system, gene disruption mutations are made by
combining DNA cassettes obtained by polymerase chain reaction synthesis followed
by direct insertion into the pneumococcal chromosome. The project will identify
and determine the function of genes of this natural transformation system in two
broad areas: (a) genes allowing cell-to-cell communication for regulation of
this pathway in response to a measure of population density, and (b) genes of
the pathway that transports extracellular DNA into the cell and processes it for
genetic recombination.&lt;br/&gt;