* 0110575
* Molecular Mechanisms of Brassinosteroid Action
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Steven Clouse, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Steve R. Rodermel
* 08/31/2004
* USD 240,000.00

Brassinosteroids (BRs) are essential growth-promoting natural products found at
low levels in pollen, seeds and young vegetative tissues throughout the plant
kingdom. The P.I.'s group has identified a BR-insensitive mutant in Arabidopsis
thaliana (bri1) that confers severe pleiotropic phenotypic effects inhibiting
plant development. BRI1 has been shown by others to encode a membrane-bound
leucine-rich repeat Ser/Thr receptor kinase. In animals, the Transforming Growth
Factor-b (TGF-b) family of peptides, acts via receptor kinases to prominently
impact several pathways involved in animal development and adult homeostasis.
TGF-b Receptor Interacting Protein (TRIP-1) is an intracellular substrate of the
TGF-b Type II receptor kinase that plays an important role in TGF-b signaling.
TRIP-1 is a WD-repeat protein that also has a dual role as an essential subunit
of the eukaryotic translation initiation factor eIF3 in animals, yeast and
plants, thereby revealing a putative link between a developmental signaling
pathway and the control of protein translation. The P.I.'s group recently found
that transcript levels of TRIP-1 homologs in plants are regulated by BR
treatment under a variety of conditions, and that antisense TRIP-1 plants
exhibited a broad range of developmental defects including some that resemble
the phenotype of BR-deficient and -insensitive mutants. Furthermore, recombinant
BRI1 kinase domain phosphorylates recombinant TRIP-1 in vitro. These findings
suggest that TRIP-1 may mediate some of the molecular mechanisms underlying the
regulation of plant growth and development by BRs. The P.I. will test this
hypothesis by performing the following two objectives: OBJECTIVE 1: TRIP-1
protein levels will be monitored under a variety of conditions, in both wild-
type and BR mutants, and the effect of BR on translation initiation will be
examined. The possible nuclear localization of TRIP-1 protein, in addition to
its role in the eIF3 complex, will also be studied. OBJECTIVE 2:
Immunoprecipitation followed by mass spectrometry will be used to identify in
vivo phosphorylation sites of TRIP-1 and their dependence on an active BRI1
receptor kinase. This project should increase our understanding of BR signal
transduction and the role that this hormone plays in controlling plant growth
and development. Given that BRs are found throughout the plant kingdom, greater
understanding of the molecular mechanisms of BR action could have practical
impact on generating crop plants with altered growth properties.