* 0110769
* Mechanistic Organic Chemistry of Relevance to the Interstellar Medium
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2004
* Robert McMahon, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 07/31/2004
* USD 395,541.00

Professor Robert J. McMahon, of the Department of Chemistry at the University of
Wisconsin - Madison, is supported by the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry
Program for his studies directed toward the elucidation of the identity,
structure, properties, and reactivity of organic molecules that occur in
interstellar space. A combination of experimental and computational
investigations are focused on organic species that are either known to or are
likely to exist in the interstellar medium. These organic species will be
generated in the laboratory, and their molecular structure investigated by
infrared, ultraviolet/visible, electron spin resonance, and microwave
spectrometry. In order to address the question of the existence of cyclic,
aromatic species in interstellar space, as well as the mechanisms for their
formation from acyclic molecules whose existence has been demonstrated, the
fundamental chemical mechanisms by which open-chain organic molecules undergo
ring closure will be investigated. Additional studies will attempt to detect
aromatic species and their precursors in the interstellar medium through a
combination of laboratory rotational spectroscopy and subsequent radio-
astronomical searches.

The origin of the so-called "diffuse interstellar bands" has been described as
one of the fundamental problems in modern astronomy and molecular spectroscopy.
At the present time, it is not known with certainty whether cyclic species
displaying the unusual stabilization known as aromaticity exist in interstellar
space and, if so, how these species can be formed from the acyclic molecules
that are known to exist there. With the support of the Organic and
Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor Robert J. McMahon, of the Department
of Chemistry at the University of Wisconsin - Madison, is carrying out a
combination of experimental and calculational studies designed to address these
questions. By preparing acyclic precursors to aromatic species and examining
their structure and reactivity, Professor McMahon explores the fundamental
reaction chemistry which could occur in interstellar space. By probing these
species with a variety of spectroscopic techniques, he both elucidates their
structures and provides spectroscopic "signatures" which may be sought in the
interstellar medium, providing evidence for the existence (or absence) of these
species.