* 0110023
* Establishment of Robust Maize Transformation Systems
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2007
* Kan Wang, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 09/30/2007
* USD 4,325,963.00

&lt;br/&gt;Kan Wang, Principal Investigator, Iowa State
University&lt;br/&gt;Stanton Gelvin, Co- Principal Investigator, Purdue
University&lt;br/&gt;Heidi Kaeppler, Co- Principal Investigator, University of
Wisconsin-Madison&lt;br/&gt;Bill Thompson, Co- Principal Investigator, North
Carolina State University&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the Plant Genome
Project matures, improved technologies for plant transformation are becoming
essential. Given the rapid increase in genomic information and the need to
understand the biological functions of numerous genes, it is essential to
establish efficient transformation systems and make them available to
researchers in the public sector. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Maize is the most
studied model plant that has important economic value. Although genetic
transformation systems for maize have been established in private laboratories,
the lack of such systems is still a key limitation for public researchers. This
is because most public research groups do not have access to the resources and
infrastructure necessary for maize transformation by currently available
procedures. In addition, the current technology has serious limitations,
including low efficiency and throughput, difficulty with inbred line
transformation, unpredictable transgene copy numbers and integrity, and
undesirable transgene silencing during development and over generations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long term goal for this program is to conduct research
aimed at establishing robust maize transformation technologies by: 1) developing
a routine Agrobacterium-mediated transformation system, 2) enhancing transgene
integration and expression, 3) investigating alternative transformation
protocols using non-tissue culture approaches, and 4) expand transformation to
more maize inbred lines. In addition, this program will facilitate transfer of
improved protocols to the public sector by providing a more efficient
transformation service, training research staff, and organizing transformation
workshops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;