* 0110540
* RUI:  Lamprey Developmental Genetics and the Evolution of the Vertebrate Body Plan
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2006
* James Langeland, Kalamazoo College
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 06/30/2006
* USD 320,193.00

0110540 Langeland

The overall goal of the proposed study is to take advantage of the unique
phylogenetic position of the lamprey, Petromyzon marinus, to address fundamental
issues of developmental and molecular evolution in the vertebrate lineage.
Lampreys are the simplest extant vertebrates, situated phylogenetically between
the cephalochordates (represented by amphioxus) and the gnathostomes
(represented by mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians, and fish).
Morphologically, lampreys share several characteristics with their gnathostome
sister group, including multiple brain divisions, neural crest and its
derivatives, neurogenic placodes, pharyngeal arches, and a cartilaginous
endoskeleton, but they lack jaws and paired appendages and retain a relatively
simple axial morphology. Genetically, lampreys also appear to be less complex
than gnathostomes, having undergone fewer duplications of developmental
regulatory genes. Lampreys are thus a perfect system with which to investigate
developmental and molecular events associated with early vertebrate evolution.
Dr. Langeland has led in recent efforts to establish lampreys as a viable system
for comparative developmental genetics. There are two basic thrusts to this
proposal: 1) to use gene expression studies in lamprey embryos to investigate
fundamental aspects of the evolution of vertebrate head patterning, and 2) to
use gene phylogeny studies to test whether duplications of select regulatory
genes accompanied vertebrate origins. The Langeland laboratory will clone and
characterize members of the goosecoid, Emx, and snail/Slug gene families in P.
marinus. These genes are excellent markers for three key developmental
innovations that accompanied vertebrate origins: the establishment of the head
organizer, the elaboration of rostral brain patterning, and the acquisition and
diversification of cephalic neural crest. Comparative expression analyses of
these genes during lamprey embryogenesis will allow more precise reconstruction
of developmental events associated with vertebrate origins. In addition,
determination of the copy number of these genes in lampreys, and analysis of
their phylogenetic relationships with their gnathostome and protochordate
homologs, will provide important evidence concerning whether widespread gene
duplications, or even whole genome duplication, facilitated vertebrate origins.
This research will take place at a four-year undergraduate liberal arts college.
Extensive involvement of undergraduates in all phases of the project will help
maintain the strong record of the host institution and of the principal
investigator in integrating research with teaching, and in preparing future
Ph.D.s in the life sciences.

