* 0110329
* Theory of Locally Crystalline Liquids
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2001,09/30/2004
* Steven Kivelson, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 09/30/2004
* USD 348,000.00

This grant supports theoretical research on the properties of strongly
correlated electron systems; in particular, the behavior of liquid crystalline
phases in these systems. There is strong support for the idea that the liquid
crystal phases of highly correlated electronic systems have considerable local
crystalline (charge) order. Various electronic liquid and liquid crystalline
phases of doped Mott insulators are expected on theoretical grounds and/or are
known experimentally (especially from neutron diffraction and x-ray scattering
experiments) to possess considerable local "stripe" order. There is also clear
theoretical and compelling, although indirect, experimental evidence that there
is a large degree of stripe order in the anisotropic metallic state observed at
low temperatures in quantum Hall systems in higher Landau levels. The metallic
phases of the low-density two dimensional electron gas with rs less than, but
near to the critical density for Wigner crystallization, are expected,
theoretically, to have a large degree of crystalline order. The normal state of
quasi-one dimensional charge and spin density wave insulators has long been
known to possess substantial (phase disordered) local density wave order. Even
ordinary quantum Hall liquids, especially those at very low filling factor, are
known to possess incipient crystalline order, as indicated by the deep magneto-
roton minimum in the collective mode spectrum. It is proposed to undertake a
systematic theoretical study of the implications of this statement. In
particular, we will find defined limiting situations in which the intuitive, but
vague, notion of local crystalline order can be made precise, and to explore the
consequences of local crystallinity on the electronic properties of highly
correlated electronic liquids. Special attention will be paid to the physics of
the "fluctuating stripe" phases of the high temperature superconductors, to the
incipient glassy character of such a locally crystalline liquid, and to the
relation of this study to the theory of classical supercooled
liquids.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;