* 0110607
* Physiology and Function of Sensory Feedback Loops
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2001,08/31/2006
* Wolfgang Friesen, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/2006
* USD 513,822.00

Lay Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Animal locomotion results from the intricate
interplay between connections within the nervous system and sense organs that
monitor the execution of commands from the central nervous system. For animals
that swim by undulating the whole body, sensory receptors detect body bending
and transmit that information to the central nervous system, where the
'commanded' and realized movements are compared and compensatory actions are
orchestrated. Much is already known about the neuronal wiring diagrams for some
behaviors and about relevant sensory structures, but the nature of the
connections between the two is largely unknown. The experiments funded by this
grant are designed to advance the understanding of interactions between stretch
receptors in the body wall, their connections with the central nervous system,
and the importance of these interactions in generating an optimal body shape
during locomotion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Experiments are conducted on animal
preparations and on isolated central nervous systems with two approaches. One
approach is electrophysiological, with the aim of describing stretch-sensitive
receptors in greater detail and to map their interactions with neurons in the
central nervous system. The other is a 'systems' approach, with experiments
designed to test the functional importance of the stretch receptors for swimming
movements. Electrophysiological experiments to map neuronal interactions are
conducted with standard extracellular and intracellular recording techniques.
Systems experiments, employing similar techniques, include tests of whether
stretch receptors form oscillatory circuits with the central nervous system and
of the nature of intersegmental mechanical interactions. Because there is
significant functional similarity between swimming and related locomotory
movements in all animals, insights gained from this research will be widely
applicable throughout the animal kingdom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;