* 0110593
* Molecular and Genetic Analysis of Drosophila Proteasomes
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2001,10/31/2004
* John Belote, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 10/31/2004
* USD 450,000.00

Regulated protein degradation is important for normal cell function, playing a
key role in such diverse processes as growth control, metabolic regulation,
embryonic development, and cell cycle progression. Targeted protein breakdown is
also important for protecting cells against the potentially deadly effect of
accumulated damaged or malformed polypeptides. Thus, an understanding of how
cells selectively identify unwanted proteins and target them for destruction has
fundamental importance for the study of development, cellular metabolism, and
cell fate determination. An essential component of this pathway is the
proteasome, a large, multi-subunit complex that acts as the proteolytic
"machine" that removes abnormal polypeptides and short-lived regulatory proteins
from cells. Recent work, using the tools of biochemistry and cell biology, has
revealed much about the physical and biochemical properties of proteasomes, but
many aspects of their biological function remain unclear. As an approach toward
learning more about their role during development, a genetic and molecular study
of Drosophila proteasomes is being undertaken. This project is focused on two
major questions: (1) what is the role of the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway in
specific developmental processes, and (2) are there structurally distinct cell-
type specific proteasomes that have specialized functions? To address the first
question, a mutational approach is being pursued. A number of dominant
proteasome mutants have been isolated, and are being used to disrupt proteasome
function in vivo, so that their effects on specific biological processes can be
examined. For the second question, a reverse genetics approach is being used.
Several proteasome subunit genes that are expressed exclusively in male germ
cells have been isolated by molecular cloning methods. A combination of
molecular, cell biological, and genetic approaches are being used to investigate
the importance of proteasome-mediated protein degradation in spermatogenesis,
and to address the functional role of a "sperm-specific" proteasome in this
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;