* 0110045
* Support of Student Participation in the North American Paleontological Convention (NAPC-2001), June 26-July 1, 2001, Berkeley, California
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2001,03/31/2002
* Jere Lipps, Paleontological Society
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 03/31/2002
* USD 25,000.00

Abstract: Support of student participation in the North American Paleontological
Convention (NAPC-2001) June 26-July 1, 2001

The North American Paleontological Convention is a quadrennial meeting of
paleontologists from a variety of disciplines. It is supported by
paleontological societies headquartered in North America, and is open to all who
are interested in paleontology. The meeting planned for June 26 through July 1,
2001 in Berkeley, CA will be the seventh NAPC. Each previous convention has been
judged an excellent opportunity for the presentation of the results of new
research and for discussions of current areas of paleontological research. One
aim of NAPC is to allow specialists who would not otherwise normally be in
contact to meet and exchange ideas. Based on past experience, the Organizing
Committee for NAPC-2001 expects that over 500 professionals will attend and
interact during four days of meetings and on several field trips.

The Organizing Committee believes that the continued interest of students and
young professionals is critical to the health of the field. Not only will they
maintain the study of past life, they are the ones who will provide fresh
approaches and examine old fossils with new eyes. NAPC provides an outstanding
educational opportunity to obtain focused presentations of paleontological
information from talks and poster presentations without the other distractions
presented at a general geological meeting. It also allows students the ready
opportunity to meet with leaders in the field and to discuss their research in
progress, both formally and informally, in a venue not provided by a national or
regional geologic meeting.

This proposal requests $25,000 to support the attendance at NAPC-2001 of
students and young professionals from the U.S., Mexico and other countries where
students and professionals work on North American paleontology.