* 0110483
* Molecular Genetic Analysis of the Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae Avirulence Determinants
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2004
* Pamela Ronald, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Steve R. Rodermel
* 06/30/2004
* USD 360,000.00

In the establishment of infection, many mammalian and plant bacterial pathogens
produce effector molecules that are delivered to host cells. Transport of these
effectors is accomplished through several different mechanisms. For example,
bacterial Type III secretion systems channel effectors directly into the host
cell whereas bacterial Type I systems secrete effectors into the extracellular
environment. In many plant/pathogen interactions, host resistance responses are
initiated via intracellular receptors encoded by plant disease resistance genes
that recognize Type III secreted effector molecules encoded by bacterial
avirulence (avr) genes. In contrast, the mechanisms by which plant cell surface
receptors respond to extracellular effectors are unknown. Xa21 is a rice
resistance gene encoding a presumed receptor kinase that confers resistance to
Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae (Xoo) Philippine race 6, the causal agent of
bacterial leaf blight, the most destructive bacterial disease of rice in Asia
and Africa. Dr. Ronald has shown that the presumed extracellular leucine rich
repeat domain of XA21 is responsible for specific recognition of the avirulent
strain Xoo Philippine race 6. Dr. Ronald has identified 6 Xoo genes from this
strain that are required for the avirulence function. Three of these genes
(xooA, xooB, xooC) encode proteins that share similarity with components of Type
I secretion systems of gram negative bacteria. The long-term goal of this
proposal is to elucidate the relationship and function of these six Xoo
avirulence determinants, identify and characterize the effector molecule and
analyze the interaction between the effector and rice receptor kinase XA21. The
Xa21/Xoo interaction is particularly advantageous for these studies for several
reasons. Xa21 is the only disease resistance gene encoding a receptor kinase so
far identified and likely recognizes an extracellular effector. Xoo is
genetically tractable and the genes encoding Type I secretion systems are
characterized. Finally, rice is a model for studies of all cereals and therefore
the expected results will have a broad impact on understanding and controlling
bacterial diseases of cereals. Accomplishment of the proposed objectives is
expected to lead to the first detailed understanding of the roles of Type 1
secretion systems and sulfation in determining host specificity of
phytopathogenic bacteria.