* 0110824
* Effect of Spontaneous Mutations on Global Genome Expression in C. elegans
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2001,11/30/2005
* Larissa Vassilieva, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Rita Teutonico
* 11/30/2005
* USD 517,618.00

The primary objective of this research is to assess alterations in the genome-
wide expression pattern caused by accumulation of spontaneous deleterious
mutations in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Mildly deleterious mutations
play a central role in a broad array of evolutionary and genetic phenomena,
including the distribution of the transposable elements, the level of nucleotide
diversity in various regions of the genome, the magnitude of inbreeding
depression, the evolution of sex and recombination, the degeneration of Y
chromosome, the senescence and extinction of endangered species. Presently the
knowledge of deleterious mutations has been limited to two levels of biological
organization: the DNA and the organism. Difficulty in predicting the effects of
most DNA mutations on organismal phenotypes limits the first. The second is
unsatisfactory, because the high phenotypic variances of the fitness-related
traits obscure effects of mildly deleterious mutations. &lt;br/&gt;This project
will survey the consequences of spontaneous deleterious mutations on the genome-
wide gene expression level because microevolutionary changes in fitness are
likely caused by mutations that change gene expression, rather than mutations
that alter protein structure. The mutant strains used for this study will be
mutation-accumulation lines, which have been created by propagating worms from
single individuals from a population without selection for 400 generations. The
combination of the complete genome sequence of C. elegans allowing DNA
microarrays available to screen genome-wide expression, and the longest
mutation-accumulation lines among eukaryotes presents an unparalleled
opportunity to investigate deterioration of the global gene expression by
spontaneous deleterious mutations. This work will contribute to establishing a
basis for prediction of the evolutionary and genetic consequences of spontaneous
mutations on genome-wide expression patterns.&lt;br/&gt;