* 0111527
* Applications of Mechanism Design
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2003
* Tomas Sjostrom, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2003
* USD 123,595.00

This project will apply the theory of incentives and mechanism design to various
models in micro credit, conflict, and multi-community models.&lt;br/&gt;1. Micro
credit. The Grameen Bank in Bangladesh has achieved high repayment rates from
small uncollateralized loans. The Grarneen Bank's lending has two distinctive
features: joint liability and cross reporting. The microfinance literature has
largely neglected the cross reporting aspect, although it appears to be crucial
to Grameen's success. The project tries to understand the role of both joint
liability and cross reporting. It, is commonly assumed that the villagers share
information not available to the bank, and that the villagers can enforce
cooperative behavior using social sanctions. The mechanism design approach makes
it possible to make precise assumptions about the agents' ability to side
contract with each other, their shared and their private information, etc. Ashok
Rai (Harvard University) is a collaborator on this part of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Conflict. The Mechanism Design literature
usually makes strong assumptions regarding the existence of a third party (such
as a court) which enforces the "rules of the game". In contrast, this project is
interested in models where there is no such pow-erful third party and in
particular institutions for the prevention of conflict. Suppose there are two
nations, and each has private information about its own propensity to arm. The
Bayesian Nash equilibrium may be very inefficient, since each state may arm
itself in self defense, even though the probability that any state actually
desires a conflict is vanishingly small. What kind of institution will solve
this dilemma ? One particular institution world be an arms control agreement,
which in the absence of a third party is essentially cheap talk. Other
institutions might involve a mediator. Sandeep Baliga (Northwestern University)
is a collaborator on this part, of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Multi-
district models. The Mechanism Design literature usually assumes that there is
one monopolistic mechanism designer. In contrast, this project is interested in
models with competing mechanism designers. For example, in a Tiebout type model,
many communities decide on local taxes and local public goods production. These
decisions will in general have externalities on members of other districts. What
kind of institutions will be efficient? This project addresses such issues as
the equilibrium selection of a voting mechanism or a tax system. It, is
particularly interesting to allow migration among different districts, as in the
original Tiebout model, since it amounts to a very direct competition between
the "local mechanism designers". Christian Schultz (University of Copenhagen) is
a collaborator on this part of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;