* 0111372
* Collaborative Research:  Substantive and Methodological Innovations for the Study of Temporal Dynamics in International Conflict
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2003
* Dan Reiter, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* James S. Granato
* 06/30/2003
* USD 52,430.00

This award funds a project that contributes to our understanding of
international relations in two broad ways. First, from a theoretical standpoint,
it addresses empirically what scholars have understood in principle for decades:
that temporal factors such as history, sequence, and perceptions of the future
are critical to any complete understanding of international interactions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators' work tests a number of central theories
of conflict, including propositions linking democratization, economic
interdependence, and uncertainty to war. Their proposal emphasizes that the
inferences we draw about political dynamics are necessarily conditioned by both
the recognition and satisfaction of one's model's assumptions, and on a close
correspondence between that model and the process generating the data examined.
Neither model assumptions (e.g. that of temporal stability in covariate effects)
nor basic substantive facts about the phenomenon of study (such as the repeated
nature of conflict in the international arena) are innocuous; different
methodological treatments of prior disputes, for example, imply fundamentally
different understandings of the effects of those disputes on current conflicts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this vein, this project examines a series of related
issues:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Do conflicts beget future conflicts? They
develop two hypotheses on this question, one from a rationalist perspective and
the other from a model rooted in neorealism and social psychology. They test
these competing theories, using innovative techniques that account for the
influence of past conflicts between two states (that is, repeated events) on the
likelihood of a future dispute. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. They examine an
assertion implicit in all existing quantitative studies of international
conflict, that observations are exchangeable. The investigators assert that this
assumption is incorrect on both theoretical and empirical grounds. Culture and
exogenous shocks clearly affect the probability of conflict. Such heterogeneity
is a form of model misspecification, making the conclusions drawn using standard
statistical approaches suspect. They use mixture models to address unmeasured
heterogeneity, and show how such models conform closely to our understanding of
international disputes and provide superior assessments of the causes of those
disputes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Finally, they determine whether the effects
of certain influences on conflict have varying effects over time. A host of
theoretical work suggests that the affect of those factors, which have been
shown to foster or inhibit international conflict, vary over time. The
substantive implications bear fundamentally on the validity of different
theoretical perspectives in international relations, and have substantial policy
implications for decision makers in the international arena. Conventional
analyses do not and cannot allow for the effects of such factors on disputes to
change over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In sum, the investigators will further
improve the study of international relations by paying greater and more explicit
attention to the connection between a number of general theoretical expectations
regarding time and conflict and the kinds of statistical tools used to model and
test those expectations.&lt;br/&gt;