* 0111459
* Margins:  Workshop on Modeling of Subduction Zone Dynamics and Thermal Structure
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* Peter van Keken, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 07/31/2003
* USD 20,735.00

Theoretical modeling of subduction zone provides an essential complement to
observational and experimental approaches and a fundamental tool to test
conceptual models of the dynamics of convergent margins. Despite large advances
in numerical techniques and increasing computational capacity, major obstacles
exist in the road to full integration of accurate and consistent modeling into
subduction zone research. Large uncertainties about the dynamical controls on
subduction initiation and evolution remain. This is in part due to important
assumptions that have to be made about the rheology and composition of the slab
and mantle wedge, and the dynamics of the seismogenic zone and overriding plate.
In addition, we lack a systematic investigation into the influence of various
numerical techniques or rigorous solution tests. An overview of recently
published results shows that large discrepancies remain in our understanding of
the thermal structure of subduction zones.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Major tasks for
the modeling community are to benchmark and evaluate existing numerical
approaches, to guide the use of increasing computer power and improving
numerical techniques, and to further the integration of numerical modeling into
experimental and observational studies. A focused, technical workshop held at
the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, MI addresses these issues. The workshop
format is collaborative and hands-on, with an audience consisting of subduction
zone modelers, experts from observational and experimental disciplines, and a
number of graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To maximize discussion, the
workshop is limited to 25 participants and has limited time allocated to formal
presentations. The goals of the workshop include:&lt;br/&gt;1) a numerical
benchmark of standard cases;&lt;br/&gt;2) an overview of technical improvements
and limitations;&lt;br/&gt;3) a survey of the parameters that are fundamental in
controlling the dynamics of the slab-wedge environment;&lt;br/&gt;4) a set of
base models for use in the wider community;&lt;br/&gt;5) information exchange
and knowledge transfer between specialties;&lt;br/&gt;6) increased
collaboration, including code and resource sharing.&lt;br/&gt;