* 0111860
* CRUI: Osmoregulation in Euryhaline Fish: Physiology, Ecology and Molecular Biology.
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2007
* Robert Preston, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2007
* USD 869,566.00

Most fish are confined entirely to fresh water (FW) or seawater (SW) and cannot
live in or adapt to the other environment. What may be surprising is that the
internal salts and organic molecules (solutes) in the blood of all bony fishes
are maintained in an "intermediate" concentration (which is actually similar to
that in mammals). In other words, fish in salt water may suffer stress because
they are living in a medium about 3 times as salty as their blood and therefore
must "pump out" extra salt that is ingested. This requires molecular transport
proteins (such as the sodium/potassium pump and other ion pumps and channels).
&lt;br/&gt; FW fish, on the other hand, face the problem of becoming
"waterlogged". In other words, the higher concentrations of salts in their
tissues and blood cause the fish to gain water by diffusion (also called
osmosis). These fish must rid themselves of the extra water and conserve salts.
They do this by using molecular transport proteins. In general the control of
internal salt and water balance (osmoregulation) requires significant metabolic
energy to power it.&lt;br/&gt; As most people know, a small number of fish like
salmon and eels spend a part of their life in FW and part of their life in SW.
These fish literally switchover from the FW metabolism to the SW metabolism, a
process that may be metabolically stressful.&lt;br/&gt; A surprising little fish
(3 inches long), the killifish (Fundulus heteroclitus), has been shown to have
phenomenal osmoregulatory abilities. This fish can survive indefinitely in FW or
in SW up to 3 times more concentrated than ocean water. Furthermore, killifish
may migrate daily from SW to FW and back to feed (and to breed and lay eggs in
the Spring) making them appear to be unusually adept at osmoregulation. At
present there is intense interest in the metabolic machinery and especially the
molecular transport proteins that are involved. Indeed, many of the same types
of proteins and their responses to salinity change that are found in killifish
also are found in salmon and eels.&lt;br/&gt; However, with killifish (and
perhaps other fish as well) another mechanism, to deal with salinity stress has
been suggested, termed behavioral osmoregulation. The heart of this hypothesis
is that, all other things being equal, killifish will try to swim up FW streams
to the point where their internal salt and water composition resembles that of
the external water (about 1/3 strength SW) and stay there conserving metabolic
energy that would otherwise be expended pumping salts in or out of the fish.
Preliminary data support the hypothesis that killifish may seek salinities about
1/3 that of SW. &lt;br/&gt; This new idea has broad implications physiologically
and ecologically. The principal investigators will measure the metabolic energy
requirements for osmoregulation in killifish. Using DNA based techniques, they
will measure the presence of and changes in the molecular transport proteins in
killifish. They also will investigate the ecology of wild killifish and attempt
to correlate natural distributions and breeding behavior with projected salinity
preferences. &lt;br/&gt; A very important part of this project is that the
principal investigators will lead a team of 8 undergraduate students per year
(for each of 4 years) who will work during their academic year on this research
at their home institutions and then come to Mount Desert Island Biological
Laboratory for 2 months during the summer to do fieldwork, physiology and
molecular biology. The students will have the opportunity to do original
research while learning modern techniques in many fields at one of the country's
finest marine laboratories. It is expected that this experience show these
students the passion and fulfillment of scientific research that will motivate
them in their future careers.&lt;br/&gt;