* 0111238
* Combining Many Forecasts with General Loss Functions
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* Halbert White, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2003
* USD 301,413.00

Economic time series are often difficult to predict and as a result different
forecasters, faced with predicting the same economic variable, often come up
with very different answers, reflecting their use of separate forecasting
models, information sets and estimation methods. It is very rare for any
individual forecast to systematically dominate the others. Many studies have
found that a simple equal-weighted combination of forecasts produces better
predictions than those generated by individual models. This project develops
both theoretical tools and empirical techniques for explaining why simple equal-
weighted forecasts do so well in practice and compares these with wider classes
of combinations. &lt;br/&gt; The research project develops estimation and
forecast combination methods that can compete with the equal-weighted forecast
combination. We establish conditions under which our proposed methods can be
expected to produce improved forecast. The research project also considers the
performance of different forecast combination methods under a host of economic
circumstances, including prediction of economic variables in the near, medium
and distant future, prediction of the entire probability distribution of an
economic variable and prediction with loss functions that are tailored to
individual policy makers or economic decision makers. The proposal also
investigates the possibility of letting the forecast combination weights vary
over time since some models may work better in some situations (e.g. when the
economy is in a recession) and others may prove to be better in different
circumstances (e.g. an expansion state).&lt;br/&gt; Forecast combination
techniques have already been found to be useful in practical situations. This
proposal provides further understanding of why this is so and explores various
alternative approaches both theoretically and in practice, particularly when
many forecasts are involved, and expands the approach in new ways. The interest
in developing these methods is in part driven by practical concerns of the
Principal Investigators that has come through interaction with the various
Federal Reserve banks and other international organizations such as the IMF and
through considering their needs and requests. We expect to continue strong
relations with these and other organizations through the grant
period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;