* 0111517
* Acquisition of 14C and 3H counting equipment to support hydrologic, tectonic, and paleoseismic studies at Brigham Young
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Alan Mayo, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2003
* USD 102,786.00

0111517&lt;br/&gt;Nelson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides partial
support for the cost of acquiring two liquid scintillation counters and a
benzene synthesis system [sample preparation] for isotopic studies at Brigham
Young University [BYU]. The PI, Stephen Nelson, is an Associate Professor in the
Department of Geology. He and his colleagues in the department, Alan Mayo, Ron
Harris, and Matthew Mabey, their students and collaborators will use this
facility in support of hydrology, paleoclimate, and tectonic studies. In
addition to NSF, BYU is sharing 40% of the cost for this system. The counters
and sample preparation facilities will be housed in a laboratory that already
contains vacuum lines and a Finnigan Deltaplus isotope ratio mass spectrometer
for stable isotope analysis. These counters will be used primarily to make
measurements of 14C and 3H activity in water and 14C activity in organic matter
and carbonate materials. One low level and one ultra low level counter will be
acquired to facilitate both routine counting as well as counting of low activity
materials. Electrolysis cells will be constructed to permit 3H enrichment where
necessary. A majority of the work conducted in this facility will support
studies of ground water systems, paleoclimate studies, estimates tectonic uplift
rates, and fault slip rate investigations by BYU geologists and their
collaborators. Other departments at BYU provided substantial support for the
facility, and it is anticipated that this facility will permit faculty and
students from other departments to expand and augment their research
capabilities. The facility will be unique to Utah and it is expected to support
additional collaborative studies in the geosciences with colleagues in Utah and
nearby states.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;