* 0111456
* Organizational Size and the Logic of Economic Development:  An Analysis of Brazilian Personal Services
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Samuel Cohn, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2005
* USD 68,286.00

SES- 0111456&lt;br/&gt;Samuel Cohn&lt;br/&gt;Texas A&amp;M
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project is an analysis of the social and
political determinants of economic development in Brazil. Current sociological
writing on economic development is mis-specified because it fails to account for
differences between the determinants of growth for small and large firms. Small
firms represent the vast majority of employment in third world nations but
receive very little scholarly attention. It is hypothesized that the
relationship between state intervention and the growth of microenterprise does
not follow traditional models because a) small firms have little influence on
national governments and b) governments set policies based on the priority of
large firms - producing effects on small firms that are unplanned but
consequential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The project considers state-year level
variation in employment in three Brazilian industries: restaurants,
barber/beauty shops and hotels. All three industries involve personal service;
however, restaurants and barber/shops have very low average firm size, while
hotels are large and subject to chain and multinational ownership. Data from the
Brazilian census has already been collected and analyzed to develop an
econometric model of employment in these sectors. This model allows for the
statistical control of economic factors such as market size, and the estimation
of the role of key costs such as rent, taxes and wages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
The residuals from the econometric model have been used to identify a set of
states with unusually high or low levels of service sector activity net of
market factors. National Science Foundation funds will be used to support a year
of fieldwork to allow for qualitative investigation of the cases selected in
this manner. The principal investigator will perform a sustained contrast of
three northeastern states. One, Sergipe, has an extraordinarily high level of
employment n barber/beauty shops, and has maintained this level since 1940. One,
Bahia, saw a resurgence of service sector activity in the 1970's. The third,
Alagoas, is average in all respects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The study will also
do smaller analyses of residual employment in other states. These include a)
contrasting high and low levels of service employment in two artificially-
created "planned" capitols, Campo Grande and Brasilia, b) the slow decline of
services in both of Brazil's major metropoli (Sdo Paulo and Rio de Janeiro), and
c) the marked decline in residual service employment in otherwise prosperous Rio
Grande do Sul. Interviews of businessmen and policy makers will be combined with
relevant documentary and archival sources. The methodology of the qualitative
fieldwork will resemble that standard sociological works on Brazilian economic
development such as those of Peter Evans. However, this study can link those
findings to econometric results from a time-series cross-section analysis
providing more rigorous tests of the impacts of the phenomena observed in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The quantitative and qualitative analysis tests
theories drawn from neoclassical economics, the orthodox state-led development
literature, political economy, the new network-based economic sociology, the
informal economy literature and the ethnic enclave literature. A goal of the
project however is to go beyond these theories and produce a new decision-
theory-like account that emphasizes the unanticipated developmental consequences
of policies designed for other purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;