* 0111861
* Information, Response Delays, and the Effects of Monetary Policy
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2007
* Michael Woodford, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2007
* USD 239,611.00

This project contributes to the understanding of the transmission mechanism of
monetary policy, which is to say, of the way in which changes in monetary policy
affect real activity and inflation. The primary aim of developing a more
accurate model of these effects is to allow a more precise analysis of the
consequences of adopting one or another monetary policy rule, and the
calculation of an optimal rule. The analysis is grounded in optimizing private-
sector behavior, in order to allow an analysis of the welfare consequences of
alternative policies in terms of the extent to which private objectives are
fulfilled.&lt;br/&gt;A defect of existing optimizing models of the monetary
transmission mechanism is that they are too exclusively "forward-looking": both
inflation and real activity are predicted to be determined purely by current and
expected future interest-rate policy, with no effect of past conditions.
Empirical evidence on the effects of monetary policy instead indicate the
existence of response delays, that imply both that the effects of policy changes
are not observed immediately and that they persist longer than do the effects
upon interest rates. The project considers the consequences of two kinds of
modifications of standard models that allow for response delays while still
assuming optimizing behavior on the part of the private
sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first class of models assumes that private
decisionmakers do not continuously reoptimize in the light of current
conditions, but instead only reconsider their actions after a certain interval.
This allows a delay in the effects of a monetary policy change upon aggregate
expenditure, on the ground that not everyone immediately revises their previous
spending plans. When this model of intermittent optimization is applied to
consumer expenditure, it has consequences for aggregate consumption similar to
those of the recently popular hypothesis of "habit persistence", but without
certain implications for individual household behavior that do not fit with
panel data evidence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second class of models assumes
that private decisionmakers do not continually monitor current conditions with
complete accuracy, in order to economize on limited information-processing
capacity. It is assumed that decisionmakers monitor their environment using a
"noisy channel" in the information-theoretic sense. This is not simply a
metaphor, but provides a quantitative model of the sources of error in
decisionmakers' perception of their environment, and in particular provides a
useful way of quantifying the assumed constraint on information-processing
capacity. This allows a delay in the effects of a monetary policy change, on the
ground that decisionmakers are not immediately able to discern with certainty
that the change has occurred. The resulting theory has some similarities to
asymmetric-information models of the 1970s, but is able to answer important
objections that were raised to those theories because the asymmetric information
is based upon limitations upon individuals' ability to pay attention to
everything in their environment, rather than upon any claim that the relevant
data are not publicly available.&lt;br/&gt;An interesting feature of this type
of model is that significant delays in price adjustment can result even when the
information of individual price-setters about current aggregate conditions is
relatively accurate. It suffices that (because the errors in observation
resulting from inadequate channel capacity) there be significant uncertainty
about what others may believe that others may believe that others may believe
... about the aggregate state. In other words, it is not uncertainty about the
state of the economy so much as the absence of common knowledge that results in
response delays. This approach to explaining response delays helps to explain
aspects of the observed effects of monetary policy that optimizing models with
sticky prices cannot, including differential speeds of response of prices to
different types of shocks, and apparent stickiness of the rate of inflation (as
opposed to the price level) under certain conditions.&lt;br/&gt;A more
sophisticated version of this class of models seeks to explain the degree of
precision with which individual variables are monitored by decisionmakers, by
assuming a global channel-capacity constraint (a constraint upon the overall
number of bits per period of information that can be pro-cessed), subject to
which decisionmakers choose an optimal information-collection strategy. This
offers the prospect of a theory that yields very tight predictions, and at the
same time allows for important changes in information structure in response to
changes in economic conditions, including sufficiently dramatic changes in
monetary policy. The project considers the design of optimal monetary policies,
both when the information structure is taken as given, and when endogenous
response of the information structure to the policy regime is taken into
account.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;