* 0111342
* Theoretical and practical issues in estimation of nonlinear panel data models
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2005
* Bo Honore, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2005
* USD 194,760.00

&lt;br/&gt;Panel data sets play an important role in empirical work in almost
all areas of economics. Formally, panel data sets are data sets where there is
more than one observation for each unit of observation. Typically, this is
because the data set consists of observations for the same individual over a
period of time, but the methods for dealing with panel data are equally
applicable to situations where the unit of observation is firms, municipalities,
etc. This project develops new econometric methods for dealing with nonlinear
panel data models, including duration models. The project also develops software
to implement these methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The advantage of panel data is
that by following an individual over time, it is possible to investigate an
individual's dynamic behavior while controlling for that individual's
characteristics. It is easiest to illustrate the importance of this by
considering the following simple example. Suppose, as is often the case, that
one observed that individuals, who use a certain social program in one period,
are also more likely to use it the next period. This ``persistence'' could be
observed because some characteristic of the individual makes him or her more
likely to use the program. If that characteristic does not change much over
time, then the same people will tend to use the program in different time
periods. On the other hand, the persistence is also consistent with a situation
in which using the program causes the individual to be more likely to use the
program in the future (for example, because the individual learns about the
program by using it). Being able to distinguish between these explanations of
the persistence is important because under the second explanation, a policy that
changes the availability of the program in a single period will also have an
indirect effect on participation in the program in future periods. This project
develops econometric tools for dealing with panel data in situations like this
one, although the tools are more generic and hence applicable in many other
empirical situations as well.&lt;br/&gt;