* 0111865
* Estimating Earnings and Labor Supply Responses to Income Taxation with RCS Data
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2006
* Robert Moffitt, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2006
* USD 240,611.00

The labor supply response to income taxation is a venerable topic in labor
economics and public economics. It has experienced a revival in the last decade
with a literature that has refocused attention on responses in earnings rather
than hours of work, and with a focus on high-income individuals rather than the
full distribution of workers. Generally speaking, somewhat higher elasticities
for high-income earners have been .fund than were .apparent from the older
hours-ofwork literature for the workforce as a whole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
major methodological issue that has emerged in the newer literature relate, to
the intersection between difference-in-difference (DID) methods and panel versus
repeated cross section (RCS) data. The recent literature has used DID methods
for the most part because there is no plausible cross-sectional identification
for assessing the effects of the federal income tax, which applies equally to
all individuals in the country at a point in time. DID methods compare changes
over time, from before to after a change in marginal tax rates, for high-income
taxpayers to changes for taxpayers at lower levels of income. While these
methods face some difficulties when applied to panel data, they face greater
difficulties when applied to RCS data because income itself is an endogenous,
time-varying variable. Forming "treatment" groups and applyingWaldtype
estimators to groups defined by income leads in principle to inconsistent
estimates. This is a serious problem because RCS data are far more common than
panel data in this area of research and are a major continuing database for tax
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research outlined in this proposal will
investigate methods for the estimation of federal income tax effects on earnings
and labor supply with RCS data. The starting point for the research is based on
the P.I.'s own work on RCS methods. The P.I.'s research has sought to clarify
and delineate the identification conditions for consistent estimation with RCS
methods and to propose alternative estimation methods. The p.rs work has also
made clear the central importance of age ami cohort in the use of kCS methods--
that is, following cohorts of individuals from one cross-section to another as
they age--a focus which is missing from existing tax analysis with RGS data. The
research will also be based on the P.L's :_~~'.= in the tax effects area using
panel data, work which has sought to clarify the identification conditions for
DID methods in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate the
estimation of tax effects with several cross-sections of the Survey of Consumer
Finar.z:s (SCF), used in common in some parts of the analysis with several
crosssections of SOI microdata tax files as well as several cross-sections of
SOI microdata tax files. Some comparative analysis will be conducted with a
1983-1989 panel of the SCF as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;