* 0111059
* Studies of Motion Vision
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Karen De Valois, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Robert Paul Malchow
* 08/31/2005
* USD 330,000.00

De Valois/ De Valois (0111059)

Studies of Motion Vision

Lay Abstract

This project is designed to increase our understanding of how the brain analyzes
visual motion. Telling the difference visually between stationary and moving
objects is a very difficult problem. The physiological responses of neurons in
the visual system of macaque monkeys to stationary and moving objects will be
examined and compared to the behavioral responses of human observers in similar
tasks. Two major subtopics will be considered. An early step in the analysis of
visual motion is the creation in the first visual cortical area (V1) of
directionally-selective neurons, neurons that respond only if an object moves in
a particular direction within the limited visual region from which the cell
receives inputs. One topic of investigation will be how these cells are created;
in particular, where do their inputs come from and how are they combined to
produce directional selectivity. A specific model will be tested by several
experiments on both directional V1 cells and on the cells in the lateral
geniculate nucleus (LGN) that provide inputs to the directional cells. The
results of these experiments will be compared to the results from related
psychophysical studies on human observers. A second topic will be the way the
color-vision system provides input to or interacts with the visual motion
system. Psychophysical experiments on human observers will examine the effects
of color alternation on the discrimination of the direction of motion of a
luminance-varying grating. Different chromatic combinations will be used,
including those that preferentially excite specific classes of photoreceptors or
neurons in the LGN. Earlier work predicts differential effects for different
color combinations. Physiological studies will examine the effects of color
alternation on the responses of directionally-selective neurons in V1 for
comparison to behavioral responses from humans. These studies will significantly
advance our understanding of the initial mechanisms of the visual motion system
in humans and other primates. In addition to increasing our knowledge of the
brain and its organization, this work will contribute to the advancement of
health and human understanding. The fuller understanding gained from these
studies may also have direct application in the design of lighting systems,
particularly for moving vehicles, and in other situations in which human factors
concerns are significant. This project will contribute to the scientific
education and training of both undergraduate and graduate students. Graduate
students will be involved in the design, performance, analysis and publication
of these studies. Undergraduate students will work as laboratory technicians and
psychophysical subjects. When possible, they will also be involved in the
design, performance, analysis and publication of the studies. Many former
graduate students who have worked on similar projects in these laboratories have
built distinguished careers in the study of vision. Several former
undergraduates who have worked in these laboratories have become health workers
or scientists. Students employed on similar projects in the past have come from
both genders and many ethnic groups. This research, like previous work in these
laboratories, is expected to increase the opportunities for students from
minority groups to participate in scientific research and prepare for future
careers of their own.