* 0111033
* Studies of Degradation of Xenobiotic Compound:  A Window on the Evolution of a Novel Metabolic Pathway at an Early Stage of Development
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Shelley Copley, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 08/31/2005
* USD 312,182.00

This project will address the evolution of the pathway for degradation of
pentachlorophenol (PCP) in the soil bacterium Sphingomonas chlorophenolica.
Since PCP was introduced only in 1936, this pathway must have evolved and
assembled rather recently in microorganisms. This experimental system provides
an unusual opportunity to study a metabolic pathway at a very early stage in its
development. The emergence of this pathway is also of special interest because
PCP is highly toxic, as well as being xenobiotic, and is thus a particularly
challenging target for degradation. Previous work has suggested that
tetrachlorohydroquinone dehalogenase, the second enzyme in the pathway, may have
originated from a glutathione-dependent double bond isomerase such as
maleylacetoacetate isomerase or maleylpyruvate isomerase (enzymes involved in
degradation of tyrosine and benzoate, respectively). The first objective of the
project is to further explore the origin of this enzyme. Levels of dehalogenase
activity in several maleylacetoacetate and maleylpyruvate isomerases will be
measured in order to evaluate the hypothesis that this enzyme was recruited to
serve as a dehalogenase because it fortuitously had a low but useful level of
dehalogenase activity. The second objective of the project is to investigate the
genetic context of the dehalogenase gene in order to determine whether
it&lt;br/&gt;originated from a gene duplication event in S. chlorophenolica or
was introduced by horizontal transfer from another organism. This project
addresses the mechanisms by which soil bacteria evolve new metabolic pathways to
degrade anthropogenic pollutants which have been recently introduced into the
environment as a result of agricultural, industrial, military, or household
uses. Such pollutants are often resistant to biodegradation and consequently
persist in the environment. The ability of bacteria to evolve new pathways to
degrade anthropogenic compounds is a critical factor that affects the
environmental fate of these compounds. This project concerns the evolution of a
new metabolic pathway for degradation of pentachlorophenol, a widely used and
highly toxic wood preservative, in a soil bacterium called Sphingomonas
chlorophenolica. This bacterium has apparently evolved a new pathway by
recruiting proteins already present in the cell to perform new functions. The
evolutionary origin of one of these enzymes, tetrachlorohydroquinone
dehalogenase, will be studied during this project.&lt;br/&gt;