* 0111578
* Biomimetic Conformational Motifs for Practical Molecular Recognition
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2005
* Arthur Cammers, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 07/31/2005
* USD 270,000.00

Professor Cammers-Goodwin's research focuses on two biomimetic themes in
molecular modularity. In one project the development of chiral foldamer-based
molecular recognition is proposed and the other proposes the exploration of
molecular encapsulation in the mimicry of the structure and function of viral
bodies. The synthesis and study of solution-phase conformations of chiral
oligoureas is planned. The binding phenomena between helical conformations of
the proposed oligoureas will be studied. The helical conformations of the
oligoureas will create hydrophilic internal and hydrophobic external molecular
surface area, which will be useful when the oligoureas are included in
hydrophobic membranes and on polymeric solid supports to transduce signal. These
helical macromolecular conformers will possess protic and/or charged internal
cavities and hydrocarbon-based exteriors. Molecular architecture of this sort
may find use in chemical sensors or in chiral
separations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular motifs will be used to assemble
viral-like bodies to mimic both the structure and function of real viruses.
Encapsulation of anionic species is sought in the structural and functional
mimicry of natural viral particles. Perhaps structural mimicry of viral
assemblies will lead to drug delivery to cells without the viral pathogenic
response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program
supports the research of Professor Arthur Cammers-Goodwin of the Department of
Chemistry at the University of Kentucky. Professor Cammers-Goodwin's research
addresses the nature of the interaction between biological molecules. Professor
Cammers-Goodwin's educational activities include mentoring students and teaching
a new course entitled Computational Molecular design.