* 0111818
* ITR/SI: Wireless Transmission Optimization for Bursty Data Traffic
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2004
* Rohit Negi, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph B. Evans
* 09/30/2004
* USD 305,726.00

The wireless channel is expected to play as dominant a role as the wired
internet, in providing seamless information 'super-highway'. In the future,
wireless data traffic will be increasingly dominated by a variety of multimedia,
such as real-time video, email, web downloads, as opposed to voice transmission.
"Tether-free communication and networking', as envisioned by the Information
Technology Research program, requires intensive research into handling the
transmission of multimedia over the wireless channel. Various multimedia have
very different traffic characteristics than voice, being characterized by
different delay constraints and burstiness. Handling bursty data has been
addressed primarily in the networking communit. The community has focussed on
the relationship among the traffic delay constraint, the packet loss rate (which
is assumed to be the packet drop rate), and the channel capacity, captured by
measures such as "Effective bandwidth'. Networking problems in wired (fiber,
copper, etc.) media have been successfully solved by this approach, because this
channel is inherently a low-error channel. However, the networking community has
by and large ignored the fact that there is a very real, non-idea physical
channel on which this data is carried. Therefore, the migration of these
approaches to the wireless medium meets a significant obstacle- the fact that
the wireless channel is inherently a very noisy, non-robust channel. Thus for
wireless channels, it is important to consider the effect on packet loss of
both, burstiness and channel errors. Researchers have been approaching the issue
of considering both these effects in (the PI believes) an ad hoc manner. This
proposal intends to approach the issue in a systematic and logical manner.
Specifically, the PI proposes to introduce a joint measure of burstiness and
channel condition, and use the measure to solve the key problem of allocating
scarce resources among competing users of a wireless system. The proposed joint
approach is a fundamental change in paradigm, since it attempts to synthesize
ideas from the Networking and Communication Theory communities. The reason why
source burstiness as well as channel errors (due to noise, fading, etc.) affect
the standard notions of channel capacity, is due to the requirement of finite
delay in the data communication. The PI has therefore developed an initial set
of measures (details in the full proposal) that relate the delay and packet
loss. The measure is based on the random coding error exponent approach,
developed in an information theoretic setting. To reduce the packet drop
probability, the wireless transmitter must transmit at as high a data rate as
possible. But a high rate of transmission would imply a high packet error
probability on the wireless channel, due to transmission errors. The measure
developed by the PI attempts to capture this trade-off. Preliminary analysis
indicates that using this measure indeed offers a substantial benefit (in terms
of designing an optimum system) for bursty traffic transmission over fading
wireless channels. The first step in the current research would be to refine the
developed joint measure. This would involve using more sophisticated source
traffic models, more sophisticated fading channel models, and practical channel
coding schemes. The developed measure will then be used to design optimal or
robust schemes (as the need may be) to allocate wireless resources to competing
streams of data traffic. This will involve developing scheduling flow control
algorithms, and the associated adaptive channel coding schemes, using the joint
measure. In summary, this research will introduce a fundamentally new paradigm
for transmission optimization of bursty data traffic over wireless channels, and
then demonstrate the usefulness of the new paradigm in practical situations.