* 0111082
* Molecular Mechanisms for Polar Growth in Pollen Tubes
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2006
* Zhenbiao Yang, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 08/31/2006
* USD 592,000.00

The mechanisms by which cell polarity arises are fundamental to development and
morphogenesis of multicellular organisms, particularly of plants because their
cells are non-motile. The goal of this project is to use tip-growing pollen
tubes as a model system to elucidate how polarity arises during plant growth and
development. Work from prior NSF funding has demonstrated that a plant-specific
Rho family GTPase, Rop, acts as a central switch to control polar growth in
pollen tubes. This switch is controlled by a positive feedback loop of Rop
activation and recruitment at the plasma membrane that is initiated locally and
amplified laterally by unknown mechanisms. This feedback loop is inhibited
globally by Rop GTPase activating proteins and guanine nucleotide dissociation
inhibitors to generate a tip-focused gradient of active Rop at the plasma
membrane. Recent findings indicate that the active Rop specifies the apical
plasma membrane domain for tip growth and then activates growth via the
regulation of both dynamic tip F-actin and tip-focused cytosolic Ca2+ gradients.
Two active Rop interacting proteins (ARIPs) have been identified that may link
Rop to tip actin and Ca2+, respectively. These advances have relied heavily on
biochemical and cellular Rop signaling assays such as a fluorescence-based Rop
activity assay, actin imaging, and complementary Arabidopsis and tobacco pollen
tube systems that are suited for a multifaceted functional approach that
includes genetics, transient expression of proteins, and microinjection. This
research will continue to use a similar approach but also develop new assays and
methods to address several significant outstanding questions regarding Rop-
dependent mechanisms for polar growth in pollen tubes: 1) What is the functional
interplay between Rop, Ca2+ and actin? 2) How does Rop regulate Ca2+ and actin?
3) What is the molecular basis underlying the Rop positive feedback loop?
Specific experiments will include identification of Rop effectors and potential
factors that may activate and recruit Rop at the plasma membrane using
interactive cloning and mutant isolation, alteration of specific components in
Rop signaling using genetic and chemical methods, and analysis of changes in Rop
recruitment and activation and in signaling targets such as tip actin and Ca2+.
This work should uncover key components and mechanisms in Rop-dependent
signaling to pollen tube growth and may lead to new insights into how cells
control development, polar growth and morphogenesis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;