* 0111783
* Have Transition Economies Become More Efficient? Evidence from Russian and Czech Panel Data on Firms and Individuals
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2001,02/28/2005
* Katherine Terrell, William Davidson Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 02/28/2005
* USD 556,971.00

There are widely divergent views of what constitutes a successful transition
from a planned to a market economy, how well transition economies have
performed, and what policies account for differences in observed performance.
This project will contribute to our understanding of this process by providing
rigorous evidence on the evolution and determinants of economic efficiency in
two countries that represent divergent models of transition - Russia and the
Czech Republic. Similar initial conditions and widely different transition
experiences in these two economies provide a useful context for the analysis of
policies and other factors determining the evolution of well-functioning
markets. The researchers are able to carry out this analysis because they have
new micro panel data on a large number of firms and workers that are linked and
span the final years of the communist system through the first decade of the
transition.

The research project will address the following key questions: (Q.1) How has
firm efficiency changed during the transition period? Which types of firms show
the greatest absolute and relative gains in efficiency and which ones are losing
out? Stylized facts on efficiency are being established; the productive
efficiency of different types of firms will be assessed relative to the best
practice in the country in a given year and the practice of western firms in
each country in 2000. (Q.2) What matters more for efficiency: ownership,
economic liberalization or competition? The project ascertains the relative
importance of these factors in determining the levels and changes in efficiency
over time. (Q.3) Does firm turnover replace the least efficient firms with more
efficient ones? The efficiency measures derived for each firm are used to assess
if entering firms are more efficient than exiting firms. The analysis shows if
the bankruptcy laws and continuation of subsidies slowed down the cleansing
process. (Q.4) Is labor reallocation efficiency enhancing? The research assesses
if workers move from firms with low marginal products of labor to firms with
higher marginal products of labor, and if government policy affects these flows
in a positive way. (Q.5) Are capital markets becoming more efficient? At the
start of the transition, some firms had excessive and some inadequate capital
stock. The project evaluates whether subsequent investment behavior corrected
this misallocation.