* 0111712
* SBIR Phase II:   Subgrade Repair and Stabilization
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2007
* Lawrence Farrar, RESODYN CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* William Haines
* 07/31/2007
* USD 524,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop and
demonstrate a novel vitrification process for subgrade soil stabilization. The
process includes a method to inject readily available materials into the
vitrification zone eliminating subsidence that would otherwise occur as the
soils densify during vitrification. The process is based on the use of modifiers
that adjust the vitrified soil properties. The Phase I work demonstrated
feasibility of the process and that the vitrified material was suitable for
subgrade stabilization and resulted in materials having strengths qualified for
structural reinforcement applications. Economic analysis completed in Phase I
indicated that the method is competitive with conventional subgrade repair
methods. The Phase II work will establish the commercial merit of the process by
demonstrating its economy, robustness and versatility to produce subgrade
synthetic rock from soils in the field. The Phase II work includes participation
by a university and an end user. The proposed research and development will
yield a fundamental understanding of the relationships between the vitrification
process parameters, soil and synthetic rock properties. This will enable
optimization of the process in commercial applications.

The commercial market for the proposed technology includes soil stabilization of
inadequate foundation and slope materials around many kinds of structures
including building, bridges and waterways. Customers will be highway departments
(state and federal), airport authorities, municipalities and the industrial
sector. Essentially, the process will be useful to any entity, including
contractors that deal with maintenance of subgrade and/or new construction that
have "local" subgrade instability issues to overcome.