* 0111325
* Grafts and Blends of Poly(alkyl/arylphosphazenes) of Organic and Inorganic Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2005
* Patty Wisian-Neilson, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 07/31/2005
* USD 348,000.00

Professor Patty Wisian-Neilson in the Department of Chemistry at Southern
Methodist University is supported by the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry
Program for her studies on the preparation of a series of grafted poly
(alkyl/arylphosphazenes) using anionic, ring opening, and atom radical transfer
polymerization and characterization of their fundamental properties by NMR
spectroscopy, elemental analysis, differential scanning calorimetry, thermal
gravimetric analysis, and gel permeation chromatography. The number, length, and
type of graft will be systematically varied and correlated to their physical
properties. Gas permeability, flammability, and the ability to stabilize and
organize inorganic nanoparticles will be closely examined by standard ASTM
flammability tests, permeation studies involving gas chromatography, and
transmission electron microscopy, respectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the
support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor Wisian-
Neilson will prepare a series of inorganic polymers and examine their
fundamental properties such as thermal stability, solubility in common organic
solvents, miscibility, gas permeability, and flame retardancy. The ability of
these polymers to stabilize and organize metal and semiconductor nanoparticles
(particles with nanometer dimensions) will also be investigated.