* 0111841
* GOALI/FRG: Structural Properties of Alumina and Adsorbed Metal Particles
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Karl Sohlberg, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2005
* USD 397,823.00

The focus of the proposal is to pursue fundamental understanding of structural
transformations in materials that occur in applications and device methods to
control them so that they can be either averted or enhanced, as needed by
industry. The specific problem of interest is the stabilization of g-alumina
that is widely used as a catalyst support and as a catalyst. At high
temperatures, g-alumina, which is porous, converts to a-alumina, which is not
porous, and catalytic activity stops. Empirically, it has been found that the
addition of 3.5-5% lanthanum stabilizes g-alumina. In a laboratory process
developed by one of the PIs, it has been found that stabilization can be
achieved with only 0.3-0.5% La, but the process is not scalable for
manufacturing (La is very expensive). The proposed research will use a
combination of atomic-resolution Z-contrast microscopy and electron-energy-loss
spectroscopy and first-principles theoretical modeling to understand the atomic-
scale processes that underlie the phase transformation and the stabilization
with different impurities. A second problem will be the interaction of catalytic
particles with the alumina substrate in catalytic systems. The PIs at two
universities, a national lab, and an industrial lab have prior expertise and
collaborative synergy on similar projects in the past and also propose to
develop a parallel educational program. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will seek to understand the atomic-scale processes that underlie a
phenomenon that has proved to be quite costly for industry: the material known
as g-alumina is porous and is used as a substrate in catalytic systems. At high
temperatures, it undergoes a transformation to a different phase known as
a-alumina (different atomic arrangements in the crystal), which is not porous.
Catalytic activity stops. Addition of 3-5% of the rather expensive element
lanthanum stabilizes g-alumina. One of the PI's developed an alternative process
that produces stable g-alumina with only 0.3-0.5% La, but the process cannot be
scaled for manufacturing. The PIs have an assembly of unique experimental and
theoretical tools and have demonstrated synergistic collaboration in the past.
They will be able to determine the atomic scale processes that are responsible
for the transformation and the stabilization by impurities and develop
alternative approaches with either La or other impurities that will be efficient
and cost-effective. In addition, they propose to study related interactions
between catalytic metal particles on alumina substrates. Finally, they propose
an educational program that will enable students to participate in research done
at a national lab and an industrial lab. &lt;br/&gt;