* 0111227
* Spectroscopic Studies of Weakly Bound Metal-Molecule Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2005
* Dong-Sheng Yang, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 07/31/2005
* USD 331,600.00

Dr. Dong-Sheng Yang of the University of Kentucky is funded for his research on
spectroscopic studies of weakly bound metal-molecule complexes by the Physical
Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division. Pulsed field ionization-zero
electron kinetic energy (ZEKE) spectroscopy will be used to provide the
electronic structure of metal (Al, Ga, in, Sc, Y, La) ligand (ammonia, amines,
phosphines, arsines) 1-1 complexes. These complexes will be prepared by pulsed
laser vaporization and identified with photoionization mass spectroscopy. The
ionization energies and vibrational frequencies measured by ZEKE spectroscopy
will be used, in combination with ab initio calculations, to elucidate the
bonding and structure of these complexes. The spectra and understanding obtained
will be useful for detection and process development for semiconductor
applications and for studies of the reaction mechanisms of these
complexes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is important in the semiconductor industry to
have sensitive spectroscopic methods for detecting ammonia, amine, phosphine,
and arsine complexes of important metals such as aluminum, gallium, and indium.
Dr. Yang's work will elucidate the electronic structure of these complexes. Such
results will provide critically needed data for the study of these species in
industrial processes and will increase our understanding of how metals interact
with such useful molecules in organometallic complexes, bioinorganic complexes,
and at metal surfaces.