* 0111304
* Housing in the Business Cycle and the Life Cycle
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2001,10/31/2002
* Jonathan Heathcote, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 10/31/2002
* USD 157,768.00

Housing is an unusual good, both in terms of the way it is produced and the way
it is subsequently used. On the production side, residential investment is three
times as volatile as non-residential investment, and leads the business cycle
whereas non-residential investment lags. On the consumption side, housing is
unlike non-residential structures or producer durables in that it is rarely an
input to marketed production. Rather housing is perhaps best characterized as a
form of capital used to produce at home. In addition, housing is an important
form of saving for most households: in aggregate the stock of housing is equal
in value to annual GDP and is three times larger than the stock of consumer
durables. The goal of this project is to deepen our understanding of the role of
housing in the economy. The project consists of two broad components. The first
component focuses on the production of new housing and attempts to understand
the aggregate dynamics for residential investment, housing prices, and the
relation between these variables and standard macroeconomic aggregates. The
second component focuses on the role of housing and production at home for
understanding behavior through the life-cycle at the household level. These two
subprojects can be integrated into a single coherent framework for studying many
issues to housing. The analysis takes place within calibrated artificial
economies, in which households make dynamic decisions and all prices are
determined in general equilibrium. Housing is carefully distinguished from other
goods in the economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the question to be
ad-dressed in the first part is whether a neoclassical growth model, augmented
to include a sector producing new housing, can account for the behavior over the
business cycle of residential investment and house prices. A calibrated model of
the economy with explicit microfoundations is simulated and its ability to
account for the stylized facts about housing at the aggregate level is assessed.
Industry-level data will be collected to as-sess the model's ability to account
for observed time series for macro aggregates and house prices since WWII.
Previous work exploring the empirical determinants of residential investment is
investigated in light of the exact equilibrium model relationship between
residential investment, house prices and the real interest
rate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second part of the project focuses on the role
housing and other con-sumer durables may play in explaining observed consumption
and savings be-havior through the life-cycle. Two interesting empirical facts
are that a large fraction of households save very little in the form of
financial assets, and that household consumption typically drops significantly
at retirement. The hypothesis to be explored here is that the gap between
observed behavior and the predictions of a standard life-cycle model would
disappear once production at home is introduced. Suppose true household
consumption exceeds measured consumption, because measured consumption ignores
consumption of home pro-duced goods. This measurement issue might shed light on
retirement behavior if households substitute working in the market for working
at home when they retire. &lt;br/&gt;