* 0111557
* Chemical Sensors Based on Electrodeposited Metal Nanowires
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2006
* Reginald Penner, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 07/31/2006
* USD 696,792.00

The Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program supports this project by Prof.
Reginald Penner at the University of California at Irvine on the synthesis of
nanowires of various metals and an evaluation of their use as chemical sensors.
Nanowires are to be fabricated by the procedure of electrochemical step
decoration, which has been demonstrated for molybdenum to make wires that are up
to 150 micrometers in length, hemicylindrical in cross-section, and removable
from the surfaces on which prepared. The high-aspect ratio nanowires, with
diameters ranging from 10 to 500 nanometers, can be prepared size-selective on
stepped graphite surfaces, transferred to a polystyrene film, and then
electrodes attached. The conductivity is similar to that of bulk metal. As a
sensor, the nanowires function by exposure of the metal surface to an analyte
while measuring the electrical conductivity of the nanowires. For example,
molybdenum wires are reactive with oxygen yielding a substantial, but stable
drop in conductivity as a metal oxide coating is made. The future research
directions include preparation of noble metal nanowires. One synthetic scheme to
be tested is metal wire preparation via a mercury amalgam. Then, sensors are to
be fabricated with nanowires, either bare metal or with a metal oxide overlayer.
Yet to be determined is the physical model to connect analyte concentration with
the change in metal nanowire conductivity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New generation
chemical sensors will have a wide range of applications, from biomedical to
pollution control. As nanotechnology moves from the laboratory to practical
applications, the synthesis of devices must be improved; faster, cheaper,
better. There is a great need for reliable and efficient synthesis of nanowires.
Electrochemical step decoration is an application of fundamental knowledge of
electrochemistry with the known step features naturally occurring on a clean
graphite surface. The graphite provides a template for the controlled growth of
an electrochemically grown metal wire. The nanowires have an extremely high
surface area in relation to the number of metal atoms in the wire. For this
reason, electrical conductivity depends upon the number and kind of molecules
attached to the surface, making nanowires a logical component of new generation
sensors.&lt;br/&gt;