* 0111066
* Biochemical  Characterization  of Phage Lambda Assembly
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2001,04/30/2006
* Carlos Catalano, University of Colorado at Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 04/30/2006
* USD 373,548.00

The assembly of an infectious virus particle requires the coordinated action of
a number of proteins, and complex interactions with viral DNA. Terminase enzymes
are common to many double-stranded (ds) DNA viruses, including poxvirus, the
herpesvirus groups, and most dsDNA bacteriophage. Terminases "package" viral DNA
into the capsid, a critical step in virus assembly. This project centers on the
terminase enzyme from bacteriophage lambda and attempts to define the
biochemical, biophysical, and structural characteristics of nucleoprotein
intermediates involved in DNA packaging. Three approaches designed to provide
mechanistic insight into virus assembly are examined. (I) One of the most
fascinating and least understood aspects of the packaging pathway is the
transition from complex I, an extremely stable packaging precursor, to a mobile
packaging complex. Biophysical, kinetic, and structural experiments are used to
provide a mechanistic underpinning for this transition. (II) Current models
describing the packaging pathway are based on genetic and crude in vitro
packaging studies. Biochemical studies are used that will define, at a molecular
level, the role of terminase, and inancillaryls packaging proteins at each step
of the packaging pathway. (III) Genetic studies suggest a domain organization
for gpA, the large terminase subunit. Biochemical and biophysical experiments
will rigorously define functional domains in gpA. These three experimental
approaches represent discrete research directions that are intertwined in their
attempt to provide a detailed description of lambda terminase, and its role in
virus assembly. This work will provide a paradigm for genome packaging on other
dsDNA viruses. Moreover, mechanistic similarities exist between genome packaging
and complex cellular processes such as DNA replication, transcription, and site-
specific recombination. Thus, an understanding of the structural and catalytic
properties of this packaging apparatus has broad implications in our
understanding of DNA manipulation by large multiprotein enzyme complexes in
biology.