* 0111334
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Processing Techniques for Improving Mechanical Properties of Biodegradable Polymers
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* James Mark, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2004
* USD 25,000.00

0111334 Mark

Description: This award is to support a collaborative project between Dr. James
E. Mark, Department of Chemistry, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio and
Dr. Mohammed Sharaf, Department of Chemistry, Helwan University, Helwan, Cairo,
Egypt. They plan to devise new techniques for processing polymer chains into
high-performance materials. Specifically they plan to: identify polymeric chains
of sufficient stiffness to give liquid-crystalline, anisotropic phases, either
homopolymers or block copolymers consisting of stiff and flexible sequences,
cross-linking the chains, either by peroxide thermolysis, chemical regents, or
high-energy radiation, in the presence of solvent. The cross links confer
sufficient solidity for the polymer to remain in a deformed state for any length
of time, and the solvent prevents the premature ordering of the stiff chains,
deforming the swollen network uniaxially or biaxially to induce segmental
orientation, and removing the solvent, at constant length or at constant force,
causing a first-order transition, and thus yielding a single-phase, homogeneous,
and highly ordered material. These techniques will be applied to polymers having
a desired level of biodegradability. This control of molecular ordering will be
used simultaneously to optimize mechanical properties and environmental
degradability.

Scope: The project supports collaboration between two well-known scientists who
have complementary expertise and resources to investigate an important material
and environmental problem. Their past collaboration has been productive. The
project is a combination of strengths of the PIs, and issues related to
molecular orientation and strength in polymers with the challenges associated
with biodegradable polymers. There will be opportunities for interaction with
industrial scientists in Egypt to test the impact of this collaboration. Two US
graduate students will participate in the project. This project meets the INT
objective of supporting collaborative research in areas of mutual interest.