* 0111315
* Collaborative Research:  Sunspots in the Laboratory
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Eric Fisher, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* LAURA RAZZOLINI
* 08/31/2002
* USD 45,707.00

Economists have developed a theory of "sunspot" equilibrium to describe
situations where economic fluctuations are not driven by changes in market
fundamentals, but are instead due to extrinsic, non-fundamental factors. This
project involves the design of an experiment that will explore whether and how
such extrinsic factors can result in market fluctuations, and whether the
particular market institution also plays a role. The experiment consists of two
main treatments. In the first, human subjects participate as buyers or sellers
in a computerized "double auction", where goods can be bought and sold
continuously over a fixed trading period at mutually agreed upon prices that are
observable as they occur to all participants. In the second "call market"
treatment, subjects submit private bids and offers, and a centralized mechanism
determines the single, market clearing price, as well as the quantities that
each participant can buy or sell. Thus, the only information subjects receive in
this environment is the resulting market price and the quantity they were able
to buy or sell at this price. In both treatments, subjects face uncertainty in
that they are given two sets of values or costs for the goods they can buy or
sell; these two sets correspond to the"state" of the economy, and are referred
to as "high" or "low" in reference to the equilibrium price in the two states.
(the equilibrium quantity is the same in both states). Initially, subjects are
told the state of the economy in advance, so that they become familiar with the
two states for prices. After several rounds, subjects are informed that the true
state of the economy, will henceforth be determined expost, after all trading is
completed. Furthermore, the rule for the determination of the state will depend
on the median trade price in the double auction environment or on the analogous
market clearing price in the call market environment. If this price lies within
a proscribed domain of the equilibrium low price, then the state is declared to
be low and if it lies outside this domain, in that of the equilibrium high
price, then the state is declared to be high. Subjects are provided with a
potential coordination device (or sunspot realization) which takes the form of a
random announcement by the experimenter of the forecast for the state of prices
in the current period. Subjects are instructed that this announcement has no
binding consequences. Preliminary findings suggest that subjects coordinate
perfectly on the announcement in the highly centralized call market environment
but fail to do the same in the more decentralized double auction environment.
These experimental findings if replicated, have significant implications for the
architecture of real financial markets.