* 0111450
* The Double Irony of Citizenship: A Comparative/Historical Approach to Studying Naturalization in Advanced Industrialized Countries
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Thomas Janoski, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2004
* USD 181,402.00

SES-0111450&lt;br/&gt;Thomas Janoski&lt;br/&gt;University of
Kentucky&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Naturalization rates vary considerably from
country to country with rates in the United States and Australia being high, the
United Kingdom and France being moderate, and Japan and Germany being very low.
Naturalization rates not only measure the number of new citizens in a society,
but also measure the extent to which states and societies formally integrate
minorities into their realm. As such, naturalization rules and rates will have a
large influence on: the quality of life of immigrants and their children, on
ethnic conflict and social solidarity, on attempts at social control, and on the
recent efforts at transnational unification (e.g., European Union citizenship
and the possibility of North American citizenship). Given the importance of
these issues, why do some countries willingly integrate and others block the
transformation of strangers into full-fledged citizens? This proposal uses a
political economy and institutional framework to explain naturalization rates in
20 countries, and collects new data on naturalization rates and innovative
explanatory variables.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Naturalization rates are explained
using three methodological approaches-comparative/historical analysis of law and
institutions; four case studies; and pooled time series analysis. First, from a
comparative historical analysis of law and institutions, it is hypothesized that
experiences with colonization and settlement cause high naturalization rates,
while non-colonizers have no particular reason to integrate strangers into their
country. The main explanatory factors are: colonization from 1855-1955,
indigenous population decline from 1800-1920 as a measure of settler country
labor supply, and a barrier index to naturalization constructed from national
laws. Cross-national regression procedure will be used to explain a major part
of the variance in naturalization rates from 1970-95. Controls are used for
economic, demographic, cultural, and other variables, and arguments are made
against the impact of immigration itself as an explanation of
naturalization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Second, in four case studies using
Millsean methods, pairs of culturally similar countries are examined to identify
the institutional mechanisms that affected multi-cultural approaches to
naturalization. In a comparison of the primary colonizers of France and the UK,
the effects of the method of colonization and the elite decisions to pursue
citizenship for a larger empire are examined. A documentary and time-series
analysis of Germany and Austria show Germany as a non-colonizer developed into a
mono-cultural empire hostile to naturalization and Austria as a European
colonizer transformed itself into a multi-cultural empire that was more friendly
to naturalization. Another documentary analysis of culturally similar countries
shows that the Netherlands, as an early and extensive colonizer, has a much more
liberal naturalization regime than Belgium, which was a late and reluctant
colonizer. And the final comparative case study is of three Anglo-Saxon settler
countries where the impact of differential treatment of indigenous peoples on
naturalization will be examined. Throughout the case studies, the emphasis is on
demonstrating the how elites made open or restrictive decisions about
naturalization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Third, in a pooled time-series and cross-
sectional analysis, the unit of analysis is the "yearcountry" (i.e., 20
countries from 1970-95 with about 500 cases). This allows a year-to-year
analysis of political party power, unemployment, demographic changes, and other
factors that are purported to influence naturalization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Zolberg's approaches to immigration) and will challenge previous economic,
demographic and cultural theories of naturalization. It embeds cultural
institutions within a larger political economy framework of colonization and
emphasizes that theories of naturalization are clearly distinct from theories of
immigration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;