* 0111045
* RUI: San Jose State/IBM Almaden Center Integrated Research and Education Program
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Joseph Pesek, San Jose State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2005
* USD 750,000.00

This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project,
supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program and the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities, combines the demonstrated intellectual and
physical resources at the IBM Almaden Research Center (IBM/ARC) and San Jose
State University (SJSU), a primarily undergraduate institution. Professors
Joseph Pesek and Maureen Scharberg head the SJSU effort and Dr. Charles Wade
coordinates the IBM/ARC effort. Together, these two institutions will offer
undergraduate students and high school teachers/small college faculty research
projects in many areas of analytical chemistry, interfacial science, and
materials science. This academic-industrial research and education program
builds on two previous NSF grants, CHE-9300131 and CHE-9625628. .

In this project, both year-round and summer programs are offered: For
undergraduates, there are six positions year-round and twenty ten-week summer
appointments. There are four summer positions for high school teachers and two
summer positions for visiting small college faculty. Mentors come from the 22
chemistry faculty at SJSU and among the 240 scientists at IBM/ARC. Students work
in the areas of polymer chemistry, materials characterization, lithography,
semiconductor packaging, magnetism, computational chemistry, and surface
chemistry. Each of the participants will spend time working in laboratories at
both SJSU and IBM/ARC, giving them a broad understanding of both academic and
industrial research opportunities and procedures. The assessment and evaluation
of the project is evolving. Exit surveys have already been performed, and now
long term tracking protocols are being developed.