* 0111621
* Asymmetric Hydrogenation at Electrode Surfaces
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2005
* Bernadette Donovan-Merkert, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 07/31/2005
* USD 225,000.00

This research program entitled "Asymmetric Hydrogenation at Electrode Surfaces"
represents a significant expansion of the prior work by Professor Bernadette
Donovan-Merkert of the University of North Carolina at Charlotte and is
supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry program. The goal of this
project is to prepare electrodes capable of chiral electrochemical
hydrogenation. Metal complexes with pyrrole-modified chiral ligands will be
attached to electrodes via electropolymerization of the pyrrole tether. This
strategy allows several metal catalysts to be investigated, both as the pure
film or copolymerized so as to increase the conductivity of the film. The chiral
electrochemical hydrogenation will be evaluated with acetamidoacrylates, a class
of substrates known to give high enantiomeric excess when hydrogenated under
homogenous conditions.

Catalytic hydrogenation is a standard chemical reaction and usually yields an
equal mixture of two stereoisomers. However, for biological applications, the
two stereoisomers can have quite different properties. For example, one isomer
may be a sedative while the other other may cause genetic abnormalities. To
obtain the desired stereoisomer, there are two routes: One can make both
isomers, and then separate the good from the bad. Or, more elegantly and less
wasteful, create a chiral catalyst which only makes the desired stereoisomer.
This research is focussed on a new style of chiral catalysts which could operate
at lower temperatures and pressures, and thus more safely, than previous chiral
catalysts.