* 0111380
* Estimation of Spatial Autoregressive Econometric Models with Continous and Limited Dependent Variables
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2004
* Lung-fei Lee, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2004
* USD 212,990.00

The field of spatial econometrics is concerned with the use of statistical and
econometric techniques to handle spatial effects in multiregional economic
models and economic interaction of agents located in space. Proper spatial
econometric models need to be developed to empirically validate modern spatial
economic theories. Further empirical developments are motivated by the growing
importance of Geographic Information Systems (GIS) in regional and urban policy
analyses. This project develops econometric methodologies for the estimation and
testing of complex spatial econometric models including spatial models with
limited dependent variables. This project proceeds in several directions.
Statistical properties of some popular estimation methods in the literature are
often assumed without detailed investigation into possibly distinctive features
of a spatial econometric model. While some claims are correct under certain
spatial scenarios, they might not be so in others. The existing literature on
spatial econometrics has mainly focused on models with small group interaction
but models with large group interaction have many interesting potential
applications. This project continues the investigation of statistical properties
of popular estimators for spatial autoregressive models with large group
interaction. Estimators for spatial models with large group interaction have
quite different statistical properties from those of models with small group
interaction. This project explores alternative models to capture social
interaction effects and addresses issues of random sample and possible
incomplete spatial interactions in spatial models. In addition, statistical
procedures are developed for distinguishing spatial models from social effect
models.

Spatial models with agents making interactive discrete choices are useful for
research on innovation diffusion processes. The estimation of a discrete choice
model with spatial interaction can be quite challenging as its likelihood
function involves high dimensional integral. The dimension of integration can be
as large as the number of sample observations. In order to develop these models
to their full capacities, computationally tractable methods must be developed.
This project develops estimation methods based on simulation estimation
methodologies. The effectiveness of various simulation estimation methods, which
include the method of simulated maximum likelihood, the method of simulated EM
algorithm, the method of simulated scores, and the Gibbs sampler, are
investigated. Statistical properties of those estimators are studied. In
addition to estimation, test statistics for spatial correlations and diagnostics
are also developed. This project develops computationally tractable generalized
method of moments for the estimation of spatial autoregressive models of any
finite order with or without the presence of exogenous variables. Asymptotic
properties of such estimators are investigated.

Dynamic discrete choice models capture various notions of dynamic effects, state
dependence, heterogeneity, and spurious correlation in a panel data setting.
This project generalizes existing models to incorporate possible contemporaneous
and intertemporal spatial interaction effects. Spatial dynamics in discrete
choices are of special interest. Special attention is paid to the specification
and estimation of such panel data models. Even though the development of
econometric methods is the main focus of this project, empirical studies with
panel data from developing countries illustrate the useful of the new models and
the feasibility of the methodologies.

