* 0111288
* The Historical Development of the English Anaphora System
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2002
* Edward Keenan, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Cecile Mckee
* 06/30/2002
* USD 37,758.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Edward Keenan will conduct one
year of linguistic research. The focus of his project is documenting
quantitatively a historical change in the logical expressive power of English.
In Modern English, the logical meanings of 'The king defended himself' and 'The
king defended him' are distinct. In the former, the defender and defendee must
be the same. In the latter, they must be different. But Old English (700 - 1150)
lacked reflexives, like 'himself'. In Old English, a sentence like 'He defended
him' was ambiguous according to whether the defender and defendee were the same
person or not. Based on some 11,000 examples drawn from over 100 texts dating
from c750 to c1750, this project will document the creation and interpretation
of reflexives in English. The data show that reflexives come into being around
1200 and assume their current semantic interpretation rather suddenly in the
1500s.

The linguistic interest of the project is twofold. First, this is the first
empirically substantiated study of change in logical expressive power of a
natural language. The study shows that some logical distinctions that we take
for granted in Modern English do not necessarily characterize languages in
general. Second, the type of change that this research documents is relatively
novel: New forms are created internal to the language rather than borrowed. So
this research expands our understanding of how languages may change over time.
Finally, this project will contribute to a large database that Dr. Keenan has
been building since 1989. The data will be publicly accessible on the web so
that other scholars can verify the generalizations produced by this research.