* 0111733
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Psycholinguistic Investigation of Second Language Lexical Acquisition
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2002
* Judith Kroll, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Cecile Mckee
* 07/31/2002
* USD 11,681.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Kroll &amp; Sunderman 0111733&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
National Science Foundation support, Ms. Gretchen Sunderman will collect data
for her doctoral dissertation under the direction of Dr. Judith Kroll. Her
research will investigate the development of second language lexical fluency.
Although it is common practice to have second language learners attempt to
suppress their first language in classroom contexts, recent psycholinguistic
research suggests that it is impossible to do so. Words in the first language
are active and compete for selection even when learners intend to read or speak
in the second language only. Ms. Sunderman's experiments will include three
groups of native speakers of English at different stages of second language
proficiency in Spanish. Her goal is to examine the activation of the first
language as learners acquire Spanish. One set of experiments will examine the
first language in comprehension, and another set of experiments will examine it
in spoken production. Participants will also take a battery of individual
differences tests in their first language. Comparisons of these second language
learners to monolinguals matched on the individual differences measures will
provide an examination of some cognitive consequences of second language
learning for first language performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is
important for several reasons. First, it will advance our understanding of the
cognitive processes involved in second language lexical acquisition. Second, it
will advance our understanding of cross-language competition at different levels
of second language proficiency. Finally, in examining differences in
individuals' ability to suppress the first language during second language
comprehension and production, this research will inform second language pedagogy
and enhance the success of learning and teaching of second language
vocabulary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;