* 0111170
* US-Turkey Cooperative Research:  Calixarene Based Receptors for Site Reclamation by the Removal of Toxic Heavy Metals
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Richard Bartsch, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2005
* USD 35,280.00

0111170&lt;br/&gt;Roundhill&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project
supports a collaborative project between Dr. D.M. Roundhill, Department of
Chemistry, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, Texas and Dr. Mustafa Yilmaz,
Department of Chemistry, Selcuk University, Konya, Turkey. The focus of the
collaboration is the synthesis of new chemically modified calixarenes, and their
use as liquid-liquid phase extractants for heavy metal ions. In particular,
metal ions will be targeted that are presently causing environmental problems.
The researchers plan to study calixarene-based receptors designed for heavy
metal clean up applications. The work includes the generation of new ionophore
polymer systems with specific binding strategies for Cs+ and selected cations
and anions. Specifically the calixarene known as calixcrown-6 polymer will be
synthesized and incorporated into copolymer resins. The material thus derived
will be characterized, and will be used in liquid-liquid extractions with equal
volume mixtures of metal and extractant analyzed for aqueous phase metals. The
solid-liquid extraction will be determined by batchwise column methods. The plan
of work involves three sequential components: synthesis of ionophores,
characterization of ionophores and extraction studies that will assess the
ability of the ionophores to extract metal ions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope:
The project supports collaboration between two well-known scientists who have
complementary expertise and resources to investigate an important material and
environmental problem. There are substantial environmental implications of the
research, as it may lead to new and improved means for decontamination of heavy
metal polluted sites. Both groups have independently studied the complexation of
metal ions by calixarenes and both will conduct research on liquid phase
extractants of heavy metals with the use of calixarene modified polymers. Dr.
Yilmaz is a synthetic organic chemist with extensive experience in calixarene
chemistry, and Dr. Roundhill is an inorganic chemist who has considerable
knowledge of the complexation chemistry of heavy metal ions. The proposed
collaborative effort will establish stronger international ties and provide
scientific benefits. This project meets the INT objective of supporting
collaborative research in areas of mutual interest.&lt;br/&gt;