* 0111054
* Chemical and Genetic Studies of the Nonactate Polyketide Synthase
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Nigel Priestley, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 08/31/2004
* USD 375,000.00

The soil microorganism Streptomyces makes over half of the antibiotics that are
obtained from all microorganisms. The study of how antibiotics are made is a
basic prerequisite for developing new antibiotics and new methods of producing
antibiotics, as well as for understanding basic ecological processes in the soil
microbiota. Nonactin is an antibiotic that is active against Gram positive
bacteria, mycobacteria, and fungi and also blocks one of the major processes by
which cancer cells are resistant to anti-cancer drugs. The microorganism
Streptomyces griseus makes nonactin in fermentative culture although the exact
details of this process are not presently understood. Current evidence suggests
that nonactin is assembled by a number of proteins which work together as a
large protein complex known as a polyketide synthase. The structure of nonactin
is quite unusual in that it is made up of two forms of a precursor that are
mirror images of each other. It is also not known how the organism achieves the
synthesis of both mirror images of this precursor. The objectives of the
research are to gain an understanding of how nonactin is made by a polyketide
synthase and to determine how the formation of two mirror-image compounds is
achieved and controlled. The project will use a multidisciplinary approach to
study the polyketide synthase genes from Streptomyces griseus as well as the
basic chemistry of the natural synthesis pathway. The research will determine
which genes in the organism control the synthesis of each of the mirror image
precursors and the exact manner in which these precursors are formed from simple
organic acids. The basic information gained in the study of this unusual system
will add to the body of existing knowledge of natural product synthesis. The
long term goal of the research is to understand the natural synthesis pathways
in sufficient detail that an organism can be rationally altered to produce any
designed, target antibiotic by a fermentation process from cheap starting
materials in an environmentally friendly manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;