* 0111402
* Small Achiral Ligands as Vibrational Circular Dichroism Probes of Active Sites in Metalloproteins
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2001,12/31/2005
* Laurence Nafie, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 12/31/2005
* USD 309,500.00

Dr. Laurence A. Nafie of Syracuse University is funded for his research on small
achiral ligands as vibrational circular dichroism (VCD) probes of active sites
in metalloproteins by the Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division.
Improved experimental measurements and theoretical calculations will be used to
complete the developement of VCD as a sensitive probe of metal-ligand active-
sites in metalloproteins. New information about the solution-state structure and
conformaton of metalloprotein complexes will be generated, and new insight into
the (1) low-lying electronic structure of associated metal centers, (2) protein
pocket environments in metalloproteins, and (3) coupling of these structural
elements to the vibrational modes observed in VCD spectra will be obtained. Such
studies will positively impact associated vibrational measurement techniques
such as IR absorption and resonance Raman scattering in metalloprotein
complexes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of various spectroscopies to better
understand protein structure and function is a long-standing goal of
experimental physical chemistry. The vibrational circular dichroism studies of
metalloproteins and associated complexes at Syracuse University will extend our
structure-function understanding of metalloproteins, so important to energy
metabolism in biological systems.&lt;br/&gt;