* 0111255
* Structure of the Photoreceptor Complex of Photosynthetic Bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Paul Loach, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 08/31/2005
* USD 364,549.00

A supramolecular complex exists in the membranes of photosynthetic bacteria,
which is responsible for absorbing light and converting this energy into an
electrochemical gradient of protons. Macromolecular components of this complex
include the core light-harvesting complex (LH1), the photosynthetic reaction
center, most likely ubiquinol/cytochrome c oxidoreductase and possibly several
other components. The major focus of this research is on the interaction of LH1
with the reaction center. A newly isolated protein, PufX, is found in
Rhodobacter species and has been implicated to interact with LH1 to allow
reducing equivalents from the reaction center in the form of ubiquinol to reach
the bc1 complex. The interactions between LH1 and PufX can be studied under
equilibrium conditions using reconstitution methodology. PufX will be chemically
synthesized as well as various core segments. Fluorescent probes will be
covalently attached to selected positions of these PufX polypeptides as well as
to the LH1 alpha and beta polypeptides. Association constants for interactions
between bacteriochlorophyll, the LH1 alpha polypeptide and PufX will be
determined. Cross-linking reagents will also be employed in order to determine
proximity and composition of interacting systems. The structure of chemically
synthesized core regions of PufX will be determined in organic solvent by NMR
spectroscopy. Experiments probing interaction of LH1 and PufX with the reaction
center will also be initiated. It is expected that the results obtained in these
studies will be important for understanding the fundamental process of energy
capture, not only in all photosynthetic bacteria, but also in oxygenic
photosynthetic organisms as well.