* 0111646
* MRPG:  Type of Information Processing and Attitude-Behavior Relations
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Patrick Vargas, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 08/31/2003
* USD 18,000.00

For over 70 years psychologists have sought different ways to measure attitudes,
and to understand the relationship between attitudes and behavior. This project
adds to the extant body of knowledge by examining four classes of attitude
measures, and by demonstrating how these measures relate to different types of
behaviors. Contemporary attitude measures are generally of two types: explicit
and implicit. Explicit attitude measures ask people to report their attitudes by
drawing on evaluations stored in memory; implicit attitude measures similarly
assess evaluative tendencies, but they do not require intentional recollection
of stored information. Further, contemporary theories of attitude-behavior
relations posit that explicit measures reliably predict deliberative,
consciously-chosen behaviors; and that implicit measures reliably predict
spontaneous, automatic behaviors. It is proposed that the previous failure of
explicit measures to predict spontaneous behaviors, and of implicit measures to
predict deliberative behaviors, may be due to a confounding of the type of
attitude measure and the level of cognitive processing required by the attitude
measure. By untangling these variables (type of measure, type of cognitive
processing), four categories of measures are proposed: deliberative explicit
measures, deliberative implicit measures, spontaneous explicit measures, and
spontaneous implicit measures. The present research aims to demonstrate that the
type of measure is secondary to the type of information processing in relating
attitudes and behavior. That is, deliberative measures, whether they be explicit
or implicit, should reliably predict deliberative behaviors. Similarly,
spontaneous measures, whether they be explicit or implicit, should reliably
predict spontaneous behaviors.