* 0111193
* Nanostructured Polymers for Bronsted and Lewis Acid Catalysis via Monomer Self-Assembly
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2001,12/31/2005
* Douglas Gin, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 12/31/2005
* USD 325,000.00

This award will support a research program in the development of functional,
nanostructured polymeric systems based on polymerizable liquid crystals (LCs).
The goal of the proposed project is to design and examine nanostructured,
polymeric acid catalysts based on lyotropic LC assemblies that would potentially
offer the best of both worlds in terms of properties and control. One specific
new research direction is the design of lyotropic LC monomers that form the Hii
phase which contain strong Bronsted acid groups. To out knowledge, polymerizable
amphiphiles with this combination of features are unprecedented. This aspect of
the proposed work will involve investigating fundamental issues of functional
group compatibility in LC monomer design, as well as investigating the effect of
the nanoscale architecture and confinement on Bronsted acid-base equilibria in
the resulting polymer. More applied studies will also be undertaken to determine
the effectiveness of these proposed nanostructured polymer resins in acid
catalysis relative to the more conventional inorganic and organic acid
materials. The second new research direction is the design of new lyotropic
monomers which contain strongly Lewis acidic Sc(III) headgroups. Although
amorphous, polymer-supported Sc(III) catalysts have been realized,
nanostructured Sc-containing polymeric catalysts are unprecedented. LC network-
supported Sc(III) materials may yield unique heterogeneous Lewis acid catalysts
that not only operate in water but also afford different reaction kinetics and
selectivities compared to traditional isotropic Sc(III)
systems.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impact, the proposed
research will provide training for students in the important area of
nanoscience. Nanoscale science has recently become a national science and
technology priority. The proposed research provides a novel training ground for
students in polymer chemistry to examine the effect of nanostructure on
important materials properties, such as catalysis and reactivity. The research
itself may lead to new fundamental insights for designing polymeric materials
with novel capabilities as a result of control of order on the nanometer
scale.&lt;br/&gt;