* 0111241
* Character Acquisition During the Transition to Amphibious Life in the Oxudercine Fishes
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Jeffrey Graham, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* John A. Phillips
* 07/31/2005
* USD 114,830.00

0111241 Graham&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study investigates the specializations
for amphibious life and air breathing of fishes in the goby subfamily
Oxudercinae. Included among the oxudercines are species such as the mudskippers,
which are highly amphibious and air-breathing, as well as several less- and
entirely non-amphibious species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research studies the
characters associated with mudskipper terrestriality and the sequence of change
these characters have undergone within the Oxudercinae. DNA sequence analyses
will confirm the phylogenetic relationships among the oxudercine species.
Comparative study of different oxudercines examines the functional relationship
between the gills and auxiliary air-breathing surfaces considering, for example,
such questions as how the presence of dual respiratory surfaces affects
properties such as respiration, ionic and acid-base balance, and nitrogenous
waste excretion. Also studied will be how the gills and auxiliary air-breathing
structures function in oxudercine recovery from exhaustive exercise. Comparisons
of oxudercine eyes will reveal how changes related to aerial visual acuity
developed. Fieldwork in both Japan and Australia will correlate species-specific
specializations with behavior and microhabitat distribution in order to
establish how different degrees of terrestrial adaptation affect oxudercine
distribution and natural history. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The oxudercines are
unique among the vertebrates in providing evolutionary "snap-shots" along the
phylogenetic continuum extending from aquatic to amphibious life, and are thus
ideal for studying the sequence of character changes that occurred over the
course of this transition. This study therefore contributes to an understanding
of the suite of changes that occurred during the invasion of land by the
vertebrates in the Devonian Period, 360 million years ago.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;