* 0111078
* Rho GTPases in Plant Development: A Genetic and Cell Biological Analysis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2001,01/31/2005
* John Fowler, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan J. Lolle
* 01/31/2005
* USD 341,000.00

0111078 Fowler

Because plant cells are immobile, and are fixed within tissues by a cell wall,
their shapes and sizes (morphology) must be generated by precise regulation of
the sites of cell expansion and/or the planes of cell division. Current data
indicate that regulation of expansion and division depends on interactions among
factors associated with the cell cortex, the plasma membrane and the cell wall.
However, a mechanistic understanding of these factors (proteins and signals) and
their functions in plant cell morphogenesis is incomplete. Evidence is building
that the plant-specific Rop subfamily of the Rho GTPases is involved in
regulating these morphogenetic processes at the cell cortex, including pollen
tube growth, the distribution of the actin cytoskeleton, and cell wall
synthesis. However, the in vivo functions of specific Rops throughout plant
growth and development are poorly understood.

Using the model crop plant Zea mays, the P.I. has isolated a large collection of
mutations in five rop genes, and evaluation of mutant phenotypes indicates that
at least one of these rop genes, ropB, functions in the pollen tube. The P.I.
will take a combined genetic, molecular, and cell biological approach to
understanding the functions of the Rop family in plant development.
Specifically, the P.I. will determine the in vivo functions of maize ROPB by a
detailed characterization of the ropB mutant phenotype. Growth in the maize
style (the silk) of mutant pollen tubes from single and double rop mutant plants
will be analyzed. Mutant pollen tubes will be tested in culture with a variety
of inhibitors, to dissect the signaling pathways downstream of ROPB. The P.I.
will also generate and characterize maize plants expressing fluorescent
reporters of the plant cytoskeleton, and use these to more precisely dissect the
effects of rop mutations on cytoskeletal distribution in vivo.

This work will provide insight into these important signaling molecules, and
should help clarify their roles in several processes (e.g., pollination and
pollen tube growth, cell wall synthesis). In addition to contributing to basic
scientific knowledge, our results may suggest ways to manipulate specific rops
that would lead to crop improvement. The close relationship of the monocot Zea
mays to other important grass crops (rice, wheat) suggests