* 0111755
* Prosecuting Crimes Against Humanity in the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* John Hagan, American Bar Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Isaac Unah
* 07/31/2005
* USD 164,960.00

This research will study the Office of the Prosecutor (OTP) of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), the first truly
international court for the prosecution of war crimes, genocide, breaches of the
Geneva Conventions, and crimes against humanity. The research will use a
structural theory of social movements to explain the emergence and evolution of
the ICTY by focusing on political opportunities, mobilization structures, and
cultural framing through human agency. Particular emphasis is placed on the
tenure of Louise Arbour, the Chief Prosecutor, as she contributed elements of
human agency and cultural reframing that were essential in utilizing
opportunities presented by the post-cold war period and in mobilizing the
organizational potential of the Tribunal. The research will involve archival
work and two panel survey waves and in-person interviews with about 200
respondents randomly sampled from 320 employees of the OTP. The survey and
interviews will provide a demographic profile and ethnographic picture of how
the Tribunal was established and how the investigation and trial teams operate
as mobilizing structures in building personal commitment to organizational
goals. The surveys and interviews is to provide a stringent test of the thesis
that intense interpersonal exposure to mobilizing structures, in this case
through the Tribunal work teams, is a key source of commitment to Tribunal goals
involving the successful prosecution of war crimes and other crimes against
humanity. The theme of this work is ultimately that the collective benefit of
human agency is dependent on the way in which the leadership of figures such as
Louise Arbour can be translated into the everyday and collective commitment of
individuals like those who make up the investigation and trial teams of The
Hague Tribunal. This is the first study to focus on the actual
institutionalization and operation of the ICTY as "living law," that is, as "law
in action."