* 0111788
* Parties and Societies:  Social Clevages and Voting Behavior in  Compatative Perspective
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Jeff Manza, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 08/31/2006
* USD 186,869.00

This project conducts a large-scale comparative analysis of the impact of social
cleavages - especially those based on class, religion, race/ethnicity, and
gender - on voting behavior in 23 capitalist democracies since 1945. It examines
four questions that have been the subject of much controversy in recent years.
One, are social cleavages declining in importance as factors predicting
individual voting behavior? Two, do party strategies, issue and attitudinal
differences, and social, economic, and political contexts explain the patterns
of change over time across each cleavage? Three, what individual and macro-level
factors explain cross-national differences in the importance of cleavages? And
four, what has been the impact of these changes on the electoral coalitions of
major political parties?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To answer these questions, the
project creates an original data set containing pooled information from over 200
surveys done in 23 countries since 1945. The investigators recode the data to
provide cross-nationally comparable information on each respondent's class
location, religion, gender, political attitudes, and voting behavior. They next
combine the survey data with national figures on ethnic-linguistic and religious
heterogeneity, percentage of women in the labor force, percentage of regular
church attendees, levels of social mobility, and welfare state expenditures.
They lastly add information to the data set on party platforms for most of the
nations. The investigators not only use the data to address the substantive
questions about changes and national differences in social cleavage-based
voting, but also make the data available to other researchers interested in
comparative voting behavior.&lt;br/&gt;