* 0111006
* Cloning and Functional Characterization of an Avian Pituitary Gland Vasotocin Receptor
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Nawab Ali, University of Arkansas Medical Sciences Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 05/31/2006
* USD 523,909.00

The hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal axis in vertebrate animals is important for
regulation of responses to stress, chiefly by release of adrenocorticotropic
hormone (ACTH) from the pituitary, which in turn stimulates release of steroid
glucocorticoids from the adrenal glands. In birds, the peptide compound arginine
vasotocin (AVT), which regulates water balance and reproduction, may be a major
factor regulating ACTH release from the pituitary gland, though this function
has not yet been well defined in birds. This project tests the hypothesis that a
novel VT receptor molecule is expressed by certain cells in &lt;br/&gt;the
pituitary, and mediates the stimulatory effect of AVT on ACTH release. A
&lt;br/&gt;collaborative team with complementary skills will use molecular,
cellular, biochemical and behavioral approaches in a uniquely integrative,
comparative study to clone and characterize this novel receptor, to localize the
cells expressing the receptors, and to establish the physiological role for the
VT receptors. &lt;br/&gt; Results will be important in neuroendocrinology for
understanding comparative aspects of pituitary function in vertebrates other
than mammals; for an integrated understanding of molecular, cellular and
behavioral mechanisms for stress regulation; and for general aspects of poultry
reproduction. It will also have a broader impact on bird physiology, on general
vertebrate endocrinology and reproductive behavior. There is also a strong
impact on scientific infrastructure because the project has a training component
&lt;br/&gt;including graduates and undergraduates, and involves three campuses
in an EPSCoR &lt;br/&gt;state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;