* 0111618
* Microanalytical Methods for the Investigation of Metabolism and Transport of Substance P
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2004
* Susan Lunte, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 07/31/2004
* USD 426,000.00

The research project by co-PI's Dr. Susan M. Lunte, Dr. Kenneth L. Audus and Dr.
Karen J. Nordheden from the University of Kansas entitled "Microanalytical
Methods for the Investigation of Metabolism and Transport of Substance P" is
supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program. There are four
specific aims in the proposal 1) Continued development in microchip based
analysis. The emphasis will be toward on-line microdialysis with capillary
electrophoresis and electrochemical detection (CEEC). 2) Monitoring nitric oxide
(NO) release from microvessel endothelial cells in vivo using microdialysis and
microchip CEEC. 3) Continued studies on the transport and metabolism of
Substance P using copper complexation and electrochemical detection. 4) The
development of a 2-dimensional microchip separation system. This system will be
used for the preconcentration and analysis of substance P and other
peptides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Lunte has an established reputation for
mentoring underrepresented groups and for integrating education and research.
This research is multidisciplinary and will have significant impact on the
fields of separation science, microchip based analyses, neurotransmission and
neuroregulation. There is significant potential societal impact from this
research related to follow-on medical advances.&lt;br/&gt;