* 0111140
* Econometric Methods for Discretely-Sampled Continuous-Time Models
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Yacine Ait-Sahalia, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2005
* USD 225,398.00

Interest rates have traditionally been modeled in the economics literature as
following continuous-time Markov processes, and more specifically, diffusions.
By contrast, recent term structure models often imply non-Markovian continuous-
time dynamics. Can discretely sampled interest rate data help decide which
continuous-time models are sensible? Within the Markovian world, diffusion
processes are characterized by the continuity of their sample paths. It is
immediately, obvious that this condition cannot be verified from the observed
sample path. By nature, even if the sample path were continuous, the discretely
sampled interest rate data will appear as a sequence of discrete change. This
grant continues work begun under NSF award 970305 on this fundamental problem in
financial economics.&lt;br/&gt;This project develops new likelihood-based
estimation methods for discretely-sampled continuous-time models and extends our
understanding of the properties of estimators in four related
situations:&lt;br/&gt;1. Since many realistic models in economics involve
multiple state variables, the first part of the project develops a closed-form
sequence of likelihood functions applicable to arbitrary multivariate diffusion
models.&lt;br/&gt;2. These functions are used to infer consistent dynamic models
from market data.&lt;br/&gt;3. Allowing now for jumps, it is shown that the
lower the frequency of observation, the more difficult it is to disentangle from
discrete data the respective effects of the jump and volatility components. The
project makes this intuition rigorous by deriving Fisher's information matrix
from an explicit expansion of the likelihood answering questions such as: How
fast does the precision of the jump estimates decrease when the frequency of
observation decreases? What is the influence on the identifiability of jumps of
the relative magnitudes of the (continuous) volatility and (discontinuous) jump
parts?&lt;br/&gt;4. New issues arise when the data are not only discretely but
also possibly randomly spaced in time. The project derives the properties of
estimators based on maximum-likelihood with either full or partial information,
the generalized method of moments, and discrete sampling schemes such as the
Euler approximation. Studying the effect of the sampling randomness, the
asymptotic distribution of the various estimators will be decomposed in terms
that are due to the discreteness vs. terms due to the randomness of the
sampling. This makes it possible to compare the relative costs of ignoring
either the discreteness or the randomness of the sampling scheme producing the
data. When the estimators are asymptotically biased, their biases will also be
analyzed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project integrates research and education by
creating datasets and developing publicly available computer code (both made
available through the web, as has been the case for past projects) for each of
the main research endeavors funded by this proposal. The results will be
disseminated broadly through presentations at seminars, conferences and
professional association meetings.&lt;br/&gt;