* 0111429
* Entry, Learning, and Industry Evolution
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2007
* Steven Klepper, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2007
* USD 191,410.00

Three projects concerning the conditions that lead firms to enter new industries
and that cause industries to be concentrated in narrow geographic regions are
conducted. &lt;br/&gt;The first project analyzes the circumstances that lead
employees of existing firms to leave and start competing firms in the same
industry. Employees of incumbent firms are assumed to learn useful technical and
marketing knowledge in the specialized domains in which they work for their
employers, which they exploit in starting their own firms. Better performing
firms are assumed to be richer learning environments, leading them to spawn more
and better-performing employee startups. Employee startups thus serve to diffuse
knowledge to new organizations, thereby increasing the strength of the
competitors in an industry. These ideas are tested using data that builds on
data collected in a prior NSF project on all entrants into the automobile and
laser industries. For each industry, various predictions concerning the types of
firms that spawn more employee startups, the market conditions that are
conducive to such startups, and the relationship between employee startups and
the prior experiences of their founders are tested.&lt;br/&gt;The second project
analyzes the potential of a rare chance event, namely the location of a few very
successful early entrants in the same region, to profoundly affect the evolution
of the geographic structure of an industry. This can occur through the employee
startup process envisioned in the first project. If employee startups drive
regional concentrations, it implies that regional public policy efforts to
promote industry concentrations should focus on facilitating employee startups.
The importance of employee startups in regional industry concentrations is
tested using the data compiled in the first project on the automobile industry,
which became heavily concentrated around Detroit, Michigan. The location and
heritage of every automobile producer is traced to test the extent to which the
success of the Detroit producers was concentrated in firms that either directly
or though other employee startups can be traced back to four of the most
successful early automobile entrants, Olds Motor Works, Cadillac, Buick, and
Ford, all of which located in the Detroit area. &lt;br/&gt;The last project
explores how learning from experience leads firms to expand the repertoire of
activities they conduct within industries. It is conjectured that as firms learn
about the core technologies of an industry, they expand their efforts into new
activities that are more challenging to master. This perspective can account for
patterns in the way firms grow and also why the leaders of industries tend to
produce the broadest array of the industry's products. It also implies that
older and more qualified firms are the first to diversify into new industry
domains created by innovations, which contrasts with recent theories about how
innovations can lead to turnover in the leaders of an industry. The theory is
tested using the data for the automobile and laser industries and also using
data for part of the history of the tire industry developed in the same prior
NSF project. The empirical examination probes the kinds of innovations that pose
the greatest challenges to an industry's leading firms versus those that
reinforce the positions of the industry's leaders. &lt;br/&gt;