* 0111795
* The Private Equity Premium Puzzle
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2002
* Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2002
* USD 42,713.00

Both asset pricing and investment theory rely critically on our understanding of
investors' portfolio choices. One of the most studied puzzles in financial
economics is that, given the returns and volatility of publicly traded equity,
investors seem to allocate too little wealth to stocks. That is the premium
demanded for holding equity appears too high given observed investment in the
stock market. However, while most of the literature has focused on publicly
traded equity, this project analyzes the holdings of households in privately
held firms. The private equity market is at least as large as the public equity
market. Thus, it is equally important to understand investment behavior and the
risk-return trade-off in this market. The project analyzes both the risk of
private equity as a whole as well as the cross-sectional distribution of
realized private equity across households, using data from the Survey of
Consumer Finances and the Flow of Funds Accounts and supplementary sources.
Preliminary results show that most private equity is held by households who have
a large proportion of their wealth invested in a single non-publicly traded
company; the average returns on private and public equity are similar, but
investing in a single private company is substantially riskier than investing in
an index of publicly traded equity. Together these facts imply that the typical
owner of private equity faces a much worse risk-return trade-off than could be
obtained by investing in an index of publicly traded equity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second part of the project explains the puzzle of poor
risk -return trade-off for owners of private equity. The project examines
theories of moral hazard due to partially unobservable entrepreneurial effort
and theories of asymmetric information in which entrepreneurs are better
informed about firm prospects than potential outside investors. making it
difficult for entrepreneurs to obtain a fair value when selling equity. The
project uses previously unexploited data on hours worked by entrepreneurs as
well as alternative measures of ownership to provide evidence on the theory of
moral hazard. To test theories of asymmetric information, the investigators have
obtained data for pre- and post-IPO ownership shares for shareholders in about
400 initial public offerings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rational entrepreneurs
should realize based on observing the large average ownership shares of current
entrepreneurs, that they would need to hold large undiversified positions in
their companies conditional on entry. Given the poor risk-return trade-off oil
private equity, it is puzzling why, entrepreneurs then decide to enter. Low
entrepreneurial risk aversion. non-pecuniary benefits, and over optimism and
misperceived risk are possible explanations. The project provides evidence to
rule out low risk aversion, leaving the distinction between alternative
explanations for future work.&lt;br/&gt;