* 0111743
* RUI: Dynamics of European Buckthorn (Rhamnus cathartica L.) Invasion in the Northeastern United States
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Deanna McCay, Colgate University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2005
* USD 107,296.00

Invasive non-native plants threaten the ecological integrity and economic value
of natural areas throughout the world. Despite the severity of this growing
problem, our understanding of how exotic plants become established in new areas
and move across the landscape is weak. The objective of this research is to
describe the process by which European buckthorn (Rhamnus cathartica), a shrub
native to Eurasia, colonizes new areas in North America and how that process
varies with ecological context. Field observations and experiments will be used
to examine each stage of the colonization process in second-growth deciduous
forests, conifer plantations, and abandoned agricultural fields. Differences in
microclimate, soils, and resident fauna will be considered as potential sources
of variation in colonization. Spatial configuration of the environment also will
be considered as a factor affecting colonization. Detailed stand-level maps
relating species composition, canopy gaps, edges, and streams to European
buckthorn distribution will reveal factors facilitating colonization and spread.
Aerial photographs and geographic information systems will allow measurement of
size, shape and spatial context of areas occupied by this plant. This research
will demonstrate whether fragmentation of North American forests serves to
promote or inhibit the spread of European
buckthorn.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;European buckthorn competes with native plants
and is a host of oat crown rust fungus, a disease that attacks oat crops. Native
birds nesting in this shrub experience high rates of predation, and leaves of
European buckthorn may be toxic to native mammals. This research will lead to a
greater knowledge of the physiology and ecology of this relatively unstudied
species of conservation concern. In addition, this research will contribute to
understanding of how invasion success is affected by the properties of invaded
ecosystems. This study also will quantify how forest fragmentation due to timber
harvest and abandonment of agricultural lands affects the movement of an exotic
species across the landscape. Although many invasive species are found in human-
modified environments, there is growing concern about the presence of invasive
species within pristine natural areas. Understanding the effect of environmental
context, within particular settings and among settings in the landscape, will
guide land managers and scientists to identify potential threats to natural
environments.&lt;br/&gt;