* 0111435
* Fundamental Studies of Electron Transfer in Supramolecular Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2004
* David Waldeck, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 07/31/2004
* USD 311,000.00

Professor David H. Waldeck, of the Department of Chemistry at the University of
Pittsburgh, is supported by the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program for
his studies of electron transfer in supramolecular systems. Time-resolved
fluorescence spectroscopy will be used to study photoinduced electron transfer
in well-defined supramolecular systems. The studies will explore fundamental
issues of solvation and electronic coupling that are important to chemical
reactivity and supramolecular chemistry. By studying electron transfer in a
rigid unimolecular system which has electron donor and acceptor units on
opposite sides of a molecular cleft, the importance of non-bonded contacts
between the electron clouds of the donor and acceptor groups and other molecules
can be assessed. Studies will be performed for two types of systems, one in
which a molecular moiety is covalently bound to the rigid bridge and lies in the
cleft and one in which a guest molecule hydrogen bonds to a receptor located on
the bridge. Molecular solvation models, the dependence of coupling on electronic
character, the transition from weak to strong coupling, and the influence of
nuclear motion will be explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electron transfer between
distinct molecular units is the primary event in many natural (e.g.,
photosynthesis) and technological (e.g., corrosion) processes. In addition,
electron transfer is a relatively simple chemical transformation amenable to
rigorous and quantitative study. On a broader level, electron transfer and
charge displacement are central elements of most chemical reactions.
Nonetheless, our understanding of how the two electron clouds of non-bonded
molecules interact with one another, an essential element of any chemical
transformation, is not well understood. With the support of the Organic and
Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor David H. Waldeck, of the Department
of Chemistry at the University of Pittsburgh, is carrying out studies designed
to investigate and quantify fundamental aspects of electron transfer reactions
that involve electron tunneling through non-bonded contacts.