* 0111635
* State-Resolved Photodissociation Dynamics of Small Free Radicals:  Structure, Energetics, and Photochemical Reactivity
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Jingsong Zhang, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 07/31/2004
* USD 337,961.00

Dr. Jingsong Zhang of the University of California Riverside is funded for his
research on state-resolved photodissociation dynamics of small free radicals,
structure, energetics, and photochemical reactivity by the Physical Chemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division. Fundamentally new insigts and quantitative
understanding of photochemical reactivity of small prototypical free radicals
will be generated experimentally uisng laser excitation, laser probing, and time
of flight mass spectroscopy. Laser spectroscopy and state-resolved
photodissociation dynamics will be used to fully characterize prototypical
reactive intermediates and small alkyl, unsaturated aliphatic, alkoxy, and
aromatic radicals, as well as the HOCO radical. These systems will also be
examined at a high level of theory (electronic and dynamic) with little or no
approximation. Detailed mechanisms involving dissociation and nuclear
rearrangement will be generated. Open-shell electronic states, structures and
multiple potential energy surfaces of free radicals and their influences on
photodissociation and unimolecular reactions will be deduced. Competitive
dissociation pathways and decomposition mechanims of free radicals and product
energy disposal will be mapped. Free-radical electronic states, thermodynamics,
and energetics will be tabulated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The energetics and
dynamics of small free radicals are important areas of physical chemistry and
have practical importance in combustion and atmospheric chemistries. The
experimental and theoretical analyses by Dr. Zhang will provide detailed
advances in our understanding of important carbon-based radicals and the
hydrogen extraction chemistry of these radicals. In addition, important teaching
and training will be provided students at one of our nation's most culturally
diverse universities. Multi-disciplinary approaches, for example, connections
between fundamental molecular-level knowledge and practical atmospheric and
combustion chemistry, as well as those between modern techniques and scientific
advances, will be stressed.