* 0111822
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Advancing Theoretical and Empirical Models of Legislative Voting Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2002
* John Aldrich, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 06/30/2002
* USD 3,161.00

This Doctoral Dissertation Research Support investigation examines the sources
of 1) legislator policy "location" on roll call votes, and 2) legislator voting
consistency, or variance around this location. The study begins with the common
wisdom that legislators select a policy location based on their constituency,
party, and ideology. However, legislators also decide whether their primary goal
is to gain re-election, advance within the party, or pursue policy outcomes, and
this determination impacts their positioning as well. Furthermore, this study
posits novel models of mass voting and committee assignment behavior that
influence legislator location. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To test the roll call model
requires an accurate measure of legislator ideology, independent of party and
constituency, and a determination of legislators' goals. This project surveys
700 former members of the United Sates congress to elicit their current ideology
and their goals when in office. Analysis of this data will produce unbiased
estimates of the impact of constituency, party, and ideology on voting behavior.
Next, the study hypotheses that voting consistency is a function of district
diversity, party heterogeneity, and member ambivalence. The proposed survey will
yield measures of member policy ambivalence, and thus permit a variance model to
be tested for the first time.&lt;br/&gt;