* 0111682
* Intrinsic Interaction Between Superconductivity and Magnetism in Quaternary and Pseudoquaternary Borocarbides
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Donald Naugle, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 08/31/2005
* USD 43,000.00

This individual investigator award will provide support to a senior professor
for a collaboration with leading scientists in Ukraine to investigate the
interplay between two "hostile" states, superconductivity and magnetism. The
rare-earth-nickel-borocarbide family of compounds which exhibit a wealth of
related phenomena have been chosen for the study. Important length scales can be
changed by introduction of point defects. This will be done by both chemical
substitution and irradiation with high energy electrons in order to separate the
effects related to physical disorder from those related to chemical "pressure".
The research will address the role of pair breaking mechanisms in the region of
coexistence of superconductivity and magnetism, the nature of exotic electronic
states in this region and the anomalies in normal state transport in these
intermetallics. The results are expected to be of general applicability to the
understanding of the interplay between superconductivity and magnetism, valid
well beyond the particular material chosen. Students will receive training that
will prepare them for careers in industry, academia or government. The close
contact and interaction with leading scientists from another country will
provide new perspectives on science and culture for these
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This individual investigator award will provide
support to a joint effort by the principle investigator and leading scientists
in Ukraine for an investigation into the intricate interplay between "hostile"
physical states, namely magnetism and superconductivity. A family of compounds,
rare-earth-nickel-borocarbides, that shows an unusual variety of phenomena
related to these two states has been chosen for these studies. The effects of
disorder, introduced both by chemical substitution and irradiation with high
energy electrons, on the interplay will be studied. The interplay between
superconductivity and magnetism is a fundamental problem in solid state physics,
and the results of this investigation are expected to lead to a much better
understanding of this interplay that will be applicable beyond the chosen
material. Students will have the opportunity to collaborate with leading
international scientists while learning state-of-the art technology and
experimental skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;