* 0111802
* Uncovering Long-Run Economic Relationships in High-Frequency Financial Data -- An Accomplishment Based Renewal
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Tim Bollerslev, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/2006
* USD 167,773.00

The advent of computerized communication networks and automated trade execution
systems have resulted in the recent availability of real-time prices and
information variables for a host of different financial markets and instruments.
This project aims to expand on the ability to extract useful information about
important economic phenomena from this new rich source of data. Specifically,
the high-frequency data hold the promise of delivering: (i) a much better
understanding of the type of information that induces important price movements
and their relation to the underlying market microstructure; (ii) a deeper
understanding concerning the functioning of markets and the effectiveness of
various macroeconomic policies; (iii) the development of new and more accurate
risk measurements; and (iv) important information about the longer-run interday
volatility dependencies that play a crucial role in asset pricing and risk
management. Meanwhile, it has become increasingly clear that the satisfactory
empirical analysis of high -frequency data presents a host of unique and
challenging problems, requiring the development of new modeling paradigms and
specialized procedures relative to the techniques employed in traditional time
series econometrics involving the analysis of daily or lower frequency
macroeconomic and financial data. The previous NSF-sponsored research (award
SES-9730440) has been at the forefront of these developments. Many of the ideas
and methodologies put forth in our various papers have already been successfully
implemented and applied by other researchers and finance practitioners in
academia, government, and the private sector. Most immediately, our findings
have allowed for the construction of more accurate financial market volatility
forecasts and ex-post volatility measurements. Our proposed research agenda in
turn holds the promise of improved procedures for risk management, monitoring,
and oversight, and should also result in a deeper understanding concerning the
efficiency of markets and the effectiveness of different macroeconomic policies.
The general results of the proposed activity should therefore be of relevance to
applied macroeconomists, time series econometricians, financial researchers,
regulators, and practitioners alike.