* 0111025
* Role of Protein-RNA Interaction in Virus Assembly
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2001,01/31/2005
* Adam Zlotnick, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 01/31/2005
* USD 341,113.00

&lt;br/&gt;The lifecycle of many spherical (icosahedral) viruses involves co-
assembly of the protein&lt;br/&gt;capsid around the viral genome. However, the
details of this process are largely&lt;br/&gt;unknown. Important questions
remain about how capsid protein associates with the&lt;br/&gt;nucleic acid to
initiate assembly and complete virion, and how the viral genome
becomes&lt;br/&gt;organized within the capsid. We will examine assembly of
Cowpea Chlorotic Mottle&lt;br/&gt;virus (CCMV), a plus strand RNA plant virus.
This is an ideal model for studying in vitro&lt;br/&gt;assembly because CCMV
capsid protein (CP) can assemble into empty capsids, virus-
like&lt;br/&gt;particles with non-specific RNA, and infectious virions with
viral RNA. We hypothesize&lt;br/&gt;that virion assembly proceeds stepwise by
(i) non - specific binding of CP to RNA, (ii)&lt;br/&gt;specific binding to
viral RNA, (iii) refolding of the RNA - protein complex, and
(iv)&lt;br/&gt;finally, cooperative association of CP to the complex, leading to
completion of the&lt;br/&gt;capsid. This hypothesis implies that the protein -
protein interactions will affect the&lt;br/&gt;organization of the packaged RNA
and that RNA structure will have a profound effect on&lt;br/&gt;capsid
assembly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the assembly of empty capsids is a
preliminary to studying assembly of&lt;br/&gt;RNA-filled virions. Study of the
protein-protein interaction is complicated because the&lt;br/&gt;CCMV capsid is
an oligomer of 180 copies of CP. We have developed analyses
of&lt;br/&gt;assembly that allow us to deduce elements of the mechanism and
thermodynamic and&lt;br/&gt;kinetic parameters. Experimentally, assembly will be
observed using light scattering,&lt;br/&gt;liquid chromatography, and electron
microscopy.&lt;br/&gt;Assembly of RNA-filled capsids adds an additional layer of
complexity. In vivo, only&lt;br/&gt;viral RNA is encapsidated; in vitro,
encapsidation is promiscuous. The role of RNA in&lt;br/&gt;directing assembly
remains to be determined. RNA binding will concentrate CP, but is&lt;br/&gt;also
likely to affect CP - RNA quaternary structure. We have observed distinct CP -
RNA&lt;br/&gt;complexes that are likely to play critical roles in assembly and
specificity. We will&lt;br/&gt;physically and structurally characterize these
complexes and their formation on viral and&lt;br/&gt;random RNA. Subsequent
capsid assembly will be observed with electrophoresis, and&lt;br/&gt;solution
assays using RNA with bound complex, bare viral RNA, and random RNA
as&lt;br/&gt;substrates. We expect that protein - protein interaction energy,
observed for formation of&lt;br/&gt;empty capsids, will probably contribute to
the cooperativity of assembly. We anticipate&lt;br/&gt;that these studies will
yield a detailed picture of a basic biological process, the
assembly&lt;br/&gt;of an infectious virus. These studies will be a paradigm for
understanding assembly of&lt;br/&gt;other viruses, identifying new targets for
anti-viral intervention, and for manipulating&lt;br/&gt;virus assembly to yield
novel nano-structures.&lt;br/&gt;