* 0111876
* 187Re-187Os Calibration of Molybdenite from Henderson, Colorado: A New NIST Reference Material
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2003
* Judith Hannah, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2003
* USD 109,882.00

0111876&lt;br/&gt;Stein&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Use of the geochronometer based on
the decay of rhenium (Re) to osmium (Os) is rapidly expanding, and there are no
reference materials certified by the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) for inter-laboratory comparison. Advances in chemical and mass
spectrometric procedures permit high precision determination of Re and Os, even
on low-ppt level samples. Molybdenite (MoS2) is uniquely suited for the Re-Os
chronometer because it commonly contains high concentrations of the parent Re
and essentially no initial daughter Os. Thus, the decay of 187Re to 187Os yields
precise ages, even in very young samples, without correction for initial Os.
With increasing demand for Re-Os dating, particularly of molybdenite, the need
for an accepted reference material for inter-laboratory comparison has become
crucial. We propose to calibrate a Re-Os molybdenite reference material, working
together with University of Alberta and NIST. The proposed Re-Os reference
molybdenite is from Henderson, Colorado, the location of a well-studied
molybdenum deposit. NIST will physically mix, split, and bottle the Henderson
molybdenite powder. Statistically representative sets of samples will be
analyzed by the AIRIE Lab at Colorado State University and by the isotope lab at
the University of Alberta. The distribution of the reference material will be
fully handled by NIST, and the cost for the molybdenite reference material will
reflect only the costs incurred by NIST for their part of the work.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;