* 0111824
* CSEDI: Collaborative Res.: Toward Mapping 3D Variations in Temperature and Chemical Composition in the Upper Mantle through a Mineral Physics-based Inversion of Seismic Waveforms
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2003
* Shun-ichiro Karato, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2003
* USD 64,948.00

Romanowicz &lt;br/&gt;Karato &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a collaborative study
between seismologists at UC Berkeley and mineral physicists at Yale University,
to explore the feasibility of inverting seismic long period waveform data
directly for 3D variations in effective temperature and major element chemistry
in the upper mantle. Effective temperature will include the effects of
temperature and water content, which cannot be easily separated from seismic
data alone. Water content is likely to have large effects on rheology and
therefore has significant influence on the dynamics of the Earth's mantle. They
will use the mineral physics framework to delineate contributions from these
various factors and provide estimates of relevant partial derivatives. Effects
of major element chemistry can be distinguished from that of water, because
water has a large influence on anelasticity whereas major element chemistry does
not. On the other hand anelasticity is more strongly dependent on temperature
than seismic velocity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the heart of this study is the
conjecture, supported by theoretical considerations, that the one step inversion
of seismic waveforms for physical parameters such as composition C and
(effective) temperature T*, should yield more stable results than the standard
approach of first inverting for velocity and Q structure and then interpreting
the obtained maps in terms of physical parameters. The latter is currently
inhibited by the poor resolution in 3D upper mantle Q, due to contamination of
amplitudes by largely unmodelled, but significant, effects of focusing and
scattering. In the one step inversion the effects of C and T* are coupled in the
inversion matrix elements, whereas in the standard approach, only the amplitudes
depend on anelastic terms, while both phase and amplitudes depend on the elastic
ones, leading to strong biases in the distribution of Q inferred. The coupled
character of the equations in the one step approach, combined with the strong
sensitivity of amplitudes to T* (through anelastic terms) should offset the
approximate character of the available mineral physics partial derivatives and
the errors due to inadequate theoretical treatment of focusing.