* 0111611
* Collaborative Research:  Database Development For The Study Of Public Policy
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2007
* Frank Baumgartner, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Humes
* 12/31/2007
* USD 207,309.00

This collaborative infrastructure project continues the development of a
comprehensive database for the analysis of public policy processes in the United
States, and establishes a truly interactive application system for the delivery
of that database to public policy scholars, students, and policy analysts. The
existing database is centered on lawmaking activity; the current project extends
the work to the presidency, the executive branch, the courts, and interest group
activity. The database links several independent data sets via a system of
policy content codes that are constructed to be consistent across time. The
approach avoids the pitfalls of relying on data collected for purposes other
than policy monitoring. Numerous other variables are collected in addition to
the policy content of the cases, adding to the richness and flexibility of these
data sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data currently in the system include
Congressional hearings (1946-1994), Public Laws (1946-1994), Congressional
Quarterly entries (1946-1994(, all statutes enacted (1946-1994), a sample of
stories in the New York Times (1947-1994), and Congressional Budget Authority
(1947-1997). The researchers add bills introduced in Congress (currently being
integrated), legislative floor activity, executive orders and other measures of
presidential activity, interest group activity tabulated in the Encyclopedia of
Associations, and Supreme Court decisions. The investigators promise to explore
other potential sources that contribute to the quantitative monitoring of public
policy in the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resulting system is unique
as a research tool because of its comprehensiveness and because of its capacity
to allow researchers to analyze policy processes in ways that heretofore have
not been possible. These facets continue to improve the ability of social
scientists to study policy dynamics and link those dynamics to the process of
democratic governance---representation, public decision-making, political
communication, and the operation of democratic
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;