* 0111966
* A National Conference Center
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2007
* J. Brian Conrey, American Institute of Mathematics
* Cooperative Agreement
* Christopher Stark
* 12/31/2007
* USD 5,219,807.00

The AIM Research Conference Center (ARCC) will foster progress in&lt;br/&gt;the
mathematical sciences and contribute significantly to the&lt;br/&gt;current and
future productivity of mathematicians. Through the&lt;br/&gt;sponsorship of
focused workshops, ARCC will provide a new venue&lt;br/&gt;for research
mathematics which will enhance and complement&lt;br/&gt;existing conference
centers and institutes. ARCC focused&lt;br/&gt;workshops will be distinguished
by their emphasis on a specific&lt;br/&gt;mathematical goal, such as a
significant unsolved problem, an&lt;br/&gt;important new result, or the
explanation of the convergence&lt;br/&gt;between two distinct areas of
mathematics. Also planned are&lt;br/&gt;workshops exploring connections between
mathematics and other&lt;br/&gt;sciences. A small team of researchers will
carefully plan each&lt;br/&gt;workshop so as to maximize its effectiveness in
achieving this&lt;br/&gt;goal. Central to each workshop will be a public website
which,&lt;br/&gt;during the lead-in phase, will outline the scope of the
workshop&lt;br/&gt;and provide resources to the participants. Most workshops
will&lt;br/&gt;last for one week and will feature a small selection of
talks&lt;br/&gt;coupled with several problem and discussion
sessions.&lt;br/&gt;Immediately following the workshop, the website will be
expanded&lt;br/&gt;to serve both as a record of the workshop and as a
comprehensive&lt;br/&gt;resource for the current status of important problems
and&lt;br/&gt;results. The website will remain up-to-date through
the&lt;br/&gt;incorporation of future work and new developments.
The&lt;br/&gt;collection of all workshop websites will grow to become
a&lt;br/&gt;comprehensive and interconnected resource for the most
important&lt;br/&gt;problems and results in modern
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, mathematics has become an
increasingly&lt;br/&gt;collaborative endeavor, and many of today's important
unsolved&lt;br/&gt;problems will require techniques from several areas of
the&lt;br/&gt;mathematical sciences. The ARCC focused workshops will
provide&lt;br/&gt;an ideal forum for a team of researchers, working together,
to&lt;br/&gt;map out strategies, set priorities, work toward a solution,
and&lt;br/&gt;set in place a framework for progress on important problems.
It&lt;br/&gt;is expected that these workshops will often lay the
groundwork&lt;br/&gt;for significant efforts, both by focused research groups
and&lt;br/&gt;through special, longer term programs at other institutes.
When&lt;br/&gt;it is operating at full capacity, ARCC will sponsor 20-25
focused&lt;br/&gt;workshops per year, each designed to facilitate
collaborative&lt;br/&gt;progress on an important area of the mathematical
sciences. To&lt;br/&gt;ensure that these collaborations will be successful, the
leaders&lt;br/&gt;in each field will be involved in the planning of the
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;Equally importantly, junior scientists and graduate
students will&lt;br/&gt;be actively involved in the workshops, thereby ensuring
the&lt;br/&gt;long-term development of the ensuing work and contributing to
the&lt;br/&gt;education of new mathematicians. Special attention will
be&lt;br/&gt;devoted to facilitate collaborations which include
women,&lt;br/&gt;minorities, and researchers at primarily
undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;institutions. This will allow for a more effective use
of the&lt;br/&gt;nation's collective mathematical knowledge and resources.
The&lt;br/&gt;AIM Research Conference Center's emphasis on
focused&lt;br/&gt;collaborative research will foster significant progress
on&lt;br/&gt;important mathematical problems and will be of
significant&lt;br/&gt;benefit to both current and future generations of
mathematicians.&lt;br/&gt;