* 0111289
* The Chadic Languages of Yobe State, Nigeria
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2005
* Russell Schuh, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 11/30/2005
* USD 177,696.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Russell G. Schuh and his colleague
Dr. Alhaji Maina Gimba of the University of Maiduguri, Nigeria, will spend three
years documenting five languages of Yobe State, Nigeria. These are Bole,
Karekare, Ngamo, Bade, and Ngizim, all major languages of the Chadic family.
None of these languages has yet been described comprehensively in full grammars
or dictionaries; nor is any used in written form by its speakers. Drs. Schuh and
Gimba will train teams of native speakers to collect and transcribe data in
their own languages. The teams will begin by building on existing lexical
databases and collections of texts. Databases currently range from 700-800 words
for Ngamo to over 3000 words for Bole. Researchers will work toward relatively
large dictionaries of several thousand items per language. Texts currently
emphasize folktales. Researchers will collect new texts, including oral history,
descriptions of customs and traditions, poetry and song, and personal narrative.
One source of new texts will be transcription of audio and video recordings of
people recognized as being particularly knowledgable or skilled in various
domains. One goal of the project will be to stimulate speakers to write in their
native languages. To this end, the project will solicit texts in written form
from people already literate in Hausa (the lingua franca of Northern Nigeria),
particularly secondary school students. As collections of texts increase, they
will be published locally so that people can see themselves in print. Ultimately
the project will produce sizable dictionaries for each language in both paper
and electronic form (CD and searchable web databases) and collections of texts
both for local distribution and, with translations, in both paper and electronic
form for an audience outside Nigeria. Not least, a long-term outcome, extending
beyond the duration of the project, should be continued self-documentation of
the languages in written form.

This language documentation project is significant in four ways. First, it
emphasizes linguistic structure that is encoded in the lexicon. This includes
derivational processes that make nouns from verbs, make verbs passive, or create
nouns indicating agent or instrument; inflectional processes that indicate
gender, number, tense, or (in)definiteness; compounding creating word
combinations whose overall meaning is not predictable from the parts. Second,
the project's documenting of a group of related languages reveals language
history. The lexicons of these languages tell us, for example, which words can
be reconstructed as having been shared by the original ancestor language, how
words may have shifted in meaning in individual languages, and which words have
been adopted from other languages. Third, the lexicon is also a repository of
ethnoecology. It includes names for flora, fauna, and natural objects, and means
of constructing names for things in the environment (compounding, word
derivation, etc.). Finally, the lexicon represents all aspects of culture,
including words from the entire range of crafts, occupations, traditions, and
social organization. The text collections are especially critical to the study
of historical and cultural changes. All these issues require detailed
documentation and input from natives of the culture, which this project will
provide.