* 0111080
* Genetic Analysis of Root-knot Nematodes
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2004
* Valerie Williamson, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 07/31/2004
* USD 384,979.00

Root-knot nematodes are tiny, parasitic worms that infect a wide range of plants
and cause major yield losses to the world's crops. Changes to the plant after
infection include the formation of galls or root-knots on root systems. Complex
molecular signaling between the host and parasite mediates this interaction.
Analysis of the roles of the nematode's genes in causing root galling and crop
loss has not been possible because of the lack of genetic analysis of the
nematode and the lack of knowledge of nematode's genome structure. A major
constraint has been that several species of nematodes do not reproduce sexually,
making genetic analysis very difficult. However, isolates of the nematode
species, Meloidogyne hapla, do reproduce sexually, making this species an
excellent model to gain information on what genes in the nematode are
responsible for its destructive properties. The goal of the current research is
to establish a genetic system for M. hapla. Nematode strains with differences in
DNA markers and in ability to reproduce on particular plant lines have already
been identified. In this study, the inheritance of ability to reproduce on a
wild potato isolate with the gene Rmc1 will be investigated. A protocol to carry
out controlled genetic crosses will be developed and segregation of DNA markers
will be monitored. Segregation of markers and virulence in the presence of Rmc1
will be assessed to initiate a genetic linkage map. A DNA library representing
the entire M. hapla genome will be produced. DNA hybridization to nematode
chromosomes will be carried out to aid in determining the genome structure. The
linkage map and markers will be a resource for cloning nematode genes associated
with ability to parasitise different plant species. Information gained from
these studies will facilitate understanding of mechanisms by which parasitic
nematodes circumvent plant resistance genes and may lead to environmentally
safer means of nematode control in agriculture.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;