* 0111356
* RUI: The Use of Anion Inhibitors to Investigate the Role of Chloride in Oxygen Evolution by Photosystem II of Higher Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Alice Haddy, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 08/31/2005
* USD 330,000.00

The importance of chloride for the formation of molecular oxygen by higher
plants will be investigated in this project. Oxygen, which is required by all
respiring life forms, is evolved as a byproduct of the conversion of light
energy into chemical energy during photosynthesis. The production of oxygen is
therefore among the most important biochemical reactions for the support of life
on earth. Oxygen is formed by the oxidation of water at a cluster of manganese
ions in Photosystem II, a membrane-bound protein complex. Chloride is required
as a cofactor for this catalysis. The approach to be taken in this project will
be to characterize the action of anions that inhibit oxygen evolution activity
by competing with functional chloride. Inhibitor studies are valuable in
pointing out the characteristics of normal function. Using photosystem II-
enriched membranes from spinach, the effects of anion inhibitors such as F-,
N3-, I-, NO2-, and NO3- on the enzyme kinetics of oxygen evolution activity will
be analyzed. These results will be compared with the effects of the anions on
the electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectra of the manganese cluster and
other redox active centers. Studies will also be undertaken to characterize some
of the anions as activators of oxygen evolution along with chloride itself and
bromide. These experiments will facilitate the interpretation of the effects of
the anion inhibitors at a molecular level. Since this project will be carried
out at a primarily undergraduate university, this project will provide beginning
researchers with laboratory experience, which is expected to influence their
career choices.