* 0111605
* SBIR Phase II: Development of NZP-Based Advanced Thermal Barrier Coatings
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2001,08/31/2004
* Ramachandran Nageswaran, COI Ceramics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 08/31/2004
* USD 496,470.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will further
develop and optimize the NZP (sodium zirconium phosphate type) ceramic-based
thermal barrier coating (TBC) technology for use in advanced turbine and power
generation systems. These advanced systems drive the need for higher operating
temperatures to achieve better efficiencies without compromising durability.
Such requirements heighten the threat of: (i) microstructural changes which
reduce thermal barrier effectiveness; (ii) premature oxidative spalling; and
(iii) susceptibility to mechanical stresses in conventional yttria-stabilized
zirconia (YSZ)-based TBCs. Some NZP ceramics have very low thermal and oxygen
conductivity, excellent thermal cycling resistance and high temperature
stability but also have low thermal expansion. Phase I demonstrated the
feasibility of thermal spraying simple and functionally graded (to minimize
thermal expansion mismatches) TBCs of NZP with YSZ that are better thermal
barriers and also have very good thermal cycling resistance to 1200 degrees C.
The primary goal for Phase II is to complete the scientific and engineering
development in order to commercialize the NZP-based TBC technology. A team of
academic and industrial collaborators will work under the guidance of committed
end-users to achieve this goal.

Potential successful development of the NZP-based TBC concept will enable
applications in high efficiency power generating systems and gas turbine
engines; specifically, for turbine vanes and blades, and combustors and
afterburners. Coatings based on NZP can also double up as environmental barrier
coatings (EBCs), and find use in diesel engines and as abradable seals. The
financial benefits of the NZP-based coatings could be over $100M arising from
reduced component maintenance and fuel and operational costs.