* 0111830
* Assessment Via Contests:  (1) Persistence in Occupation Choice; (2) Over/Underconfidence and Interaction Levels
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2005
* Eddie Dekel, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Kaye Husbands Fealing
* 06/30/2005
* USD 222,450.00

Many assessments, both of an individual's own ability and that of others are
based in part on bilateral interactions. These interactions, which take place
among colleagues and between family members and friends, can take the form of
arguments over business tactics or politics, discussions of past work and of
other colleagues, and many other issues. After such interactions the
participants usually have an assessment of which participant came out ahead; who
won or lost the debate. These interactions may influence an individual's self-
assessment, and thereby choices of occupation and investment in human capital.
These contests will also influence an individual's assessment of the person with
whom they interacted, and hence it will influence their recommendations for
these others. This in turn may influence the desire of agents to interact. This
project explores how these assessments affect choices by individuals themselves
and of promotions of others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In deciding which occupation
to pursue individuals need information about their ability. If such signals take
the form noted above, namely of wins and losses against others, the information
contained in these signals will be significantly influenced by the perception of
the other person's ability. It is natural to assume that different occupational
classes have different abilities-which would arise from individuals choosing
occupations according to their self assessment-and that children interact with
parents (more generally adults) from a particular occupational class. In such an
environment, the children of different occupational classes will have access to
different types of signals. In particular, those from occupational classes
requiring low ability will observe signals that compare them to the low ability
individuals. This will lead to a form of persistence in occupational choice. The
project explores this persistence in a rich model of types, contests, and
occupational choice, and compares it to stylized facts regarding persistence.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is ample evidence that individuals incorrectly
assess their own ability. The project explores how these incorrect assessments
spillover into incorrect assessments of others. The study begins by assuming
that individuals may either be correct about their own ability, or they may have
a bias; in particular they may either be over- or under-confident. If these
individuals are otherwise rational, then they will tend to over or under
evaluate those with whom they participate in contests. This in turn will lead
those who need to be assessed, say for promotion, to want to interact with
certain types of assessors, in order to bias their evaluations upwards. Despite
these errors, the increased interaction can improve assessment and thereby the
promotion process. Of course, biases may take other forms, and the research
explores in general the effect that biases in self-assessment have on the
assessment of others, and thereby on promotion processes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will have several contributions. It will
provide new models of persistence in occupational and social mobility. It will
also explore how biases in perception influence promotion and other decisions in
organizations. &lt;br/&gt;