* 0111057
* The Surface Archaeology of Southwestern Wyoming: A Pilot Project
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2001,10/31/2004
* Mary Lou Larson, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2004
* USD 74,564.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Mary Lou Larson and her
collaborators will combine field and laboratory research to develop an
archaeological data base for a large multi-county region within Southwest
Wyoming. In the course of many cultural resource management projects as well as
through basic archaeological research, data has been recorded for nearly 25,000
prehistoric sites in southwestern Wyoming. These include potentially valuable
information on individual types of artifacts as well as larger features such as
structures. These data are curated in the Wyoming Cultural Records Office and
available for potential research. However because of the method of storage - in
paper form in multiple filing cabinets - they are extremely difficult to use.
Collation of data on one specific distribution of one specific artifact type for
example can involve hundreds of hours culling through individual site reports.
An added difficulty rests in the fact that these materials, collected over a
period of decades by multiple individuals, may be of variable quality. In
preliminary work, Dr. Larson has organized this material and incorporated it in
standardized form into a Geographic Information System thus making it readily
available for analysis. In her NSF research, she and her team will continue this
process. In order to assess the accuracy of these data she will conduct limited
field research to compare actual and recorded spatial coordinates. Because one
basic use of the data is to examine distributions of features and artifact types
over space, and because observed distributions can be significantly affected by
geomorphological processes such as differential erosion and deposition, the team
will also examine the degree of distortion such factors induce. The GIS system
will allow incorporation of landform, vegetation and hydrological data from
other sources and thus permit researchers to examine cultural patterns within an
environmental context.

Dr. Larson notes that the Wyoming surface material provides an extensive record
for Archaic period hunters and gathers and that sites from multiple periods
allow one to trace changing land use and subsistence patterns over time. Wyoming
is unusual in the widespread presence of underground pit dwellings - a type of
house which most often is associated with more settled agricultural peoples. The
Wyoming record reveals that during the early Archaic period a complementary,
non-overlapping relationship is evident between pit dwellings and stone lined
storage pits. She believes this results from seasonal movement across the
landscape with different activities occurring in spatially segregated areas at
varying times of the year. She plans to use these features as a test case, both
to answer a significant anthropological question as well as to test the utility
of the Wyoming records and her GIS database as a research tool.

This work is important for several reasons. It will result in a data base of
potentially great utility. It will also provide a test case to evaluate the
research potential of state archaeological records and their incorporation into
a GIS system. The work will also shed new light into early American subsistence
adaptations.