* 0111344
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Mitigating the Deterioration of Monuments from the Effects of Evaporating Shallow Groundwater
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Richard Parizek, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2004
* USD 18,000.00

01111344&lt;br/&gt;Parizek&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a collaborative project between a US team headed by Dr. Richard Parizek,
Department of Geosciences at the Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania and an Egyptian team headed by Dr. Ahmed Swedan, Geological Survey
of Egypt, Cairo, Egypt. They plan to study the causes and means of combating
deterioration of ancient monuments due to rising ground water. Shallow
groundwater levels, coupled with concentrations of salt, dissolved solids, and
biological compounds, are causing rapid and significant deterioration of
monuments and other structures in Egypt. Monuments that have survived for
thousands of years are rapidly disintegrating, with temple reliefs and paintings
often being sacrificed because they are shallow and readily exfoliated. At
Hierakonpolis, a variety of monuments and materials are being degraded. For
example, the granite threshold block and its sandstone foundations have lost an
alarming amount of surface in the past 15 years. In order to mitigate these
problems, it is first necessary to determine the hydrogeologic conditions at
each site of interest. This involves measurements of the subsurface flow regime,
which typically is not known at the affected areas. Practical geotechnical
methods need to be developed for site-specific characterization and groundwater
flow modeling leading to recommended mitigation measurements. Once these methods
are shown to be effective, they can be applied to many sites by geotechnical
contractors in the private sector. The teams will use a combination of
geological, geophysical, geochemical and hydrologic methods to develop and
validate a flow model for the Hierakonpolis site that can be used to design a
practical mitigation plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The project supports
collaboration between two research teams of investigators, with extensive
experience in geosciences and in material sciences, to carry out a research
project of a major societal impact. The combination of these two sides is
essential to carry this fieldwork, to drill boreholes and collect samples
necessary for developing a groundwater flow model for this region in Upper
Egypt. Using the resources at the Pennsylvania State University, and those in
Egypt at the Geological Survey of Egypt, the National Research Center and at
Cairo University makes it possible to conduct the field work, the laboratory
analysis and to develop the models. The proposal meets INT objectives in
supporting collaborative research in areas of mutual interest. This project is
being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to
scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative
activities.