* 0111427
* Do Alternate Stable Community States Exist in the Gulf of Maine Rocky Intertidal Zone
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2008
* Mark Bertness, Brown University
* Continuing grant
* David Garrison
* 09/30/2008
* USD 480,001.00

It has recently been suggested that intertidal mussel beds and seaweed canopies
represent alternate community states on rocky shores in the Gulf of Maine. This
theoretically appealing idea hypothesizes that these shoreline habitats are
disturbance patch mosaics dominated by either seaweed or mussel communities, and
that the community occurring in a given habitat is stochastic and dependent on
the size of the original disturbance and recruit availability. Large
disturbances are postulated to be dominated by mussel beds and barnacles which
have widely dispersed larvae, while smaller disturbances are dominated by
seaweeds, which have more limited dispersal. Positive feedbacks are proposed to
maintain the stability of these two distinct community types. Dr. Bertness
tested this hypothesis on the shores of a tidal estuary in central Maine. These
habitats are conducive to exploring this idea because discrete mussel beds and
seaweed canopies occur in close proximity and are easily manipulated. The
results did not support the alternate stable state hypothesis. Instead, they
suggest that the occurrence of mussel beds and seaweed canopies is highly
deterministic. Largely independent of the size of artificial disturbances, they
found that mussel beds and seaweed canopies rapidly returned to their original
community type, but only in the absence of grazers. Seaweed canopies dominate
habitats with little water movement, whereas mussel beds dominate habitats with
high flows. In the absence of grazers, these communities predictably and rapidly
returned to their original state, but with grazers present, neither community
showed signs of recovery even after two years. In this project Dr. Bertness and
collaborators will examine the robustness and consequences of these findings. In
particular, they will: I. Continue monitoring experimental clearings to examine
the time course and trajectory of natural disturbances with grazers present and
examine the role of consumer refuges in the recovery of naturally occurring
mussel beds and seaweed canopies; II. Explore the hypothesis that intertidal
mussel and seaweed communities can represent alternate community states, but in
a narrower range of intermediate flow habitats; and III. Extend the generality
of the findings to coastal, wave-exposed habitats where the idea that mussel
beds and seaweed canopies can represent alternate states was initially
developed.

The notion that natural communities can represent stochastically determined
alternate stable states is an intellectually stimulating idea that has important
implications for understanding the structure and dynamics of natural systems and
for the management of marine and terrestrial ecosystems. Nonetheless, the very
existence of alternate stable community states in nature has been difficult to
establish. The work outlined in this project will critically evaluate the
alternate community stable state hypothesis in the Gulf of Maine rocky
intertidal zone, elucidate mechanisms underlying the stochastic and/or
deterministic nature of alternate stable states in this system and establish the
conditions where they are most likely to occur.