* 0111715
* The Politics of Identity and Democratic Values
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2004
* Paul Sniderman, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 06/30/2004
* USD 108,145.00

This award is an Accomplishment Based Renewal and allows the principal
investigator to continue a very productive stream of research on the general
problem of prejudice and politics in Western Europe. The researcher has
conducted three large-scale general population public opinion surveys, one in
Italy, one in the Netherlands, and one in France. The surveys are uniquely
cumulative in design. The Dutch study was expressly designed to respond to
theoretical and methodological questions in the measurement of cultural and
economic sources of prejudice raised by the Italian study. The French study was
expressly designed to extend the Dutch analysis of the political consequences of
intolerance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first extension of this research
concentrates on the Dutch study and focuses on the contemporary strains over
multiculturalism. It focuses particularly on three strands: the clash over group
interests, the concern over national identity, and conflicts over values built-
in to modern liberal democratic societies. It aims to show both how these three
sources of strain are tied together, yet nonetheless have distinct political
consequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second study, which concentrates on the
French investigation, focuses on democratic values under strain. Using a new
generation of experiments imbedded in opinion interviews, it explores in a way
not previously possible the willingness of citizens to abandon or qualify their
commitment to democratic values in the face of different forms of political and
social pressure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The third study, which takes advantage of
virtually all the data sets collected by the investigator, focuses on a theory
of political choice. As an alternative to the standard "bottom up" approach, it
aims to develop an explicitly political "top down" perspective, emphasizing the
role of strategic political actors and institutions in structuring the party
system and thereby the alternatives on offer to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator has made numerous outstanding
contributions to social and behavioral science literature on the topic of
prejudice and politics in Western Europe. His contributions have substantially
enhanced our understanding of the topic and this current award allows the
investigator to pursue further high quality research opportunities via the
Accomplishment Based Renewal mechanism.&lt;br/&gt;