* 0111885
* The Effect of Internet Car Shopping on Prices and Discrimination
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2008
* Fiona Scott Morton, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/2008
* USD 366,501.00

Internet referral services (IRS's) are web-based businesses that provide
information about the characteristics and market prices of new cars to
consumers, and allow them to request a price quote from an affiliated dealer in
the region. If the quote is satisfactory, the consumer can buy the car from that
dealer without further negotiation. IRS's sell subscriptions to one or two
dealers in a region in exchange for giving the dealer a stream of customer
leads. If the dealer does not sell to a sufficient proportion of the leads, the
IRS may terminate the dealer and contract with another dealer in the area.
&lt;br/&gt;Our dataset combines referral requests from Autobytel.com (the
leading IRS) in 1999 with new car transaction data from J.D. Power and
Associates that contain prices, car characteristics, and customer
characteristics. We compare the prices paid by consumers who did use
Autobytel.com and those who did not. We conjecture that online shoppers pay
lower prices because the IRS "bargains" on behalf of its customers by being
willing to move the group's purchases to another dealer. Also, the web site
provides information about current market prices, and this may also reduce
overcharging. In addition, the IRS may be contracting with more efficient
dealerships that sell at lower prices to all consumers.&lt;br/&gt;We find that
IRS users pay about 2% less for a given car than an "offline" consumer. However,
in that analysis we do not formally distinguish between a causal role for the
referral service and a selection effect. If customers who use the Internet are
more educated, for example, we expect them to achieve lower than average prices
regardless of the Internet. Alternatively, the Internet could be educating
customers who were previously not informed so they pay lower prices. This is
obviously a very important distinction both for social welfare and industry
structure. We therefore to use two different econometric techniques to establish
what the causal effect of an IRS is on the price that customers pay for new
cars. A second goal of the expanded research program is to create an index of
competition in the local dealer market to see if the IRS is "creating
competition" in markets where there is little existing competition.
&lt;br/&gt;The second project examines whether there is race and gender
discrimination in new car prices. Since we have individual-level information on
gender as well as on whether a consumer is Asian or Hispanic, we test if female,
Asian, and Hispanic buyers pay above or below average for a new car. To analyze
the prices paid by African-Americans we have no individual-level data and thus
rely on the probability that a customer is black according to census block
information.&lt;br/&gt;The final aspect of the project is the most exciting: to
integrate the race and ethnic discrimination results with the use of the
Internet. We plan to find out a) if minorities and women who use the Internet
pay prices that are closer to those paid by whites and men, respectively, and b)
if the Internet is causing the change. Our results have very important policy
implications. If use of the Internet can reduce the effects of racial
discrimination then the so-called "Digital Divide" is of even greater importance
and concern. Our results may demonstrate the benefits of Internet usage to
minority consumers, and inform the choice of policies to help disadvantaged
groups get Internet access.&lt;br/&gt;