* 0111069
* RUI - Functional Characterization of a Nematode Gene Related to the Class II bHLH Protein, ABF-1
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2004
* Craig Vierra, University of the Pacific
* Continuing Grant
* Joanne Tornow
* 08/31/2004
* USD 139,429.00

Basic helix-loop-helix proteins are important transcriptional regulators of
cellular proliferation and differentiation in organisms ranging from
invertebrates to vertebrates. Recently, a new gene closely related to the
mammalian basic helix-loop-helix protein activated B-cell factor 1 (ABF-1),
designated CeABF-1, was cloned from the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. The
objectives of the research include 1) investigating the function of the CeABF-1
gene; 2) elucidating the transcriptional properties of the CeABF-1 protein; 3)
identifying the target gene(s) regulated by CeABF-1. To accomplish these
specific goals, gene function and expression studies will be performed to
delineate the role of CeABF-1 in the nematode. The functional studies will
integrate a broad spectrum of genetic and biochemical techniques, including RNA
microinjections and the development of transgenic animals for expression
analyses. The transcriptional properties and target gene(s) regulated by CeABF-1
will be analyzed using DNA transfections, electrophoretic-mobility shift assays
and DNA microanalysis. This project will allow for the comparison of HLH gene
function in both nematodes and humans and identify conserved molecular pathways
important for cellular processes. The results of these studies will help to
elucidate the evolutionary as well as the biological relationship between the
nematode and human ABF-1 protein.

Helix-loop-helix (HLH) proteins are important transcriptional regulators of
cellular proliferation and differentiation in organisms ranging from
invertebrates to vertebrates. The importance of HLH proteins as potent mediators
of immune system function and muscle development has been well established. The
significance of these studies will allow for the determination of the biological
function of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans HLH gene, designated CeABF-1,
and will provide data that will help to elucidate the molecular mechanisms that
govern cell-restricted eukaryotic gene expression. This project will enhance the
knowledge of target gene(s) controlled by the protein CeABF-1, and provide an
understanding of the ancestral relationship between the worm CeABF-1 and human
homologue, activated B-cell factor 1 (ABF-1).