* 0111468
* Development of Algorithms for DFT Calculations of the Rate of Transitions In Ground and Excited States
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2005
* Hannes Jonsson, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 07/31/2005
* USD 318,000.00

Hannes Jonsson of the University of Washington is supported by the Theoretical
and Computational Chemistry Program to develop methods for calculating
transition rates in materials in combination with a plane-wave-based density
functional theory (DFT) description of the energetics. Methods for finding
mechanisms and transmission rates, such as the dimer method, climbing image-
nudged elastic band method, and optimal hyperplanar transition state theory,
will be explored and implemented. Methodologies will be applied to study
diffusion and growth in semiconductors, in particular the growth of
silicon/germanium surface mounds that may be useful in opto-electronic
applications. Simulations that combine DFT estimates of transmission rates and
kinetic Monte Carlo simulations of long time dynamics will be carried out to
enable careful comparisons to new experimental data. This project will also
begin developing techniques to calculate excited states in condensed matter. A
many-body perturbation expansion that builds in corrections to the DFT mean
field description will be tested on small molecules, and then applied to study
optical properties and photoinduced catalysis on titanium dioxide surfaces.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first principles prediction of technologically
important material properties is a longstanding goal. The combination of
efficient theoretical chemistry techniques and implementation on computer
clusters or parallel computers finally can bring this elusive goal within reach.
The outcomes of this research are anticipated to contribute to new knowledge of
quantum dots, which have technological promise for use as optical switches. As
well, studies of titanium dioxide photocatalysis are expected to improve
understanding of important applications for this material that include harmful
microorganism destruction, cancer cell inactivation, and oil spill cleanup.