* 0111941
* Dissociating Affect and Deliberation in Choice Processes
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2004
* Ellen Peters, Decision Science Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2004
* USD 141,586.00

Although many of the most important issues of our time (e.g., cleaning up a
nuclear waste site or choosing a medical procedure) involve thoughts and
feelings about decision options, relatively little is known about how affect
(feelings or emotional evaluations) and deliberation interact in such human
judgment and decision processes, particularly among older adults.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the proposed research, we use a new perspective to
examine how thoughts and feelings interact in decision making. Human decision
making is a complex phenomenon involving multiple components that may change
with age. By examining how older and younger adults make decisions in different
ways, we can build better theories of how our judgment and decision making might
change as we age. We suggest that the judgments and decisions of older adults
(compared to younger adults) may be influenced less by deliberation and more by
affect. As a result, older adults may produce different decisions than younger
adults (sometimes better, sometimes worse). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding from
this grant will allow us to pursue experiments that build on recent findings
about the role of affect and deliberation in the judgment and decision-making
processes of older and younger adults. This research will add to the growing
body of knowledge concerning how affective and deliberative ways of thinking may
interact and follow particular developmental paths. Studying the judgment and
decision processes of older adults has strong practical implications since the
quality of the decisions that older adults make impacts the quality of life that
they experience. Improving our understanding of older adult decision making will
undoubtedly provide great practical benefits by pointing the way toward aiding
and improving decisions. In addition to these practical benefits, coordinating
decision-making research with studies of age-related changes in memory, affect,
and other psychological processes may produce important scientific insights into
the mechanisms that underlie the judgments and decisions of older and younger
adults.&lt;br/&gt;