* 0111471
* RUI: Acquisition Of An Environmental Scanning Electron Microscope (ESEM) And Energy Dispersive Spectrometer (EDS)
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2004
* Frank McKinney, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2004
* USD 233,622.00

0111471&lt;br/&gt;Hageman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant, made through the
Major Research Instrumentation Program, supports the acquisition of an
Environmental Scanning Electron Microscope (FEI-Phillips XL30 ESEM-TMP) and
Energy Dispersive Spectrometer (EDAX CDU-UT), to be housed in the Electron
Microscopy Laboratory of the College of Arts and Sciences at Appalachian State
University. This instrument will significantly improve and expand research
opportunities for faculty and undergraduate students in Earth Science at
Appalachian State, other departments in the College, and the regional community.
The new ESEM will provide the following new capabilities not currently available
from our 16 year old conventional Hitachi S570 SEM. (1) imaging of uncoated
specimens; (2) elemental analysis and mapping with digital stage; (3) imaging of
hydrated specimens; (4) wide angle imaging of large specimens; (5) imaging and
analysis under cathode luminescence; (6) high magnification in both secondary
and backscattered electron modes; (7) production, storage, and network
distribution of high resolution digital image files for publication and image
analysis; (8) windows driven operation for easy access by a diverse user
population. The ESEM will support five primary researchers in the Department of
Geology, who have had previous NSF support. Initial projects supported by this
proposal include (1) Bryozoan Colonial Growth Habits: Macroevolutionary Patterns
in Morpho-ecospace (S.J. Hageman); (2) Ultra High Pressure and Temperature
Metamorphic Rocks (R.N. Abbott); (3) Climatic Variation and Source of Glacio-
marine Sediments (E.A. Cowan); (4) Eastern North American Cretaceous Bryozoans
(F.K. McKinney); and (5) Cement Stratigraphy in Carbonate Mud-mounds (B.C.
Schreiber). The instrument will also be used in research and course work by
faculty, graduate students and undergraduates in the departments of Geology,
Biology, Chemistry, Physics, Anthropology and Criminal Justice. This instrument
will provide an excellent focus for community outreach because its products are
visual, tangible and derived from state-of-the-art technology.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;