* 0111799
* Research in Microeconometric Methods and Their Applications
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Luojia Hu, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory N. Price
* 08/31/2002
* USD 19,999.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project proposes research on three related subjects in
theoretical and applied microeconometrics. The first study deals with estimation
of nonlinear dynamic panel data models. Panel data track individuals over time
and therefore offer us an opportunity to study an individual's dynamic behavior
while controlling for his/her (observed and unobserved) characteristics.
Econometric techniques for linear panel data models are well developed, but, in
general, our knowledge of nonlinear panel data models is still very limited. In
most cases, the key assumption is that the explanatory variables are strictly
exogenous, which essentially requires no dynamic feedback from the outcome
variable in one period to the explanatory variables in the next period (e.g. it
rules out the lagged dependent variable as an explanatory variable). This
assumption is not plausible in many empirical applications. For example, in an
earnings model, this assumption amounts to requiring that an individual's
earnings today do not affect his/her earnings tomorrow. One theme of the
proposed research is to relax this assumption for a particular nonlinear model,
namely the censored regression model, which is the appropriate model in the
presence of data top-coding. The proposed method is applied to the matched data
from the Current Population Survey and Social Security Administration (CPS-SSA)
Earnings Record to study the racial difference in earnings stability. In
particular, I empirically investigate whether the relative earnings stability
between black and white had changed before and after the Civil Rights Act of
1964.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Although a step forward, the first study considers
only one special form of endogeneity, namely, the presence of the lagged
dependent variable. As a result, the proposed method heavily relies on this
special structure. The goal of the second element of the proposed research is to
extend the basic theoretical idea to construct alternative estimators for models
with more general forms of endogeneity (e.g. predetermined regressors in the
panel data model and endogenous regressors in the cross-sectional model). The
proposed method is relevant in many empirical applications. For example, if we
are interested in estimating a life-cycle female labor supply model using panel
data, then the fertility variables, such as the number of children, are
predetermined instead of strict exogenous since a woman's labor supply decision
for today can affect her fertility decisions for tomorrow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
The third part of the project proposes a method for estimating duration models
using repeated cross-section data. More specifically, we estimate the
conditional probability of an individual leaving unemployment at a particular
point in time using repeated cross-section data on uncompleted unemployment
spells. The proposed method improves upon the existing estimators by relaxing a
stationarity assumption (i.e. we allow the compositions of the inflow of
individuals into unemployment to vary over time). We compare estimates between
using single and repeated cross-section data (on uncompleted unemployment
spells) as well as those using panel data to gauge the performance of our
estimator. We also extend the theoretical results to the competing risk models
that allow for multi-state exit at the end of an unemployment spell. Finally we
apply the proposed method to the Spanish Labor Force Survey data to investigate,
among other things, the effects of the introduction of the temporary contracts
in the mid 1980s on women's labor market experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; In
sum, the proposed research is mainly on the econometric methodology, but the
problems it tackles are relevant to many empirical applications. Therefore the
results from the proposed project will be important for our understanding of
many issues in economics and other social sciences.&lt;br/&gt;