* 0111123
* Collaborative Research:  Sunspots in the Laboratory
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2001,06/30/2003
* John Duffy, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2003
* USD 49,542.00

Economists have developed a theory of "sunspot" equilibrium to describe
situations&lt;br/&gt;where economic fluctuations are not driven by changes in
market fundamentals, but are&lt;br/&gt;instead due to extrinsic, non-fundamental
factors. This project involves the design of an&lt;br/&gt;experiment that will
explore whether and how such extrinsic factors can result in
market&lt;br/&gt;fluctuations, and whether the particular market institution
also plays a role.&lt;br/&gt;The experiment consists of two main treatments. In
the first, human subjects participate&lt;br/&gt;as buyers or sellers in a
computerized "double auction", where goods can be bought and&lt;br/&gt;sold
continuously over a fixed trading period at mutually agreed upon prices that
are&lt;br/&gt;observable as they occur to all participants. In the second "call
market" treatment,&lt;br/&gt;subjects submit private bids and offers, and a
centralized mechanism determines the&lt;br/&gt;single, market clearing price, as
well as the quantities that each participant can buy or&lt;br/&gt;sell. Thus,
the only information subjects receive in this environment is the
resulting&lt;br/&gt;market price and the quantity they were able to buy or sell
at this price.&lt;br/&gt;In both treatments, subjects face uncertainty in that
they are given two sets of values or&lt;br/&gt;costs for the goods they can buy
or sell; these two sets correspond to the"state" of the&lt;br/&gt;economy, and
are referred to as "high" or "low" in reference to the equilibrium price
in&lt;br/&gt;the two states. (the equilibrium quantity is the same in both
states). Initially, subjects are&lt;br/&gt;told the state of the economy in
advance, so that they become familiar with the two states&lt;br/&gt;for prices.
After several rounds, subjects are informed that the true state of the
economy,&lt;br/&gt;will henceforth be determined expost, after all trading is
completed. Furthermore, the rule&lt;br/&gt;for the determination of the state
will depend on the median trade price in the double&lt;br/&gt;auction
environment or on the analogous market clearing price in the call
market&lt;br/&gt;environment. If this price lies within a proscribed domain of
the equilibrium low price,&lt;br/&gt;then the state is declared to be low and if
it lies outside this domain, in that of the&lt;br/&gt;equilibrium high price,
then the state is declared to be high. Subjects are provided with
a&lt;br/&gt;potential coordination device (or sunspot realization) which takes
the form of a random&lt;br/&gt;announcement by the experimenter of the forecast
for the state of prices in the current&lt;br/&gt;period. Subjects are instructed
that this announcement has no binding consequences.&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary
findings suggest that subjects coordinate perfectly on the announcement
in&lt;br/&gt;the highly centralized call market environment but fail to do the
same in the more&lt;br/&gt;decentralized double auction environment. These
experimental findings if replicated,&lt;br/&gt;have significant implications for
the architecture of real financial markets.&lt;br/&gt;