* 0111282
* The Reactions of Elemental Mercury with Reactive Halogens
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2004
* Kirk Peterson, Washington State University
* Continuing grant
* raima larter
* 06/30/2004
* USD 296,000.00

Kirk Peterson of Washington State University is supported by the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry Program to carry out theoretical investigations of the
reactions of atomic mercury with reactive halogen species (X, HX, XO and X2
where X= chlorine, bromine, and iodine). High accuracy, large-scale potential
energy surfaces for both ground and low-lying electronically excited states will
be constructed using accurate ab initio electronic structure methods, i.e.
multireference configuration interaction and coupled cluster methods with large
one-particle basis sets. These results will be used to elucidate the
thermochemistry, spectroscopy, and reaction dynamics of the relevant species
involved. In calculations of potential energy surfaces, particular emphasis will
be given to an accurate recovery of both scalar relativistic and spin-orbit
effects. Given the lack of available information on nearly all of the systems,
this project has the potential to impact significantly the knowledge of gas-
phase mercury chemistry with reactive halogen species.

Because of its high biological toxicity and long atmospheric residence time,
mercury is considered to be a high priority among environmental pollutants.
Recently, the contamination of the Arctic ecosystem by mercury has been of
particular concern. In the atmosphere, mercury exists almost exclusively in the
gas phase and in its elemental form, but the amount of data on its chemical
reactions in the gas phase is surprisingly scarce. The outcomes of this project
are expected to provide information that will improve the understanding of
environmentally significant chemical reactions including mercury.