* 0111541
* Quasi- Concave Social Welfare Functions
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Uzi Segal, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Sandra L. Schneider
* 08/31/2002
* USD 50,000.00

Utilitarianism suggests that societies should be interested in maximizing the
sum of individual utilities. Modern objections to utilitarianism are that it
implies indifference to randomization. When society is indifferent between
giving an indivisible good to one of several individuals, nothing is gained by
choosing the recipient by a lottery. Nonlinear alternatives to utilitarianism
can solve this problem. Such alternatives use what is technically labeled as
'quasi concave social welfare functions.'&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Here we suggest
another difference between utilitarianism and these alternatives. Rather than
starting with situations of social indifference, we concentrate on situations of
extreme inequality, and investigate the implications utilitarian and non-
utilitarian have in these situations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Suppose society is
facing trade-off between reducing the number of those who are worse off and
improving their overall position. Both objects are desired, but often one comes
at the cost of the other. Our theoretical conjecture is that the more society
prefers randomization in symmetric situations, the more it will prefer improving
the position of those who are at the bottom at the cost of increasing their
numbers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the less theoretical part of this research, we
would like to establish the following claim: free, liberal societies move in the
same direction as the one suggested by quasi concave preferences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Charity&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Suppose society is composed
of two groups, `haves' and `have nots.' We have a given budget to help the
second group, and the choice is between two policies: "Individual help" that
takes individuals from the second group and transfer them into the first, and
"community help," where the money is spent on improving facilities for the
second group. We can also choose any feasible combination of the
two.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increasing the amount spent on community help means
less money for individual help, therefore higher probability of being at the
lower group, but the welfare of all individuals of this group is increasing with
the money spent on such programs. We predict that a quasi-concave society will
prefer the community to the individual help.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cruel and
Unusual Punishment&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Harsh punishment is more deterring than
mild one. By using such punishments we can reduce the number of people who will
be punished, and improve the position of those who do not commit crimes, at the
cost of reducing the welfare of those who are at the bottom. Our conjecture is
that the utilitarian society will use harsher penalties than the quasi-concave
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Safety and
Prevention&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sometimes, quasi-concave societies choose
outcomes whose optimality is questionable. Suppose society can choose between
improving public safety, or spending money on saving people who had an accident.
Suppose further that more people could be saved the first way. It follows from
our conjectures that for a given budget, the quasi concave society will spend
less on prevention and more on saving people after an accident happens than the
utilitarian society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;