* 0111650
* MARGINS: NARS-Baja: A Five-Year Deployment of Broadband Seismic Instruments around the Gulf of California
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Robert Clayton, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 07/31/2004
* USD 156,070.00

Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NARS-Baja: A 5-year Deployment of
Broadband Seismic Instruments Around the Gulf of
California&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NARS-Baja is a 5-year deployment of seismic
instruments along the Baja-California peninsula and Sonora province in Mexico.
This network fills a gap of seismic instrumentation between present-day networks
in California and southern Mexico Seismic data from NARS-Baja is key to
constrain the structure of the crust and mantle and to study earthquake faulting
in the Gulf of California region, where active rifting is taking place. NARS-
Baja involves collaboration between the California Institute of Technology
(Pasadena, USA), CICESE (Ensenada. Mexico), and the University of Utrecht
(Utrecht, The Netherlands). The first seismic instruments of NARS-Baja will be
installed in October of 2001.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NARS-Baja network shares
many similarities with other passive-source deployments, commonly funded by the
PASSCAL program of the National Science Foundation. However, in some aspects
NARS-Baja stands out.&lt;br/&gt;(1) NARS-Baja will be in operation for at least
5 years to ensure that a large seismic database is constructed.&lt;br/&gt;(2)
NARS-Baja bridges the gap in seismic stations between present-day broadband
networks in California and the UNAM network in southern Mexico. In combination
with these networks, NARS-Baja yields an unprecedented 3000-km long array along
the tectonically active Pacific margin of Mexico and California.&lt;br/&gt;(3)
The NARS-Baja data will be made available via the Internet from the IRIS data
center as soon as it is received and checked. This promotes involvement by the
entire research community.&lt;br/&gt;