* 0111405
* Justice, Faith and Gender: Muslim Women's Responses to Domestic Violence in Kazakhstan
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* Daniel Maier-Katkin, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher J. Zorn
* 07/31/2003
* USD 56,287.00

This research examines how Muslim activists utilize traditional gender roles and
Islamic principles to offer victim-survivors of domestic violence alternatives
to the criminal justice system in the Central Asian Republic of Kazakhstan. The
central research question guiding the proposed project is: How do Muslim and
non-Muslim service providers define and respond to domestic violence, its
victims and its perpetrators through gender, religious and ethnic constructs?
Theoretical approaches from cultural anthropology addressing the role of agency
at the intersection of gender, nation, and religion will frame the analysis of
both Muslim and non-Muslim responses to violence. The methodology for the
proposed project will combine ethnographic observation with semi-structured
interviews and a comparison of domestic violence cases collected from both
Muslim and non-Muslim service providers. Interviews with service providers will
be used to interpret the specific responses to victims in each case of
intervention collected and to elicit information regarding the normative
principles associated with particular responses. Ethnographic observation will
address both ideal beliefs and actual practices. The project will reveal how
certain culture-specific and informal responses are either more, or
alternatively, less effective in reaching the goals of providing safety and
services to victims of domestic violence. The study will shed light on how these
informal interventions are shaped by Muslim women's negotiations between
justice, gender and faith.