* 0111355
* RUI: A Longitudinal Study Of Cognitive And Motivational Determinants Of Children's Acquisition Of Expertise
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2001,12/31/2001
* Yun Dai, University of Central Missouri
* Standard Grant
* Rodney R. Cocking
* 12/31/2001
* USD 61,833.00

The emergent literature on expertise demonstrates the powerful role of
deliberate practice in the development of high-level expertise. Yet the question
remains as to whether effects of such practice and dedicated effort are
constrained by individual differences in cognitive aptitude, particularly when
highly demanding intellectual domains are involved, and how cognitive and
motivational factors interact with each other in skill development. The
objectives of this study are to (1) describe the intra-individual trajectories
of skill development in the game of Go for a two-year period and inter-
individual differences (variance) in these developmental trajectories among a
group of elementary school children (ages 6-11); (2) determine the predictive
efficacy of psychometric measures of cognitive aptitude (fluid ability), as well
as initial success levels, intrinsic interest, and deliberate practice, with
respect to the rate of skill development; and (3) identify developmental
constraints of cognition and motivation on the development of expertise in
complex skill/knowledge domains. &lt;br/&gt;To achieve the above objectives, a
longitudinal design with multiple age cohorts will be employed, and structural
equation modeling will be used to model the latent growth (rate of skill
development), reciprocal relationships among cognitive aptitude, initial success
levels, intrinsic interest, and deliberate practice, and their effects on
individual differences in the rate of the acquisition of expertise.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;