* 0111037
* Can Interspecific Variation in Whole-Plant Resource Economies and Underlying Physiological and Morphological Traits Provide a Mechanistic Basis for Forest Composition?
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2004
* Michael Walters, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Winner
* 09/30/2004
* USD 444,771.00

Human activities are substantially influencing the availability of nitrogen,
calcium&lt;br/&gt;and water in north temperate forests. These changes may
strongly affect forest composition and dynamics because water, nitrogen and
calcium limit - in a species-specific manner -the growth and survival of trees
in northern temperate forests. The ability to predict forest responses will be
aided by characterizing the functional mechanisms that underlie tree species
differences in growth and survival across soil resource gradients and how these
species traits interact with light availability in determining species
competitive abilities. We hypothesize that seedlings of tree species with
greater growth and survival in low soil resource environments have collections
of traits that enhance whole-plant use efficiency of and access to limiting soil
resources, that these traits underlie adaptation to low soil resources, and that
these traits occur at a tradeoff with shade tolerance and/or high light growth
rates in high soil resource environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A seedling
transplant experiment to field plots and a closely linked potted seedling
experiment are proposed to address these hypotheses. Both experiments will use
the same nine broad-leaved deciduous species that are common in northern
temperate forests, but that vary in abundance across light and soil resource
environments. For the field experiment, seedlings have been transplanted into
fertilized (Ca, nitrogen, Ca + nitrogen) and unfertilized plots distributed
across variation in light and independent landscape-level gradients of water and
nutrients in glaciated northwestern lower Michigan. Over the three-year duration
of the experiment, we will monitor seedling growth and survival and measure
whole-plant morphological and physiological traits that we hypothesize underlie
species differences in performance. The outdoor plastic pot experiment will
allow us to more thoroughly examine fine root physiology and dynamics than could
be accomplished in the field experiment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collectively these
data will allow us to determine: 1) species specific growth and survival
responses to natural gradients of nitrogen, calcium, water and light; 2) with
fertilized plots, the degree to which N and Ca limit growth and survival and how
it varies over the landscape gradient; 3) interspecific variation in access to,
and use efficiency of nitrogen, calcium and water; 4) the physiological and
morphological components of whole-plant resource economies that are associated
with species differences in access to, and use efficiency of soil resources; 5)
whether interspecific variation in whole-plant resource economies and related
traits underlie variation in growth and survival at low soil resource
availability; 6) interspecific trade-offs in resource-based growth and survival
and the particular morphological / physiological traits underlying species
differences. &lt;br/&gt;