* 0111245
* Spectroscopic Studies of Anion Hydration and Intracluster Photoreactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2001,12/31/2006
* Mark Johnson, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 12/31/2006
* USD 754,800.00

Dr. Mark A. Johnson of Yale University is funded for his research on
spectroscopic studies of anion hydration and intracluster photoreactions by the
Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division. Survey spectra of band
origins via a mass-selected argon matrix isolation scheme will be recorded and
analyzed. The clusters studied will be grown in an argon cluster and mass
selected before its spectrum is scanned with an IR laser. When the laser is
tuned to a resonance of the embedded complex, the absorpotion of a photon leads
to heating. Evaporation of several argon atoms leads to cooling. Mass is readily
determined by mass spectrometry. The structure and assembly mechanism for
hydration and small water network formation around dihalides, trihalides, and
organic functional groups such as carboxylates will be elucidated in such survey
spectra. The fine structure hidden beneath argon-mediated spectra at rotational
resolution will be obtained by using two-color laser methods, and the rotational
structure will be used to refine the structures of the
complexes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The solvation of anions by water molecules is
one of the most basic aspects of physical chemistry and an extremely important
phenomenon in nature and everyday life (e.g., the use of salt to clear highways
of snow and ice is an important public safety issue in the northeast). The
detailed and simple hydration reactions that will be studied will greatly
advance our understanding of hydration chemistry and how to study similar
complexes and chemistry involving other compounds.