* 0111737
* Quantifying the Lock-in Effect in a Dynamic Industry
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2002
* April Franco, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* LAURA RAZZOLINI
* 07/31/2002
* USD 20,000.00

The goal of this research is to understand why incumbent firms sometimes are
followers in using new technology, even when they were instrumental in
developing it. The evidence suggests that they face a larger opportunity cost
than entering firms. Incumbents are locked in to older technologies because of
their higher productivity in using older technologies, while entering firms can
only use the new technology. The primary goal is to determine how large this
lock-in effect is. The data used is from the rigid drive industry. This industry
is well-suited for this exercise, since technology advances are rapid and there
has been evidence of both situations where incumbents have lagged behind in the
use of new technology and where they have been the first to use new
technology.&lt;br/&gt; Simulating the model to approximate the data will provide
information on what changes in the environment lead to the lock-in effect. In
the model, as the relative value of the product produced using the new
technology increases, the lock-in effect tends to decrease. However, the
simulation of the model can provide us with direct evidence of how much the
relative value must increase, given the other parameters, in order to eliminate
the lock-in effect. A similar experiment can be run with changes in
productivity.&lt;br/&gt; Computationally, this means solving the equilibrium
model with many agents and calculating the difference in the value of an
incumbent firm from switching to the newest technology. This is a formidable
task as the agent's productivity using a given technology and the distribution
of the agents' productivity using a given technology are state variables.
Because the output from the computed model must approximate the data, this means
repeating this task as the program searches for the appropriate values of the
state variables, as well as the other parameters for the model.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;