* 0111198
* Structure and Thermodynamics of Quasicrystals
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Michael Widom, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 06/30/2005
* USD 210,000.00

0111198&lt;br/&gt;Widom&lt;br/&gt;Aluminum-rich alloys containing transition
metals form intricate crystal structures and quasicrystals. These alloys display
unusual and useful mechanical properties such as low coefficients of friction,
great hardness at low temperatures, and ductility at high temperatures.
Quasicrystals already strengthen surgical alloys and coat surfaces of frying
pans. Further applications such as coatings for ball bearings have been
proposed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The greatest interest in quasicrystals lies in
the fundamental scientific issues they raise. Coexistence of sharp diffraction
peaks with crystallographically forbidden decagonal and icosahedral symmetry
posed the paradox that initially drew researchers to the field. After
recognizing that quasiperiodicity allows such symmetries, interest turned to
explaining the origin and nature of quasiperiodic order. This problem, which
remains unsolved today, is the focus of this theoretical
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior research applied methods of total energy
calculations using interatomic potentials and full ab-initio calculations to
intermetallic alloys. Total energy calculations were incorporated into
sophisticated Monte Carlo computer techniques known as quasilattice gas
simulations. These methods were developed to predict structures of AlCuCo and
AlNiCo decagonal quasicrystal phases, achieving excellent qualitative agreement
with experimental structural data. These methods reveal fundamental excitations
in addition to optimal, energy minimizing, structures. In principle, the entire
thermodynamic evolution with temperature and composition can be
obtained.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current grant builds on this success by
studying ternary decagonal phases. Accurate atomistic models and reliable energy
calculations will be used to examine matching rule energetics and the coupling
of adjacent decagonal layers. Detailed quantitative comparisons will be made of
models with experimental data. The basic techniques used for decagonal phases
will be adapted to stable icosahedral phases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development
of abstract random tiling models continues with study of high codimension
tilings as model amorphous structures and study of codimension-1 tilings as
models of stacked membranes.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;Aluminum-rich alloys
containing transition metals form intricate crystal structures and
quasicrystals. These alloys display unusual and useful mechanical properties
such as low coefficients of friction, great hardness at low temperatures, and
ductility at high temperatures. Quasicrystals already strengthen surgical alloys
and coat surfaces of frying pans. Further applications such as coatings for ball
bearings have been proposed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The greatest interest in
quasicrystals lies in the fundamental scientific issues they raise. Coexistence
of sharp diffraction peaks with crystallographically forbidden decagonal and
icosahedral symmetry posed the paradox that initially drew researchers to the
field. After recognizing that quasiperiodicity allows such symmetries, interest
turned to explaining the origin and nature of quasiperiodic order. This problem,
which remains unsolved today, is the focus of this theoretical
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current grant continues the study of ternary
decagonal phases. Accurate atomistic models and reliable energy calculations
will be used to examine matching rule energetics and the coupling of adjacent
decagonal layers. Detailed quantitative comparisons will be made of models with
experimental data. The basic techniques used for decagonal phases will be
adapted to stable icosahedral phases.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;