* 0111295
* US Surface Ocean - Lower Atmosphere Study (SOLAS) Workshop
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2001,01/31/2003
* Patricia Matrai, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 01/31/2003
* USD 20,174.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0111295&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will
support a science-planning workshop on the biogeochemical and physical processes
controlling climate relevant compounds (CRCs) in the Surface Ocean-Lower
Atmosphere (SOLA) region. This workshop will initiate the development of a
science plan for a US Surface Ocean-Lower Atmosphere Study (SOLAS). US SOLAS
will be part of the international SOLAS, which is currently planned as a new
international interfacial program by the IGBP, SCOR and CACGP. The international
SOLAS has already been approved by SCOR and IGBP. This workshop will be
structured around several interelated fundamental science issues in
ocean/atmosphere biogeochemical coupling:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-- The Surface
Ocean-Lower Atmosphere Sulfur Cycle&lt;br/&gt;-- Radiation and Photochemistry in
the Surface Ocean-Lower Atmosphere&lt;br/&gt;-- Boundary Layer Dynamics of CO2
and other climate relevant gases&lt;br/&gt;-- Atmospheric Connections with the
Marine Nitrogen Cycle&lt;br/&gt;-- Boundary Layer Physics
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through discussions in the five science issue areas above,
the overall objectives of the workshop will be to: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;--
Summarize recent advances in quantifying fluxes of CRCs in the SOLA region.
&lt;br/&gt;-- Identify critical and addressable knowledge gaps to predict future
concentrations of CRCs in the lower marine atmosphere. &lt;br/&gt;-- Prioritize
which inter- and multi-disciplinary studies will further our understanding of
controls on the concentrations and fluxes of CRCs in this boundary region.
&lt;br/&gt;-- Further the development of a US science plan for study of the SOLA
region and evaluate how such an effort would interface with other national and
international science initiatives such as the U.S. Carbon Cycle Science Plan
(CCSP), the IGBP International Global Atmospheric Chemistry (IGAC) project and
the international SOLAS. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The atmospheric concentrations of
many CRCs are affected by physical, biological, and chemical processes in the
SOLA region. Models suggest that this region is particularly susceptible to
climate change, and that changes in this region can affect global concentrations
of CRCs. Forecasting future levels of the CRCs thus requires better knowledge of
processes in the SOLA and how the processes there will change under various
climate change scenarios. Many processes in the SOLA region are closely linked
on both sides of the air-water interface and must be investigated in a
comprehensive interdisciplinary fashion. Advances have been made over the last
decade in the study of the relevant processes, but a holistic and interlinking
view of these processes has been lacking. The need for such an approach has been
amply documented by increasing evidence of the interconnectivity of
biogeochemical and physical cycles. Some processes, such as the effect of
aeolian deposition of trace nutrients on the surface ocean's carbon cycle, have
received increasing attention. Others, such as the effect of ocean-derived
aerosol particles on lower atmosphere oxidation efficiency are just becoming
apparent. To quantify these climate-relevant processes a partnership between
scientists investigating the surface ocean and lower atmosphere is necessary.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing a program that crosses traditional disciplinary
boundaries is challenging and requires significant community input from
investigators who have not routinely interacted in the past. The proposed
workshop is one avenue to foster such interactions. As with previous
interdisciplinary efforts, such as JGOFS, the returns are high as scientific
breakthroughs are often accomplished by thinking "outside the box"[or in this
case reservoir]. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;