* 0111058
* Identifying New Open Reading Frames Involved in Redox Regulation and Photosystem II Assembly in Thylakoid Membranes
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Willem Vermaas, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 08/31/2005
* USD 335,000.00

With the availability of ever increasing amounts of genomic sequence
information, the old adage "the more we know, the more we know that we don't
know" rings true. Of the thousands of genes in prokaryotes, close to half code
for proteins of as yet unknown function. Whereas some of these may code for
structural proteins, many unidentified open reading frames are expected to
encode important regulatory proteins involved with assembly or stabilization of
functional protein complexes. Surprisingly, over the past years it has become
clear that many of these putative proteins of unknown function do not have
easily recognizable counterparts even in relatively closely related organisms.
Yet the functional identification of proteins involved in regulation or
stabilization of physiological processes is of major importance in understanding
the molecular physiology and metabolism of an organism as a function of its
genomic information. Fairly comprehensive cosmid interruption libraries that
each contain 30-45 kb fragments of genomic DNA from the yanobacterium
Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 into which transposons have been integrated at random
sites will be used to identify new genes involved in photosynthesis. Such
transposon interruption libraries are available for about 90 different cosmids,
together covering more than 80% of the Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 genome.
Synechocystis strains lacking photosystem I, the major sink for electrons in the
plastoquinone pool in the thylakoid membrane, will be transformed with these
interruption libraries and transformants will be screened for high-light
tolerance. Photosystem I-less strains are light-sensitive because over-reduction
of the plastoquinone pool in the thylakoid membrane, which occurs at high light
intensity, apparently is lethal. A second approach will use pseudorevertants
(second-site mutants restoring a particular phenotype that can be selected for
positively). The two approaches (random inactivation of genes in a relatively
small region of the genome resulting in positively selectable phenotypes, and
pseudorevertant mapping using genomic restriction maps) together provide an
excellent way to link specific open reading frames to specific functions. As
this approach uses the appearance of specific phenotypes as the first selection
criterion and as identification of the affected gene is a simple second step,
this project provides a powerful means to identify unknown open reading frames
affecting electron flow around the plastoquinone pool in thylakoid membranes.
Because a clear phenotype exists, work on mutants that do not segregate wild-
type and mutant genome copies or that do not show a phenotype (often a source of
frustration in targeted reverse-genetics approaches) is essentially eliminated.
This project will contribute significantly to the identification of new open
reading frames whose products are involved in processes such as redox regulation
of the plastoquinone pool or assembly and stability of photosystem II. It is
anticipated that the function of a number of unidentified genes relating to
photosynthesis will be found that have not been identified by other means.