* 0111291
* Collaborative Research Testing Affect Control Theory:  Restoring the Challenged Identities of Others
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2004
* Dawn Robinson, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2004
* USD 129,981.00

The investigators will conduct a series of experiments that focus on crucial
substantive implications of modeling social interaction as the result of a
cybernetic process of meaning control whereby actors behave so as to maintain
meanings in the situation. Affect Control Theory describes a control system
between identities and actions, with identity meanings acting as a reference
level for interpreting social interactions. Specifically, it suggests that
people will not only try to maintain their own identities, but will also strive
to restore the identities of others with whom they are interacting. The theory
also incorporates the restorative actions of other actors into the model. If
another person in the interaction takes a restorative action, it may restore the
meanings so that no further reparation is necessary. The studies described here
propose to test these key predictions that differentiate Affect Control Theory
from the other major control perspective. Study one challenges (negatively
deflects) the identity of an alter, and tests to see whether this challenge
evokes restorative behavior from ego. Study two creates an atypically positive
interaction for the alter, to see if this evokes negative behavior by ego toward
the alter (as predicted to be restorative of original meanings). Study 3 draws
on pre-test results that indicate two alternative means of restoring another's
challenged identity. Here, the investigator use computer-regulated interaction
to make available alternative means of restoring another's identity. The
prediction involves the substitutability of different behaviors for meaning
restoration. Study four elaborates the substitutability of restorative action
hypothesis. The investigators will test whether or not a restorative act by one
actor affects the probability of another actor's engaging in a restorative act.
Study five examines whether or not the identity of the actors influences the
effect of the restorative behavior. Taken together, the five experiments explore
how we go about maintaining the identities of others, and how the social
situation in which we are embedded affects those restorative
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;