* 0111630
* Local Spillovers, Externalities and Sorting of Households by Race and Income in Locational Equilibrium
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2007
* Holger Sieg, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 09/30/2007
* USD 236,648.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, we investigate the determinants and
consequences of household residential location decisions. In particular, we
study factors leading to stratification of households across communities by
income, demographic characteristics, and preferences. For example, households
may choose communities based on housing prices and the quality of local public
goods and amenities such as education, public safety, and environmental quality.
In addition, preferences for income, race, or other demographic characteristics
of neighbors may play a role in household location choices. We also investigate
how residential choices of individuals affect neighborhood and community
outcomes. Such effects may operate through collective (e.g., voting) decisions
that affect expenditures on education, police, and other public services.
Effects may arise more directly via neighborhood effects-interactions among
individuals that affect the character and quality of neighborhoods and the
services they provide. For example, parental involvement and peer effects both
within and outside schools may affect children's educational achievement and
social development. Interactions within neighborhoods may also affect public
safety and the quality of the neighborhood environment. Choices of individuals
may also affect satisfaction of others with a neighborhood if households care
about income, race, and other demographic characteristics of neighbors. A
particular focus of our work, then, is to understand the interaction of
preferences for neighborhood demographic composition and local public goods in
determining the sorting of population by race and other characteristics across
communities. We also investigate the importance of spillover effects and
externalities within communities and across neighboring
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our contributions are both to development of
new methods and to application of those methods. In previous research, we and
others have developed strategies for studying stratification in models that
impose considerable a priori structure on the patterns of household sorting
across communities and associated variation in housing prices and public service
quality. In particular, such models imply a common ordering across communities
of household incomes, housing prices, and public service quality. While these
models provide many valuable insights and have considerable predictive power,
they are nonetheless restrictive. In particular, they allow for relatively
limited variation across individuals in demographic characteristics and
preferences, and, where multiple local public goods are present, they imply a
common ordering of qualities across communities for the various goods. Our
research advances the state of the art by developing models and computational
and econometric methods that permit consideration of multiple observed and
unobserved characteristics of individuals and multiple local public goods and
amenities. The framework that we are developing also accommodates neighborhood
effects and spillovers across neighborhoods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Efforts to
understand the adjustments of heterogeneous households to spatial differences in
local public goods, environmental amenities, and neighborhood quality have
important policy implications. Our comprehensive analysis of the sorting and
mixing of households provides improved understanding of racial segregation and
income stratification observed in metropolitan areas. Our framework also permits
investigation of the effects of large-scale changes such as tax limitations,
school finance equalization programs, changes in environmental quality, and
falling crime rates. In particular, our approach permits investigation of how
such changes affect location decisions of households, how gains and losses
arising from the changes are distributed across households, and how the changes
affect the distribution of housing prices across communities.&lt;br/&gt;