* 0111617
* Collagen Mimetic Structures for Novel Biomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2004
* Murray Goodman, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2004
* USD 300,000.00

The area of collagen research has developed into an important focus for
biomaterials technology. The search for robust and diverse collagen-based
biomaterials has expanded into areas of drug delivery systems, ocular devices,
wound healing therapies and artificial organs. In the Goodman laboratories,
synthetic and biophysical strategies have been developed to design and
investigate the properties of triple helical collagen mimetic structures as
candidate biomaterials. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;As an expansion of early work
with n-isobutylglycine (Nleu) incorporated into the collagen trimeric building
blocks Gly-Pro-Nleu and Gly-Nleu_Pro, fluorinated residues fluoroproline or
N-(hexafluoro)isobutylglycine will now be incorporated into tripeptide building
blocks. Their effects on triple-helical stability will be investigated by a
series of biophysical measurements. The biophysical analysis includes
temperature-dependent optical rotation measurements, circular dichroism (CD) and
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, molecular modeling, as well as
studies of the thermodynamics of triple helix folding and hydrations. Biological
profiles will be assessed by collaborators at Integra Life Sciences and the
group of Andrea Tenner at the University of California, Irvine. In addition to
novel building blocks, templates have been employed to enhance the stability of
triple helices. Tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane (TRIS) has been successfully
derivatized to create collagen mimetic arrays. The additional amine functional
group provides a point of attachment to surfaces and other reactive molecules.
The TRIS-terminated collagen structures will be utilized to create ditemplated
molecules in which the collagen peptide chains are anchored at both the N- and
C-termini. Ditemplated collagen units can be linked together in a chain as
precursors for the formation of nanostructures (rod-like polymers). In line with
template research, orthogonally protected scaffolds will be introduced in order
to assemble heterotrimeric collagen structures to which unique biologically
relevant peptide chains can be attached. This design will result in collagen
mimetics that elicit specific biological responses to mimic natural collagen
proteins such as collagen type I or the defense collagen protein C1q.&lt;br/&gt;