* 0111481
* A Study of Geographic Information Technology Use in Collaborative Water Resource Planning
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2001,04/30/2005
* Piotr Jankowski, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Gregory H. Chu
* 04/30/2005
* USD 155,987.00

The increasing involvement of stakeholder groups in solving spatial decision
problems has created a need for information technology capable of supporting
collaborative spatial decision making. The goal of this project is to develop a
better understanding of how groups of stakeholders may use geospatial technology
to enhance collaborative approach to problem solving and decision making. Such
knowledge is necessary in order to develop geospatial technology support tools
capable of accommodating diverse participants involved in solving location-based
decision problems. This project will use a field experiment approach to study
the dynamics of collaborative work and decision making supported by geospatial
information technology. The experiment will involve true stakeholders invited to
engage in a realistic decision problem of water management planning in the Boise
River basin in southwestern Idaho. Two groups each with 10 participants will be
used: the control group will be exposed only to traditional support tools such
as traditional maps, whereas the experimental group will be exposed to
collaborative decision support tools such as geographic information system (GIS)
-based maps and three-dimensional visualizations. The human-computer-human
interaction process during the experiment will be captured using professional
video cameras. A tested social-behavioral science technique called "interaction
coding" will be employed to compile data logs from the experiment and
exploratory sequential data analysis techniques will be used to analyze the
data. Parametric and non-parametric statistical procedures will be used to test
a number of research hypotheses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dealing with location-
based decision problems in an open manner is becoming more important as
stakeholder participation increases in land use, natural resource, and
environmental decision making. The primary rationale for enhanced stakeholder
participation in environmental decision making is based on the democratic maxim
that those affected by a decision should participate directly in the decision
making process. The project results are expected to expand knowledge about the
impacts of geospatial information technology on collaborative decision processes
engaging diverse groups of stakeholders. Moreover, the project will help develop
and share a better understanding of the integration needs for information
technology involving geographic information systems, decision models, and group
collaboration support tools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;