* 0111112
* RUI: Molecular Mechanisms for Physiological Variations in the Swimming Musculature of Fishes
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2004
* David Coughlin, Widener University
* Standard Grant
* Ione Hunt Von Herbing
* 08/31/2004
* USD 165,777.00

&lt;br/&gt;Axial swimming in fishes is powered by the myotome, the musculature
that usually constitutes the majority of the animal's mass. The myotome is
composed of both red or aerobic muscle fibers and white or anaerobic muscle
fibers, with the white muscle often comprising 90% and red muscle 10% or less of
the swimming musculature. Slow, steady swimming is powered by the lateral strips
of red muscle that run down each side of the animal. Alternating waves of
muscular contraction pass down the red muscle from head to tail, leading to
oscillation of the body and/or tail and resulting in forward thrust.
&lt;br/&gt;Research over the last decade on the function of red or aerobic
muscle during steady, axial swimming has revealed a variety of patterns of power
production. In some fish species, the power for swimming is generated in equal
amounts by each longitudinal position (e.g. eels, mackerel and tuna), while
others are theorized to generate much higher mechanical power from the anterior
myotome (e.g. carp). Lastly, several species have been shown to power swimming
primarily with the posterior myotome (e.g. scup, rainbow trout and bass). In
most of the species studied the anterior myotome experiences lower muscle
strains, longer activation periods and shorter phase shifts of muscle activation
relative to muscle shortening, as compared to posterior muscle. These muscle
activity conditions limit power production by the anterior myotome during steady
swimming. However, the contraction kinetics of the red muscle also vary along
the length of most fishes, and these variations in the contractile properties
can mitigate the impact of disadvantageous activation conditions. For instance,
faster kinetics (e.g. rates of relaxation and, in some species, rates of
activation) allows anterior muscle to produce more power under a given set of
activation conditions than posterior muscle.&lt;br/&gt; The goal of this
research program is to understand the basis for variations in swimming form in
different fish species. This proposal focuses at the molecular and muscle
physiology levels and addresses the relationship of contraction kinetics to the
protein composition of muscle. Since understanding the patterns of power
production during swimming requires knowledge of the kinetics of that muscle, I
propose to measure the contraction kinetics of fish red muscle and to determine
the molecular correlates of longitudinal variations in kinetics. The proposal
will pursue two objectives.&lt;br/&gt;First, what are the molecular mechanisms
for physiological variations in the swimming musculature of rainbow trout?
Several molecular techniques will be used to determine if previously observed
longitudinal variations in contraction kinetics and power production are
associated with variations in the molecular structure of swimming muscle.
Molecular techniques will be developed to screen the aerobic swimming muscle of
trout to see if longitudinal differences in both activation and relaxation rates
correlate with variations in the protein composition of the muscle. Several
muscle proteins will be targeted, including troponin, tropomyosin and myosin.
&lt;br/&gt; Second, do the patterns of molecular variation in the red muscle
vary between species? Axial based swimming in fishes varies widely, from stiff-
bodied swimming in tuna and mackerel to the high body curvature of swimming
eels. This research proposal extends the analysis of both contraction kinetics
and molecular structure to several new species that vary in swimming mode and
patterns of power production. Little is known of the patterns of contraction
kinetics and muscle composition amongst fishes in general. For this objective,
the same sorts of molecular approaches will be used. However, physiological
measurements of muscle contractile properties will also be made, including
measurements of activation and relaxation rates and shortening velocity. The
targeted species include eel, mackerel, largemouth bass and scup.&lt;br/&gt;