* 0111248
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Interfacial Chemistry Analysis of Wastepaper Deinking Processes with Fatty Alcohol Ethoxylates
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Jan Miller, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2004
* USD 24,852.00

0111248&lt;br/&gt;Miller&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a collaborative project between Dr. Jan D. Miller, Department of
Metallurgical Engineering, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah and Dr.
Ahmed Yehia, Mineral Benficiation Department, Central Metallurgical Research and
Development Institute, Helwan, Cairo, Egypt. They plan to study the fundamental
aspects of wastepaper deinking in the presence of modern surfactants, fatty
alcohol ethoxylates. The adsorption of these compounds on the surfaces involved
in wastepaper processing will be studied at the molecular scale using soft-
contact atomic force microscopy. Understanding of interaction forces between
wastepaper components in the presence of fatty alcohol ethoxylates, necessary
for further improvement in deinking technology, will be achieved by colloidal
probe atomic force microscopy study. These results will be correlated with
agglomeration tests, microcolumn flotation and bench-scale flotation of
wastepaper pulp in a Denver-type cell. Also the relationship between molecular
structure of the fatty alcohol ethoxylates and the conditions necessary for
optimization of industrial deinking processes will be
established.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The project supports collaboration
between two very active groups in the area of materials processing and
beneficiation. The University of Utah team is well qualified and has high-tech
instrumentation facilities that are needed for the project, while the Egyptian
team will conduct flotation experiments using model components and real
wastepaper pulp, as well as analysis of fiber brightness, recovery and yield
during flotation. Dr. Yehia also has the means to test the developed technology
in the industrial setting in Egypt. The results will be helpful in dealing with
the problem of wastepaper. It is likely to have more economic impact in
countries with few pulp resources such as Egypt. The proposal meets the INT
objective of supporting collaborative research in areas of mutual interest. This
project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides
grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out these
cooperative activities. &lt;br/&gt;