* 0111829
* The Developmental Foundations of Number and Operations Sense
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Arthur Baroody, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Paul A. Klaczynski
* 08/31/2005
* USD 287,484.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The Developmental Foundations of Number and Operations
Sense&lt;br/&gt;Arthur J. Baroody&lt;br/&gt;Children's counting-based knowledge
of number and arithmetic builds on their nonverbal knowledge in these domains.
The nature of this pre-counting phase and how children make the transition to
the counting phase, however, are not clear. According to the mental model
proposed by Janellan Huttenlocher and colleagues, children initially represent
even small collections of 1 to 4 items inexactly, not precisely as much current
theorizing suggests. With Transition 1, children develop the ability to
represent collections exactly but nonverbally. This and the development of
counting permit Transition 2 to an exact, verbally based representation of
number. &lt;br/&gt;Whereas the mental model focuses on how number is
represented, Lauren Resnick's developmental model focuses on what is
represented. According to this model, mathematical thinking evolves from
concrete (context-bound) to abstract (general). In the first phase, children
form a nonverbal understanding of uncounted quantities (engage in
protoquantitive reasoning). In the second phase, they construct understandings
of counted collections (become capable of quantities-level reasoning). In the
third phase, children construct knowledge and can reason about specific numbers
in the absence of actual collections (numbers-level thinking). In the fourth
phase, they discover numerical or arithmetic relations and can reason with and
about generalities (abstract l-level reasoning).&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
will entail evaluating a model that integrates the two models discussed above.
According to this integrated model, children may pass through three subphases
between protoquantitative- and quantities-level thinking. After Transition 1,
they may first reason sensibly but imprecisely (qualitatively) about exact
representations of number (subphase 1) and then reason precisely
(quantitatively) about them (subphase 2). After children learn number names but
before they can enumerate collections (can use counting to determine the number
of items in a collection), they may be able to reason quantitatively about exact
representations of collections and attach number labels to them (subphase 3).
Although the integrated model is consistent with much existing research,
including that which suggests the rapid recognition of number without counting
is a basis for quantitative-level thinking, specific implications of the model
need to be tested.&lt;br/&gt;Studies 1 and 2 will involve evaluating predictions
that follow from the integrated model about how the development of an exact
nonverbal representation of number, verbal counting, and simple
addition/subtraction are inter-related. For example, according to this model,
pre-counting children in subphase 1 should be to nonverbally create a matching
collection for one previously seen but now hidden. Whereas, these children
should can only estimate the effects of addition or subtraction on a collection,
subphase 2 pre-counters can mentally determine small sums and differences
accurately, and subphase 3 pre-counters can further identify such results by
verbally labeling it with a number. Study 1 will entail combining a cross-
sectional design, questionnaire-based interviews of children's parents or
teachers (to provide context and observational data), and repeated re-testing
(to examine the learning effects often induced by testing young children). Study
2 will consist of long-term case studies based on naturalistic observations and
microgenetic methods (repeatedly administering selected tasks in a specific
manner at a prescribed interval, particularly during a developmental transition
phase). Using a combination of methods should provide richer data on number and
arithmetic development than using any single method. Understanding children's
performance in a microgenetic study, for instance, can be significantly improved
by a detailed knowledge of their developmental readiness and performance in
their natural environment (as documented by naturalistic data). In return, the
focused nature of a microgenetic study can provide naturalistic observations
with a clear direction (e.g., direct attention to key behaviors or patterns of
behavior). Four other studies will involve examining the early development
(nonverbal understanding) of the following key number and arithmetic concepts:
part-whole knowledge (e.g., a whole is larger than any single part), additive
composition (e.g., a sum is larger than either part), the inverse principle
(addition of a certain amount is undone by the subtraction of the same amount),
and additive commutativity (the order in which two collections are combined does
not affect the outcome).&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project should have important
theoretical, methodological, and practical value. Directly testing the
implications of the integrated model should lead to a better understanding about
the origins of number and operation sense and how it evolves. The integrated
methodologies and task-specific tests developed should be useful in
investigating pre-counting mathematical knowledge, exploring the transition to
counting-based knowledge, and gauging the effects of the former on the latter.
The more powerful developmental framework and assessment measures should be
useful for those planning, developing, or implementing early childhood
mathematics programs.&lt;br/&gt;