* 0111558
* Organic Transformations with h2-Arene Complexes of Rhenium
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Walter Harman, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 08/31/2004
* USD 369,000.00

With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor
W. Dean Harman, of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Virginia, is
studying organic transformations using eta-2 arene complexes of rhenium. Through
the selective and reversible binding of arenes or polyaromatic hydrocarbons
through dihapto coordination to a transition metal, their reactivity toward
electrophiles is enhanced. Reactive intermediates (e.g., arenium and allyl
cations) are stabilized, facilitating the assembly of polycyclic structures. In
addition, metal coordination directs the stereochemistry of various chemical
transformations and protects the coordination site for additional
transformations. While dihapto coordination of arenes has previously been
limited to pentaammineosmium(II) complexes, Professor Harman is developing a new
class of rhenium(I)-based dearomatization agents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aromatic
compounds (e.g., benzene, toluene) represent one of the most readily available
classes of compounds for elaboration into more complex molecular structures.
However, their unique properties place some limitations on the chemical
reactions available for their elaboration. Professor W. Dean Harman, of the
Department of Chemistry at the University of Virginia, with the support of the
Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, is developing unique metal-based
reagents which allow for the dramatic alteration of the reactivity of aromatic
compounds. Through his studies, new methods are being developed allowing the
facile and selective conversion of these readily available starting materials to
compounds of potential significance in their own right or as intermediates in
the synthesis of pharmaceuticals and other fine chemical products.