* 0111803
* Productivity, Location and Growth in the Service and Manufacturing Sectors
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* J. Vernon Henderson, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Kaye Husbands Fealing
* 06/30/2005
* USD 303,893.00

Business service and headquarters activities locate disproportionately in the
largest metro areas, while manufacturing is found disproportionately in smaller
towns and cities. The question is why; and, hence, what is the role of large
metro areas versus small and medium size cities in the USA. To start to
understand the forces at work, this project examines local growth patterns,
productivity, and out-sourcing decisions in the service and headquarter sectors.
For the case of headquarters, by locating in the largest metro areas,
headquarters separate themselves from their production facilities, creating
significant internal company face-to-face communication costs. To what extent do
they choose to be in these metro areas to take advantage of the diversity of
local intermediate service inputs such as advertising, legal, and financial
services found there, as opposed to gather information about innovations, export
markets, financing, and the like through local information spillovers from, say,
other headquarters? Similarly, why are business services located in the largest
and most expensive metro areas? To what extent is it local scale economies
within the service sector, versus upstream and downstream linkages within the
service sector, versus linkages to sectors using services (e.g., headquarters)
where those sectors may experience high own sector scale economies?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first two sections of the project examine these issues
through a detailed analysis of city growth of headquarters and service
industries, out-sourcing decisions, and productivity of headquarters and service
sector firms. One issue is that for headquarters, there is no direct output
measure, so productivity benefits must be measured through their effects on
wages and rents. Another issue concerns the role of firm structure and the
relationship between operating units and their headquarters in determining out-
sourcing decisions. The last section of the project looks at the determinants of
industry mobility across cities and compares mobility for service versus
manufacturing sector industries, an issue for cities in planning and competing
for industries. Manufacturing industries are highly mobile across cities, so
that over the course of a couple of decades a smaller city may switch from being
a textile manufacturer to specializing in electronics. Are service sector
industries so footloose?&lt;br/&gt;