* 0111326
* Social Identity and Subgroup Social Dilemmas
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,02/28/2005
* Jay Jackson, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 02/28/2005
* USD 176,583.00

When each individual in a group benefits more by defecting than cooperating, the
situation is a social dilemma. For example, giving blood is irrational in a
purely economic sense because it is costly in terms of time, effort, and pain,
and because people who do not donate are still permitted access to the blood
supply in a time of need. It is often the case that the economically rational
response to a social dilemma is defection, because no matter what others do, a
defector ends up in a superior position, whereas contributors risk being taken
advantage of or exploited. However, if most act this way, everybody is worse off
than if most cooperate. Theoretically, the extent to which people identify with
a group should lead to more cooperative responses to a social dilemma. However,
research on this relationship has been equivocal. A recently developed
multidimensional model of social identity will be applied to this controversy.
In the first phase of this program of research (10 studies), a multidimensional
scale of group identification will be developed and evaluated. Standard
psychometric procedures will be followed to establish the validity and
reliability of the scale across various types of real and contrived groups. In
Phase 2, hypotheses regarding the relationship between the dimensions of social
identity and cooperative responses to social dilemmas will be tested across
three types of groups (large-scale, small-scale, contrived) using standard
laboratory procedures. Hypotheses regarding how critical sociostructural
variables (group size, group status, and group assignment) affect the different
dimensions of social identity and cooperative responses to social dilemmas will
also be tested. Although real life social dilemmas often involve subgroups, or
people with varied social identities, little empirical research has directly
examined these particular social situations. Therefore, in Phase 3, laboratory
experiments will test hypotheses regarding how people respond to subgroup social
dilemmas compared to interpersonal or superordinate social dilemmas, and the
cognitive and emotional processes underlying such responses. The impact of
resource inequality between the groups and attributions regarding the inequality
will also be examined. Finally, in Phase 4, the ongoing interactions between
individuals caught up in a social dilemma will be examined. Both intra- and
inter-group interactions will be examined. Overall, this program of research is
designed to integrate and be applicable to theories of social identity, social
dilemmas, intergroup relations, and small group decision making. The broader
goal is to further our scientific understanding of real situations that are
increasingly prevalent in society: When people with diverse backgrounds make
decisions that affect both the members of their own group and the members of
other groups.