* 0111944
* Investigating Emotion-Based Choice
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2002
* Barbara Mellers, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* DEBORAH FRISCH
* 08/31/2002
* USD 335,439.00

Anyone who has ever made an important decision knows that anticipated emotions
play a role. There are effects of the feelings and moods we experience at the
time of a choice and effects of anticipated feelings about future consequences
of choice. We have developed a descriptive theory of the anticipated pleasure of
outcomes called decision affect theory. The theory rests on the assumption that
pleasure and pain are evaluated relative to the status quo and other salient
reference points, such as counterfactual outcomes, personal goals, and social
comparisons. All of these comparisons have asymmetric effects; the incremental
displeasure of obtaining the worse of two outcomes is greater in magnitude than
the incremental pleasure of getting the better of two outcomes. Finally, beliefs
about the likelihood of outcomes moderate the effects of comparisons. Surprising
outcomes lead to stronger emotional responses than expected outcomes.

In past research, we have applied our theory to risky choice. We assume that
people anticipate the pleasure or displeasure of each outcome of an option (as
predicted by decision affect theory), weight those feelings by the chances they
will occur, and sum over outcomes. This process yields an average anticipated
pleasure for an option. People then compare the average pleasure of all options
and select the one that maximizes expected pleasure.

Our theory of choice is called subjective expected pleasure theory. This
proposal builds on past work and has three primary goals. First, we will extend
our theory to riskless choice and test it by conducting seven studies. Four of
them examine endowment effects and the status quo bias. Three additional studies
investigate other well-known phenomena in riskless choice, such as asymmetric
dominance, preference reversals, and advantages vs. disadvantages. Our second
goal is to examine the effects of moods on anticipated emotions, beliefs, and
choice. Although we expect to find mood-congruent effects, it is quite possible
that moods can have opposing effects on judgments and choice. Our third goal is
to examine the accuracy of hedonic forecasts immediately after the decision has
been resolved and some time later. Accuracy is essential for emotion-based
choice; decisions based on faulty predictions will surely be sub-optimal.
Research suggests that people focus on attributes that are salient at the
moment, but not necessarily important later one. That is, they are insensitive
to adaptation. We will explore affective forecasts in three real world studies
and three laboratory studies. If deviations in forecasts occur, we will explore
methods for improving accuracy.

