* 0111412
* Acquisition of a PC Cluster for Geodynamic Modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Shijie Zhong, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2004
* USD 40,320.00

0111412&lt;br/&gt;Zhong&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides partial support
to build a 24-node dual processor PC Cluster for geodynamic modeling in the
geophysics group at the University of Colorado. The PC cluster will be used by
the PI, Shijie Zhong, and his group to model viscoelastic deformation for
Earth's mantle with 3-D mechanical structure (a project currently funded by the
NSF), 3-D thermal convection with temperature-and stress-dependent rheology, and
other geophysical problems. The PC cluster will benefit geodetic and gravity
modeling and seismic modeling in our geophysics group (Professors John Wahr and
Mike Ritzwoller). It will also help us in high performance education for
undergraduate and graduate students. The PC cluster may have the following
features: 24 nodes each with two Pentium III 866 MHz processors (dual
processor), 10-100 bps fast Ethernet communication, and 2 Gbytes RAM and 20
Gbytes disk space per node (total 48 Gbytes RAM and 480 Gbytes disk space for
the cluster). We will mainly use the 3-D spherical finite element software
CitcomS on the proposed cluster. CitcomS is a piece of software that we have
developed specifically for studying thermal convection and viscoelastic
deformation. CitcomS has been proven highly efficient on parallel computers
including PC clusters. CitcomS along with the PC cluster will enable us to
tackle various geodynamic problems with adequate accuracy and
resolution.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;