* 0111421
* Exploring Mechanism of Additions to Alkenes; Extending a New Technique by Four Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Donna Nelson, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 08/31/2004
* USD 89,399.00

There are two proposal objectives. The first is to extend development of a
technique, which has been developed by the PI, for correlating measurable
characteristics in addition reactions of alkenes in order to gain information
useful mechanistically and synthetically. The PI has applied the technique to
enough systems to establish its viability, but its range is not determined. The
technique enables (1) a procedure to determine relative magnitudes of steric and
electronic effects in the rate-determining step, (2) a relatively simple way to
predict the effects of substituents on reaction rates for synthetic purposes,
and (3) a method to choose between alternative proposed reaction mechanisms in
some cases. The simple technique to be extended is correlating (plotting) the
logs of the relative rates (log krel) of the alkene addition reactions studied
versus measurable characteristics of the alkenes, such as ionization potentials
(IPs), their highest occupied molecular orbital energies (HOMOs), and in some
cases their lowest unoccupied molecular orbital energies (LUMOs). There have
been previous mechanistic studies making use of IP vs log krel comparisons,
tables, and plots; this technique differs in that it focuses on the separation
of steric versus electronic effects, and it requires more data points and
substituents with a variety of electronic effects in the alkenes in order to
spread out the data points and to facilitate
visualization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many of the reactions studied and to be
studied are fundamental reactions, which appear in undergraduate organic
chemistry texts. Surprisingly, the relative reactivities of many of these have
not been studied at all, and in some cases, erroneous conclusions have been
drawn by using too few data points or alkenes bearing substituents without a
wide enough range of electronic effects. This project will advance the
understanding of these fundamental reactions and benefit chemists using addition
reactions in synthesis, because relative reactivity data will enable prediction
of site selectivity when more than one double bond is present in the molecule,
but it is desired to effect reaction at only one.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
second objective is to increase the participation of native under-represented
minorities (URMs) in chemistry. The direct influence of the grant will be
limited due to its short (one year) duration, but subsequent funding can
continue efforts toward the goals.