* 0111173
* Conserved Regulatory Elements from the Rpx/HesxI Homeobox Gene
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Kathleen Mahon, Baylor College of Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 08/31/2004
* USD 329,396.00

The hypothalamic-pituitary axis influences multiple bodily functions, such as
homeostasis, growth, and reproduction. The concerted development of the
primordia of the hypothalamus and pituitary (Rathke's pouch) during early
embryogenesis presages the integrated neuroendocrine functions these tissues
later share. Studies on the homeobox gene Rpx/HesxI have allowed unique
molecular access to these early developmental processes. Rpx/HesxI is one of the
earliest markers for the anterior region of the mouse embryo, and it is
dynamically and transiently expressed in the prechordal plate, anterior
forebrain and, at later stages of development, in Rathke's pouch. Targeted
mutagenesis has demonstrated that Rpx plays a key role in the development of
both the forebrain and the pituitary. In addition, examination of Rpx expression
in other mouse pituitary mutants has allowed Rpx and other homeobox genes to be
ordered in a putative regulatory hierarchy controlling pituitary organogenesis.
It has been determined that multiple regulatory elements interdigitated within
the Rpx gene separately control the early expression in the anterior forebrain
and the late expression in Rathke's pouch in the mouse embryo. Dr. Mahon will
undertake a further, more precise, delineation of the regulatory regions,
focusing on sequences that are both structurally and functionally conserved
between mouse and frog. Furthermore, based on the deletion analysis in frog and
mouse, it will be possible to determine whether genes known to genetically
regulate Rpx bind directly to Rpx regulatory sequences. This approach will
further elaborate the genetic network involved in forebrain and pituitary
development, and provide insight into the development of this important
neuroendocrine system.