* 0111789
* Labor Market Compensation and Economic Behavior:  An Experimental Examination of Team Production and Tournaments
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Donald Vandegrift, The College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2005
* USD 103,366.00

&lt;br/&gt;In the standard economic theory of labor markets, employees are
compensated based on the value of their individual contributions to output: the
relative performance of co-workers does not affect compensation. But
corporations are increasingly instituting compensation arrangements that do not
reward employees in accordance with the standard theory of labor markets. In one
arrangement, often referred to as a tournament, rewards are based upon the
relative performance of the participants rather than their absolute performance.
In another arrangement, often referred to as team production, teams rather than
individuals are responsible for a set of tasks. If firms are able to measure
only team output, firms cannot compensate team members in accordance with their
individual contributions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite widespread incidence of
tournaments and team production in labor markets, the economic literature
contains relatively little on behavior in tournaments and under team production.
These experiments assess behavior, performance, and risk taking under
tournaments and team production. Such experiments provide a better understanding
of behavior under various compensation schemes as well as a basis for the design
of contracts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research in this proposal provides three
separate studies. The first study considers whether tournament participants are
overly optimistic regarding success in tournaments (i.e. overestimate their
relative performance) and whether this causes too many individuals to enter
tournament markets. If too many individuals enter, we may implement public
policies to reduce the inefficiencies related to overcrowding. The second study
considers whether performance under team production varies based on: i) the
number of team members; ii) whether team members have information about the
performance of other team members; and iii) whether the firm sets production
targets and rewards the team when they exceed the target. A better understanding
of team production helps in the design of public policies concerning contractual
relations within and between firms. The final study considers whether an
irrational desire to avoid losses, referred to as loss aversion, is an important
determinant of performance in tournaments and whether this effect diminishes
over time. Such information is important in the design of labor contracts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To assess performance and risk taking in tournaments and
under team production, we conduct controlled experiments using students at The
Pennsylvania State University as subjects. Subjects complete a computer-based
numerical forecasting task to measure performance. To simulate labor market
decisions, subjects are paid based on the accuracy of their forecasts at the end
of each experimental session. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;