* 0111249
* Calibrating the Early Peopling of North America:  Ancient Biomolecular and Chronological Contexts
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2004
* R. Taylor, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2004
* USD 108,265.00

With the support of the National Science Foundation, Dr. R. E. Taylor
(University of California, Riverside) and Dr. David Smith (University of
California, Davis) will undertake radiocarbon (14C) measurements using
accelerator mass spectrometry technology and examine the mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA) content in a group of 35 human skeletal samples from 15 North America
sites with indicated ages ranging from approximately 5,000 to 11,000 years.
Recently developed technical capabilities in the laboratories of the
collaborators will provide data to address questions recently raised by what
appears to be anomalous physical characteristics of several North American human
skeletons dating to the early Holocene--between 10,000 and 6,000 years ago. The
14C data will provide the temporal controls and the mtDNA data will define
genetic relationships between and among the group of human skeletal samples
examined. The purpose of this research is to examine various questions that have
recently been posed involving new understandings concerning the timing and
character of earliest human migrations from Asia to North America at the very
end of the Pleistocene and beginning of the Holocene. This movement of hunter
and gatherer groups constitutes one of the most significant migration in the
history of the human species. Precisely when and how it occurred have been the
subject of long standing and sometimes contentious debates among scientists. The
long-held view that the late Pleistocene North American Clovis culture
represented the earliest New World human occupation has been challenged on the
basis of data from several sites in both North and South America. This data
appears to point to the presence of human groups in the New World at least 1,000
years prior to the earliest manifestation of Clovis occupation in North America.
In addition, preliminary evaluations of physical characteristics of a number of
North American human skeletons recently assigned to the early Holocene suggest
that the origins of the ancestral populations of Native Americans may be much
more complex than currently understood. A series of early multiple migrations
may have produced a very complex late Pleistocene/early Holocene genetic
admixture in North America. A major research question that will be directly
addressed with the data to be obtained in this study is whether some early North
American human populations did not survive and thus may not be genetically
related to any contemporary Native American group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;