* 0111604
* Genetics and Plasticity in Adaptation to Altitude in the Deer Mouse
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Mark Chappell, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Dianna K. Padilla
* 08/31/2005
* USD 290,000.00

0111604 Hammond &amp; Chappell&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Life at high altitude poses
a dual challenge to mammals. First, energy demands are greater because
environmental temperatures are generally lower than at low altitudes in the same
latitudinal range. At the same time, however, low oxygen availability (hypoxia)
limits an individual's capacity for energy expenditure. One of the physiological
mechanisms animals use to cope with the low oxygen availability at high
altitudes is to increase the amount of oxygen that can be carried from the lungs
to the cells by increasing hemoglobin oxygen binding capacity (hemoglobin oxygen
affinity). These changes can occur within the lifetime of an individual, but
there are also known genetic differences between animals, within a species, for
hemoglobin / oxygen binding ability. Alternatively, many animals are known to
have the capacity to reversibly increase the size and functional capacity of
various organ systems (including the cardiovascular system) in the face of
increased demand (phenotypic plasticity) and some animals use this plasticity to
cope with both low temperatures and hypoxia at high
altitudes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A model animal for the study of hemoglobin
genetics is the deer mouse (Peromyscus maniculatus) which has been shown, in
classic studies, to have genetic differences in hemoglobin type that are
strongly correlated with native altitude, affect oxygen binding, and positively
influence short-term exercise performance. Deer mice have also been shown to
display increases in the size of the lungs, heart and digestive tract at high
altitudes. One limitation of the work to date on both deer mice hemoglobins and
organ phenotypic plasticity, is that it did not incorporate the influence of the
site of gestational development and maturation (birth site), because it was
performed on animals that were born and allowed to mature at low altitudes
before they were moved to high altitude. It is known, however, that the
gestational environment can be crucial to determining the anatomical and
physiological capacity of adult animals. Thus the first goal of this research is
to determine how energy expenditure (aerobic performance) is affected by
gestational development at specific altitudes and if the hemoglobin genetics are
still significant in determining the individual's physiological capacity to cope
with life at high altitudes after accounting for plasticity of organ size. To
test this, aerobic performance trials will be performed on mice with different
hemoglobin genotypes born and reared at either high or low
altitude.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another unanswered question is the effect of
hemoglobin genetics on long-term energy expenditure (i.e., over periods of days
or weeks). This is an important issue new research has shown that sustainable
energy demands of mice living at high altitudes can be nearly as high as
previous measures of short term aerobic capacity. Young animals face an even
greater challenge. Newly weaned juveniles are smaller than adults but have
correspondingly higher mass-specific energy demands. Therefore it seems
reasonable to expect that growth rates might be influenced by hemoglobin
genotype and site of gestational development. Accordingly, the second goal of
this research is to determine if hemoglobin genotype influences growth rates and
sustainable metabolic rate under conditions of cold exposure and high-altitude
hypoxia. To test this, mice with specific hemoglobin genotypes will be reared in
semi-natural conditions at high and low test altitudes. We expect that mice with
the appropriate hemoglobin genotype for a given test altitude will have the
highest rates of sustainable metabolic output (measured as food consumption) and
growth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;