* 0111821
* Control of Pre-mRNA Metabolism in Drosophila
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Lillie Searles, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Tornow
* 07/31/2005
* USD 494,999.00

This project addresses the role of the Drosophila melanogaster gene called
suppressor of sable, su(s),in the control of pre-mRNA metabolism. Recent studies
from this laboratory indicate that the su(s)gene product, Su(s), associates with
a hypophosphorylated form of RNA polymerse II (RNAP II) and performs a novel
function in regulating both transcription and an early step in pre-mRNA
processing. The project has three main objectives. The first is to gain a better
understanding of how Su(s) regulates RNA production. Northern blot and RT-PCR
analyses will be used to examine the effect of su(s) mutations on the synthesis
and processing of transcripts from genes that have been defined in previous
studies as probable targets of Su(s)-mediated regulation. Drosophila genome
microarrays will be used to examine the global effect of su(s) mutations on gene
expression in embryos and to identify new genes that are regulated by Su(s).The
second objective is to investigate the interactions of Su(s) with other proteins
and with specific regions of genes. Polytene chromosomes will be probed
simultaneously with a polyclonal antibody that recognizes Su(s) and one of
several different monoclonal antibodies that recognize specific phosphorylated
forms of RNAP II. The chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) technique will be
used to examine the distribution of Su(s) and different phosphorylated forms of
RNA polymerase II in specific regions of genes. The third objective is to
characterize functional domains of Su(s) through in vivo analysis of su(s)
transgenes with alterations at specific sites in the coding
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many cellular processes once thought to be distinct
events, separated by time and distance, are now believed to occur at the same
time and in the same place, catalyzed by molecular complexes with at least some
shared components. This analysis of such a pair of processes, transcription and
transcript processing, promises to provide novel insights into the mechanisms
used to integrate various metabolic events in higher
organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;