* 0111001
* The Colonization of Land by Crustaceans
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Jonathan Wright, Pomona College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas L. Vandergon
* 06/30/2005
* USD 133,253.00

Although several groups of animals have colonized land, the evolutionary changes
that have made this possible are only superficially understood. This is due in
large part to difficulties in resolving the evolutionary relationships among
terrestrial taxa within a particular group, and their relationships to aquatic
counterparts, problems that leave the status of both the aquatic ancestors and
transitional or 'prototypal' terrestrial species unresolved. In the case of the
three most successful terrestrial taxa, the tetrapod vertebrates, the insects,
and the arachnids, it is clear that living descendents of these ancestral groups
no longer survive. This greatly limits our understanding of the adaptive
transitions that have made terrestrial life possible.

Terrestrial isopods, commonly known as woodlice or sowbugs, provide possibly the
best 'model system' for studying the evolution of physiological systems
accompanying the aquatic-terrestrial transition. In contrast to the other major
terrestrial animals, they are represented by living groups that occupy diverse
habitats from marine aquatic to 'transitional' intertidal and fully terrestrial.
The evolutionary relationships of living species have recently been elucidated
in considerable detail from comparative anatomy and molecular phylogenetic
techniques, and these indicate that the aquatic and intertidal species are more
basal, and thereby more closely related to other marine isopods, than the more
'derived' terrestrial species. Furthermore, they indicate at least three
independent origins of a terrestrial habit. Taken together, these factors
provide an excellent basis for comparative physiological studies. By
reconstructing an evolutionary lineage from marine to fully terrestrial, and
comparing specific physiological traits across species taken from that lineage,
it is possible to understand the physiological transitions involved. Building a
picture of the physiological changes in this way allows us not only to study
specific changes that have accompanied terrestriality, but also to compare
adaptive solutions among the independent terrestrial radiations.

Studies will focus on five main physiological systems. Water vapor absorption
(WVA) is known from only one group of terrestrial isopods and allows animals to
recover water in ambient humidities exceeding approximately 87%. The
condensation of water vapor involves the secretion of concentrated salt solution
by the gills to generate reduced vapor pressure. A key question in explaining
the evolution of WVA is to unravel the ancestral functions of salt secretion in
intertidal or terrestrial species. Like WVA, both nitrogenous excretion and ion
regulation are closely associated with water balance. Terrestrial isopods
excrete nitrogenous waste as ammonia gas, and this presents an intriguing
solution to water conservation by potentially eliminating simultaneous water
losses. Ammonia volatilization does, however, cause acidification of the gill
surface and buffering of accumulated acid is essential for the process to work.
Understanding the buffering mechanism, and its possible preadaptive functions,
is thus essential in explaining how ammonia volatilization evolved.

Most terrestrial animals possess efficient mechanisms for regulating blood
solute concentration, protecting the tissues against osmotic hydration or
dehydration and resultant changes in cell volume. Aquatic isopods are capable of
regulating blood salt concentration in both elevated (hyper-osmotic) and
depressed (hypo-osmotic) external salinities. Recent studies have shown that
intertidal species counteract increasing blood salinities imposed by dehydration
by excreting salts across the gills, as in aquatic species. Fully terrestrial
species cannot excrete salts, however, since dietary salts are impoverished. One
group has been shown to down-regulate blood salts by sequestration in the
hindgut during dehydration. Although regulation has been demonstrated in other
groups, the mechanisms await investigation. At least one group appears to have
lost the ancestral capacity for osmoregulation. As well as osmotic concentration
imposed by dehydration, isopods may face osmotic dilution during rain showers, a
danger exacerbated by their permeable cuticles. The mechanisms by which excess
water is eliminated are essentially unstudied, though recent work indicates a
role of the maxillary glands in producing dilute urine.

The remaining areas of study will focus on reproductive physiology, specifically
maternal regulation of the embryonic environment and ion regulation of
periembryonic fluid by the eggs. The eggs and newly hatched juveniles (mancas)
are brooded in a fluid-filled marsupium. Marine isopods flush this with
seawater, but terrestrial species either fill it from external water sources or
from the blood. Desiccation and thermal stresses on land demand either maternal
regulation of the marsupial environment or high physiological tolerance in early
developmental stages. Recent studies have shown extreme tolerance of osmolality,
pH, temperature and ammonia extremes in embryos of terrestrial isopods, and pH
and ion regulation appears to employ a greatly enlarged embryonic 'dorsal
organ'. Studies will investigate ion transport mechanisms in this organ.
Comparisons within lineages will reveal whether the enlargement of the dorsal
organ is a unique terrestrial innovation and will test the hypothesis that its
ancestral function was calcium uptake for mineralization of the cuticle.