* 0111754
*  Pathway to Emergent Literacy
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Frederick Morrison, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Paul A. Klaczynski
* 05/31/2005
* USD 501,253.00

This research has three broad aims. First, the work will examine the nature and
sources of growth in cognitive, language, and literacy skills during the
transition from preschool to the early school years. Utilizing an ecological
perspective, the research will investigate specifically the interactive role of
child (e.g., IQ, social skills), family (e.g., parental warmth/sensitivity, home
learning environment), and schooling (e.g., amount of instruction in alphabet
recognition) factors in shaping academic trajectories from three years of age to
the end of kindergarten. Second, the project will explore the utility of
constructing and charting developmental pathways to literacy, employing a
combination of analytic tools, including multiple regression and Structural
Equation Modeling (SEM). The combination of methods will permit creation of
frameworks for describing complex, dynamic interactions among child, family, and
schooling factors that shape literacy acquisition in young children making the
transition to school. Third, the "pathway" framework and analytic strategy will
be utilized to investigate the sources of reading success or failure in early
elementary school. The conceptualization will combine the child, family, and
schooling factors into a broad, comprehensive model of early reading
acquisition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two hundred 3-year-old children (following
attrition) who attend center-based daycare or preschool and whose parents intend
to enroll them in a local elementary school will participate in this three-year
longitudinal study. Children's cognitive, language, and literacy outcomes will
be assessed with individually administered standardized instruments and non-
standardized measures. Additionally, information will be gathered on children's
temperament and social skills. Finally, parenting and schooling factors will be
assessed using questionnaires and direct observation. A longitudinal design will
be implemented, following children for three years from age three through age
five. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is likely to make substantial
theoretical, methodological, and analytic contributions. In particular, the
pathway strategy employing SEM permits a rigorous yet broad perspective capable
of describing the complex, dynamic interactions among variables shaping early
developmental trajectories. In addition, the research may well have important
implications for educational policy. The findings will likely confirm the
centrality of the early childhood years as one source of meaningful individual
differences in important literacy, language, and cognitive skills. Consequently,
the results are likely to highlight the crucial role of parents in shaping
children's early educational trajectories. Moreover, finding important
connections between children's learning-related social skills and academic
growth implies that in preparing children to be maximally ready for school,
socialization of children's developing independence, responsibility, and self-
regulation should go hand in hand with the promotion of early literacy skills.
Finally, it is anticipated that different kinds of kindergarten instruction
(e.g., teacher-directed versus child-directed) are likely to differentially
benefit children with different skill levels. Taken together, the findings
should be of interest to parents of preschool children as well as to preschool
educators, kindergarten teachers, and school personnel concerned with issues of
school readiness, school transition, and risk factors of early school failure.