* 0111285
* Regulation of Cellular Interactions by Extracellular Matrix Proteolysis
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2001,12/31/2003
* Jerry Hedrick, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 12/31/2003
* USD 228,478.00

0111285 Lindsay

The extracellular egg envelope plays a crucial role in regulating sperm-egg
interactions both before and after fertilization, and is thus a major subject of
interest in developmental biology. After initial sperm penetration and
fertilization, the egg envelope is modified by egg factors to defend the egg
against sperm to prevent polyspermy, a condition that is lethal to embryonic
development. During this complex "block to polyspermy" reaction, sperm binding
sites on the egg envelope are inactivated, and the envelope structure is
modified so that it is "hardened" to impede sperm penetration and to protect the
developing embryo. These observations are almost a century old but still the
mechanisms behind the reactions are unknown, due primarily to the lack of
biological material, especially in mammals. One hypothesis is that an egg
protease is involved in the reaction, since proteolysis of a specific egg
envelope glycoprotein, ZPA, has been observed following fertilization. The
current research project is designed to test this hypothesis by isolating and
characterizing the responsible egg protease, designated "ZPAase", followed by
the determination of its effects on egg envelope physical properties and
function. The amphibian model system Xenopus laevis is used due to the large
amounts of gametes that are available for study. Previously funded research
identified ZPAase as a metalloprotease and it was partially purified. Continuing
studies will complete the purification of ZPAase, and use molecular cloning
techniques to determine the amino acid sequence of ZPAase for functional
information and comparison to other proteases. Purified protease, obtained from
eggs or through protein expression, will be used test the hypothesis of ZPA
proteolysis on sperm binding to the egg envelope and envelope hardening. The
results of these studies will make a significant contribution to our knowledge
of the complex reactions that regulate sperm-egg interactions following
fertilization and are fundamental to normal animal development.