* 0111612
* A Value Protection Model of Justice Reasoning
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Linda Skitka, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2004
* USD 199,990.00

The goal of this research is to test the theoretical possibility that personal
identity concerns play an important role in how people decide whether something
is fair or unfair, and to explore how these concerns relate to people's ability
to generate procedures to resolve conflict. Specifically, people are highly
motivated to act in ways that allow for public and private affirmation of the
belief that they are authentically good and moral beings (Steele, 1988). Given
that moral values form the core of personal identity (Rokeach, 1973), self-
affirmation should involve endorsing self-expressive moral positions or stands,
or what Skitka (in press) has referred to as "moral mandates." Thinking about,
experiencing, witnessing, or behaving in a way that leads to a violation of a
moral mandate should be experienced as a threat to people's sense of self, and
therefore should be defended more vigorously than other kinds of strong
attitudes. One implication of this line of theorizing is that people should have
much greater difficulty negotiating procedures to decide issues that involve
moral mandates than they do for issues that involve other concerns. To test this
hypothesis, research participants (college students) participating in small
heterogeneous or homogeneous groups, will be asked to come to consensus on a
fair procedure to decide an issue that they either (a) have a moral mandate
about, (b) do not have a moral mandate about, or (c) have a strong attitude, but
not a moral mandate about. Groups will have three options to end negotiations:
Unanimously agree to a procedure that each participant agrees that they could
accept as a binding way to decide their assigned issue; unanimously agree that
they will never come to consensus on a binding procedure; or 1 hour passes
(whichever occurs first). Groups' ability to generate a consensually accepted
procedure, perceptions of the group process and other group members, and degree
of post-discussion attitude change (i.e., polarization on morally mandated as
compared to non-morally mandated issues) as a function of group discussion will
be assessed. A follow-up study will explore the perceived fairness of the
procedures generated in the group discussion study when they are evaluated
without reference to a specific issue.&lt;br/&gt;