* 0111518
* Contractual issues in the financing of new firms: macroeconomic and policy implications
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2001,01/31/2007
* Thomas Cooley, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/2007
* USD 357,556.00

The research described in this proposal is directed to understanding the link
between the contractual arrangements used to finance new firms and their growth
and the volatility of the aggregate economy. The ability to attract external
financing is crucial for the creation of new firms and the expansion of existing
ones. For that reason the nature of the financial arrangements between lenders
and firms has important consequences for the growth of firms. It also can have
important consequences for the propagation of aggregate shocks and the
volatility of the aggregate economy. This research project has three objectives.
First, it studies how contractual problems affect the optimal financing of new
firms and their subsequent growth. Second, it evaluates the welfare costs of
these contractual problems that result because they induce an inefficient
allocation of resources and studies the type of policies or institutions that
alleviate these welfare consequences. Third, it studies how contractual problems
affect the propagation of new investment opportunities in the macro-economy.

To pursue these objectives, the project integrates the two main approaches to
studying the impact of financial frictions on the investment behavior of firms.
The first approach focuses on the primary sources of frictions that prevent
market completeness, and the implications of this incompleteness for the
behavior of individual firms. It fails to consider, however, issues of
macroeconomic relevance. The second approach is concerned with the aggregate
implications of market incompleteness. Given its aggregate focus, in this
approach market incomplete-ness is exogenously imposed, rather than derived
endogenously. Because the properties of these models depend critically on the
type of financial frictions assumed, it is desirable that these frictions are
endogenously generated in the model rather than imposed by assumption. This is
especially important for the design of policies and institutional arrangements
aimed at improving the inefficiencies generated by limited contractability.

The project integrates the existing approaches to the study of financial market
incompleteness, by developing a general equilibrium model with a solid micro-
foundation for the incompleteness. Entrepreneurs have the ability to run an
entrepreneurial project over a long time but need external funds to finance
investment. Entering into a long-term relationship with a lender through an
optimal long-term contract solves the financing problem. Market incompleteness
derives from the ability of the entrepreneur to repudiate the financial contract
(i.e. from the limited enforceability of contracts). By integrating the existing
approaches to the study of market incompleteness, the model is able to address
theoretical and policy-related questions. The general equilibrium structure
facilitates the evaluation of the welfare costs of market incompleteness, while
the micro-foundations permit the analysis of the type of policies or
institutional arrangements that can support a superior allocation of resources.