* 0111734
* Reading and Speaking Words in Two Languages:  A Psycholinguistic Approach to Bilingualism
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Judith Kroll, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher T. Kello
* 07/31/2005
* USD 283,197.00

How does a bilingual read and speak words in one language when words in the
other language are available and potentially compete for selection? Recent
psycholinguistic research suggests that information in both of a bilingual's two
languages is active during language comprehension and production. The bilingual
is thus a model system to examine the conditions that give rise to competition
and the manner in which that competition is resolved. This problem will be
investigated in a series of experiments in which bilinguals read and speak words
in one or both of their languages. The research has two aspects, comprehension
and production of language. In each, experiments will examine the activation of
alternative lexical candidates and the factors that modulate the resulting
cross-language competition. In experiments on comprehension, word naming will be
compared in the first and second languages. By manipulating the properties of
the words to be named and the contexts in which they occur, it should be
possible to identify the factors that induce and control language selection. In
experiments on production, performance on picture naming and translation tasks
will be compared to examine spoken word production in two languages. Using cued
naming and task-switching paradigms, it should prove possible to examine the
effects of requiring both languages to be active prior to speaking. The approach
is intended to provide complementary methods for examining the activation of
words in each language when a bilingual is required to speak a word in one
language and to suppress or ignore information in the other language. The goal
of this research is to develop converging approaches to study language
comprehension and production in bilinguals. Together with existing research on
monolingual language performance, the data generated by these studies should
provide the basis for a more complete model of the bilingual lexicon. The
mechanism of language selection that is the focus of the bilingual research has
the more general potential to illuminate current debates about the type and
timing of information available during comprehension and production. In this
sense, bilingualism provides a useful tool for investigating universal cognitive
constraints. The outcomes of this work also hold important implications for the
more general problem of learning and using two languages.