* 0111497
* Acquisition of Light Scattering Instrumentation for Complex Fluids Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2002
* Robert Meyer, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2002
* USD 56,353.00

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials research will allow Brandeis
University to acquire a light scattering spectrometer that will be the keystone
f a facility to perform both static and dynamic light scattering measurements.
The facility will be multi-user and multi-disciplinary, as well as fulfill
research and educational needs. The facility will consist of an ALV light
scattering spectrometer ($80k), a homemade static light scattering spectrometer
(built in 1999), and a Brookhaven differential refractometer (purchased in
2000). Currently there are no general-purpose light scattering spectrometers at
Brandeis. The equipment will be used as a non-invasive probe to study complex
fluids, such as liquid crystals, colloidal suspensions, and protein
crystallization in the Physics department. Several members of Biology and
Chemistry departments will have access to this facility as secondary users.
Their research goals are to study protein complexes. The equipment be used to
train physics graduate and undergraduate students and biology graduate students
in light scattering, an important technique in its own right, which additionally
shares many principles with other techniques such as neutron and x-ray
scattering. Students will take either a six or nine week intensive training
course in light scattering that will integrate pedagogical instruction with
research experience. Instructional exercises will be developed to elucidate both
physical phenomena of macromolecules and to provide training in light scattering
techniques. This combination will give students a greater understanding of
complex fluids in general and will enable them to participate in research, at
Brandeis with a deeper understanding of scattering techniques and principles.
Finally, this will be the only research-grade general-purpose light scattering
instrument at Brandeis University. Thus establishment of this facility will have
a large impact on research program of the investigators, as well as serve as a
resource for the entire campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the
Instrumentation for Materials research will allow Brandeis University to acquire
a light scattering spectrometer that will be the keystone f a facility to
perform both static and dynamic light scattering measurements. The facility will
be multi-user and multi-disciplinary, as well as fulfill research and
educational needs. The equipment will be used as a non-invasive probe to study
complex fluids, such as liquid crystals, colloidal suspensions, protein
crystallization, and protein complexes. The equipment be used to train physics
graduate and undergraduate students and biology graduate students in light
scattering, an important technique in its own right, which additionally shares
many principles with other techniques such as neutron and x-ray scattering.
Students will take either a six or nine week intensive training course in light
scattering that will integrate pedagogical instruction with research experience.
Instructional exercises will be developed to elucidate both physical phenomena
of macromolecules and to provide training in light scattering techniques. This
combination will give students a greater understanding of complex fluids in
general, and will enable them to participate in research, at Brandeis with a
deeper understanding of scattering techniques and principles. Finally, this will
be the only research-grade general-purpose light scattering instrument at
Brandeis University. Thus establishment of this facility will have a large
impact on research program of the investigators, as well as serve as a resource
for the entire campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;