* 0111263
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Design, Fabrication, and Intelligent Control of Nanopositioning Devices
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Sabri Cetinkunt, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2004
* USD 25,080.00

0111263&lt;br/&gt;Cetinkunt&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a collaborative project between Dr. Sabri Cetinkunt, Department of
Mechanical Engineering, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois and
Dr. Magdy Abdelhameed, Design and Production Engineering Department, Ain Shams
University, Cairo, Egypt. The goal is to develop new control systems for a nano-
positioner mechanism (piezoelectric tool post) used in high precision machining,
specially when machining brittle materials such as mirrors, silicon wafers and
ceramics. The performance of control systems used in controlling the motion of a
nano-positioner is crucial in maintaining a stable and accurate trajectory
tracking. These investigators will develop new control algorithms based on
neural network architectures. Specifically they will use Cerebellar Model
Articulation Controller (CMAC) neural network architecture to improve the
dynamic control performance. They will also design and implement a hardware
setup for the mechatronics control system at the laboratory at Ain Shams
University. This will include a Nano-positioner mechanism, sensing system, power
amplifier of the PZT actuator and the real time
controller.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The project supports collaboration
between two experienced investigators. The laboratory at the University of
Illinois at Chicago has the required facilities. Dr. Cetinkunt has experience
using neural net-based controllers for nanomachining and fast tool post
machining operations. The Egyptian collaborator has an active research program
in the dynamic and control of manufacturing systems, and an active research
program in mechatronics. The project will include exchange of graduate students
between the two universities. The proposal meets the INT objective of supporting
collaborative research in areas of mutual interest. This project is being
supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to
scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative
activities. &lt;br/&gt;