* 0111800
* Balance Sheets and Monetary Policy in the Open Economy:  A Research Proposal
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2007
* Roberto Chang, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2007
* USD 375,046.00

The design and analysis of exchange rate regimes has long been a research
priority. The subject has attracted even more attention recently because of the
emerging-market crises of the 1990s, and the ensuing controversies over how the
exchange rate was managed. In those episodes the domestic financial system often
crashed along with the currency. Moreover, financial considerations -such as the
health of banks or the size of dollar debt posed severe constraints on the
conduct of monetary policy. For these reasons, increasingly the focus of
research is on the interaction between the structure of the financial systems
and the effects of exchange rate policy. For instance recent work has stressed
that in the presence of liabilities denominated in foreign currency a
devaluation can weaken the balance sheets of domestic firms and reduce their
access to world credit markets thus causing a fall in investment. aggregate
demand. and output. In joint work with Luis Felipe Cespedes of NYU, the
investigators were among the first to model this channel in the context of a
dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model and to explore its implications for
monetary and exchange rate policies. But the literature that studies monetary
policies in open economies with imperfect fi-nancial markets is still in its
infancy. This project advances this line of work in two
directions:&lt;br/&gt;(i) It develops formal models of how exchange rate policy
may have an impact on overall activity through the effect of exchange rates on
balance sheets and, more generally, on credit constraints. Previous work relied
on some very strong simplifying assumptions.&lt;br/&gt;(ii) It analyzes the
proper choice of monetary and exchange rate policy. Almost all papers so far
have looked at once and for all monetary reactions to a particular shock. This
project characterizes the optimal monetary policy rule with and without
commitment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theoretical results, and the quantitative
implications of calibrated simulations of the models could have important
implications for a number of policy issues. Could floating be the optimal
exchange rate policy in the presence of financial imperfections? What is the
optimal monetary policy in a floating regime? In particular. how close should
the correlation be between home and foreign nominal interest rates? Can the
optimal policy be replicated or approximated by an inflation-targeting rule? If
so. how should that rule be designed?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;