* 0111159
* Travel Grant for Second Eastern Mediterranean Chemical Engineering Conference for Collaborative Research
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2001,03/31/2004
* Jacques Zakin, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 03/31/2004
* USD 68,600.00

Abstract

CTS-0111159 Zakin, Jacques, Ohio State University (PI); Baird, Donald, Virginia
Polytechnic Institute (Co-PI)

This award supports an international group travel grant for US academic
researchers invited to the Second Eastern Chemical Engineering Conference for
Collaborative Research to be held in Ankara, Turkey, May 20-25, 2001. The
conference participants are from the eastern Mediterranean countries of Turkey,
Greece, Israel, Jordan, and also include participants from the United States.
Collaborative research between Turkey, Greece, Israel, Jordan, and the United
States will be very much encouraged as the key by-product of this conference.
Chemical engineering research sub-disciplines to be covered at the meeting
include: catalysis, advanced materials, separations, systems engineering, and
biotechnology. NSF funding will be used for travel costs for about twenty Unites
States chemical engineering faculty including partial support for five prominent
U. S. researchers to serve as discussion leaders in their respective areas of
chemical engineering. The USA participation plan for the Conference is designed
to help assure the participation of young faculty and graduate students through
an approximate 50% target for this group. Five, sub-discipline reports
summarizing the activities and accomplishments of the meeting in each of the
five areas will be provided to NSF after the meeting as part of the final
report. The Turkish organizers will pay for local arrangements as well as pay
for the travel of seven additional U. S. researchers in areas and for
individuals they particularly want to attend. The U. S. will benefit from this
program by virtue of the productive relationships that are expected to emerge
leading to the transfer of expertise.

