* 0111729
* Comparative Political Economy
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2001,09/30/2004
* David Baron, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 09/30/2004
* USD 226,303.00

This research program focuses on the development of comparative theories of
public policy from a political economy perspective where policies are chosen
within institu-tions embedded in a political system. The principal comparisons
are between presidential and parliamentary systems and between public and
private politics and institutions. The policy focus is on the influence of
organized and unorganized interests on choices by public and private
officeholders. In the context of public politics, interests attempt to influence
both the choice of government and government in office. In private politics.
activist and interest groups attempt to affect economic activity without
reliance on public institutions by pressuring firms to change their practices,
such as environmental protection policies or working conditions in factories in
developing countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program has three
principal components. The first is a comparative study of parliamentary and
presidential systems with an emphasis on the dynamics of policy choice. The
model of parliamentary systems includes a proportional representation electoral
system, government formation, and policy choice. The model of a presidential
system includes a geography-based electoral system and a legislature with
supermajority features arising from a presidential veto override and a
legislative supermajority, as in the case of the filibuster in the U.S. Senate.
One objective is to incorporate political parties as reputation carriers in
these institutional settings. The principal focus is on the stability of
governments and their policy responsiveness to economic
shocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second component is the study of the influence
of interest groups on the policies chosen in political systems. The research
generalizes existing common agency and vote buying theories to incorporate forms
of influence in addition to contributions; e.g., the grassroots mobilization of
constituents. This interest group theory is then related to the first component
of the research program by studying constituency and interest group influence in
proportional representation and geography-based representation systems. This
incorporates influence both on the choice of government and government in
office.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The third component of this research is on private
politics; e.g., pressure applied directly to firms by activist groups seeking to
change the practices of those firms. This pressure may take the form of an
organized consumer boycott or public exposure of practices such as the working
conditions in overseas factories. The game of private politics includes firms
and activists as players, and the equilibrium can correspond to the
establishment of a private institution to mitigate commitment, coordination,
information, and free-rider problems. The research on endogenous private
institutions is extended to the private law of firms that organize electronic
markets.&lt;br/&gt;