* 0111210
* New Methods in Free Radical Chemistry
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2005
* Eric Enholm, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 07/31/2005
* USD 306,465.00

With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor
Eric J. Enholm, of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Florida, is
developing new methods for free radical reactions on reusable solid supports.
Professor Enholm uses ring-opening metathesis methodology to prepare new soluble
polymers to serve as supports for free radical transformations. Following
establishment of the methodology through the analysis of established radical
reactions, including tin hydride reduction of halides, radical cyclizations, and
one-electron allyl transfers, new chiral reactions will be examined. The latter
will include polymer-supported versions of the asymmetric "interrupted" Kharasch
atom transfer and catalytic asymmetric Giese reactions. Reusable chiral
scaffolds, with enantiopure stereo-directing elements imbedded in the support,
will be prepared, and catalytic asymmetric transformations, particularly those
allowing for enantioselective acyclic stereocontrol in radical and ketyl
radical-anion transformations, will be explored.

Molecular species bearing unpaired electrons ("free radicals") have historically
been viewed as highly reactive and therefore relatively chemically
undiscriminating intermediates. Recent studies have demonstrated that the
reactivity of these radicals may be harnessed, allowing the selective and
effective synthesis of a variety of significant organic molecular structures.
With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor
Eric J. Enholm, of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Florida, is
exploring new methods for carrying out reactions of organic radicals. By
exploring radical reactions tethered to polymeric supports, the properties of
the polymer may be used both to control the outcome of the radical reactions and
to facilitate separation of desired materials from waste products. These studies
are leading to new and general methodologies for the synthesis of complex
organic molecules and to the development of polymer-supported reaction chemistry
of relevance to the fields of combinatorial chemistry and solid-phase organic
chemistry.