* 0111040
* RUI: The Role of Multiple Modulators in a Small Neural System: A Comparative Approach
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Patsy Dickinson, Bowdoin College
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/2005
* USD 312,313.00

Animals must alter their behavior to meet the demands of a changing environment.
One mechanism that allows such behavioral flexibility in the pattern generators
that drive rhythmical movements, such as locomotion and chewing, is the
functional reconfiguration of neural networks by neuromodulators. The
stomatogastric system, which contains the pattern generators that drive the
pyloric filter and the gastric mill in the crustacean foregut, provides an ideal
system in which to study neuromodulation. Both the pattern generators and the
modulatory inputs in the stomatogastric system have been extensively
characterized. More than 20 modulatory substances have been identified in this
ganglion, raising the following question: Why are so many modulators involved in
modulating such a relatively simple system? This project asks whether a
comparative approach can shed light on this question and thus provide insights
into the fundamental mechanisms and effects of neuromodulators.&lt;br/&gt;The
pyloric pattern and its responses to modulators have been studied to some extent
in a number of different species of decapod crustaceans. The present study will
further examine the responses of six species - two closely related species of
crab, two related lobster species, the California spiny lobster, and a kelp crab
- to a test group of four neuromodulators. Using standard recording techniques,
the basic pyloric pattern and its responses to these substances will be recorded
and characterized qualitatively and quantitatively. Additionally, some of the
mechanisms involved in modulation will be compared, as will the effects of these
four modulators on muscle activity and contraction in the six
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;