* 0111041
* CAA:  A Plant Genomics Research and Training Career Advancement Program
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2001,12/31/2002
* C. Michael Smith, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Herbert
* 12/31/2002
* USD 56,640.00

&lt;br/&gt;Scientists at the Kansas State University Plant Resistance to
Insects&lt;br/&gt;Laboratory have identified several molecular markers linked to
genes&lt;br/&gt;expressing resistance to the Russian wheat aphid, a serious pest
of cereal&lt;br/&gt;grain crops in Africa, North America, and South America. In
order to&lt;br/&gt;conduct more detailed research, the Principal Investigator of
this Minority Career Advancement Award, Dr. Smith, will obtain hands-on research
training&lt;br/&gt;in the use of RFLP marker linkage analysis, cDNA cloning, and
cDNA and BAC&lt;br/&gt;sequencing. The specific new skills to be acquired will
be plant RNA and&lt;br/&gt;plasmid DNA isolation, Southern and Northern blotting
and hybridization,&lt;br/&gt;construction of a subtractive cDNA library, and
sequence analysis of DNA&lt;br/&gt;clones. Experiments will be conducted during
the training that will provide&lt;br/&gt;information about the linkages of
various RFLP loci to the Dn6 Russian wheat&lt;br/&gt;aphid resistance gene, and
initial information about possible DNA sequences&lt;br/&gt;related to Dn6. Thus,
this information will serve as a starting point for&lt;br/&gt;further research
on aphid resistance gene sequences. Dr. Smith will also&lt;br/&gt;attend a
course in bioinformatics at Kansas State University and attend
two&lt;br/&gt;continuing education conferences which emphasize bioinformatics.
Knowledge&lt;br/&gt;gained from these educational activities will be used to
update three&lt;br/&gt;courses dealing with plant resistance to pests in which
Dr. Smith serves as&lt;br/&gt;instructor or co-instructor. Information and
experience derived from the&lt;br/&gt;research and training objectives of the
current proposal will provide&lt;br/&gt;students enrolled in these courses
current information on plant genomics,&lt;br/&gt;bioinformatics, and gene
sequencing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RFLP - restriction fragment length
polymorphism; cDNA - complementary DNA;&lt;br/&gt;BAC- bacterial artificial
chromosome&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;