* 0111410
* IRCEB: Nitrate Uptake and Retention in Streams: Mechanisms and Effects of Human Disturbances from Stream Reaches to Landscapes
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2007
* Bruce Peterson, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Martyn M. Caldwell
* 08/31/2007
* USD 3,049,269.00

Human activities are flooding the biosphere with nitrogen (N), changing the
biogeochemistry of terrestrial and aquatic environments. The fate of much of the
anthropogenic N load to the biosphere is uncertain because mass balance studies
of major watersheds show that most of the added N is not exported to the oceans
but is missing, having disappeared from our accounting somewhere within these
watersheds. Most of the inorganic N entering streams is in the form of nitrate.
Traditionally, nitrate has been thought to flow freely downstream to coastal
ecosystems. Recently, however, mass balance analyses for the Mississippi
drainage have shown that large quantities of nitrate are lost as water travels
through its tributary streams. This conclusion is consistent with earlier
findings that smaller streams are most retentive of ammonium. This project will
be an intensive, inter-site study of the fate of nitrate in streams. The
investigators will evaluate whether streams are indeed important sites of N
retention in the landscape and how human disturbances affect that retention.
Field 15N-tracer experiments will be used to determine the rates and factors
controlling nitrate uptake and retention in relatively pristine streams and in
disturbed (agricultural and urban) streams. The experimental results will be
used to develop a process-based model of nitrate retention in streams. The
results will be extended to larger spatial scales using GIS approaches to
predict nitrate retention in large river basins at each of eight study sites.
These predictions will be tested with synoptic field measurements of stream
nitrate concentrations within each basin. The validated river basin model will
be an important land-use planning tool for controlling the N loading of lakes
and coastal ecosystems. The work will have broader implications to society by
explicitly evaluating the effects of human disturbance on N retention in stream
networks, contributing the new knowledge needed for a more sustainable
management of watersheds.