* 0111143
* RUI:  Forced Rayleigh scattering on heterogeneous liquid crystals: Directional solidification at forced wavevectors
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Daniel Spiegel, Trinity University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 08/31/2005
* USD 116,811.00

Dr. Daniel R. Spiegel of Trinity University is funded for his research on forced
Rayleigh scattering (FRS) on heterogeneous liquid crystals by the Physical
Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division. The interfacial modulation
accompanying an impurity-diffusion-driven instability during nematic-directional
solidification can be stimulated and probed by FRS techniques. Non-homogeneous
perturbations at selected wavelengths (frequencies) of such transforming systems
will be used to experimentally probe the nonlinear reaction-diffusion modeling
and pattern formation of such liquid-crystal systems. FRS pump-beam interference
fringes will be used to effect modulation of the nematic-isotropic interface of
a directionally solidified liquid crystal. The temporal evolution of specific
Fourier component amplitudes will be tracked using diffracted FRS probe beams.
Fundamentally important dispersion relations relevant to the basic linear
instability will be mapped experimentally.

Nonlinear dynamical systems, including those that produce non-equilibrium
pattern formation, are becoming increasingly upbiquitous in research and in
chemcial industry. The analysis and modeling of such systems is important for
developing quantitative methods for controlling such phenomena. The FRS
experiments at Trinity University should provide definite means for improving
our experimental approaches to developing such models, and for testing our
understanding of such models. Furthermore, invaluable state-of-the-art training
will be afforded the undergraduates participating in this research program.