* 0111224
* Lobbying and Issue-Definition
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2004
* Frank Baumgartner, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 06/30/2004
* USD 235,930.00

This research involves an extension and continuation of research begun with an
earlier National Science Foundation award. In that project the investigators
laid out a methodology for conducting interviews on a random sample of public
policy issues and assessing the strategies and resources of lobbyists and other
policy advocates as they attempt to influence the policy process. The
researchers focused on the use of arguments and evidence in addition to the more
standard variables of material resources. In the current project, the
investigators complete documentation of 100 randomly selected cases of federal
government policy debates. The analyses allow for the systematic comparison of
advocacy efforts on a broad sample of issues in government. The researchers
compare the dimensional structures of those issues, the lobbying and advocacy
efforts of those involved, the degree to which government officials themselves
are advocates along with those outside government, the impact of money and
material resources on coalition formation and policy outcomes, the differences
between highly visible and less-visible policy decisions, and the ability of
advocates to affect policy outcomes through the use of arguments, targeted
lobbying efforts, and other means. Further, they integrate with the research
project the creation of a massive web site to serve other researchers and
students. For each of the cases, not only do they collect a range of information
from public and confidential sources but all of the public information they
collect, including versions of legislation, public testimony, press releases by
those involved, press coverage, and lobby spending reports, is released in a
comprehensive web site for each issue. This allows other researchers access to a
well-organized set of raw materials for all manner of subsequent analyses, as
well as providing primary source material suitable for teaching courses on U.S.
government, Congress, and public policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theoretic
focus of this research is based on the ideas of rhetoric, heresthetics, and the
related questions of decision-making for complex multidimensional issues. Policy
advocates mastering the arts of heresthetics would be able to affect policy
outcomes simply by focusing attention on new dimensions of issues or by
otherwise altering the context in which policy choices are made. However, there
are many constraints on these efforts, including the strategic efforts of policy
advocates who disagree, institutional factors and other sources of stability in
public advocacy. The researchers explore these questions of strategic
redefinition of policy issues and stability in considerable detail, identifying
specific hypotheses and showing how these can be systematically
tested.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a project that will allow numerous other
scholars to use the dataset and do subsequent investigations to enhance
substantially our understanding of the topic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;