* 0111073
* RUI:  Na+/H+ Exchange in Fish Acid-Base and Ion Regulation
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* James Claiborne, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Dona Boggs
* 08/31/2006
* USD 553,833.00

The gills of fish accomplish many of the same functions as the lungs, liver and
kidneys in terrestrial animals. Gills are the site for gas exchange, metabolic
waste excretion, salt balance, and pH adjustments. At the cellular level,
certain proteins are thought to be responsible for the movement of salts like
sodium (Na+) and acid (H+). The transfers of these ions across the gills may in
turn assist in acid-base and ion regulation in these animals. Over the past 70
years, a variety of cellular systems have been proposed to drive these exchanges
in freshwater and marine fish species. &lt;br/&gt;Na+/H+ exchange proteins (NHE)
have been described in a number of mammalian and non-mammalian systems. These
proteins are thought to function in several roles including cell volume
regulation, pH balance, and Na+ uptake. Several different types of NHEs have
been characterized in mammals with NHE-2 and 3 thought to be specific to
transporting epithelial tissues such as kidney and intestine. In this continuing
study, the authors have focused on the presence and function of similar Na+/H+
proteins in fish gills. Using RT-PCR and 3' RACE they have recently demonstrated
the presence of mRNA transcripts homologous to NHE in the gills of the marine
long-horned sculpin (Myoxocephalus octodecimspinosus), the euryhaline mummichog
(Fundulus heteroclitus), elasmobranchs (Raja erinacea and Squalus acanthias) and
a craniate (Myxine glutinosa). When M. glutinosa was made acidotic, quantitative
PCR revealed that mRNA for NHE in the gills increases in a fashion parallel to
net acid efflux measured in vivo. The presence of gill NHE in these species was
also established using antibodies for the mammalian NHE-1 and NHE-3 isoforms.
&lt;br/&gt;The investigators have proposed that net H+ excretion following
acidosis in these marine species is driven by gill Na+/H+ exchange in a fashion
similar to mammalian transporting epithelia such as the renal proximal tubule.
The objectives of their research are three-fold: 1) to determine the presence
and isoform distribution of Na+/H+ antiporter mRNA and protein expression in the
gill tissue of marine fish; 2) to describe the specific cellular distribution of
the NHE antiporters in the gill epithelium; and 3) to characterize the effects
of systemic acidosis or variations in external salinity on gill NHE expression.
&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish these goals, they propose to study gill ion transport
mechanisms using a combination of molecular, physiological, and immunological
techniques. They plan to design fish-specific monoclonal and/or polyclonal
antibodies to correlate in vivo and cellular changes following acidosis or
alterations in the external salinity. The cellular distribution of these
proteins will be shown using immunohistochemical localization and confocal laser
microscopy. RT-PCR, 3' and 5' RACE and quantitative PCR will be used to detect
and amplify regions of currently unknown NHEs. The authors have already cloned
the first full-length sequence for a fish NHE isoform which is most closely
related to the specialized epithelial NHE-2 in mammals. This study will provide
new insight into the physiology of gill acid-base and ion regulation, and may
lead to a greater understanding of the molecular structure and conserved
regulatory domains of other vertebrate NHE isoforms. This four-year project will
involve both undergraduate and Masters of Science students doing research at the
home institution (Georgia Southern University) and at a marine field station
(The Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory).&lt;br/&gt;