* 0111811
* The Impact of Television on Very Young Children
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Daniel Anderson, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Marguerite Barratt
* 08/31/2004
* USD 282,160.00

Abstract

The Impact of Television on Very Young Children

Daniel R. Anderson

Little is known about the impact of television on children younger than three
years. Nevertheless, field studies indicate that exposure to television is
associated with slower language and cognitive development. This research
considers the impact of two types of television to which very young children are
exposed. The first type is television as background, watched by others, to which
the child pays little active attention. The second type is television as
foreground specifically designed for very young children and to which they
actively attend. The first two studies test the hypothesis that background
television disrupts toy play and parent-child social interactions. If the
hypothesis is correct, background television reduces the quality of these
activities essential for healthy cognitive and social development. In the first
study very young children's toy play is observed in the presence of a television
program for adults, a television program for older children, and with no
television. If background television disrupts play, it is expected that there
will be systematic differences in both qualitative and quantitative aspects of
toy play. In the second study parent-child interactions are observed in the
presence of a television program for adults and with no television. If
background television disrupts parent-child interactions, both qualitative and
quantitative differences in parent-child interactions will be found.
Increasingly, television programs are being developed specifically for very
young children. There has been no firm determination as to when very young
children begin to comprehend such programs. The third study is designed to
assess the age at which very young children discriminate comprehensible and
incomprehensible versions of Teletubbies. The fourth study assesses whether
Teletubbies influences the quality of toy play subsequent to viewing. The
research will provide significant new information relevant to the current debate
concerning the impact of electronic media on very young children. Specifically,
the research will indicate whether background television disrupts very young
children's cognitive and social behaviors. Additionally, the research will
provide an initial determination of the earliest age at which conventional
television can be plausibly educational, as well as whether play behavior is
stimulated or otherwise influenced by a prominent television program
specifically designed for very young children. The research will also cast light
on the impact of two future trends in media. One trend, the advent of high-
definition and broadband television, will provide programming that is more
salient as a background influence in young children's environments. The second
trend is that, with the economic success of Teletubbies, other programs for very
young children will soon follow. These studies will provide basic observations
essential to evaluating the impact of television on very young children now and
in the future.