* 0112199
* Tribology Issues in Biology and Medicine, a Workshop (June 2001, Chicago, Illinois)
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2001,03/31/2003
* Michael Bryant, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Yip-Wah Chung
* 03/31/2003
* USD 60,012.00

0112199&lt;br/&gt;Bryant&lt;br/&gt;Support is provided for a multi-disciplinary
workshop to identify important areas of research in tribology that involve
biological, biomedical, and medical issues. This workshop willhave principal
goals of providing an overview of the current state of the art and recommending
new directions of research. The workshop will have approximately 40 to 50
participants, and feature several keynote speakers and participants from
tribology, medicine, the biomedical implant community, and biology. The 2.5 day
long&lt;br/&gt;workshop's format will consist of the following:&lt;br/&gt;
Introductory session&lt;br/&gt; Presentations by keynote speakers&lt;br/&gt;
Posters by attendees&lt;br/&gt; Breakout sessions&lt;br/&gt; Final half day wrap
up session&lt;br/&gt;The workshop results will be documented to provide valuable
guidance for future research directions in tribology. Results of the workshop
will be released into the public domain by the workshop organizing committee, as
a report to NSF, and as an article to be submitted to one of the Tribology and
Biomedical Engineering periodicals and as web-based documents. Special efforts
will bemade to facilitate communication between the various scientific
communities involved and to identify areas for future cross-disciplinary
research. Special efforts will also be made to bring new researchers and
graduate students to the meeting and to attract attendeed from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;