* 0112354
* Orographic Precipitation and Airmass Transformation
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2006
* Ronald Smith, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 08/31/2006
* USD 790,218.00

An improved understanding of, and the ability to model, orographic precipitation
and air mass drying would contribute to solving a number of earth science
problems involving: flash flood prediction, water resources, mountain glaciers,
ice core interpretation, erosion, rain-shadow deserts and inter-ocean water
transport. Most current models either oversimplify or fail to resolve key moist
orographic flow processes. In this research, the Principal Investigator will
test existing mesoscale models and develop new theories combining airflow
dynamics and microphysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The highest priority is to
compare existing model runs with data from the Mesoscale Alpine Programme (MAP).
This is the only detailed data set using new technologies that allows moist air
flow over a major mountain range to be diagnosed. Four MAP cases have been
identified with differing characteristics. For each case, output from three
numerical models will be compared with conventional and aircraft data. If the
agreement is satisfactory, detailed interpretation of the output will follow.
Several theoretical questions will be addressed in the analysis: the relative
role of moist ascent versus flow splitting and blocking; triggered convection;
the accuracy of parcel trajectories; the effect of model resolution; the testing
of the "threshold" theory of precipitation efficiency; sensitivity to
microphysical algorithms; and the conservation of equivalent potential
temperature in mixing flows. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second phase of the
research will include data and publications from three contemporary medium scale
experiments managed by other groups. The results from these projects will be
compared to put the MAP results into a broader context and allow cautious
generalizations to be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the final phase of the
project, applications of relevant orographic precipitation models to other
geoscience disciplines (see items above) will be undertaken, broadening the
impact of the work. A scholarly survey of the field will be attempted.
Considerable influence on educational programs should be seen from this research
activity. Undergraduate and graduate students and post-docs will be involved in
the field work and data analysis.