* 0112863
* US-Pakistan Workshop: 26th International Nathiagali Summer College on Physics and Contemporary Needs:  Islamabad, Pakistan, 25th June - 14th July, 2001
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2002
* Talat Rahman, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 06/30/2002
* USD 15,000.00

0112863 &lt;br/&gt;Rahman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project
supports the participation of US scientists in the 26th International Nathiagali
Summer College on Physics and Contemporary Needs in Islamabad, Pakistan, June
25-July 14, 2001. Dr. Riazuddin, Director of the National Center for Physics at
Quaid-e-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan is the organizer of a one-week
session on condensed matter physics (CMP) at the College. Scientists from
Europe, Pakistan and the United States will make presentations. Attendees
include scientists, mostly recent Ph.D.'s, from a number of developing countries
in the region, including Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, China, India, Iran, Nepal,
Tajikistan, Turkey, as well as Pakistan. They also include graduate students
from Pakistan. There are four areas covered during the three week College. The
US team will participate mainly in the CMP session. The topics are selected with
the aim of providing a synoptic view of latest advances and trends in these
fields of research. These include the statistical mechanics of systems far from
equilibrium; studies of nanostructuring and etching of metal surfaces; theory,
synthesis and characterization of nanostructured materials for photocatalysis;
macroscopic studies of thin film growth on semiconductor surfaces; atomistic
studies of thin film growth on metal surfaces, carbon nanotubes; studies of
permanent magnetic materials and magnetic multilayers; and studies of permanent
magnets, magnetic nanostructures and magnet recording applications. The
organizers are planning to have a publication of the proceedings of the entire
College presentations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: This project enables eight
US scientists to attend an important meeting and to allow scientists from
countries in south Asia to stay in touch with recent developments in physics,
especially condensed matter physics, resulting from observations at facilities
in advanced countries. This is an excellent opportunity for scientists from the
advanced countries to take their knowledge and ideas for exchange, development,
and application in other communities. Lecturers and speakers from Europe, China
and Japan are increasingly participating in these summer colleges. This project
allows the US to maintain a presence in programs like this and to remain
competitive in scientific collaborations, recruiting graduate students and
visitors, and to have the opportunity to disseminate results of research. Past
colleges have resulted in recruitment of several new graduate students who have
added significantly to US research programs. The project meets INT objectives in
supporting seminars where mutual benefits and dissemination of information is
likely to result.