* 0112923
* Bandgap Engineering and Scaling Approaches to SiGe HBT Optimization for Mobile and Optical Networking IC's
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* John Cressler, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2005
* USD 210,000.00

0112923&lt;br/&gt;Niu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Driven by both consumer and
commercial needs, the Internet is becoming mobile and broadband, thus allowing
the user high speed access to the world wide web from their cell phones and
other wireless devices. Optical networking and mobile communication are the key
enabling technologies for a mobile and broad-band&lt;br/&gt;Internet. Because of
its high performance, low cost, and compatibility with silicon CMOS, SiGe HBT
technology has recently emerged as a contender for both mobile and optical
networking applications. Current SiGe HBTs designs are focused on improving the
speed of these devices, while our recent experiments have&lt;br/&gt;shown that
the optimum device structure for wireless applications are considerably
different. Issues important for mobile and optical networking, such as 1/f
noise, phase noise (frequency domain sideband and time domain jitter), and
linearity, have not been researched as a function of the device structure, or
optimized for these performance targets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This ITR proposal
is aimed at systematically examining the impact of bandgap engineering and
scaling on all of the device figures-of-merit that are of interest to wireless
and optical communication IC's, and use of these results to optimize the SiGe
profiles and geometries for various circuit applications. In the
process,&lt;br/&gt;scientifically intriguing and technologically important
questions, such as why SiGe HBTs with a nonlinear I-V can have excellent
linearity, will be answered. This is a brand new area of SiGe device research,
and has a high potential payoff given the exploding industry interest in
applying SiGe technology to wireless and optical&lt;br/&gt;networking systems.
The outcome will include a scientific understanding of important open questions
on SiGe HBTs, a modification of the design approach and methodology, as well as
hardware demonstration of the novel SiGe profiles through our close
collaboration with IBM, thus ensuring a timely impact on current and future
development in SiGe technology. Given the enormous amount of interest in
applying SiGe technology to both wireless and optical networking applications,
the PIs will develop an advanced course on SiGe HBTs using WebCT, so that the
outcome of the proposed research can be remotely accessed by graduate students
and practicing engineers in industry.&lt;br/&gt;