* 0112067
* Learning in Multiple Behavioral Contexts
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2001,12/31/2005
* Daniel Papaj, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Godfrey R. Bourne
* 12/31/2005
* USD 340,291.00

Learning in Multiple Behavioral Contexts&lt;br/&gt;Daniel R. Papaj and Martha R.
Weiss&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of animal learning from an ecological
perspective is expanding. One area that has received relatively little attention
is learning in multiple contexts. This is surprising because most animals must
learn in multiple behavioral contexts, and it is reasonable to expect that
learning in one context affects learning in another. In the proposed research, a
butterfly will be used to address if and how learning interacts across
behavioral contexts. Color learning in a species of swallowtail butterfly will
be evaluated in egg-laying and nectar-foraging contexts, two situations in which
associative learning of color is known to occur in this species and for which
dual learning has been demonstrated. The objectives of this proposal include:
(1) assess color preferences of native individuals in each behavioral context;
(2) assess a butterfly's selectivity to color under training in each context
singly. (3) assess a butterfly's selectivity in responses to color combinations
under dual training in different contexts and; (4) explore how learning in one
context might interfere with learning in the other context. To meet these
objectives, a battery of laboratory and enclosure assays will be undertaken.
Results of the proposed research will be of general interest to students of
animal learning in diverse fields, and will provide a link between work in
behavioral ecology, on the one hand, and laboratory-based studies of learning
and memory from psychological, ethological, and neurobiological perspectives, on
the other. With respect to broader impacts, involvement of undergraduates
through university-sponsored programs at both the University of Arizona and
Georgetown University will enable students to experience the pleasures and
challenges of research first-hand. In addition, an undergraduate-level
laboratory exercise on butterfly learning initiated by co-PI Weiss will be
refined and made available to the scientific community through the Animal
Behavior Society web site. Finally, taking advantage of the broad public appeal
of butterflies, our findings will be disseminated not only in scientific
publications but also through popular essays, public talks, and visits to
primary and secondary schools.&lt;br/&gt;