* 0112111
* Evaluating the Role of Acetylcholinesterase (AChE) in Axonal Outgrowth Using AChE Knockout Mice
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* David Jett, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* James Deshler
* 08/31/2002
* USD 35,533.00

0112111 Jett

Abstract

The morphology of neurons is a primary determinant of connectivity patterns in
the adult nervous system, and the formation of functional neural circuits
depends upon precise regulation of the outgrowth of axons from neurons during
development of the nervous system. It is clear that developing neurons use
specific environmental cues to regulate the growth of axons in space and time.
One cue that is emerging as a potentially important factor in controlling axonal
growth is acetylcholinesterase (AChE). While AChE is best known as the enzyme
that metabolizes the neurotransmitter acetylcholine, recent evidence suggests
that AChE also promotes axon outgrowth. Thus, the spatiotemporal expression of
AChE in some neuronal cell types is consistent with its proposed role in axonal
outgrowth. Functional studies using pharmacological inhibitors of AChE or
genetic manipulations of AChE levels in cultured cells further support the
hypothesis that AChE promotes axonal outgrowth, and suggest that the morphogenic
activity of AChE is not dependent on its catalytic activity. It has been
proposed that AChE promotes axonal growth via adhesive mechanisms since analyses
of its structure indicate significant homology with cell adhesion molecules
known to function in neuronal morphogenesis. However the relevance of these
observations to regulation of axonal outgrowth in laboratory animals has yet to
be directly tested. Dr. Jett and co-workers will address this by examining
axonal morphology in the developing central and peripheral nervous systems of
the recently described transgenic mouse that lacks the gene for AChE. Dr. Jett
will: (1) Determine if the targeted disruption of the AChE gene alters axonal
growth patterns in the nervous system of mice; and (2) Determine if aberrations
in axonal morphology can be rescued by addition of exogenous AChE. The first
specific aim will be accomplished by comparing spatial and temporal patterns of
axonal growth of neurons in AChE knockout mice to those in wild-type mice.
Axonal outgrowth will be visualized using specific labeling dyes and
immunocytochemical localization. The gain-of-function studies proposed in the
second specific aim will be performed by adding recombinant AChE to cultures of
DRG neurons derived from AChE knockout mice. Axonal morphology will be
quantified with respect to number, length and branching using computerized
morphometric analyses of neuronal cultures immunostained for neurofilaments. It
is anticipated that results from these studies will further our understanding of
the basic mechanisms that control neuronal connectivity in the developing
nervous system.

