* 0112542
* ITR/AP:  Collaborative Research: Sampling Methods for Optimization and Control of Subsurface Contamination
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Carl Kelley, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2005
* USD 166,666.00

The objectives of this project are (1) to simultaneously design optimization
methods and subsurface flow and transport simulators for a variety of subsurface
contaminant remediation problems, (2) to implement the optimization-simulation
combination in a way that exploits parallelism in both the optimization and
simulation, including some ideas for grid-based implementations of search-poll
type methods, (3) to apply the new algorithms to two demonstration problems, (4)
to train a generation of students in this multidisciplinary setting. Two of the
PIs, Dennis and Kelley, have expertise in a wide range of optimization
technology, both gradient-based methods for smooth problems and sampling methods
for problems for which gradients are not available. Kelley and Miller have a
long-standing collaboration in numerical methods for simulation of multi-phase
flow. The PIs will exploit this expertise and design the simulators and
optimization algorithms simultaneously. There will be IT-centered activity in
software. Two codes, FOCUS and IFFCO, are under development by the principal
investigators. The most mature of these, IFFCO an implicit filtering
optimization code, will be ported to MPI from PVM, packaged for ease of
installation and testing, documented as a book, and released in final form. The
PIs will also continue to develop FOCUS, an implementation of the surrogate
management framework ideas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Remediation of subsurface
contamination is an important issue world-wise. The goal is to clean up, or
render immobile, underground contaminants such as fuel spills from underground
tanks or industrial waste from leaking drums, and do this at minimum cost.
Management decisions must be made, and the potential financial penalty of bad
decisions is great. Mathematical models of subsurface systems are often used to
assist in making such decisions and these models are increasingly linked with
optimization approaches to aid design and management decision making. Subsurface
remediation strategies involve decisions such as the restoration approach to
use, the selection of locations to install devices, such as wells, and the rates
of extraction from or injection into these wells. There are open scientific
problems in simulation related to fundamental modeling and choice of numerical
methods that need to be addressed as part of the design of software to optimize
the remediation methods. The three PIs have expertise in simulation, modeling,
and experimental work in multi-phase flows as well as broad expertise in
optimization methods. The objectives of this project are to design models,
simulators, and optimization methods simultaneously with the goal of more
efficient optimal design based on more accurate models.