* 0112256
* CSEDI Collaborative Res.: Composition and Seismic Structure of the Mantle Transition Zone
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Stephen Grand, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2005
* USD 165,000.00

Bass &lt;br/&gt;Grand &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators propose a
collaborative effort between a mineral physicist (J Bass, University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign) and a seismologist (S. Grand, University of Texas, Austin)
aimed at elucidating the seismic structure and mineralogy of the Earth's
transition zone, from 300-1000 km in depth. The seismic structure will be
determined in several regions with unprecedented resolution of the velocity
jumps across transition zone discontinuities and the seismic velocity gradients
between the jumps. The available mineral elasticity data and phase relations for
relevant mineral systems will be used to calculate the compositions and
proportions of individual phases, and the properties of candidate mantle
assemblages as a function of depth for a range of bulk compositions. Two key
experiments on the high temperature and pressure elasticity of beta phase and
aluminous perovskite will be done to fill in the most pressing gaps in the
elasticity data base. A new waveform inversion code will be used to determine
acceptable fits of mineralogic models directly to the seismic data within
certain imposed constraints. For example, with the percent olivine component and
size of discontinuities fixed, they can search for allowable models of gradients
that satisfy seismic constraints. Other initial conditions will be tried as
well. In this way the investigators propose to define both the structure of the
transition zone and the range of mineralogical models which are compatible with
the seismic data in a more formal quantitative way than has been done before.
This research will involve one student working on mineral physics aspects of the
project at UIUC, and a student working on the seismological aspects at UTA.
&lt;br/&gt;