* 0112358
* Size-Scale Sensitivity in Multiphase Systems with a Liquid Crystalline Phase
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2001,02/28/2005
* Morton Denn, CUNY City College
* Continuing grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 02/28/2005
* USD 314,486.00

Abstract/ CTS-0112358 / Denn, Morton M / CUNY City College

Size -Scale Sensitivity in Mutliphase Systems with a Liquid Crystalline Phase

Liquid crystalline systems contain an intrinsic length scale, the correlation
length over which the liquid crystalline order is preserved; this scale is of
the order of a few micrometers in nematic liquid crystalline polymers (LCPs).
The liquid crystalline order can affect the interphase structure in a multiphase
system, which in turn can affect macroscopic properties. Thus, the system
behavior depends on the interaction between the different length scales: the
molecular nanoscale characterizing the interfacial region, the mesoscales
characterizing the correlation length and the phase dimensions, and the
macroscopic scale on which properties are determined. Blends containing small
amounts of a LCP in a matrix of a flexible thermoplastic are of considerable
technological interest. It is possible to develop "self-reinforced" composites
that exploit the outstanding tensile properties of fibers made from LCPs by
creating a fibrillar morphology in the LCP dispersed phase. In addition, LCPs
can act as "flow modifiers" for conventional thermoplastics, effecting a
reduction in extrusion pressure at low concentrations. Our prior research has
shown that the linear viscoelasticity of LCP blends is insensitive to droplets
smaller than the nematic correlation length, and that the dynamics of LCP
droplets do not follow the same scaling as droplets of flexible polymers.
Furthermore, we have shown in preliminary Monte Carlo calculations that the
interfacial tension between a LCP and a flexible polymer depends on the far-
field nematic orientation in the droplet.

The proposed research comprises three complementary approaches to elucidate the
effect of multiple length scales on the mechanics of blends containing LCPs:
continuum theory, Monte Carlo calculations, and experiments.

Continuum theory. The LCP orientation distribution in the droplet will be a
major factor in the deformation mechanics, and transitions between radial and
bipolar orientations, which will affect the interfacial tension, are expected
with droplet deformation. The Principal Investigator plans initially to use a
perturbation analysis of a Leslie-Ericksen (LE) material with equal Frank
elastic constants to analyze the first-order effect of droplet deformation. The
LE fluid is the most elementary nematic model, and it is the asymptotic limit of
more complete models for LCPs that are extensions of the Doi theory. Then the
Principal Investigator will undertake a full three-dimensional finite-element
solution of the equilibrium distribution in a deformed sphere for a LE material
with unequal Frank coefficients. The purpose of this computation is to
understand the likely orientation distributions in droplets after shearing. The
time scale for droplet response defines the frequency range in which interfacial
effects can be observed in blend rheology. The Principal Investigator will
initially determine the response of a LE fluid, using an expansion in spherical
harmonics. This is an important calculation in light of the experimental
observations for blend linear viscoelasticity and droplet dynamics. The
principal investigator expects the transient response of the droplet in the
linear regime to depend on the Frank elasticity when the elastic stresses in a
"domain" become comparable to the Laplace pressure. Available data do not show
this dependence, but they do show a dependence on initial strain that is absent
for droplets of a flexible polymer. This behavior needs to be rationalized by an
analysis of the type proposed here. The principal investigator will repeat the
Palierne analysis of viscoelastic blends for a monodomain liquid crystalline
droplet, first using the LE theory for simplicity. The computed rheological
properties are likely to depend on the anchoring conditions imposed on the
nematic phase at the boundary, which will define the nematic order in the domain
interior. The principal investigator expects the response to be sensitive to the
Frank elasticity terms in the LE equation in the neighborhood of singularities.
The LE theory is structurally similar to multi-domain theories for LCPs, so
these calculations should provide a framework for interpreting experimentally
observed differences between multidomain and monodomain droplets. The principal
investigator anticipates a dependence of the storage modulus G' on a new
dimensionless group involving the correlation length. The principal investigator
will then carry out the comparable calculation for the Doi theory and relevant
extensions.

Monte Carlo Calculations. The Bond Fluctuation Model (BFM) will be used to study
the effect of nematic order on the interfacial tension between a LCP droplet and
an amorphous matrix, exploring chain length, energy parameters, and
polydispersity. Modification of the BFM by developing a rational method for
placing interpolated points on the lattice near the interface is required to
account for the large size differences between LCP and flexible chain monomers.
The effect of shear flow on the chain orientation near the interface and on the
interfacial tension will be explored using a pseudopotential model for self-
avoiding lattice chains. Experiments. Linear viscoelastic measurements intended
to isolate the effect of the interface and Frank orientational elasticity from
macromolecular effects will be carried out on blends containing low molar mass
liquid crystals (LMMLCs). The principal investigators preliminary measurements
suggest that the linear viscoelastic behavior of the LMMLCs may be unusual
(negative G') and shear history dependent. Thus, the first step will be to
elucidate the linear viscoelastic behavior and to analyze the results in the
context of the predictions of LE and Doi theories. The principal investigator
will then study the rheology of the blends, employing LMMLCs that exhibit a
phase transition to obtain nematic and isotropic dispersed phases with equal
viscosities and identical chemical compositions.