* 0112488
* ITR/PE(SBE): The Impact of Internet Use on Women's Activity Patterns and the Gender Division of Household Labor
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Mei-Po Kwan, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Thomas J. Baerwald
* 09/30/2005
* USD 191,832.00

With the rapid growth in the amount of information resources and transaction
opportunities on the Internet, Internet use is becoming an important dimension
of social inequality. Among those who will be significantly affected by this
social and technological trend, the situation of women calls for special
attention because new technologies may not necessarily lead to significant
beneficial changes in their everyday lives as suggested by past studies on
women's urban experiences and interaction with new technologies. This research
analyzes the impact of Internet use on women's activity patterns and the gender
division of household labor. It attempts to answer the following questions: (a)
Is Internet use helping to relax some of women's space-time constraints, thus
allowing more flexible spatial and temporal arrangement of activities in the
physical world and helping women to cope with the demand of their multiple
roles? (b) How do women's Internet activities affect their activities in the
physical world? (c) How does the Internet use of the female and male heads of
household affect the gender division of household labor? To answer these
questions, data from a sample of women in Columbus, Ohio, will be collected
through an activity-Internet diary survey. Hypotheses will be tested through
comparing the experiences of women with different levels of Internet use using
structural equation models. Geographic information System-based three-
dimensional visualization will also be used to analyze the space-time activity-
Internet diary data.

The study will enhance our understanding of the impact of Internet use on
women's activity patterns and the gender division of household labor. The
results will be useful for formulating social and economic policies in several
important areas. For example, sustainable transportation policies aiming at
reducing the amount of travel through telecommuting need to be informed by such
understanding. If women's many needs to travel cannot be substituted by working
at home using the Internet (e.g. chauffeuring children), encouraging women's
telecommuting will neither reduce traffic nor their stress in everyday life.
Further, this research will have significant implications for economic policies
aiming at promoting electronic commerce and the use of the Internet. If the use
of the Internet reinforces the existing gender division of household labor
rather than engenders more equitable gender relations, appropriate economic
policies may be needed to compromise the goal of reducing gender inequality in
society at large.

