* 0112960
* ITR/IM+AP(GEO)Collaborative Research:Creation of a Geospatial Data System for the Transition Between the Colorado Plateau and Basin and Range Provinces (Geoinformatics in Action)
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Stephen Reynolds, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2004
* USD 202,122.00

0112960&lt;br/&gt;Arrowsmith&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant, supported through
funds from the NSF/Information Technology Research - Small Grants Program,
facilitates a joint effort between Arizona State University and the University
of Texas at El Paso to construct an integrated data system focusing on the
Transition zone between the Colorado plateau and the Basin and Range province
primarily in Arizona and New Mexico. This region is important for the
development of an integrated geological and spatially-referenced data system as
it is of fundamental significance to the geologic evolution of southwestern
North America. In addition, such a system is timely as it can be used to address
practical problems such as the effects of urbanization and dwindling water
resources. Construction of this data system will involve three main efforts: 1)
compilation of many large, scattered and heterogeneous earth science data sets
into verified, standardized, and documented data bases; 2) construction of web-
based interfaces that allow any interested party to access these data, receive
robust metadata describing the data and how best to use them, and receive
information on how to add data to the system via structured protocols; and 3)
the design and construction of an extensive collection of public domain software
(a toolbox) that would empower users with the capability to use and update the
data in a substantial way. This project will leverage considerable support from
several federal and state agencies including NASA, the U. S. Geological Survey,
the National Imaging and Mapping Agency, and the Arizona Geological Survey.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;