* 0112163
* Computational Hardware Upgrade to Create an Efficient University of Wyoming Geophysical Department Computational Center
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2004
* Scott Smithson, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 09/30/2004
* USD 70,000.00

0112163 Dueker

This grant provides partial support for the upgrade of the University of
Wyoming, Dept. of Geophysics computation center. Specific equipment to be
purchased includes a central UNIX file server, an automated backup system, a 1/2
TB RAID storage system, and computational equipment to build a 10 node Beowulf
cluster based on 1.2 GHz CPU's with a combined 1 GB of RAM. The enhancements
will support the heavy computational needs of a growing seismology group at
Wyoming including recent hires Drs. Ken Dueker, Michael Cheadle, and Dag
Nummedal in addition to Drs. Scott Smithson and Steve Holbrook. The
seismologists in this department are undertaking new forays into high-fold data
(both onshore and offshore, and including 3D pre-stack data) and real-time
acquisition and event processing of PASSCAL/GSN/NSN broadband seismic data via
the internet. In total, they are currently processing some 3 terrabytes of data.
The Geophysics UNIX computational facility at the University of Wyoming
currently serves 28 users: 18 graduate students, 5 post-doctoral researchers, 6
professors, and several undergraduates using a heterogeneous, dispersed mix of
UNIX hardware and operating systems. This upgrade will centralize processing
power and ease the burden on a current systems administrator by adopting common
operating systems and uniform hardware. ***

