* 0112346
* MudrB Function in Maize and Origin within the Grasses
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Michael Freeling, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 08/31/2004
* USD 370,836.00

The Mutator system is a highly mutagenic family of transposable elements in
maize. Mutator transposition is regulated by the MuDR class of transposons. MuDR
elements encode two genes: mudrA and mudrB. The mudrA gene is the putative
transposase. Although known to be a necessary component of Mu activity, the
biochemical function of the mudrB gene is not known. The primary objective of
this research is to elucidate the evolution and function of this gene. The mudrA
gene is much more widely distributed among grasses than mudrB. Based on this,
and the absence of mudrB in many apparently functional MuDR-like elements, it is
hypothesized that mudrB was captured by MuDR at some point during the evolution
of this transposon. To test this hypothesis, several grasses related to maize
will be surveyed for the presence and composition of mudrB sequences. To
investigate the function of mudrB in maize, existing derivatives that express
only mudrA or only mudrB will be exploited. Experiments in which these two
deletion derivatives will be combined genetically will test the hypothesis that
the two can compliment each other. In addition, the derivative that lacks mudrB
will be crossed to mutations that affect Mutator activity. In order to determine
if mudrB can contribute to high levels of MuDR transposition in a species that
lacks this gene, rice will be transformed with constitutively and inducibly
expressed mudrB. Proteomic analysis of proteins binding Mu element TIRs will be
employed to identify proteins involved in regulating Mu element transposition in
the presence and absence of mudrA or mudrB and in the presence of mutations that
affect Mutator activity. Proteomic analysis of binding of Mu termini from these
mutations will also serve to identify other proteins that operate in the same
pathway as the mutations that affect activity.