* 0112265
* ABR:  The Measurement of 20th Century U. S. Economic Growth
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Robert Gordon, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2004
* USD 166,139.00

During the twentieth century the U. S. economy experienced sharp accelerations
and decelerations in the growth of multi-factor productivity (MFP) over medium-
term intervals. This pattern of acceleration, deceleration, and reacceleration
has been the point of departure for numerous hypotheses about the sources of
growth earlier in the century, about the post-1972 productivity growth slowdown,
and about the post-1995 productivity growth revival.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to carry out measurement projects that question the magnitude and
timing of long-term changes in MFP growth in the U. S. since the late nineteenth
century. There are two separate parts to the research plan. (1) Standard MFP
data prior to World War II are not consistent with official postwar government
series, have not been adjusted for the changing quality of inputs, and require
further adjustment for problems in the measurement of capital input. (2) In what
the investigator called the "Hulten-Bruegel Paradox," a factual inconsistency
plagues any attempt to extrapolate backward an upward price index bias of the
magnitude reported by the 1996 Boskin commission. Such backward extrapolation
implies implausibly low levels of real consumption if one goes back far enough,
e.g., two centuries. The paradox raises the possibility that for some time
intervals, price indexes for major products may have had a zero or even downward
bias.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on topic (1) has now been completed with
striking conclusions. New measures of MFP show much less of a peak in growth
during 1928-50, the period of rapid growth extends back further to 1891, and the
puzzling previous behavior of the output-capital ratio is resolved. The main
emphasis in the project now turns to price measurement. Bias in government price
indexes is normally assumed to be upward, that is, overstating inflation. The
novelty in this project is to explore the possibility that inflation may have
been understated (or overstated by substantially less) in earlier decades. This
possibility, which has not heretofore been systematically investigated, implies
that MFP growth may have been overstated in the golden era when measured
productivity growth was rapid. Shelter services (both rent and homeownership)
are the central focus of the proposed research, the aim of which is to develop
new indexes of price and quality change for shelter over the full period from
World War I to date. Several sources of data have been uncovered that suggest
that the official CPI for residential rent, which is the basis for the deflation
of home ownership in the national income accounts, may substantially understate
inflation in quality-adjusted rents, particularly between 1925 and 1975. A
useful byproduct of the research on the quality of residential shelter will be
to provide new information to reassess the puzzle of negative productivity
growth in the construction industry over the past three decades. The proposal
also provides evidence that the CPI may understate the historic inflation rate
for apparel, another important component of consumer expenditure. Comparisons of
average prices paid and hedonic indexes with matched-model indexes from the same
data source suggest the possibility of a much more rapid rate of apparel
inflation than in the matched-model indexes or in the CPI.&lt;br/&gt;