* 0112889
* ITR:SI Implementing Public-Key Cryptosystems for Secure Information Infrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* William Martin, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jie Wu
* 08/31/2005
* USD 436,000.00

The research described here addresses information security issues for embedded
processors and constrained environments. Embedded processors are found in a vast
array of existing and emerging technologies, including mobile phones, personal
digital assistants, smart cards, and remote-controlled utility network devices
and are distinguished from typical (but far less prevalent) PC-level
microprocessors in their relatively low power consumption and inherent
limitations on memory and speed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is predicted that the
number of applications with embedded microprocessors which will be connected to
our telephone and computer networks will increase dramatically over the next few
years. For instance, it is anticipated that within the next few years, 50% of
all Internet end-devices will have to operate in constrained environments. At
the same time, these networks are enabling remote access to, and manipulation
of, sensitive resources of all sorts, including bank records, medical
information, alarm system, and industrial machinery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
need is clear for long-term planning and directed research in the area of
cryptographic security for these devices. The challenges represented here
require the attention of experts from a variety of disciplines, from engineering
to computer science to mathematics. Both fundamental and immediate problems face
hardware designers, software engineers, and theoretical crypytographers
alike.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose a three-pronged approach in an effort to
contribute solutions to these problems. The long-term ambition of such research
is to bring cryptographic security solutions to the market which are low-cost,
highly scalable, and suitable for constrained environments. This project places
particular focus on implementation of public-key algorithms in embedded devices
and is divided into three modules as follow:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of
power-efficient and scalable cryptographic hardware for pervasive
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigation of emerging public-key schemes
which appear promising for implementation in constrained
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evaluation of combinatorial structures for
public-key schemes in hardware and on embedded
processors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-pronged approach combines a long
view, cutting across disciplines, as well as a variety of very promising short-
term objectives which assure practical relevance and payoff.