* 0112484
* CSEDI Collaborative  Research: Experimental Study of Trace-Element Partitioning between the Core and Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Raymond Jeanloz, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2004
* USD 135,728.00

EAR-0112484 Jeanloz Shimizu

The investigators propose to conduct a 2-year collaborative study between high-
pressure experimental geophysicists at the University of California at Berkeley
and analytical geochemists at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. This
research will experimentally evaluate the feasibility and validate the
measurement of trace-element partitioning between metal and silicate at the high
pressures and temperatures of the Earth's deep mantle and core, ~100 GPa and
4000 K. The possibility of combining the capability of the laser-heated diamond
cell, to reproduce conditions of the planetary interior, with that of secondary
ion mass spectrometry (SIMS), for measuring isotopic abundances at the ppm level
and below on spatial scales of ms, will be evaluated. If successful, these
combined tools can be used as a means of resolving major issues in geochemistry
and geophysics that depend on understanding the distribution of trace elements
within the mantle and core. Such studies are crucial for determining the
potential consequences of chemical interactions between the core and mantle over
geological time and, more generally, for deciphering the evolution of the
Earth's deep interior. The experiments proposed here are intended to help
develop methodologies for element-partitioning studies to be pursued in the
future.