* 0112281
* U.S.-Slovak Ecological Research on Responsiveness of Alpine Vegetation to Nitrogen Inputs
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2001,05/31/2006
* William Bowman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 05/31/2006
* USD 82,595.00

This U.S.-Slovak project between William Bowman of the University of Colorado,
Boulder, and Lubos Halada of the Institute of Landscape Ecology, Slovak Academy
of Sciences, compares the responses of two alpine sites that differ in their
rates and the temporal extent of nitrogen deposition due to pollution and
nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P) fertilization. The US site is at Niwot Ridge in
the Front Range of the Colorado Rocky Mountains and the Slovak site is in the
Western Tatra Mountains, near Mt. Salatin. The goal is to assess ecosystem
responses over long periods to contrasting levels of chronic atmospheric
nitrogen deposition, which historically have been very high in Europe and
relatively low in the Rockies.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The U.S. and Slovak teams
will collaborate on experimental approaches to examining plant-soil feedback and
on assessing the impact of environmental change on ecosystem function.
Specifically they intend to examine: 1) the response to N and P fertilization of
alpine vegetation which received high rates of N deposition for several decades;
2) the importance of plant species composition and abundance to N retention in
the alpine soils, and 3) the degree to which changes in the plant species
composition has occurred over the past one and two decades. Results should
improve our basic knowledge of alpine systems where the ratio of N deposition to
plant biomass is high relative to other ecosystems. If successful, the project
also may lead to better global predictions of the consequences from available
nitrogen. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This ecological research project fulfills the
program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling experts in the
United States and Central Europe to combine complementary talents and share
research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence.