* 0112040
* Collaborative Research:  Children's Development of Economic Skills and Preferences
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Catherine Krause, University of New Mexico
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2004
* USD 81,358.00

Children live in complex economic environments. They make choices about what to
consume and they earn money. Children save, exchange goods, make decisions under
uncertainty, and they share and bargain among themselves and with their parents
and other adults. There are two main reasons why it is important to improve our
understanding of these sorts of economic behavior in children. First, a better
understanding of the development of children's economic behavior will lead to a
better understanding of economic behavior in adults. Many economic norms,
habits, and preferences are acquired in childhood and this study will improve
our understanding of how these develop. Second, many of the decisions children
make have consequences for the rest of their lives. We believe that an
understanding of children's behavior based on economics will make it possible
for society to help children make better decisions as children.

The first goal of our research is to determine whether economic models are
applicable to children. If so, at what age does economics become useful for
understanding which different aspects of children's behavior? Second, we will
use computer based economic experiments to construct a panel data set that will
provide basic information on how children's economic behaviors, such as
rationality, altruism, risk behaviors, and bargaining, develop with age. Our
third objective is to develop an understanding of how demographic variables and
family policies influence children's preferences and economic skills. A very
practical and important benefit of this research will be a better understanding
of how parents, schools, and society can better prepare children for the complex
economic environment they will face as adults. Currently there is almost no
research on how children acquire economic skills. Parents rely on information
from folklore, their own experience, and advice from unscientific studies and
reports. Schools do not explicitly teach what we, as economists, would regard as
some of the most important economic skills. Children are left to acquire basic
economic decision making skills haphazardly. This research will provide some of
the basic descriptive information needed to improve this situation.



