* 0112473
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Vicarious shame and guilt:  Antecedents and Consequences
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Brian Lickel, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 08/31/2005
* USD 204,994.00

A growing body of research has identified the important role of shame and guilt
in regulating human social behavior. Past research has discovered that shame and
guilt are often evoked by similar circumstances, yet these emotions are clearly
distinct. For example, whereas guilt appears to facilitate smoother social
interactions and psychological adjustment, shame prompts feelings of self-
consciousness and a desire to withdraw from social encounters. Although existing
research on shame and guilt has focused on the experience of these emotions as
it occurs after people have committed a blameworthy action themselves, almost no
research has examined factors that predict when people experience shame or guilt
for actions carried out by other individuals. The proposed research will test a
model of vicarious shame and guilt that integrates current understandings of
self-conscious emotion with theoretical perspectives on social associations to
predict what types of associations make individuals susceptible to vicarious
shame versus guilt for the actions of others. The perceived essentiality of
one's association to a wrongdoer is predicted to intensify reactions of
vicarious shame and distancing responses, whereas one's level of interpersonal
interdependence with a wrongdoer is predicted to intensify reactions of
vicarious guilt and efforts to repair any damage done to a victim. A series of
14 experiments will manipulate the type of association participants have to an
individual who commits a wrongdoing and examine the effects of these
manipulations on participants' self-reported emotional reactions and cognitive
appraisals, as well as their behavioral responses to both the wrongdoer and the
victim. Because shame and guilt evoke such different behavioral reactions to
events, the proposed research on vicarious shame and guilt promises to yield
insights important for theories of intergroup and interpersonal behavior, as
well as for theories of emotion.&lt;br/&gt;