* 0112383
* Scientific Computing Research Environments for the Mathematical Sciences (SCREMS)
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* William Abikoff, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 08/31/2002
* USD 0.00

The Department of Mathematics at the University of Connecticut
at&lt;br/&gt;Storrs will purchase a file-server, a rack-mounted cluster
for&lt;br/&gt;parallel computation and visualization equipment which will
be&lt;br/&gt;dedicated to the support of research in the mathematical
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;The equipment will be used for several research projects,
including in&lt;br/&gt;particular: the following work of faculty with the
assistance of&lt;br/&gt;graduate students and post-doctoral
fellows:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prof. Choi's work on parallel algorithms to assist
the virtual cell&lt;br/&gt;project in mathematical biology; Prof. Neumann will
study the&lt;br/&gt;parallelization of algorithms associated to transition
probabilities&lt;br/&gt;of Markov chains; geometric analysis and associated
visualization of&lt;br/&gt;extensions of mappings, conformal geometry of
manifolds and special&lt;br/&gt;surfaces such as rational minimal surfaces are
the focus of&lt;br/&gt;investigations by Profs. Abikoff and McCune; topological
computations&lt;br/&gt;and related algebraic and symbolic computations of
3-dimensional&lt;br/&gt;manifolds and of the structure of modules over the
Steenrod algebra&lt;br/&gt;which arise from the classifying spaces of certain
vector bundles will&lt;br/&gt;be conducted by Profs. Giambalvo and Tollefson;
Computational partial&lt;br/&gt;differential equations with applications in the
physical sciences&lt;br/&gt;which include coupled Schr\"odinger equations,
travelling waves and&lt;br/&gt;the non-linear Gross-Pitaevskii equation will be
studied by&lt;br/&gt;Profs. Choi, Koltracht and McKenna.&lt;br/&gt;