* 0112290
* CSEDI Collaborative Research: Paleomagnetism, the Geodynamo, and Core-Mantle Interactions
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2004
* Lisa Tauxe, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2004
* USD 159,999.00

Bloxham &lt;br/&gt;Constable &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is proposed to undertake a
collaborative study of mantle influences on the geodynamo, combining
geodynamics, geodynamo modeling and paleomagnetism, focusing on three
timescales. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First, by looking at the last 5 million years
the long timescale behavior of the dynamo over a period for which both the time
averaged field and the paleosecular variation can be determined
paleomagnetically will be examined. Furthermore, on this timescale the lowermost
mantle is essentially unchanged from that which is imaged using seismic
tomography, so modern tomographic images of the mantle can be used.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Second, changes in reversal frequency, concentrating on
the period from the Cretaceous Normal Superchron to the present day will be
examined, including the effect of plume formation at the base of the mantle on
the occurrence of reverse flux patches in the magnetic field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Third, preliminary investigations will be conducted on the
very long-term changes in the magnetic field occurring over timescales of
several hundred million years. This work will involve a statistical re-analysis
of the available paleomagnetic measurements to assess what kinds of geodynamo
experiments will be relevant to understanding such long-term changes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dynamo modeling and geodynamical modeling will be
performed at Harvard; the paleomagnetic aspects of the proposal, involving data
compilation, analysis, and field modeling will be performed at Scripps
Institution of Oceanography. The work will be coordinated between the two
institutions primarily by electronic means, supplemented by visits and short-
term exchange of students between the institutions. &lt;br/&gt;