* 0112128
* Evaluation of Chemical and Microbiological Factors Affecting Nitrification in Chloraminated Drinking Water Distribution Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Daniel Noguera, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick L. Brezonik
* 08/31/2005
* USD 482,193.00

011218 Harrington The objective of this research project is to develop a model
integrating the chemical and microbiological phenomena that occur in
chloraminated drinking water systems. As chloramines decay, disinfection
potential decreases and the ammonia formed by the decay is converted to nitrites
by ammonia-oxidizing bacteria (AOB). This causes two problems: first, nitrite is
a public health concern and second, nitrite accelerates the decomposition of the
chloramine residual, further reducing disinfection potential and creating more
ammonia for the AOB to nitrify. In general, nitrification will occur when the
growth rate of AOB (due to the presence of ammonia) is larger than the
inactivation rate of AOB (due to the presence of chloramines). The specific
objectives of this research are to: 1) Develop a food-to-biocide ratio
indicative of nitrification potential and evaluate the ability of this ratio to
predict the time to onset of nitrification in various chemical environments
within the distribution system, 2) Evaluate the microbial ecology of AOB and
nitrite-oxidizing bacteria in chloraminated distribution systems and determine
the chloramine resistance of representative strains isolated from the
distribution systems and 3) Interconnect the chemical and microbiological
fundamentals of nitrification in chloraminated distribution systems using a
mathematical model that simulates nitrification in model distribution systems.
The development of a nitrification potential indicator may help utilities
establish criteria to minimize nitrification episodes. Furthermore, the
evaluation of the onset of nitrification under different environmental
conditions will provide relevant information to formulate strategies for
nitrification control. The microbial ecology studies and the isolation of
relevant chloramine resistant strains will provide the means to explore the
mechanisms of disinfectant resistance. ***