* 0112434
* Analyzing Organizational Ethnographies (Resubmission)
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Randy Hodson, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* beth rubin
* 12/31/2004
* USD 99,532.00

This project develops, codes, and analyzes data from a comprehensive archive of
organizational ethnographies. The archive helps advance the field of the
sociology of work by combining the strengths of both quantitative and
qualitative methodologies. The in-depth observations contained in ethnographic
accounts of organization life provide rich qualitative information, and the
systematic coding of those observations into scores appropriate for quantitative
analysis provides the basis for more precise comparisons of otherwise separate
case studies. The topics studied by the project with the organizational
ethnographies of work include: 1) co-worker relations involving race and gender
relations and discrimination, 2) the role of information technology, 3) causes
of job stress, 4) worker solidarity, unionization, and resistance, 5) workplace
marginality, and 6) sources of high performance.

The project addresses these topics by adding data from 34 recent ethnographies
to an existing archive of 108 ethnographies. Like data from the previously-
archived ethnographies, which served as the basis for numerous and influential
publications, additional data for the archive come from codings based on content
analysis of descriptive passages in the new ethnographies. With the coded data,
the analysis extensively evaluates the reliability and validity of the coding
methods, and addresses relatively new workplace issues studied only by the most
recent ethnographies. In making the archive public, the project allows others to
quantitatively analyze a variety of topics relating to work and organizations.