* 0112950
* ITR/AP (ENG): A Framework-Based Finite Element Approach to Solving Current and Future Multi-physics Problems in Geomaterials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2004
* Kanthasamy Muraleetharan, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2004
* USD 407,500.00

Geomaterials, i.e., soil and rock, are quite prevalent in nature and they are
part of numerous engineering problems and solutions. All civil engineering
structures have to be ultimately supported on soils or rocks. Soils and rocks
play an integral part in the behavior of civil engineering structures such as
buildings, bridges, dams, levees, and aqueducts during catastrophic loading
events such as earthquakes. Soils are also major part of environmental problems
and solutions. Production of petroleum hydrocarbons involves rocks at large
depths. Geomaterials are multiphase porous media consisting of a solid skeleton
and number of fluids within the pore space. Geomaterials exhibit highly
nonlinear and hysteretic behavior during various loading situations.
Traditionally the engineers have treated the above-mentioned processes
separately and often with simplifying assumptions. With the recent advances made
in Information Technology (IT) in areas such as scalable parallel computer
algorithms, distributed computer systems, high speed networks, and visualization
it is now possible to realize a unified geo-analysis tool for solving current
and future problems involving geomaterials where unnecessary simplified
assumptions need not be made and the full 3-D model of a real world system can
be analyzed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key component in achieving this unified
analysis tool is a framework-based finite element application. A framework
represents a collection of common software components for building applications
in some common domain. The basic premise behind the use of a framework is the
recognition of a common set of tasks that must be accomplished in writing the
applications. These tasks can be factored out of the application codes and
collected into a single set of components. Essentially a framework separates
physics of a problem from the computer science aspects of solving that problem.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is directed toward developing a scalable,
parallel geo-analysis tool using a framework-based finite element application in
a three-way collaboration between the University of Oklahoma (OU), the
TeraScale, LLC, and the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. This tool and
the underlying framework will be readily available to the academic community and
industry at a fraction of the cost of similar monolithic codes. This analysis
tool will initially be capable of analyzing static and dynamic behavior of dry,
unsaturated, and saturated soils (fluid flows and solid skeleton deformations).
However, as opposed to the "closed" architecture of the proprietary monolithic
codes, the "open" architecture of the framework will provide users with easy
extendibility to include other multi-physics behavior in geomaterials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resulting tool will be verified first using closed-
form solutions of simple problems in saturated and unsaturated soils. Then the
tool will be validated using centrifuge model tests results for boundary value
problems. Computational experiments will be conducted to test the analysis
tool's capabilities under various distributed and parallel computing
environments. On the educational front the TeraScale framework will be
integrated into courses such as the Introduction to Finite Element Method and
thereby introducing students to this new paradigm in engineering analysis and IT
concepts such as scalable parallel computing. Using Oklahoma's OneNet, High
School students in Oklahoma will be provided an opportunity to manipulate and
view the results from the proposed geo-analysis tool as well as conduct some
simple analyses through the Internet. Seeing and interacting with visualization
of exciting problems such as the earthquake loading of a dam will help recruit
more High School students to science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
expected that the geo-analysis tool developed will not only make the current
advances in IT, such as the distributed computing, widely accessible to
engineering community, but also advance various aspects of IT research itself in
a synergetic manner. For example, the proposed geo-analysis tool will serve as a
test case for evaluating the efficiency of current and future distributed
computing facilities.&lt;br/&gt;