* 0112106
* Discrete Choice and Hedonics: Identification, Estimation, and Application to Housing and New Goods
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2003
* C. Lanier Benkard, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 09/30/2003
* USD 200,494.00

There are two primary goals for this research project. First, the project
derives new methods for iden-tification and estimation of random coefficient
discrete choice models, focusing particularly on discrete choice models with a
finite dimensional error term sometimes called "pure hedonic" models. Such
models are superior economic models with which to an-alyze the effects of a
policy change. Second, these new methods are applied to two important empirical
applications: an analysis of housing choice and new housing policy, and
measurement of the welfare gains to individuals from recent innovation in
personal computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Besides improving the theoretical
economic properties of the model, these econometric methods have two distinct
advantages over existing methods. The project develops a new identification
strategy, using a hedonic pricing equation, which does not require the
instruments that have been widely used in the recent literature. In order to
achieve identification, the recent literature has typically made the assumption
that observable product characteristics are uncorrelated with unobserv-able
product characteristics. Such an assumption is in conflict with a long run
equilibrium in which firms optimally choose their products' characteristics
conditional on the characteristics of their rivals' products. Because the
pricing equation is used to identify unobserved product characteristics, it can
then be used for individual utility maximization to nonparametrically identify
individual taste coefficients. Recovery of individual random coefficients is
important because it allows the researcher to evaluate the distributional
consequences of a policy change, and because it provides for a richer aggregate
demand system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These techniques are used to evaluate
important empirical questions in two industries. The first industry considered
is housing. Specifically, the analysis of Bajari and Kahn (2000) is extended to
address the question of why racial segregation persists. The project also
studies current housing policy, specifically the question of where to locate new
public housing units. Second, individual welfare from innovation in personal
computers is measured over the last decade. Our approach is well suited to this
problem because of its emphasis on individual heterogeneity. In particular, the
investigators are able to break out the source of consumer welfare gains (e.g.,
product quality versus product price) and the distribution of welfare gains
across different groups of individuals, evaluating such questions as a precise
measurement of the form and extent of the "digital divide". The investigators
also revisit the important issue of how to construct an ideal price index for an
industry with rapid quality change like computers.&lt;br/&gt;