* 0112244
* CSEDI Collaborative Research:  Experimental Study of Trace-Element Partitioning between the Core and Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Nobumichi Shimizu, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2003
* USD 50,961.00

&lt;br/&gt;Shimizu EAR-0112244&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators propose to
conduct a 2-year collaborative study between high-pressure experimental
geophysicists at the University of California at Berkeley and analytical
geochemists at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. This research will
experimentally evaluate the feasibility and validate the measurement of trace-
element partitioning between metal and silicate at the high pressures and
temperatures of the Earth's deep mantle and core, ~100 GPa and 4000 K. The
possibility of combining the capability of the laser-heated diamond cell, to
reproduce conditions of the planetary interior, with that of secondary ion mass
spectrometry (SIMS), for measuring isotopic abundances at the ppm level and
below on spatial scales of ms, will be evaluated. If successful, these combined
tools can be used as a means of resolving major issues in geochemistry and
geophysics that depend on understanding the distribution of trace elements
within the mantle and core. Such studies are crucial for determining the
potential consequences of chemical interactions between the core and mantle over
geological time and, more generally, for deciphering the evolution of the
Earth's deep interior. The experiments proposed here are intended to help
develop methodologies for element-partitioning studies to be pursued in the
future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;