* 0112109
* Seeking Protection and the Origin of the State:  An Investigation Using Agent-Based Computational Economics
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Allen Wilhite, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/2003
* USD 30,465.00

Consider a simple world populated with two kinds of individuals; those who work
and create wealth (peasants) and those who survive by taking the property of
others (bandits). The presence of bandits creates an incentive for peasants to
seek protection and defend their property. But protection is costly; it consumes
resources and interferes with an individual's ability to create wealth. This
study investigates how individuals, peasants and bandits, might make decisions
in such circumstances and how those decisions aggregate into societal
characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies the origins and
existence of social institutions by creating and simulating alternative
environments using an agent-based computational economic (ACE) system. ACE is a
methodology that grew out of the artificial life paradigm. In ACE simulations
virtual worlds containing decentralized, autonomous, interacting agents are
created and those agents are observed as they wrestle with the economic problem
at hand. ACE researchers are interested in the equilibrium or steady-state
characteristics of the system, the dynamic path leading to the steady state,
and, in particular, the spontaneous emergence of an unplanned coordination or
organization of these agents. This project starts with a simple world populated
with two kinds of individuals; those who work and create wealth (peasants) and
those who survive by taking the property of others (bandits). The presence of
bandits creates an incentive for peasants to seek protection and defend their
property. But protection is costly; it consumes resources and interferes with an
individual's ability to create wealth. This study investigates how individuals,
peasants and bandits, might make decisions in such circumstances and how those
decisions aggregate into societal characteristics. The ultimate decision of the
agents is greatly affected by a variety of environmental factors introduced to
their virtual world. When there is little structure to constrain their
activities, these societies usually evolve into anarchy, although small
populations appear to organize and invest in some social protection. Such a
result suggests that primitive societies could emerge in which groups
cooperate-a state may arise-but those societies are likely to be quite
small.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A series of alternative structures and constraints
are introduced to this world and the resulting societies are compared. For
example, a spatial dimension is added so that location matters. Neighborhood
effects are introduced, i.e., agents are influenced by the decisions of other,
nearby agents. In some models individuals find the ability to coerce others to
contribute to social protection. Comparing the different social structures,
their economic proficiency, and the dynamics of these alternative worlds yield
insight into the attributes that influence cooperation among self-interested
individuals.&lt;br/&gt;