* 0112614
* High-Resolution Record of Upper Mississippi River Flood Responses to Holocene Climate Change
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2005
* James Knox, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 07/31/2005
* USD 374,194.00

The general objective of this research is to examine the history of alluvial
sedimentation of the Upper Mississippi River (UMR) to advance our understanding
of how climate variability influences the magnitudes and timing of floods on the
main channel of the UMR in western Wisconsin. This mid continent site contains a
nearly continuous alluvial record that extends nearly 10,000 years and provides
a unique opportunity to examine the history of long- and short-term extreme flow
events in this important watershed.

The specific goals of this research are to: 1) obtain high-resolution records
that can help reconstruct Holocene floods in the main and secondary channels of
the Upper Mississippi River (UMR); 2) quantitatively link the flood regime of
the main channel to independent paleoclimate proxies obtained from other
researchers; 3) quantify and contrast the response of the UMR system to extreme
hydrologic events during abrupt climate change and gradual climate change; 4)
quantify the response of flood hydrology to the relative changes in climate
change (i.e., warmer/wetter, warmer/drier, etc) inferred from proxies. These
specific goals will be achieved by a combination of field, laboratory,
statistical, and modeling analyses.

The research is important because changes in the frequency or intensity of
extreme river flows have the potential to produce major impacts on both human
society and the natural environment. Instrumental records are too short to
adequately determine how climate changes fully influence extremes in flow
hydrology on large river systems such as the UMR. Results from this research
will help us understanding how terrestrial hydrologic systems respond to changes
in global scale atmosphere circulation. The results also should be useful for
understanding the relationship between changing climate and recurring extreme
hydrologic events.