* 0112069
* Statistical and Applied Mathematical Sciences Institute
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2008
* Christopher Jones, Duke University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2008
* USD 10,000,000.00

SAMSI is a national institute that will deeply impact the future&lt;br/&gt;of
the statistical and mathematical sciences and, through them,&lt;br/&gt;science
in general, by catalyzing creation of the theory and&lt;br/&gt;methodology
necessary to confront the central data- and&lt;br/&gt;model-driven scientific
challenges of our time. SAMSI will focus&lt;br/&gt;on new syntheses of the
statistical sciences, applied mathematics&lt;br/&gt;and disciplinary science. To
illustrate the vision, consider an&lt;br/&gt;activity central to modern science
and technology, and with which&lt;br/&gt;SAMSI will be heavily engaged:
numerical modeling of complex&lt;br/&gt;physical processes. Developing numerical
models and evaluating&lt;br/&gt;their fidelity to reality requires merging
knowledge from&lt;br/&gt;multiple disciplines. Applied mathematics builds on
disciplinary&lt;br/&gt;understanding to construct a fine-detail numerical
representation&lt;br/&gt;of the deterministic aspects of a process; probability
provides&lt;br/&gt;concepts and insight to characterize stochastic elements of
the&lt;br/&gt;process; and statistics provides the mechanisms to relate
these&lt;br/&gt;constructs to observational data on the real-world process.
But,&lt;br/&gt;despite a multiplicity of context-specific advances, there
is&lt;br/&gt;currently no general framework for combining these
disciplines,&lt;br/&gt;much less a formal system for simultaneously applying
them. The&lt;br/&gt;SAMSI efforts in this direction will focus on filling this
gap,&lt;br/&gt;by bringing together statisticians, mathematicians and
modelers&lt;br/&gt;from across the country (and beyond) to establish frameworks
for&lt;br/&gt;model development and validation, at a high level that
spans&lt;br/&gt;multiple application contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To carry out
this synthesis of the statistical sciences, applied&lt;br/&gt;mathematical
sciences and disciplinary sciences, SAMSI engages&lt;br/&gt;established
researchers - from academia, industry, national&lt;br/&gt;laboratories and
government - as well as young researchers&lt;br/&gt;(postdoctoral fellows and
graduate students) at the formative&lt;br/&gt;stages of their careers. Each
research program lasts from 6&lt;br/&gt;months to one year, and involves a host
of activities ranging&lt;br/&gt;from research by intensive interdisciplinary
working groups to&lt;br/&gt;broad, energizing workshops. Outreach to
undergraduate students,&lt;br/&gt;high-school teachers and faculty from teaching
institutions&lt;br/&gt;extends SAMSI's impact on the essential development of
the&lt;br/&gt;national human resource base for science. To enable activities
of&lt;br/&gt;the breadth and depth necessary for the success of SAMSI,
the&lt;br/&gt;institute is a partnership between the National
Science&lt;br/&gt;Foundation and the consortium of Duke University, North
Carolina&lt;br/&gt;State University, the University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill&lt;br/&gt;and the National Institute of Statistical Sciences.
These&lt;br/&gt;partners provide a uniquely strong base for SAMSI's
national&lt;br/&gt;scope. Scientific input to SAMSI comes, in part, from a
National&lt;br/&gt;Advisory Council composed of eminent statistical and
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;scientists. Most important, SAMSI will engage the
entire&lt;br/&gt;nationwide statistical and mathematical sciences communities,
by&lt;br/&gt;means of widely publicized opportunities to bring problems
to&lt;br/&gt;SAMSI, or direct SAMSI's attention to them.&lt;br/&gt;