* 0112699
* The Effect of Racial, Economic, and Institutional Characteristics on Home Mortgage Lending to Underserved Markets
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Richard Williams, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 07/31/2004
* USD 114,450.00

Despite high levels of inequality in home ownership across races, ethnic groups,
and neighborhoods in the United States, recent trends among minorities and low-
income groups reveal record high levels of home ownership. In aiming to
understand this development, this project examines how the race and income of
both individuals and neighborhoods affect home mortgage lending to underserved
neighborhoods over the last decade. It also gives special attention to the
institutional factors responsible for changes in lending and the ability of
minority and low-income groups to purchase homes. On one hand, banking
deregulation may have increased competition in ways that serve all income
groups, and new performance guidelines under the Community Reinvestment Act may
have prompted lenders covered by the law to do more for underserved markets. On
the other hand, institutional factors may have had less positive effects: the
rapid changes in the home mortgage lending industry may have resulted in the use
of less favorable loan terms, inadequate consumer protection, and financing of
poor quality housing.

To address these issues, this project analyzes the consequences of institutional
changes in home mortgage lending using nation-wide data from 1992-2001 from the
Home Mortgage Disclosure Act. It measures characteristics of the mortgage
applicants and lenders, the requested loan amount and the outcome of the
request, and the census characteristics of the neighborhood of the housing. The
analysis then describes changes over time in the loans made to minority and low-
income groups, and in the determinants of the decision to deny a loan
application. By extending the previous work of the investigator on Indiana to
the nation as a whole, and using an under-studied data source, the project
contributes to our understanding of how housing inequality emerges and has
changed in recent years.