* 0112102
* Identifying Cost-Effective Environmental Policies That Address Distributional Concerns
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Lawrence Goulder, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2004
* USD 177,491.00

Some pollution-abatement policies (including typical pollution taxes and
auctioned tradeable permits) have the attraction of cost-effectiveness but
impose a very large share of the economy-wide cost of regulation on the
regulated firms, causing substantial losses of profit in the regulated
industries. Other policies (such as systems of grandfathered tradeable permits)
manage to avoid imposing such large costs on the regulated firms, but
accomplishing this involves a very large sacrifice of cost-effectiveness, that
is, a very large increase in the regulatory cost to the economy as a whole. The
inability to avoid placing a large economic burden on key industries without
significantly increasing the overall economic cost has seriously hampered the
broader use of incentive-based and other policies that promise efficiency
improvements. This project analyzes and evaluates the efficiency costs of
addressing significant distributional concerns in environmental policy. In
particular, the project examines the cost of "insulating" producers that have an
especially large stake in the economic outcomes of pollution policy, and
explores how efficiency costs change as the "insulation net" becomes broader to
protect a wider group of industrial stakeholders. It considers a wide range of
potential instruments with the aim of identifying relatively cost-effective
pollution-control policies that provide a reasonable degree of compensation or
insulation to key stakeholders - thus enhancing the prospects for political
feasibility. Policies to be considered include those involving inframarginal
exemptions to pollution taxes, partial grandfathering of pollution permits, and
(in the case of downstream firms) industry-specific corporate tax cuts or tax
credits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research employs both analytically solved and
numerical general equilibrium models to delineate the circumstances under which
the cost of insulating key sectors is small. It considers the costs of avoiding
serious impacts both on "upstream" suppliers of polluting fuels and on
"downstream" firms that utilize such fuels intensively. The first major
component of the project focuses on C02-abatement policies. The second component
generalizes the analysis so that it can be applied to other pollutants such as
NO2 and S02. The third component - to be performed in tandem with the first two
- involves empirical work to improve key parameters of the theoretical and
numerical models and to introduce important "bottom-up" details into the energy
system of the numerical model.&lt;br/&gt;