* 0112376
* CSEDI: Collaborative Res.: Composition and Seismic Structure of the Mantle Transition Zone
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Jay Bass, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 128,608.00

Bass Grand

The investigators propose a collaborative effort between a mineral physicist (J
Bass, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign) and a seismologist (S. Grand,
University of Texas, Austin) aimed at elucidating the seismic structure and
mineralogy of the Earth's transition zone, from 300-1000 km in depth. The
seismic structure will be determined in several regions with unprecedented
resolution of the velocity jumps across transition zone discontinuities and the
seismic velocity gradients between the jumps. The available mineral elasticity
data and phase relations for relevant mineral systems will be used to calculate
the compositions and proportions of individual phases, and the properties of
candidate mantle assemblages as a function of depth for a range of bulk
compositions. Two key experiments on the high temperature and pressure
elasticity of beta phase and aluminous perovskite will be done to fill in the
most pressing gaps in the elasticity data base. A new waveform inversion code
will be used to determine acceptable fits of mineralogic models directly to the
seismic data within certain imposed constraints. For example, with the percent
olivine component and size of discontinuities fixed, they can search for
allowable models of gradients that satisfy seismic constraints. Other initial
conditions will be tried as well. In this way the investigators propose to
define both the structure of the transition zone and the range of mineralogical
models which are compatible with the seismic data in a more formal quantitative
way than has been done before. This research will involve one student working on
mineral physics aspects of the project at UIUC, and a student working on the
seismological aspects at UTA.