* 0112759
* ITR/AP(DMS): Numerical Studies of the Nonlinear Interaction Between Turbulent Air Flow and Sea Surface Waves, with Application to Ocean Surface Wave Turbulence
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2007
* Gregory Baker, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2007
* USD 499,682.00

The proposed project develops a numerical model for turbulent airflow over
nonlinearly evolving water surfaces that overcomes the limitations of previous
studies. Efficient computational algorithms for modeling airflow, efficient
hydrodynamic methods to evolve the sea surface boundary, and parallel computing
techniques will be combined to make statistical analyses of realistic problems
in both two and three dimensions possible. Scientific visualization methods will
be applied to analyze results and to improve understanding of the nonlinear
interactions between wind and waves that are important for sea surface growth
and dissipation. Studies will be performed to determine the conditions under
which "decoupling" the interacting complex systems into airflow-only or
hydrodynamic-only simulations is possible by including appropriate forcing
terms; the form of these forcing terms, when applicable, will be compared with
existing empirical and analytical models to clarify the important physical
processes. Decoupled hydrodynamic-only simulations will be pursued to
investigate wave-wave energy transfer effects in larger scale problems than
those possible in the coupled air-water model, and resulting forms of the
equilibrium sea surface spectrum will be obtained. Commonly applied approximate
hydrodynamic models will also be considered to assess their performance, and
wave spectra obtained from numerical studies will be extrapolated using
applicable approximate models to include breaking-wave effects not captured in
the full numerical simulations. Results of the project will be significant for
studies of the global climate, sea wave forecasting, and interpretation of
direct and remotely sensed oceanographic data. More generally, project results
will clarify important physical effects that can occur in a system of coupled
nonlinear turbulent systems.

The generation of sea surface waves by winds is one of the fundamental air-sea
interaction processes that affect the global climate. Although this topic has
been studied extensively through both physical modeling and experimental
measurements, understanding of the physics involved remains limited due to the
nonlinear phenomena implicit in both airflow and sea surface wave evolution.
Numerical simulations offer a means to improve understanding of the complex
interactions of this problem, but only recently have computing resources
improved to make sufficiently large scale simulations possible. The proposed
project represents an interdisciplinary collaboration between applied
mathematics and engineering researchers. Educational efforts also comprise a
principal objective of the project, including graduate and undergraduate
education and research. All participants in the project will gain information
technology (IT) experience through algorithm and code development. Project
results will be communicated to the external community through conference and
journal publications and through use of the world-wide-web; project web
resources will also be used in classes taught by the research team to introduce
students to scientific applications of IT research.