* 0112185
* Scientific Coordination and Integration Activities of the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2001,03/31/2006
* Sybil Seitzinger, International Geosphere
* Continuing grant
* Louis B. Brown
* 03/31/2006
* USD 2,722,000.00

The goal of the IGBP is to improve understanding of the interactive physical,
chemical and biological processes that regulate the Earth system; the unique
environment that it provides for life; the changes that are occurring in this
system; and the manner in which they are influenced by, and in turn influence,
human actions. The IGBP scientific program, which was implemented initially
around eight "core projects" addressing specific multi-disciplinary aspects of
the Earth system, is being restructured into a more concise and integrated
structure reflecting the dynamics of the Earth system, with broad activities
organized around main components of the system-atmosphere, ocean and land-and,
equally importantly, at the interfaces between these components. Two overarching
and integrating activities-the Global Analysis, Integration and Modeling program
(GAIM) and the Study of Past Global Changes (PAGES) - will address the Earth
system as a whole. This new focus on the Earth system will also address issues
of major societal importance which link strongly to changes in Earth system
dynamics, particularly global sustainability, e.g., cross-cutting research on
(i) the global carbon cycle, (ii) food and fiber production, and (iii) water
resources. The new focus for the IGBP will be developed in large part through
the IGBP Open Science Conference, which will present the latest results of
global change research at a series of levels: research conducted throught the
individual IGBP core projects and research integrated across these projects;
research that has been integrated between the IGBP and the WCRP, the IHDP,
Diversitas, the Global Change System for Analysis, Research and Training(START),
other regional programs, and individual research projects on which these
integrated efforts are based. The Conference will also identify new approaches
to study of the complex planetary system in which human activities are closely
linked with natural processes. The IGBP's Scientific Committee, its IGBP's
Officers, and its Secretariat will lead planning for the IGBP's scientific
agenda; promote initiation, oversee and keep under review implementation of the
program; foster archiving and exchange of collected data and scientific results;
develop standards for measurements and data analysis; lead integration and
synthesis of the research into a coherent and comprehensive global picture;
avoid duplication of effort and resource use; and communicate research results
and data to a number of audiences.