* 0112607
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Mechanism of Photochromism of Dithizonate Complexes Useful for Commercial Application
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Mostafa El-Sayed, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 18,600.00

0112607&lt;br/&gt;Elsayed&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a collaborative project between Dr. Mostafa El-Sayed, Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia
and Dr. Mohamed F. R. Fouda, Department of Inorganic Chemistry, National
Research Center, Cairo, Egypt. They plan to study the molecular mechanism of the
phenomena of photochemical transformations in dithizone complexes. They plan to
synthesize transition metal primary and secondary complexes as well as organo-
mercuric compounds, and follow the photochemical transformations on the
femtosecond-to-second scale by the use of optical and infrared transient laser
spectroscopy. The formation and decay times of the different intermediates
formed during the photochromic process will be followed in time from their
electronic and vibration absorption spectra. The effect of the exciting
wavelength, temperature and solvent (including different polymers) will be
examined. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The project supports collaboration
between two very experienced investigators. Professor El-Sayed is a world-
renowned expert in laser spectroscopy and in femtochemistry. Dr. Fouda has
excellent experience in dithizone complexes synthesis and properties. These
complexes have very important photochromic properties and represent important
materials of commercial and industrial applications. The synthesis of the
compounds will be made at the NRC in Cairo while the spectroscopic studies will
be carried out at Georgia Tech. The project will include the two scientists and
a graduate student from Egypt. Visits by these three will be exchanged in each
of the three years of the project. The proposal meets the INT objective of
supporting collaborative research in areas of mutual interest. This project is
being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to
scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative
activities.