* 0112095
* Econometric Methods for Structural Models
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2004
* Jack Porter, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2004
* USD 115,326.00

&lt;br/&gt;This proposal contains projects that develop statistical econometric
methods for certain economic models of interest. The econometric issues
considered include estimation in dynamic auctions, optimal estimation of
procurement auction and job search models, and estimation of certain kinds of
economic shifts or breaks. A substantial empirical project on daily auctions in
the deregulated electric utility market in England and Wales applies some of the
econometric tools. Our estimates are used to determine profitability and examine
the incentives to invest in new capacity. Our model and estimates could also be
used to consider outcomes associated with alternative auction designs or to
analyze possible collusion among suppliers in this market&lt;br/&gt; For the
empirical project on multi-unit electricity auctions, we have obtained a license
to use the actual software used by the auctioneer to determine price and
quantity outcomes (given bids), and we are also obtaining the three most recent
years of data. With software and data in hand, we use an equilibrium model of
firm supplier behavior to estimate start-up and fixed costs for each generator.
These costs will then be used to examine profits and investment incentives. We
will also incorporate a cost of capital approach to maintenance and availability
decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The estimation method to be used in the
empirical electricity auction project is developed in detail due to its more
general applicability in a variety of auction settings. Similar in spirit to an
Euler equation approach, our econometric method uses the first order conditions
as the basis for moments of estimation. This approach avoids the computational
difficulty associated with numerically solving for optimal bidding strategies.
The technique extends the approach of Berry and Pakes (2000), which was designed
for estimation of oligopolistic models, to work in dynamic auctions. A key
challenge to a first order condition approach in auctions is the inherent
discontinuity in the firm profit function. This discontinuity leads to a
nondifferentiability that makes approximation of the first order condition
difficult. We overcome this difficulty with a semiparametric smoothing technique
and obtain parameter estimates at a nonparametric rate.&lt;br/&gt; Next, we
consider parameter-dependent support models which include certain auction models
as well as production frontier models, and some search models. While estimation
in these models has been studied broadly, we examine what estimators are most
efficient. We use LeCam's theory of statistical experiments to show that the
maximum likelihood estimators are not asymptotically efficient in such
nonregular models, while Bayes' estimators are.&lt;br/&gt; In another project,
efficient estimation in structural break models is studied. Again a limit of
experiments approach will be used to explore efficiency and other issues in
traditional unknown change point models. Another project considers estimation of
breaks in a nonparametric regression curve model. Such estimates are useful in
certain regression discontinuity settings.&lt;br/&gt;