* 0112527
* ITR/PE (SES): Empirical Studies of Network Effects
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Marc Rysman, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2003
* USD 67,277.00

A network effect exists when an agent values a good based on how many other
agents use the good. For instance, consumers choosing between VHS and Beta VCR's
are unlikely to choose based on superior technical performance. Instead,
consumers choose the standard that other consumers choose, most likely in order
to have access to a large library of pre-recorded movies. Network effects are
present in many markets and are especially important for many high technology
and information technology goods. Network goods can lead to market outcomes that
present difficult problems for public policy. This project studies two such
outcomes: The first is that a market can coordinate on a single proprietary
good, leading to market power for the owner of the good. The second is that
markets can fail to coordinate, so consumers are unsure of which standard will
ultimately be adopted. Such confusion can lead to very slow adoption rates for
new products. This project analyzes two specific industries that exhibit these
problems. The project works through estimation issues that arise in the face of
network effects and uses the results of the estimation to analyze the
implications for government intervention into those markets, either by antitrust
or standard setting.

The first part of the project estimates the importance of a positive feedback
loop in the market for Yellow Pages advertising. I estimate how much consumers
prefer directories with more advertising and how much advertisers are willing to
pay to advertise in a directory with more readers. I use resulting estimates to
consider whether the market benefits from monopoly (which takes advantage of
network effects) or oligopoly (which reduces market power). The preliminary
estimates imply that a more competitive market is preferable. This result
supports recent policy promoting competition in the directory market.
Furthermore, techniques developed here could be usefully applied to other
markets. For instance, just as consumers and advertisers prefer to coordinate on
a single directory, consumers and software developers prefer to coordinate on a
single operating system.

A drawback of my results from the Yellow Pages market is that the estimates
predict unreasonably high benefits from adding directories to the market. This
problem is a common one when using discrete choice models. The second part of
this project (which is joint work with Daniel Ackerberg, UCLA) proposes a new
estimator that captures the fact that as products enter a market, products
become more similar with regards to characteristics that are unobservable to the
researcher. Our research presents structural justifications of the estimator as
well as Monte Carlo studies of when the estimator is most appropriate. This
estimator has many applications, and the application of this technique to the
Yellow Pages market should lead to more accurate estimates, both of the strength
of the network effect and of the welfare tradeoffs between competition and
standardization.

The third part of the project is joint work with Angelique Augereau (McKinsey)
and Shane Greenstein (Kellogg). We analyze the introduction of high-speed modems
and how the market failed to coordinate on a single standard. Originally, two
competing but equivalent standards of 56K modems led to a situation in which
consumers and Internet service providers had to coordinate their choice of modem
technology. Overall, adoption was very slow and eventually, an industry group
developed a single standard that was widely adopted. Our explanation of the slow
initial adoption rate is that, in contrast to the incentives to coordinate,
ISP's also have an incentive to differentiate across the two standards because
doing so reduces price competition. Consumers then postpone adoption because
they do not know which standard will "win". We develop a theoretical model that
formalizes these points. In addition, preliminary empirical analysis suggests
that, before the arrival of the new standard, adopting ISP choices were evenly
distributed between the two standards even within individual markets. As our
theory predicts, ISP's perfectly differentiated instead of coordinated. We use
insights and results from the study of this market to discuss the competitive
determination of adoption choice and implications for the benefits of
intervention into a standards war.