* 0112899
* ITR: Digital Government:  Communications Technology and Urban Governance Reform
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Sandra Ball-Rokeach, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Brandt
* 08/31/2004
* USD 450,485.00

EIA: 0112899&lt;br/&gt;Christopher Weare&lt;br/&gt;University of Southern
California&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: ITR/IM: Communications Technology and
Urban Governance Reform&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will analyze the
effects of advanced telecommunications technologies on reform efforts seeking to
decentralize democratic governance. Analysis will focus on technology use in the
implementation of a formal neighborhood council system in the City of Los
Angeles. This reform effort represents a significant and well-defined natural
experiment in the political uses of information and communications technologies
(ICTs). As such, it provides an opportunity to extend the technology and
politics literature, which to date has focused on the national level and
elections, to investigate effects on local governance, which is the primary
sphere for civic engagement in policy making. The research will draw from
theories in the area of political communication, organizational theory and urban
political economy to develop hypotheses about the factors that influence the
successful integration of ICTs in the creation of neighborhood council systems,
their effects on patterns of political communication, and the effects of
communications networks on political outcomes and attitudes among stakeholders
at the local level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The implementation of neighborhood
councils in Los Angeles is currently in the planning process and will proceed
beginning June 2001. The current plan calls for the creation of 100 to 200
advisory councils at the community level, and the implementation of an Internet-
based early notification system intended to provide councils early input into
city policy making processes. In addition, councils are required to create
systems for communication with community stakeholders. The City in turn is
mandated to provide councils with a communication system linking all
neighborhood councils and training and material support for communications. This
reform represents an unprecedented urban experiment with political
communication, and is particularly important given the size, ethnic diversity,
and global economic position of the City of Los Angeles. The research will
employ multiple methods to elucidate the complex linkages between implementation
inputs, communication networks, political processes, and policy and attitudinal
outcomes. The methods employed will include (1) case study analysis of the
design, implementation, and diffusion of neighborhood councils and
communications technology; (2) analysis of the vertical communications
promulgated and received by elected officials as a part of the mandated early
notification system; (3) network analysis of the dynamics of communications
within and between neighborhood councils and city government; and (4)
preliminary analysis of the political effects of vertical and horizontal
communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data collection will include archival and
field research, interviews, and two panel surveys. These data will be employed
in diffusion analyses and network analyses producing sociograms of linkages and
cliques developing among members of city government and neighborhood councils.
The network analysis provides a systematic framework for conceptualizing and
analyzing the effects of ICTs on communication patterns and the manner in which
changing communication patterns influence democratic outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;This
analysis will illuminate the effects of ICTs on the distribution of information
and political communications and the resulting effects of changing communication
patterns on citizen participation and the responsiveness of political
institutions. The research is expected to improve understanding of the
technological factors that impede or promote political participation by
traditionally underrepresented groups and provide a more detailed understanding
of socio-economic and communicative characteristics of citizens impede them from
taking advantage of technology-based reforms. This knowledge will help policy
makers develop methods by which these differences may be bridged.&lt;br/&gt;