* 0112780
* Topics in Empirical Macroeconomics
* SBE,SES
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2005
* Martin Eichenbaum, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 11/30/2005
* USD 250,366.00

This research aims at developing empirically based dynamic general equi-librium
models for analyzing monetary policy based on evidence both from the U.S. and
from countries that have experienced currency crises. The research agenda can be
divided into two general topics: (i) understanding the link between monetary
policy and private sector outcomes in the US. and (ii) understanding the links
between government policy and currency crises in emerging
markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Projects under the first topic involve
constructing and estimating models that can account quantitatively for the key
facts about the US monetary transmission mechanism. The models investigated have
four key- characteristics. First. they embody complementary sources of monetary
non-neutrality steming from frictions in good, labor and asset markets. Second.
they embody modifications to the real side of standard business cycle models.
These modifications play a key role in the analysis because they help render the
models consistent with the fact that marginal production costs are only mildly
procyclical. Third, the models are designed so that individual agents, taking as
given economy-wide variables, have only small incentives to overcome the nominal
frictions in their environment. Nevertheless nominal frictions have a first
order effect on the economy. Fourth. the models are empirically tractable and
can be formally investigated using econometric methods. Preliminary evidence
from a simple version of the model, embodying modest nominal rigidities, is
capable of generating persistent real effects from monetary shocks consistent
with those identified in the data. In addition. the model can account for the
inertial behavior of inflation and real wages. Much of this research is joint
research with Lawrence Christiano (Northwestern University) and Charles Evans
(Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second topic
consists of three projects aimed at under-standing the causes and consequences
of currency crises. The unifying theme between the projects is the link between
government policies, the fragility of financial systems and currency crises. The
first project explores why governments with similar sized prospective deficits,
stemming from failing financial systems, experience exchange rate crises of
different magnitudes and different post-crises inflation rates. The key
observation here is that governments differ in the extent to which their lia-
bilities are indexed to inflation. The inflation that follows a currency
devaluation acts like a partial fiscal reform, effectively providing a
government with a source of revenue other than seignorage. Ex ante heterogeneity
regarding non-indexed liabilities leads to ex post heterogeneity with respect to
monetary policy and inflation. In addition, the research also explores why
reported inflation is so much lower than the rate of exchange rate devaluation
in the wake of many currency crises. The second project examines the
relationship between government guarantees, the sectoral composition of bank
lending and banks' hedging activities. It analyzes the impact of government
guarantees on the exposure of banking systems to real shocks and the
corresponding fragility of fixed exchange rate regimes. The third project
investigates why governments extend guarantees to banks' foreign creditors in
developing countries. Much of the research in this section of the proposal is
joint with Sergio Rebelo (Northwestern University) and Craig Burnside (World
Bank).&lt;br/&gt;