* 0112272
* Collaborative Research:  Role of Glia during Postembryonic Formation of the CNS
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Karen Mesce, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 07/31/2005
* USD 298,895.00

Collaborative Research: Mesce and Fahrbach &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Insect
metamorphosis is accompanied by extensive reorganization of the central nervous
system. These changes are regulated by steroid hormones, and during
metamorphosis insect neurons and glia express nuclear steroid hormone receptors.
A notable feature of metamorphosis in the nervous system of moths and
butterflies is the formation of compound ganglia from individual segmental
ganglia. In the moth Manduca sexta, a large species easily reared in the
laboratory, compound ganglia form shortly after the caterpillar pupates. This
collaborative project will test a model of compound ganglion formation in which
two classes of glial cells are the primary steroid targets. In this model, the
giant glial cells of the interganglionic connectives move clusters of neurons by
changes in their cytoarchitecture while the perineurial glial cells that wrap
the central nervous system alter their adhesive properties to permit the neurons
to move freely. Experiments to be conducted at the University of Minnesota in
Dr. Mesce's laboratory will describe the motility of giant glial cells during
the formation of compound ganglia and will study how damage to the giant glial
cells affects ganglionic migration and fusion. These experiments are facilitated
as a result of the recent discovery that a form of fasciclin II, a protein
expressed on the surface of insect cells, can be used as a marker for the giant
glial cells. Experiments to be conducted in Dr. Fahrbach's laboratory at the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign will determine the timing of
perineurial glial cell proliferation during metamorphosis and study the effects
of ablation of this cell population on ganglionic migration and fusion. In
addition, antibodies targeted to specific isoforms of the insect steroid hormone
receptor (the ecdysone receptor, EcR) will be used to determine which form of
the receptor is expressed by glial cells. This is envisioned as a first step
toward identifying steroid-regulated genes involved in regulation of the glial
cytoskeleton and glial cell adhesion molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous
studies of metamorphosis of the insect nervous system have focused exclusively
on neurons. This project will provide new information about the developmental
modulation of glial cell cytoarchitecture and glial cell adhesivity during the
postembryonic life of insects. The results are likely to generalize to all
arthropods and, because the regulation of cell "stickiness" and cell shape are
fundamental attributes of all multicellular organisms, to other animals as
well.&lt;br/&gt;