* 0112977
* ITR/SI:  Multi-Antenna, Multi-User Communications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Mahesh Varanasi, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Sirin Tekinay
* 08/31/2006
* USD 363,000.00

Future generation mobile wireless communication systems (third
generation&lt;br/&gt;and beyond) are expected to provide high data rates,
accomodate highly&lt;br/&gt;mobile users, and support a wide variety of services
including data, voice,&lt;br/&gt;video and interactive multimedia. Power
(battery) limitations and&lt;br/&gt;the scarcity of radio spectrum (relative to
the ambitions of such services)&lt;br/&gt;will dictate the need for cellular
networks in which these resources&lt;br/&gt;must be used highly efficiently so
as to support the continued growth&lt;br/&gt;in demand for wireless services
into the future. The&lt;br/&gt;essential infrastructure required at the
physical&lt;br/&gt;layer to fulfill this demand is a power and bandwidth
efficient,&lt;br/&gt;multi-antenna, multi-user wireless communications
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators of this project will develop
several key aspects of a&lt;br/&gt;theory of multi-user, multi-transmit antenna
communication through a study&lt;br/&gt;of high-performance, interference
resistant receivers, signature sequence&lt;br/&gt;designs and multi-user signal
constellation optimization. Their goal is to&lt;br/&gt;realize, through simple
system design, the power and spectral efficiency&lt;br/&gt;trade-offs that are
achievable for multi-antenna wireless communications&lt;br/&gt;over fading
channels. While emphasizing fundamental limits, the&lt;br/&gt;investigators will
also focus on complexity constrained systems as well.&lt;br/&gt;They will
develop results in the theory of multi-user detection and&lt;br/&gt;signature
sequence optimization for multiple receive antennas for
overloaded&lt;br/&gt;CDMA systems. Generalization of these results will be
pursued to coded&lt;br/&gt;modulation and multiple transmit (and receive)
antenna systems in order to&lt;br/&gt;further improve the performance and/or
achievable spectral efficiencies&lt;br/&gt;through more sophisticated signaling
strategies combined with sub-optimal,&lt;br/&gt;complexity-constrained, high-
performance multi-user decoding methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;