* 0112278
* Functional Analysis of the Forkhead Associated Domain in Arabidopsis Thaliana
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Steven Van Doren, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Jermelina Tupas
* 09/30/2005
* USD 382,700.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to attain a better
understanding of signal transduction pathways in plants. These studies will
focus on proteins from Arabidopsis thaliana that contain a novel phosphoprotein
binding module known as the forkhead associated (FHA) domain. The FHA domain is
found in many signaling proteins and mediates phosphorylation-dependent assembly
of signaling complexes. In plants, a type 2C protein phosphatase, kinase
associated protein phosphatase (KAPP), interacts with phosphorylated receptor-
like protein kinases (RLKs) via an FHA domain. RLKs are the largest class of
cell surface receptors in plants and regulated a myriad of cellular functions.
KAPP is a negative regulator of RLK function and recent studies indicate kapp
mutants developmentally arrest as seedlings. The specific aims of the project
are to investigate the function of KAPP in control of plant growth and
development and to identify other components in KAPP-mediated signaling
pathways. In addition, because FHA domains are found in a wide variety of
proteins involved in many different cellular processes other FHA domain-
containing proteins from Arabidopsis thaliana will be analyzed. This research,
which will use a combination of molecular genetics, cell biology, and
biochemistry, will contribute significantly to a broader understanding of
cellular communication. &lt;br/&gt;