* 0112807
* ITR/ASC: Collaborative Research - Linbox: A Generic Library for Seminumeric Black Box Linear Algebra
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2001,09/30/2005
* Bobby Caviness, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Eun K. Park
* 09/30/2005
* USD 187,700.00

The LinBox group of twelve researchers in three countries (USA, France, Canada)
proposes research in the design of efficient algorithms for linear algebra, in
their implementation in a software library, and in how to interface the library
to widely-used scientific computing software. Algorithms will be implemented,
and new algorithms designed, for the black box representation of matrices---
hence the name LinBox---over entry domains that are either symbolic, that is,
exact, or floating point, that is, inexact. The library is generically
programmed as C++ template classes with abstract underlying arithmetics; they
can be compiled with a variety of fast libraries for the basic field, floating
point, and polynomial operations. A server/client interface seamlessly attaches
the library to the common general purpose symbolic systems Maple and Mathematica
and to the numeric system MatLab. Parallel execution of the implemented
algorithms is facilitated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Black box matrices are stored
as functions (as linear operators in effect): the matrix is a procedure that
takes an arbitrary vector as input and efficiently computes the matrix-times-
vector product. Black box linear algebra generalizes sparsity. The LinBox
library will contain algorithms for solving singular and non-singular systems of
linear equations whose coefficient matrix is given in black box representation.
Furthermore, it is proposed to develop fast methods for the rank and the minimal
and characteristic polynomial of a black box matrix. Finally, LinBox will
contain methods for linear Diophantine problems with black box matrices, such as
computing an integral solution to a linear system with integer entries and
computing the Smith normal form of an integer matrix. &lt;br/&gt;