* 0112767
* ITR:  Entropy Based Multi-Objective Genetic Algorithm With Constraint Handling and Set Quality Metrics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Shapour Azarm, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 08/31/2004
* USD 370,363.00

This Information Technology Research project aims at developing an entropy based
multi-objective genetic algorithm for design optimization. The algorithm is
based on an analogy from statistical theory of gases in order to obtain a
fullest possible representation of solutions. In the proposed algorithm,
statistical behaviors of a sample of designs in a population will be simulated,
as they evolve, according to those of the molecules of an ideal gas undergoing
expansion in an enclosure. The goal of this analogy is to obtain solutions with
maximum entropy, that is, maximum possible uniformity and coverage along the
Pareto frontier. The investigation will involve the development of new methods
for handling constraints in multi-objective design optimization as well as new
quality metrics for assessing the "goodness" of a set of equally optimum
(Pareto) solutions. The quality metrics will also be used to develop new
convergence criteria for the algorithm. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
outcome of the research will advance the state of the art at the level of
computational tools that enable multi-objective engineering design optimization
with applications to a wide class of problems. The results of this investigation
will be broadly disseminated for the engineering design automation community,
transferred and integrated into several courses at the graduate and
undergraduate levels at the University of Maryland, and transferred to industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;