* 0112824
* ITR/AP:  Large-Scale Quantum Mechanical Molecular Dynamics Simulations:  Challenges, New Directions, and Applications to Carbon-Based Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Shi-Yu Wu, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2005
* USD 456,000.00

This award is the result of a proposal submitted to the Information Technology
Research initiative. Advances in computational materials science depend on the
development of efficient and reliable computational methods for large-scale
quantum mechanical molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. Linear-scaling or
order-N (O(N)) methods have been developed with the aim of overcoming the
bottleneck associated with the N3-scaling in the computation of the total energy
and atomic forces in quantum mechanics-based simulations. Despite this progress,
O(N)- ab initio-MD is still limited to systems containing relatively small
numbrs of atoms because of the overhead associated with the self-consistent
calculations in ab initio MD. On the other hand, MD schemes based on two-center
tight-binding (TB) Hamiltonians are orders of magnitude faster than O(N)-ab
initio-MD methods. However, they have been found to be unsatisfactory in systems
where charge transfer or bond breaking/rebonding plays a significant role.
Therefore, there is a pressing need for developing transferable semi-empirical
Hamiltonians that would be superior to traditional two-center TB Hamiltonians,
but would include all essential ingredients of ab initio Hamiltonians without
being computationally excessive. The O(N)-MD scheme using such a Hamiltonian can
predict accurately the properties of complex systems of large sizes.

In this research a general scheme will be developed to construct such reliable
and transferable semi-empirical Hamiltonians for materials (metal or
semiconductor) in the framework of linear combination of atomic orbitals (LCAO)
that explicitly includes the self-consistently (SC) determined charge transfer
and environment-dependent (ED) multi-center interactions. The SCED-LCAO
Hamiltonian will be implemented within the O(N)-MD scheme developed previously.
Using O(N)/SCED-LCAO-MD as our simulation tool, we will investigate the
properties of carbon multi-wall nanotubes and carbon nanorods, and evaluate
their potential as components of molecular-scale devices. Specifically, we will
study the following three projects of current interest: (1) Energetics,
structure, electronic, mechanical and vibrational properties of carbon multiwall
nanotubes (MWNT), (2) A study of the properties of contacts between metal
elctrodes and MWNT, and (3) Energetics, structure, electronic, mechanical and
vibrational peoperties of carbon nanorods (CNR). Project (2) will be done in
collaboration with the experimetal group of Professor Alphenar of Lousiville,
whereas project (3) will be done in collaboration with the experimental group of
Professor Chen of Academia Sinica (Taiwan). %%% ***

