* 0112429
* Collaborative Proposal: Using the Web as a Corpus for Empirical Linguistic Research
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Christiane Fellbaum, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Mary P. Harper
* 08/31/2003
* USD 161,989.00

This project will develop tools that make it possible to retrieve naturally
occurring sentences from the World Wide Web on the basis of lexical content and
syntactic structure, providing linguists with an immediate, easily accessible
source of raw linguistic data. The PIs will investigate specific linguistic
hypotheses at the lexical semantics/syntax interface as an illustrative
application of these tools. At a high level, the planned work constitutes an
important step toward a new paradigm for linguistic research. Rather than
relying entirely on introspective data generated by the linguist who is trying
to (dis)prove a particular hypothesis, Web-enabled linguistics research will
draw on the methodology and the tools developed by the PIs to supply naturally
occurring data on which theories can rest. With regard to specific linguistic
questions, the goal is to provide an explanation of the rules and constraints
that govern three transitivity alternations (Middle, Unaccusative, Unspecified
Object Deletion), and the PIs expect data made available by their tools to shed
light on the "grey" area between competence and performance, that is, the
linguistic behavior that seems to fall outside of rule-governed behavior.
Although naturally occurring data are not accorded great emphasis in generative
syntax, the use of text corpora has a tradition in the greater linguistic
enterprise. An explosive new phenomenon in the world of naturally occurring
text, the World Wide Web is an essentially untapped resource that embodies the
rich and dynamic nature of language, presenting a data resource of unparalleled
size and diversity