* 0112284
* Remembering Choices
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/2001,10/31/2004
* Mara Mather, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 10/31/2004
* USD 211,139.00

The proposed research focuses on people's memory for past choices. Memory for
choices has the potential to affect people's self-concept, well-being,
attitudes, and future decisions. Regret for options not taken can cast a shadow,
whereas satisfaction at having made the right choice can make a good outcome
seem even better. Our memories of past options provide essential information
about our tastes and experience in the context of current and future decisions.
These memories have implications for other people as well (e.g., as we give
advice about others' choices or participate in collective decisions).
Understanding the causes and consequences of distortion in memory for choices,
and possible ways to avoid such distortion, can have far- reaching benefits in
domains ranging from therapy and consumer education to medical decision making
and the law.

Theoretical explanations of memory distortion share many common themes and
emphasize the constructive nature of memory (e.g., Bransford & Johnson, 1973;
Loftus, 1979; Reyna & Lloyd, 1997; Roediger & McDermott, 2000; Schacter, Norman,
& Koutstaal, 1998). The current proposal uses the source monitoring framework
(e.g., Johnson, Hashtroudi, & Lindsay, 1993), one of the most well-developed
theoretical approaches to memory and its distortions, to help predict how
factors that have been shown to be associated with memory distortion will affect
memory for choices. Preliminary work (e.g., Mather, Shafir, & Johnson, 2000)
indicates that people have choice-supportive biases in memory, favoring the
option selected over the one rejected. This choice-supportive tendency goes
beyond simply selectively remembering the strengths of chosen options and the
weak attributes of rejected alternatives. People also tend to make errors that
favor their chosen option, misattributing positive features to their chosen
option and negative features to the rejected option. The studies in the first
section of the proposal investigate the mechanisms underlying such choice-
supportive memory distortion. The second section investigates some potential
effects of choice- supportive memory on well-being and on future decisions, and
the final section investigates how choice- supportive biases may be avoided or
attenuated.

Remembering choices plays a central role in making future decisions. A better
understanding of memory distortion and its influences may help improve decision
making in important domains. Better insight into the role of memory also
promises to add to our understanding of intuitive decision making practices and
emergent biases. Finally, an understanding of how memory of past decisions
affects our satisfaction, goals, perceived responsibility, and remembered
experience may contribute to well-being in numerous ways. The proposed studies
are intended to shed light on how past choices may be remembered or
misremembered, on how these tendencies may be altered, and on the hedonic
consequences that such alterations might have.