* 0112457
* Laboring against Liberalization in North America: Emerging Coalitions between U.S. and Mexican Unions
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Joe Bandy, Bowdoin College
* Standard Grant
* beth rubin
* 08/31/2004
* USD 109,837.00

The process of global economic change has required that social movements
concerned with labor, the environment, women's rights, and fair trade organize
and operate across national boundaries. Many social movements have thus forged
transnational ties, possess members in more than one nation, and engage in
action against global forces of economic liberalization. Although scholars have
studied domestic social movements in some detail, the emergence of transnational
movements raises several important questions: how do activists and organizations
build coalitions across national boundaries, how do they negotiate strategies of
action and identity with partners in other nations, and how do they deal with
special constraints and differences inherent in cross-national action? This
project investigates these questions by studying several successful, highly
active, and well-funded coalitions between United States and Mexican labor
unions, as well as some more temporary and less successful
alliances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's methods rely on semi-structured,
in-depth interviews with a selected sample of leaders, organizers, and rank-and-
file members who have participated in cross-nation labor actions or acted as
brokers between Mexican and American unions. The results describe the breadth
and depth of transnational networks among labor movements, identify the
organizational and cultural means by which networks emerge across national
boundaries, and explain how coalitions manage to cooperate and overcome conflict
in the face of differing national, ethnic, and linguistic identities. The
project thus provides a clearer understanding of how transnational economic
change shapes local and national labor movements, and how such movements respond
to the new global environment they face.&lt;br/&gt;