* 0112656
* Effects of Sexual Selection and Predation on a Genetic Polymorphism for Body Size
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2007
* Alexandra Basolo, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* John A. Byers
* 08/31/2007
* USD 519,721.00

The Effects of Sexual Selection and Predation on a Genetic Polymorphism for Body
Size&lt;br/&gt;Alexandra Basolo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The long-term goal of this
study is to understand the factors that maintain variation within populations in
genes that affect adult body size, and the factors that cause differences
between populations. In many animal systems, variation for adult body size is
common. Both natural selection and sexual selection can contribute to the
maintenance of body size variation. Intrasexual selection via male-male
competition often favors large male size, as larger males more often win
contests. However, small males may adopt alternative mating strategies, such as
sneaking, to avoid direct contests as well as subvert female choice for larger
males. Natural selection via predation may also favor the maintenance of certain
size classes. In some species, the level of predation risk is positively
correlated with body size, and in other species, it is negatively correlated
with body size. In addition, generation time may favor smaller individuals if
smaller individuals reproduce at an earlier age. Thus, sexual selection,
predation and generation time may affect the evolution of body size. The
traditional view for the evolution of sexually-selected traits is that such
traits evolve until they are countered by some source of natural selection,
usually predation. When sexual selection and predation both favor larger size,
however, life history correlates of size, such as age at first reproduction, may
constrain the evolution of body size.&lt;br/&gt; Variation between individuals
in age and size at sexual maturation is commonly observed, but the underlying
genetic basis of this variation is rarely known. However, such knowledge is
important to understand the evolutionary mechanisms responsible for body size
variation. This study proposes to investigate the factors affecting allelic
variation at a locus (the P-locus) that strongly influences adult body size in
the southern platyfish, Xiphophorus maculatus. Alleles at this locus vary within
and across natural populations. A primary effect of these alleles is the
initiation of sexual maturation. Individuals with different P-alleles become
sexually mature at different times. Females continue to grow after sexual
maturation, but males grow very little after sexual maturation. These alleles
then affect both the size at sexual maturation and adult body size in males.
Genetic stocks are available with linked color patterns. It is thus possible to
use these color markers to track changes in P-allele frequencies in experimental
populations. X. maculatus therefore provides a known genetic system with which
to test hypotheses about body size polymorphism.&lt;br/&gt; A set of experiments
will be conducted to examine the effect of sexual selection and natural
selection via predation on the evolution of P-alleles. First, male-female mating
interactions will be observed in the absence of direct male-male competition for
both large and small male morphs. Second, the mating success of large and small
male morphs will be assessed. In these experiments, large and small males will
be tested with females to determine if male mating behavior changes in the
presence of another male, e.g. if smaller males adopt an alternative mating
strategy. Male mating success will be determined by progeny analysis. Third, the
importance of natural selection via predation on body size will be investigated
and P-allele evolution will be quantified in populations with predatory fish and
populations without predatory fish. Color pattern markers will be used to track
changes in P-allele frequencies over time. A comparison between these
populations will determine to what level predation maintains P-alleles for
larger male body size by tracking the change in P-allele frequencies in each
replicate and comparing the trajectories. &lt;br/&gt;