* 0112826
* Function of the SPY O-GlcNAc Transferase in Gibberellin Signal Transduction
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Neil Olszewski, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jermelina Tupas
* 08/31/2005
* USD 426,137.00

&lt;br/&gt;Gibberellins (GAs) are phytohormones that regulate many aspects of
plant growth and&lt;br/&gt;development. The long-term goal of this research is
to understand the molecular basis of GA&lt;br/&gt;signal transduction in
arabidopsis. Loss-of-function spy mutations suppress the
phenotypes&lt;br/&gt;caused by GA-deficiency; thus, the SPY protein is a
suppressor of GA signaling. SPY has&lt;br/&gt;extensive sequence similarity to
animal O-GlcNAc transferase, which catalyzes the addition of a&lt;br/&gt;single
O-linked N-acetylglucosamine to specific serine and/or threonine residues of
nuclear and&lt;br/&gt;cytosolic proteins. O-GlcNAc modification of cytoplasmic
and nuclear proteins is about as&lt;br/&gt;common as phosphorylation and is
believed to be a regulatory modification. The work proposed&lt;br/&gt;here will
test the model that SPY-catalyzed protein O-GlcNAcylation acts to negatively
regulate&lt;br/&gt;GA signaling and begin to determine the details of how SPY
functions in signaling pathway(s).&lt;br/&gt;SPY produced in insect cells is
itself O-GlcNAc-modified and has GlcNAc transferase&lt;br/&gt;activity toward
gp40, a plant nuclear pore protein that is known to undergo terminal
O-GlcNAc&lt;br/&gt;modification. SPY is a component of a multiprotein complex
present in both the nucleus and&lt;br/&gt;cytosol of arabidopsis and
cauliflower. When GA-deficient plants are treated with GA, a&lt;br/&gt;decrease
in the GlcNAc modification of several proteins is detectable 1 hr after
treatment. spy&lt;br/&gt;mutations have similar effects. These data indicate
that protein GlcNAcylation plays a role in&lt;br/&gt;GA signaling.&lt;br/&gt;A
number of arabidopsis proteins that putatively interact with SPY's
tetratricopeptide&lt;br/&gt;repeats in yeast have been identified. One of these
proteins is GIGANTEA (GI), a protein&lt;br/&gt;involved in a number of processes
that are also affected by GA. Consistent with the physical&lt;br/&gt;interaction
between SPY and GI, with respect to the control of flowering time, spy is
weakly&lt;br/&gt;epistatic to gi.&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this work are to: 1)
characterize the protein modification that is produced by&lt;br/&gt;SPY and
determine the identity of its substrates; 2) determine if the localization or
activity of&lt;br/&gt;SPY is regulated by determining if changes in GA levels or
mutations affecting GA signaling&lt;br/&gt;alter the localization,
posttranslational modification, protein associations, or activity of SPY;
and&lt;br/&gt;3) perform additional tests on the proteins identified in the two-
hybrid screens to identify the&lt;br/&gt;proteins that physically interact with
SPY and then genetically characterize the function of the&lt;br/&gt;interacting
proteins. As part of the third goal, genetic and physiological studies will
be&lt;br/&gt;performed to further define the functional interrelationships
between SPY and GI.