* 0112217
* Acquisition of a Scanning Probe Microscope for Undergraduate Nanoscience Education and Research
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2001,01/31/2003
* Timothy Hanks, Furman University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 01/31/2003
* USD 167,000.00

This is a joint award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program in
DMR and the Major Research Instrumentation program to Furman University. The
award is for the acquisition of a scanning probe microscope for the
characterization and manipulation of nanometer size materials. The study of
materials in the nanometer regime is of fundamental importance to a host of
emerging technologies. SPM is by far the most important tool for resolving
nanometer size features of materials as well as for investigating material
properties that are significant over that distance scale. The purchase of a
Dimension 3001 SPM will allow Furman University to introduce the concepts
central to nanoscience in various undergraduate courses as well as to enhance
ongoing nanoscience research effort. Ongoing projects that will be directly
impacted by this acquisition include: The characterization of nanostructures on
the surfaces of electronically conducting polymers; Investigation of the
formation and structure of nanoporous organic crystals and thin films; The
design and operation of biosensors; The self-assembly of platinum complexes into
monolayers; Dynamic studies of additive migration in polymer films, as well as
several others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a joint award from the
Instrumentation for Materials Research program in DMR and the Major Research
Instrumentation program to Furman University. The award is for the acquisition
of a scanning probe microscope (SPM) for the characterization and manipulation
of nanometer size materials. The announcement of the National Nanotechnology
Initiative (www.nano.gov) illustrated the growing importance of nanometer-sized
structures to the scientific and technological infrastructure of the United
States. The SPM will enhance undergraduate education and research in the field
of nanoscience. The instrument will be used both to expose students to the
unique features of matter in this size regime and to investigate questions
ranging from the interaction of molecules with DNA to the design of materials
for optical computing. In addition to generating scientifically significant
results, this instrument will be used to produce educational materials for the
undergraduate educational community and to prepare students for graduate work in
nanoscience and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;