* 0112591
* ITR/SI:  Collaborative Research:  Integrated Signal Processing and Antenna Array Design for Diversity Wireless Links
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Zoya Popovic, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/2005
* USD 272,700.00

ITR Small Proposal &lt;br/&gt;0113385/0112591&lt;br/&gt;Sayeed/Popovic&lt;br/&gt
;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reliable and seamless wireless
connectivity in varied environments is a necessary requirement for the rich and
diverse communications of the future. Space-time processing has emerged as a key
enabling technology for future wireless communications: signal space dimensions
are fundamental to reliable communication and antenna arrays augment the
traditional dimensions of time and frequency with the spatial dimension. While
recent theoretical and technological advances provide a tremendous boon for
modern communications, the state-of-the-art is far from realizing the full
potential of space-time processing due to significant gaps in our current
understanding on two fronts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental mechanisms
underlying the interaction of the space-time channel with the signal space in
spatial, temporal, and spectral dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jointly
optimized design of front-end hardware, antenna arrays, and signal processing
algo-rithms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the work proposed here is
an integrated approach to the design of antenna array hardware and space-time
processing algorithms for significantly improved wireless link
performance&lt;br/&gt;at reduced cost and complexity.&lt;br/&gt;