* 0112734
* ITR-AP: A Program for Predicting and Understanding Data
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Leo Breiman, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* grace yang
* 08/31/2005
* USD 422,147.00

ABSTRACT DMS 0112734-

The two main uses of much of the scientific data currently being collected are
first to use the data to predict the types of future objects observed by means
of computerized algorithms. For instance, one such problem is to develop
algorithms that will classify the millions of stellar objects recorded on
photographic images by optical and radio telescopes. Second: to understand which
variables are discriminating between different types of objects. An example is
in locating the gene activity that discriminates between cancerous and non
cancerous DNA. This project builds on a recently discovered algorithm called
random forests which, when further developed and combined with interactive
graphical displays, will provide an advanced tool for answering these questions.

Random forests is a new prediction algorithm coming from the Machine Learning
context that functions by combining hundreds of randomly generated binary
decision. It has demonstrated state-of-the-art prediction accuracy on large data
sets with thousands of variables. It generates a wealth of information about the
data other than the prediction. This information can be used to estimate
variable importance, clustering, density estimation etc. To make this
information more readily understandable to the user, interactive graphics such
as parallel coordinates and hierarchical cluster diagrams linked together will
be incorporated into the design of a program using a more highly developed
random forests algorithm as the underlying engine.