* 0112665
* ITR/SI: Pervasive Monitoring and Control of Water Lifeline Systems for Disaster Recovery
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* John Heidemann, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Thomas A. Birkland
* 08/31/2005
* USD 400,000.00

This research applies networks of sensors and control devices to enhance the
performance of civil infrastructure systems, particularly utility lifeline
systems, under both emergency and daily operational conditions. Specific
objectives of this research are to: 1) develop a conceptual system design
capable of data acquisition, wireless data transmission, data
processing/analysis and operational control of a water delivery system; 2)
develop innovative neural network-based inverse analysis algorithms and software
to determine in near real-time the extent and locations of damage or malfunction
sustained by system components such as pipe segments, pipe joints, pumping
stations, etc., and 3) use Memphis Light, Gas and Water (MLGW) Division's water
system for a pilot case study to demonstrate the improvements offered by the
system design. The system thus designed represents a new generation of vastly
expanded and enhanced SCADA (supervisory control and data acquisition) systems
currently used by utilities. In this expanded version, the hydraulic data are
sensed and transmitted through mixed wired and wireless communications through
the network. The network will automatically detect aggregation points where data
from a region are accumulated and trigger local processing. These points will
produce summaries that can then be passed on to central observers. When
necessary, observers will be able to "drill down" on specific details with
explicit queries and control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two geographically
distant Principal Investigators provide expertise on structures/mechanics,
lifeline systems analysis and socio-economic impact of system failure and in
computer operating systems, network protocols, and sensor networks. This
combination of civil engineering and computer science expertise represents an
ideal interdisciplinary coalition for this research. Each will support and
advise one graduate student and communicate each other through internet and
frequently scheduled meetings inviting potential end users from utility
organizations. Broad impacts are expected on the frontier research in lifeline
engineering, sensor network technology, simulation and neural network-based
analysis of complex systems, and on the practice of lifeline operation and
management.&lt;br/&gt;