* 0112430
* Technological Change in a Deregulated Era:  A Study of Innovation in Environmentally Preferable Technologies in a Restructured Electric Utility System
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2006
* Richard Hirsh, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2006
* USD 81,443.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Richard Hirsh, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University &lt;br/&gt;Technological Change in a Deregulated Era: A Study of
Innovation in Environmentally Preferable Technologies in a Restructured Electric
Utility System&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines how technological
innovation in the American electric utility system has been affected by
deregulation, specifically examining research on technologies with low
environmental impact, such as renewable energy and energy-efficient devices. The
subject has interest because ongoing deregulation of the utility system has
highlighted apparently contradictory public policy goals relating to these
technologies. On the one hand, reduction of state utility regulation in a few
states has already unleashed free-market forces and spurred innovation on
technologies that can provide novel services at low cost. On the other hand,
reduced state oversight has diminished research efforts on technologies that
produce and use electricity less wastefully; in the past, those efforts had been
spurred by the same type of regulation that is now being discarded.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To gain an understanding of the unusual forces driving--
and hindering-technological innovation in an increasingly deregulated electric
utility system, this study focuses on public interest advocacy groups, corporate
entrepreneurs, government entities, and formerly regulated utilities. The
technologies most affected by changes in public policy--and the technologies
that will be the subject of this research-include renewable energy technologies,
such as wind turbines, photovoltaics, and biopower; cogeneration, gas turbine,
district heating, and other generation technologies that use fossil fuel, but at
higher efficiencies (and with less environmental impact) than traditional
electric utility hardware; energy-efficiency technologies (or demand-side, end-
use technologies).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most generally, this research examines
the effects on technological innovation of government and nongovernment parties
that seek to achieve the apparently cherished--but perhaps inconsistent--goals
of reduced state regulation and environmental improvement in the electric
utility system. Using a systems approach that spans disciplinary boundaries,
outcomes include several articles (and the foundation for a new book) dealing
with technological innovation during a period of rapidly changing public and
economic policy. The project contributes to this useful STS approach by focusing
on a system that, unlike those studied by other scholars, has seen its momentum
altered significantly because of the use of new technologies. As in past
projects by this PI, this research has practical significance to STS
practitioners, as well as to contemporary policy makers in the worlds of
business and government. &lt;br/&gt;