* 0112570
* Development of Environmental Science Instrumentation Core Facility
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Ramaraj Boopathy, Nicholls State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Farmer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. R. Boopathy at Nicholls State University in
Thibodaux, Louisiana to develop an Environmental Science Instrumentation Core
Facility. The purpose of this facility is threefold: (1) to enhance training of
students in environmental sciences, (2) to enable new training of traditional
faculty, and (3) to facilitate faculty research. This project will equip a
laboratory of analytical instrumentation, including a gas chromatograph, a high
performance liquid chromatograph, a UV-VIS Spectrophotometer, a BIOLOG Microbial
Identification System, and other small equipment. This essential equipment will
(1) enhance educational opportunities and research activities of students, (2)
enhance preparation of students for both careers and post-baccalaureate schools,
(3) facilitate development of faculty as teachers and investigators, (4) both
promote retention of existing faculty and facilitate attraction of new faculty,
and (5) enhance the value of the University's environmental science
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The University is the service institution to
south-central Louisiana, which since the1930's has been a region highly
cultivated by the oil and gas industry. Appropriately, the analytical
instruments of the facility will be used to study anaerobic biodegradation of
petroleum hydrocarbon-contaminated sites such as sediments and groundwater. The
GC and HPLC will be extensively used to quantify petroleum hydrocarbons and the
BIOLOG System will be used to identify aerobic and anaerobic bacteria
responsible for degrading petroleum hydrocarbons. In addition, the instruments
will be used to analyze other industrial contaminants such as chlorinated
aliphatic compounds including carbon tetrachloride and trichloroethylene in
ground water and sub-surface environmental samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
Environmental Science Instrumentation Core Facility at Nicholls State University
will not only enhance the infrastructure of the University and its Environmental
Science Program but also provide opportunities for students and faculty that
have not been otherwise available. Achievement of project goals will help build
and strengthen the research opportunities at a regional Louisiana university not
traditionally recognized as capable of supporting such potentially valuable
research and training. As the only university in a thirteen-parish south central
Louisiana region, and through the regionally significant projects of individual
investigators, the potential to stimulate economic development in a state
historically lacking in economic diversity is high and significant.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;