* 0112344
* Collaborative Research:  The Effects of Information on Firm Conduct and Market Structure
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2002
* Phillip Leslie, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* LAURA RAZZOLINI
* 06/30/2002
* USD 128,516.00

There is a significant theoretical literature in economics that identifies
various ways through which providing more information to consumers may lead to
improvements in market effciency and consumer welfare in particular. The
theoretical insights provide a basis for government policies that seek to
increase the amount of information available to consumers. Examples of such
policies include food labeling laws, accounting disclosure rules and energy
effciency labels on home applicances. Meanwhile existing empirical studies into
the effects of information to consumers on firm behavior find small or
negligible effects, casting doubt on the importance of such policies. In this
project, we analyze a regulatory change that provides an appealing context for
evaluating the effects of increased product information on firms' product
quality choices and disclosure decisions. In 1998, Los Angeles County introduced
hygiene quality grade cards to be displayed in restaurant windows. The
regulatory change provides an experiment in whether firms are subject to volun-
tary disclosure (of hygiene quality) without verifiability, voluntary disclosure
with verifiability or mandatory disclosure. Our research indicates substantial
effects of the increased information on restaurant hygiene quality. We also find
that the effects from mandatory disclosure are very similar to the effects from
voluntary verifiable disclosure. A possible implication of this finding is that
mandatory disclosure laws (which could be hard to introduce due to lobbying by
indus- try groups) are less important than having the government provide
mechanisms/procedures for firms to voluntarily disclose verifiable product
information. The richness of our dataset allows us to also analyze how the
effects of the grade cards differ across restaurants. This is interesting
because we can address questions that have received little or no attention in
the existing empirical literature, such as: (i) does reputation help firms to
overcome adverse selection problems, (ii) do franchised chain-restaurants free-
ride on chain reputation, and (iii) what is the effect of the increased product
information on firms' profitability and market structure?