* 0112541
* The Cognitive Basis of Stereotype Susceptibility: A Multi-Component ERP Investigation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,06/30/2004
* Nalini Ambady, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 06/30/2004
* USD 435,909.00

The categories that people use to organize their social world are known as
stereotypes. Research over the past 50 years has shown that stereotypes can have
a powerful influence on cognition and behavior. Even the subtle activation of a
person's gender or ethnic identity can produce reliable cognitive and behavioral
effects. When negative or unfavorable stereotypes are activated in memory,
performance can be hindered on a variety of behavioral and cognitive tasks. In
contrast, the activation of positive or favorable stereotypes can improve
performance. This effect is termed "stereotype susceptibility." Although these
effects have been clearly documented, not much is known about the mechanisms
underlying them. This project is designed to test key theoretical propositions
regarding possible mediators of the relationship between stereotype
susceptibility and behavioral effects. It is proposed that stereotype activation
alters flexible aspects of cognitive processing, especially attentional
resources, task orientation, and working memory. To test these propositions,
psychophysiological correlates manifested in tasks involving attention,
expectations, working memory and orienting to particular stimuli will be
examined with regard to their potential roles in stereotype susceptibility.
Several ERP components, obtained by averaging the EEG activity across repeated
presentations of a particular stimulus type, will be analyzed. The main
objective is to integrate current social psychology and psychophysiology theory
and research to gain insight into the cognitive processes that may mediate the
relationship between stereotype susceptibility and behavior. The research should
have important practical consequences and applications in the areas of education
and public policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;