* 0112113
* Acquisition of A Gas Source Mass Spectrometer For Earth Sciences Research, University Of California, Berkeley
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2004
* Kurt Cuffey, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2004
* USD 188,600.00

0112113 Ingram

This NSF grant provides partial support for the purchase of a gas source isotope
ratio mass spectrometer with peripheral sample preparation attachments, to be
housed in the Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences at the University of
California, Berkeley. The equipment includes an automated water and carbonate
preparation system and an elemental analyzer. The instrumentation will be
primarily used by the research groups of the three Principal Investigators B.
Lynn Ingram, Michael Manga, and Kurt Cuffey. The Department of Earth and
Planetary Science has recently provided newly upgraded space to house the
requested equipment. The requested package will greatly enhance the research
capabilities of students, postdoctoral fellows, and faculty in the Departments
of Earth and Planetary Science and Geography, and on the U.C. Berkeley campus in
general. Research areas include the use of carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen isotopes
in paleoclimatological and paleoenvironmental reconstructions using estuarine,
wetland, lacustrine, and coastal marine sediments and corals (Dr. Ingram, Earth
and Planetary Science Department), the use of oxygen and hydrogen isotopes as
tracers in hydrogeologic systems (Dr. Manga, Department of Earth and Planetary
Science), and the use of oxygen and deuterium isotopic ratios of water and ice
in glaciologic research (Dr. Cuffey, Department of Geography). Other users of
the proposed mass spectrometer facility from the Department of Earth and
Planetary Science include James Kirchner (watershed hydrology and
biogeochemistry, and surface process geomorphology), Walter Alvarez (asteroid
impacts, tectonics of the Mediterranean region, stratigraphy of pelagic
limestones), Dr. George Brimhall (mineral resources, low temperature
geochemistry, soil geochemistry), and Dr. William Berry (global climate change
and paleogeographic, oceanographic and life changes in the Paleozoic). Another
potential user from the Department of Geography is Roger Byrne (historical
biogeography, paleoenvironments of California and Mexico, and pollen analysis).
***