* 0112013
* Margins:  Experimental Investigation of Hydrous Peridotite Melting beneath Volcanic Arcs
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2006
* Glenn Gaetani, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 06/30/2006
* USD 229,745.00

0112013&lt;br/&gt;Gaetani&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this project are (1) to
determine the compositional characteristics and liquidus temperatures of hydrous
partial melts formed through fluxing of mantle peridotite by a H2O-rich
component from the subducted oceanic lithosphere, and (2) to measure
mineral/melt partition coefficients appropriate for modeling trace element
fractionations during partial melting of hydrous peridotite in the mantle wedge.
These goals are being achieved by determining experimentally (1) the
compositions of hydrous silicate melts in equilibrium with a lherzolite mineral
assemblage at 2.0 to 3.0 GPa, (2) the effect on partial melting of adding
variable amounts of a Na2O-K2O-H2O subduction component to the peridotite, and
(3) the partitioning of incompatible trace elements between mantle minerals
(clinopyroxene, garnet, amphibole) and hydrous partial melts at conditions
appropriate for the mantle beneath volcanic arcs. The results from this
experimental study will provide petrologic and geochemical data necessary for
understanding the role of H2O in generating arc magmas and determining the
composition of material transferred from the mantle to the crust by subduction-
related magmatic processes. The results will also help to provide a framework
for interpreting samples from MARGINS Focus Sites in the Izu-Bonin-Mariana and
Central American subduction systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;