* 0112738
* ITR/IM:  Collaborative Research:  Development of a Western North American Volcanic and Intrusive Rock Database
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2003
* Allen Glazner, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2003
* USD 68,487.00

0112738&lt;br/&gt;Glazner&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is supported through
funds from both the NSF Information Technology Research Program and the
Department of Defense, China Lake Naval Air Weapons Center, Geothermal Program.
In a collaborative effort between the Universities of Kansas, Colorado, North
Carolina and the Carnegie Institution of Washington, with assistance from the
USGS-Reston, the PI's will compile existing age, chemical, and isotopic data
from Late Cretaceous to Holocene extrusive and intrusive igneous rocks from the
western U.S., British Columbia, and northern Mexico into a web-accessible
electronic database. The resultant product, the Western North America Volcanic
and Intrusive Rock Database (NAVDAT), will be integrated into a geographic
information system (GIS) to allow visualization of complex age-compositional
patterns in volcanism throughout the study region. Ultimately, they will also
develop any necessary relational and graphical tools to allow users of the
database to address a wide variety of issues concerning the geologic evolution
and present volcanic state of the western U.S. Data entry will be undertaken at
"nodes" established by each PI at their home institutions-each PI will be
responsible for data compilation from literature, University, and DOE sources
and for the creation of metadata for igneous rocks in the geographic areas of
their expertise. Dr. Jeff Grossman (USGS, Reston) will be contracted to compile
igneous rock age and data for NAVDAT from USGS sources. The central hub location
for NAVDAT will be the University of Kansas. Here NAVDAT will be created and
maintained, and a toolbox generated of geochemical and GIS routines. The basic
NAVDAT IT architecture will use a combination of an Oracle relational database
server, housed in the Kansas Geological Survey (KGS) at KU, in communication
with a server housing the web server, the toolbox, a web development
environment, and an Internet Map Server. The KGS will work in cooperation with
the KU PIs to develop, update, and maintain the relational database component of
NAVDAT on the DBMS servers at KGS. The entire database will be accessible by
researchers around the world with a currently available, minimal web browser.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;