* 0112475
* Intrametropolitan Division of Labor and the Public Cost of Working Poverty
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2001,02/29/2004
* Jennifer Wolch, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Gregory H. Chu
* 02/29/2004
* USD 99,866.00

Working poverty - arising when a job fails to bring an employee's income above
the poverty line - is a growing phenomenon in southern California and in the
United States, but has received little attention by urban researchers. Building
on existing research on welfare, labor markets, and urban economic development,
and ongoing work on the geography of poverty and fiscal disparities (see
previous NSF project #9905866), this study investigates the relationship between
the intrametropolitan patterns of economic activity and working poverty, and
estimates the fiscal impact on local jurisdictions in the context of southern
California. More specifically, the investigators consider the extent to which
the gap between a "livable" income and the sub-poverty income of the working
poor imposes extra costs on local governments in the form of traditional anti-
poverty expenditures as well as additional services such as childcare,
transportation, training, job information, and work-related healthcare - costs
that may only be partly offset by intergovernmental transfers or expenditures.
To empirically test these relationships, the investigators will develop a model
of the impact of working poverty on local public finance and the role of the
intrametropolitan division of labor on this relationship during the 1980s and
1990s - a period of dramatic changes in fiscal federalism, welfare organization,
labor market conditions and immigration. First, they will measure the incidence
of working poverty, analyze its demographic characteristics, identify the
industries and occupations where it prevails, and estimate its geographical
distribution across municipalities in the five-county southern California
region. Second, they will calculate the gap between the actual wages of the
working poor and a "livable" wage required to avoid poverty for each city.
Third, they will estimate the impact of this gap on local antipoverty
expenditures, taking into account the role of fiscal disparities, local labor
market characteristics, business subsidies, living wage ordinances, proportion
of immigrants, and welfare-to-work factors. This last step will make use of
multivariate regression analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study addresses
important questions that have not been systematically approached by urban
geographers and other scholars of poverty. First, it provides a better
understanding of who the working poor are and emphasizes the links between
working poverty and the regional economy. Furthermore, it provides a valuable
tool for analyzing the social, political and spatial implications of working
poverty, including heightened economic and social polarization, continued
central city deterioration, and rapid exurbanization. A better understanding of
these issues is critical to the development of successful antipoverty policies
both at the national and local levels.&lt;br/&gt;