* 0112413
* Scientific Computing Research Environments for the Mathematical Sciences (SCREMS)
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Randolph Bank, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 08/31/2002
* USD 45,000.00

The Scientific Computation Group (Scicomp) in the Mathematics&lt;br/&gt;
Department at UCSD will purchase a 16-processor MPI-based parallel&lt;br/&gt;
computer and four Linux-based graphics workstations for
visualization.&lt;br/&gt; The equipment will be dedicated to the support of
research in the&lt;br/&gt; mathematical sciences. The equipment will be used for
several research&lt;br/&gt; projects, including parallel adaptive multilevel
finite element methods,&lt;br/&gt; parallel algorithms for optimal control with
PDE constraints, parallel&lt;br/&gt; level set algorithm development, and
applications in biochemistry and&lt;br/&gt; physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Supported by this computing equipment, our research program will&lt;br/&gt;
provide graduate students and postdocs a broad educational experience&lt;br/&gt;
in an environment in which different aspects of scientific
computation&lt;br/&gt; are integrated. This produces scientists who are not only
expert in&lt;br/&gt; their own area of study, but are also able to communicate
across&lt;br/&gt; disciplinary boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; As part of this
proposal, SDSC (San Diego Supercomputer Center)&lt;br/&gt; will provide fiber-
optic infrastructure to connect the 16-processor&lt;br/&gt; parallel computer to
a similar large cluster located at SDSC. The&lt;br/&gt; coupled clusters will be
used in large production calculations&lt;br/&gt; requiring substantial
resources, and the individual Scicomp cluster&lt;br/&gt; will be used for
parallel algorithm development and for smaller&lt;br/&gt; production
calculations. The Scicomp satellite with fiber link to&lt;br/&gt; SDSC will
complement similar computational satellites recently&lt;br/&gt; constructed by
the biochemistry group on campus and by the UCSD&lt;br/&gt; Medical
School.&lt;br/&gt;