* 0112962
* Economic Organization and Viability of Open Source Software
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2004
* Paul David, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* C.  Iacono
* 07/31/2004
* USD 314,999.00

Open source software relies on the expertise of developers around the world, who
volunteer to produce software collaboratively. Their mode of collaboration
requires participants to share the results of their work freely with others. By
revealing the source code of the programs on which they work, developers
participating in these collaborations are able to design new features, fix bugs
in programs, and tailor the software to suit their own needs. The attractiveness
of engaging in this method of producing software in the Internet environment has
led to the emergence and growth of specialized, online virtual communities whose
members follow rather clearly established procedures in performing their
professional tasks, but are otherwise bound together by loose rules of
association. This project inquires into the sustainability of such
organizations, and the likely extent of their domain of viability-in terms of
the kinds of goods and services that might reliably be supplied in this way. The
investigation has three more proximate empirical objectives. The first is to
identify typical patterns in the evolution of these communities' informal
organizational structures and their norms of conduct. The development of
procedural authority, and other means of resolving conflicts among individuals
in regard to the substance of their work, and of verifying and validating their
contributions, are subjects for special study. The second objective is to
characterize the distribution of effort input within these communities and its
relationship to the structure and distribution of internal "rewards," and
derived external benefits for different levels of participation. These tasks
will be approached through analysis of passively collected data, participant
responses to email survey questionnaires, and in-depth case histories of
particular communities. A third and larger goal is to understand the dynamics of
these "virtual communities" and the similarities and differences they exhibit in
comparisons with collaborative organizations involving spatially distributed
academic ("open science") researchers whose work is enabled by computer-mediated
telecommunications