* 0112231
* Language Processing and Representational Constraints in Memory
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Peter Gordon, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Maling
* 08/31/2005
* USD 219,870.00

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Peter Gordon and Randall Hendrick
will conduct three years of linguistic research on the functions of human memory
during language comprehension. Their focus is working memory, which is the
memory that keeps track of information as people actively engage in complex
tasks. Language comprehension includes complex tasks like identifying and
interpreting parts of sentences. Such tasks require that intermediate
representations of sentence parts be held in working memory and accessed during
comprehension. The project tests the hypothesis that working memory's
constraints in language, and other cognitive domains, reflect its susceptibility
to interference during encoding, storage, and retrieval. This interference
arises from the similarity of the items being processed. This research uses
three complementary methods: eye tracking during reading, analyses of patterns
in large corpora of printed language, and memory load tasks during language
comprehension. The broader aims of the project are pursued by focusing each
method on two central issues: How is language processing affected by the
proximity of similar expressions, and what are the psychologically salient
dimensions of similarity that cause interference? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
significance of the project is that it will advance knowledge of the
relationship between language and other aspects of cognition, particularly
memory. Basic scientific research on the organization of the cognitive processes
involved in crucial facets of mental life will be of benefit for later
development of more applied goals. These include the creation of effective
information technology, the teaching of reading, and the diagnosis and treatment
of language impairment. &lt;br/&gt;