* 0112929
* ITR/AP (CHE): Mutliscale Treatment of Fluid-Solid Interfaces: Development of Hybrid Monte Carlo and Finite Element Code
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Dennis Diestler, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 08/31/2005
* USD 400,000.00

0112929&lt;br/&gt;Zheng&lt;br/&gt;This ITR/AP Small Group Award supports
development of efficient and robust computational methods for simulating
physical systems involving phenomena at drastically different length scales. The
results will serve an important need in computer-aided design, analysis
and&lt;br/&gt;modeling. A classic example is a system that involves fluid-solid
interfaces with complex geometries on scales ranging from molecular to
macroscopic. On one hand, computational modeling approaches based on continuum
approximations (e.g., finite-element and finite&lt;br/&gt;-difference
techniques) are capable of describing mechanical responses only at wavelengths
much longer than the typical distances over which the fluid density at
interfaces varies appreciably. On the other hand, the whole system is far too
large to be treated by a fully atomistic simulation that would encompass
responses at all scales simultaneously. To address this problem a hybrid Monte
Carlo-finite element scheme, in which fluid molecules at the interface are
treated explicitly, while the solid is handled by continuum techniques, will be
applied. A "reduced" description in which the stochastic variables consist of
the positions of the&lt;br/&gt;fluid molecules and the nodes of the finite-
element mesh covering the solid phase will be developed. The stochastic nature
of Monte Carlo lends itself to an efficient parallel computing scheme, which is
crucial for simulating real-world systems. A multi-disciplinary team has been
assembled to undertake the three-year project, the expected outcome of which is
a powerful computational scheme for analyzing the thermomechanical response of
realistic fluid-solid systems in which the coupling of the molecularly
heterogeneous interfaces to the macroscopic continuum plays an essential
role.&lt;br/&gt;***