* 0112694
* ITR/AP(Geo): Collaborative Proposal for First Generation Model and Data Assimilation System to Reduce Volcanic Hazards
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Timothy Dixon, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2005
* USD 136,418.00

0112694&lt;br/&gt;Dixon&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant, supported through funds
from the NSF/Information Technology Research - Small Grants Program and the
EAR/Instrumentation and Facilities Program, will enable the development of a
first-generation data and model assimilation system for volcanic hazard
assessment. Essentially, this system will use Bayesian forecasting techniques to
construct hazard estimates that incorporate both prior geologic information and
near-real-time data types. The primary goal is to demonstrate, through the
application of information technology methodologies, that such disparate
geologic data types can be combined smoothly, even during volcanic crises, to
yield improved estimates of hazard and risk. The focus will be on hazards
associated with the dispersion and accumulation of volcanic tephra (volcanic
ash), both because of the importance of this volcanic hazard and our previous
experience in forecasting tephra hazards. Models will be used to relate observed
tephra-stratigraphies at several volcanoes (Colima, Cerro Negro, Montserrat,
Popocateptal) to sets of input parameters, including eruption duration, initial
gas content, and meteorological conditions. We plan to explore several
techniques (inversion, simplified models, database development) to relate
observed patterns of volcano deformation directly to the parameter estimates
used in tephra fallout models. The system will be constructed using parallel
algorithms to exploit inexpensive and widely available PC clusters. Through the
auspices of an ITR grant, we plan to clearly demonstrate the huge advantages
realized by, for the first time, systematically linking the geologic record,
process models, and near-real time monitoring results. For tephra accumulation
hazards specifically, this approach will further lead to a clear understanding
of the links between deformation, magma processes, and the fundamental
parameters governing tephra dispersion and accumulation. In this sense, the
results of the systematic approach advocated here will provide guidance about
the volcanological research most likely to results in volcanic hazard reduction.
This research will be conducted as a collaborative proposal between the
University of Miami, the University of South Florida, and Southwest Research
Institute (nonprofit). In addition, international collaboration with the
University of Bristol will bring expertise on tephra dispersion modeling and
data on the important Montserrat eruptions to the project. Students will
contribute to all phases of the project, including geological research, model
development, and software development. After appropriate testing, we plan to
make the results of this project widely available by open-sourcing the codes and
providing assistance in implementation of PC clusters to the volcanological
community. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;