* 0112659
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Comparative Paleoecology of Late Miocene Eurasian Hominoidea Based on Bovid and Equid Metapodial Functional Morphology
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2003
* John Kappelman, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 06/30/2003
* USD 11,979.00

Researchers have advanced many hypotheses about the influence of ancient
environments on the history of our species, Homo sapiens. However, reliable
reconstructions of ancient environments are often unavailable for important
fossil sites relevant to these hypotheses. One method of reconstructing ancient
environments uses information about modes of locomotion of fossil animals found
at sites to test hypotheses about the environment used by these
animals.&lt;br/&gt;Here, the researcher will develop reconstructions of ancient
environments at sites relevant to questions about the influence of environment
on the late Miocene Eurasian hominoids, a group of fossil apes potentially most
closely related to our first bipedal ancestors. Comparative data on limb bones
of fossil three-toed horses, modern Equus, and fossil and living antelopes will
be used to describe the morphological correlates of the modes of locomotion
employed by these animals. This information will allow the researcher to
identify the types of environments represented at fossil sites by identifying
the modes of locomotion of animals common at these sites. For instance, sites
with many fast-running species adapted to flight from predators across open
country would indicate a plains or savanna-like environment.&lt;br/&gt;The
comparative data collected in this study will consist of traditional metric
data, digital photographs, and high resolution X-ray CT scans of fossil and rare
museum specimens. Data collection is non-destructive and will create a valuable
archive essential to understanding both the locomotion of extinct species, the
influence of environment on human relatives, and the long ongoing history of
environmental change on our planet.&lt;br/&gt;