* 0112032
* Voting, Assignment and Matching Under Dichotomous Preferences
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Herve Moulin, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2004
* USD 140,977.00

Mechanisms to select a public decision (voting), or to assign agents to objects,
or to match a set of men and women in pairs, can not satisfy all of the basic
requirements of desirable social choice when preferences allow indifferences
between the indivisible decisions, or objects, or mates. As a first step toward
a full treatment of complete and transitive preferences in probabilistic voting,
assignment and matching, this project explores the simple yet basic domain of
dichotomous preferences, namely those where feasible allocations fall in at most
two indifferent classes, good and bad, acceptable or not, utility of zero or
utility of one. A very appealing feature of the dichotomous domain is that,
unlike the strict preference domain, the three requirements of efficiency,
incentive-compatibility and fairness are compatible. Approval Voting (AV) is the
most natural voting mechanism in the dichotomous domain. There is a finite set
of outcomes - public decisions - among which one must be chosen. Under AV, each
agent reports a certain subset of outcomes that he or she approves of and the
outcome that is approved by the largest number of voters is elected; ties are
resolved by a lottery in which all winners have equal probability. This project
uses an axiomatic characterization of approval voting to determine the
conditions under which a fair, efficient and group strategyproof (i.e., immune
to misreports by any coalition at all profiles) voting method exists. Time-
sharing of a public facility is a rich source of examples where dichotomous
preferences are plausible. This project examines mathematical models that
balance the utilitarian, i.e., choose what is desired by the largest number of
users, and the egalitarian, i.e., guarantee a minimal level of satisfaction for
every user. Under the fair share requirement, the existence of an efficient and
strategyproof rule is determined. The project also addresses the more
challenging question of whether or not group strategyproofness is within the
reach of efficient and minimally fair rules (for instance AV does not meet this
property).

The second and third models of the project are respectively the assignment and
the bilateral matching problem. Both models are formally similar and most
axioms, Consistency, Strategy-proofness, Fair Share Guarantee, are easily
adapted from the probabilistic voting model. One important new fact can be
borrowed from the mathematical literature on matching: all efficient
(deterministic) assignments (or matching) have the same number of agents
receiving a good object (the same number of mutually acceptable pairs).
Accordingly the uniform average of all efficient assignments (matching) is
efficient among all probabilistic mechanisms. A reasonable conjecture is that
this solution is characterized, like AV, by Consistency, efficiency and
symmetric treatment of agents. Other interesting efficient solutions emerge as
well: one can order the agents randomly and find the allocation maximizing
lexicographically the utilities in that order; we could equalize as much as
possible the (ex ante) utilities, which turns out to be the same thing as
maximizing their Nash product, or as applying the old idea of competitive
equilibrium with equal incomes. These and other rules are systematically
analyzed in the light of their fairness and strategy-proofness properties.