* 0112792
* Development of a High Temperature Maximun Bubble Pressure Apparatus for Measuring Surface Tension of Molten Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Sridhar Seetharaman, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2003
* USD 75,000.00

Computer modeling of metallurgical processes can be used to enhance process
control and product quality. Full exploitation of the high-level of currently
available computational tools requires improved accuracy of the physical
property input data. In particular, surface tension of molten metals critically
influences the characteristics of metals processing. For high-quality
measurements of surface tension, it is mandatory to establish the concentration
of surface-active elements present in the melt. The most ubiquitous species is
oxygen; it is present under all practical conditions involving molten metals and
is a major factor effecting surface tension, even at parts per million levels.
Since it is practically impossible to totally eliminate the presence of oxygen
in reactors and vessels, the oxygen potential needs to be closely monitored.
This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program support a
program to build a high temperature maximum bubble pressure (MBP) device
equipped with a solid electrolyte based sensor/control to monitor the oxygen
potential in the probe. This combination is uniquely suited for measuring
surface tensions of reactive alloys since: (1) the MBP probes beneath the
surface of the melt and the probed surface area is small compared to the volume
of the melt; and (2) the oxygen potential in the gas stream responsible for
creating the probed surface is monitored through an oxygen sensing/controlling
device. The instrumentation developed under this program will be made available
to students at Carnegie Mellon during laboratory session designed to study the
structure and properties of metals in their molten state. Furthermore, it is
expected that the ability to establish the effect of the oxygen potential on the
surface tension and the effects of the presence of 2D surface phases, will
significantly contribute to ongoing and future research projects at Carnegie
Mellon that study the surface thermodynamics of alloys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
order to fully appreciate the tools offered by computer models in predicting
metallurgical processes for process control and product quality, it is necessary
to parallel the advances in process modeling with improved accuracy of the
physical data that are used as input. Surface tension of molten metals is a key
property since it influences (1) the conversion of liquid droplets to solids
during the production of metal-alloy powders; (2) the formation of gas pores
during casting which diminish the final metal strength; and (3) the formation
and shape of impurity inclusions during the processing of steels. However, it is
experimentally extremely difficult to perform accurate surface tension
measurements of molten reactive alloys such as stainless steels and superalloys.
This is due to the fact that oxygen is always present in trace amounts, which
will react with the metals. Since even low levels of dissolved oxygen in the
metal can change the surface tension significantly, it is critical to control
its concentration accurately. The award from the Instrumentation for Materials
Research program instrumentation supports the development of a novel combination
of a probe that measures the surface tension under the surface of metals and an
oxygen pump/sensor that controls and monitors the oxygen level. The instrument
will benefit the metals processing industry and increase the understanding of
the physical chemistry of surfaces in the molten state and thereby positively
impacting research as well as education in materials chemistry. The instrument
built under this program will be implemented in laboratory classes at Carnegie
Mellon changing the fact that the important molten state of materials has so far
been little studied by students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;