* 0112486
* Influence of Ocean Surface Conditions on Regional Climate of the Northern North Atlantic.
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* David Bromwich, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 08/31/2005
* USD 295,327.00

The proposed research will carry out a modeling and observationally-based
investigation of the impact of northern Atlantic sea surface temperature
anomalies (SSTAs) on the climate and atmo-spheric circulation variability over a
region extending from Baffin Island to the Norwegian Sea. Mesoscale model
simulations are to be performed of known, high persistent, negative SSTAs that
occurred from October 1982 to September 1984 to the west of Greenland and from
October 1967 to September 1969 east of Greenland. Each of these events, which
are potentially associated with decadal-period ocean SSTAs, will use a modeling
approach to evaluate the oceanic impact on regional temperatures, precipitation
and atmospheric circulation variability including storm track shifts. The model
results will be compared with SSTA sensitivity experiments in which the ocean
has a positive warm anomaly during the same periods. A third model sensitivity
study will employ month-long simulations for winter and summer to investigate
the roles of SSTAs on the movement of storms across the Norwegian Sea and into
the Arctic, and the simultaneous tendency for the subpolar low to lie far east
of Iceland. Accompanying observational analyses will focus on evaluating the
climatic impacts of a decadally varying warm SST pool in the northern Atlantic,
especially from 1920-1940, as well as other cold events prior to 1970. By
examining the effects of the anomalies in regions east of Greenland and near
Labrador, the research hopes to determine whether the previously identified
extremely persistent anomalies in Davis Strait are unique or common. Rotated
principal component analyses will be used in an effort to determine links dur-
ing all seasons between northern Atlantic SSTAs and Atlantic storm tracks. Storm
track data will be used to further evaluate links between the North Atlantic and
Arctic oscillations, as well as to assess how eastward storm track shifts impact
sea ice transport. The end result is planned to be a comprehensive evaluation of
the SST impact on Atlantic Arctic climate and circulation variability and an
assessment of the dominant Atlantic storm tracks that impact the Atlantic and
Arctic basins. The research will also allow an estimate of the predictability of
cyclone activity anoma-lies in the northern North Atlantic. These results will
contribute to our understanding of high lati-tude climate and ocean-atmosphere
interactions within the context of the large changes that are at present
impacting the northern Atlantic and Arctic regions.