* 0112782
* ITR/IM:The crystal structure database and analysis tools project
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2004
* Robert Downs, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2004
* USD 350,000.00

0112782&lt;br/&gt;Downs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant, supported through funds
from both the NSF/Information Technology Research - Small Grants Program and the
Earth Science Instrumentation and Facilities Program, will facilitate the
development of a comprehensive database and suite of user-friendly analysis
tools that will permit a wide variety of scientific and educational
investigations using crystal structures and their properties over the Internet.
The database will contain the known crystal structure parameters of every
mineral or other earth related material published in the scientific literature
since 1915. A suite of interactive software will be developed for visualization,
manipulation and analysis of the data, along with a set of guides to instruct
the user and provide help for classroom education. Dissemination of the database
information, the analysis tools, and the educational guides will occur via links
from the websites of the Mineralogical Society of America and the Mineralogical
Association of Canada, and will be expedited through traditional publications.
In addition, these resources will be incorporated in the NSF Digital Library for
Earth Science Education (DLESE). Students and scientists of all disciplines will
be able to explore and analyze crystal structure data with state-of-the-art
software. The basic features of the software will be established with default
settings that allow a range of users, from the high school student in chemistry
to the professional mineralogist, to investigate fundamental properties of
minerals including: crystal chemical parameters such as bond lengths and angles,
polyhedral volumes and distortions, thermal vibration amplitudes, and rigid body
motion parameters; crystal forms; fixed wavelength or energy dispersive X-ray
and neutron diffraction patterns; and electron densities and bonding analyses.
Furthermore, a library of movies showing crystal structures evolving with
temperature, pressure, and composition, or undergoing phase transitions, will be
provided as a means to interpret the crystal structure data collected at these
conditions. The software will incorporate features that allow the user to
produce their own movies that can also be contributed to the library.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;