* 0112313
* Collaborative Research: Modeling the Earth's Deep Interior: An Integrative Approach
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Donald Weidner, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2004
* USD 81,974.00

Masters &lt;br/&gt;Weidner &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vision of a "standard
model" which unifies many now-distinct disciplines within the Earth sciences is
one that an increasing number of geoscientists are beginning to share, largely
because of recent advances in mantle flow-modeling which begin to integrate
large-scale seismological models, mineral physics data, and geodynamical
modeling. Unfortunately, our current progress is slow because of artificial
boundaries between disciplines and the tradition of small groups working in
relative isolation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of an ongoing CSEDI grant,
seismic data sets, codes, and models have been compiled which, in principle,
allow the global seismologist a more synoptic view of the problem of determining
the 3D structure of the Earth. This program is now at the point where there is
near-consensus on a seismological "background" (or long-wavelength) 3D model. A
collaboration between UCSD and Harvard (with significant involvement of UC
Berkeley) will work towards establishing the background elastic model (which
includes a 1D model). While the outcome of this research will be a specific
model (or family of models), the "reference" data sets will be made available to
the community (as well as a wide variety of other shared data sets) to ensure
broad participation in the construction of reference models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most importantly, the current program will be extended
beyond seismology and initially will include a mineral physics component (SUNY)
and a flow-modeling component (U. Toronto). Tools and data sets will be
developed that allow forward modeling of a wide range of potential compositions
for conditions which span the mantle. The goal is to make these tools
sufficiently easy to use so that non-specialists can test compositional models
directly against seismic and geodetic data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;