* 0112997
* ITR/IM: Labscape: Ubiquitous Computing for Experiment Capture in the Biology Laboratory
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2001,12/31/2004
* Lawrence Arnstein, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 12/31/2004
* USD 349,219.00

The objective of Labscape is to enable individual lab workers to contribute to a
fine-grained formal representation of ongoing lab activities i.e., to build the
database by doing the work, without having to stop and write things down in a
notebook or to enter information into a computer. By eliminating the redundancy
of doing the work and then recording it, accuracy and completeness will be
improved. And, by capturing information at a finer detail than possible for
manual entry systems, varied and novel applications can be supported. This
research supports the development of both an effective scientific working
environment and an effective scientific learning environment but supporting
better artifacts arising from the work or learning.. There are two primary
research thrusts of this proposal. The first is the highly domain specific
question of how and what data should be captured in the physical context of
performing an experiment -- this is both a data representation and a human-
computer interaction problem. The required domain expertise is derived from
close cooperation with the University of Washington's Cell Systems Initiative
(CSI) and its corporate and academic affiliates. The second question is how to
obtain good system properties in distributed laboratory environments
characterized by high degrees of device and personal mobility. For this
application, security, reliability, and functional extensibility are some of the
most important properties. These issues will be investigated in concert with
UW's Portolano program whose objective is to develop general device, networking,
middleware, and programming technologies for ubiquitous computing applications.