* 0112288
* Economic Influences on Migration Decisions of Young Workers
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2007
* John Kennan, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2007
* USD 285,387.00

&lt;br/&gt;The extent to which Americans move from one part of the country to
another is remarkable when compared with data for other countries. The research
analyzes the relevance of geographical differences in income from the point of
view of young people who must decide whether to accept the opportunities
available in their current location, or move elsewhere in search of better
opportunities. There are in fact large geographical differences in wages,
despite large migration flows that might be expected to eliminate such
differences. There are also large geographical differences in welfare benefits,
and policy-makers express concerns that these differences might create "welfare
magnets" in some locations. Thus there is reason to believe that differences in
expected income may help explain migration decisions. A more detailed
understanding of the relationship between income and migration will be useful in
many applications. For example, it will lead toward better forecasts of how
quickly regional differences in income and poverty are likely to dissipate; and
it will greatly improve our ability to analyze the effects of changes in the
welfare system.&lt;br/&gt; We build an economic model of individual migration
decisions, and we fit it to individual histories, using data from the National
Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY). Individual decisions to migrate are modeled
as a job search problem in which welfare benefits or other alternative sources
of income act as a floor, insuring workers against bad job search outcomes. A
worker can draw a wage only by visiting a location, thereby incurring a moving
cost. Locations are distinguished by known differences in mean wages, amenity
values and alternative income sources. A worker starts the life-cycle in some
home location and chooses an optimal sequence of moves before settling down.
There is a two-dimensional ranking of locations, ex ante: some places have high
wages, and others have attractive fallback options (both adjusted for amenity
values). &lt;br/&gt; The decision problem is too complicated to be solved
analytically, so we proceed by using a discrete approximation that can be solved
numerically. State data on welfare benefits and Census data on wages are used to
estimate the parameters describing the menu of choices available to individuals,
and preference parameter values are selected so as to maximize the likelihood of
the migration decisions seen in the NLSY data. The result of the project will be
a structural explanation of migration behavior, that can be used to say what
would have happened if the same individuals had been confronted with a different
menu of choices. In particular, the results will be used to assess the extent to
which migration decisions are driven by geographical wage differentials, and by
welfare magnets. Preliminary empirical results indicate that a useful structural
model of welfare migration is within reach, and it is likely that this can be
extended to obtain a broader characterization of migration decisions of young
workers. It will than be possible to analyze behavioral responses to situations
not seen in the data, such as the implementation of new policies affecting the
labor market.&lt;br/&gt;