* 0112560
* ITR/SI(SPIII): An Information Theoretic Approach to Secret Key Generation for Encrypted Communication in a Network
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Prakash Narayan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jie Wu
* 12/31/2005
* USD 371,049.00

Information security is an issue of critical importance in communication
networks. We propose a novel approach for achieving integrity,authentication and
privacy among the nodes of a network. The principal challenge that we address
concerns the generation and establishment of secret keys in such a network for
subsequent secure encrypted communication among the nodes. Our approach, which
is based on information theory, provides new insights into the problem of secret
key generation, and holds promise for the development of novel techniques and
algorithms in the design of cryptosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; An important
strength of our approach, which is based on recent theoretical developments,
lies in its ability to assure an enhanced level of information security. It uses
a stringent notion of information theoretic secrecy or security rather than the
notions of computational security and complexity-theoretic security on which all
currently used cryptosystems are based. The statistical notion of information
theoretic secrecy guarantees that legitimate messages and secret keys are, in
effect, concealed from an adversary who is assumed to possess wiretapping and
eavesdropping capabilities, and is, furthermore, not limited in terms of
computational resources. This is in contrast with the existing notion of
security which relies on the difficulty currently faced in solving certain
underlying computational problems; recent advances in factorization into primes
and quantum computing point to the potential vulnerability of cryptosystems
based on this notion of security. A second important strength of our approach is
that it enables a systematic study of secret key generation, at the outset and
in layers, with different layers of secret keys being assigned to different
subsets of nodes in the network. This feature is particularly relevant for
guaranteeing information security in networks with changing topologies,
particularly when some nodes are either disabled or cease to be authorized and
reliable. In such situations, the surviving or remaining authorized nodes can
switch from one layer of secret keys to another so as to maintain information
security among themselves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The proposed program of
research addresses several important issues associated with with the
aforementioned generation of secret keys in a network. A prime objective is the
establishment of secret keys by means of exchanges of "correlated" information
over insecure public channels, and through the extraction of "common randomness"
from noisy but secure channels; such keys must be concealed from an adversary
who can eavesdrop on the public channels, and may possess additional wiretapping
capabilities. Explicit \lq\lq rate constraints" will be imposed on exchanges
between the nodes, depicting bandwidth limitations associated with the use of
shared public channels, e.g., in a wireless environment. An innovative feature,
and a useful technical device, involves the introduction of a \lq\lq helper"
node (e.g., a centralized or trusted server in a key establishment
protocol)which, when appropriate, can serve to facilitate secret key generation
by the nodes by furnishing them additional correlated information or
computational resources. In another significant departure from current practice,
secret keys will be generated using randomization methods and drawing on
techniques from the multi-user information theory of source coding and channel
coding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Our proposed research is expected to lead to
several significant and innovative contributions. Firstly, our information
theoretic framework will provide new and valuable theoretical insights into the
problem of secret key generation in a network of nodes,while complementing the
current approach based on computational complexity. Second, our use of
techniques for data compression and channel coding in the&lt;br/&gt;design of
secret keys will lead to an exploration of novel practical techniques and
algorithms for secret&lt;br/&gt;key generation in layers. Third, our proposed
framework will afford a means for a quantitative and comparative assessment of
the extent of information theoretic security provided by existing secret key
cryptosystems, thereby buttressing or weakening current claims of security. An
important component of the proposed work is the development of new algorithms
and accompanying software for the layered generation of secret keys in a
network. Finally, the proposed work will lead to potential advances in
information theory through the introduction of new models and
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;