* 0112676
* Racial and Spatial Influences on the Labor Market Opportunities of Low Skilled Workers
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2004
* Donald Tomaskovic-Devey, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/2004
* USD 136,054.00

SES-0112267&lt;br/&gt;Melvin Thomas&lt;br/&gt;Donald Tomaskovic-
Devey&lt;br/&gt;North Carolina State University
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will study variation in the career
patterns of a late 1970s cohort of low skilled workers by examining the impact
of ethnicity and locality on these workers' careers. The PI will focus on
spatial variation in income inequality, local demand for labor overall and low
skill labor in particular, and local variation in race/ethnic inequality to
explain the career dynamics of low skill workers. A prominent explanation for
rising race/ethnic inequality is the spatial mismatch hypothesis that points
toward the spatial location of African Americans and whites relative to the
location and skill requirements of available jobs. There are also well
documented spatial variations in the degree of race/ethnic competition,
segregation, and discrimination. Therefore, it is expected that the prospects of
low skilled workers are strongly tied to both their race/ethnicity and their
opportunities in local labor markets. The investigators will develop a model of
career inequality, which focuses on the endogenous creation of human capital
disparities across the career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How do local labor market
opportunities and local race/ethnic inequality shape the cumulative labor market
experiences and earnings of low skilled workers? The investigators will develop
tentative answers to this question using the National Longitudinal Survey -
Youth Sample. The analytic strategy is to use three-level hierarchical linear
models. In these models person-year outcomes and human capital attributes are at
level one, fixed individual characteristics such as race, ethnicity, or gender
are at level two, and characteristics of the local labor market are at level
three.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research seeks to make two two key scientific
advances. The first is the explicit conceptualization of human capital
acquisition as endogenous to the labor market and so consistent with
contextualized accounts of labor market opportunity and discrimination. The
second is the implementation of a statistical framework, which assumes that the
context of decisions and behaviors is important, and that fixed individual
attributes and attributes of localities are the interactional context of human
capital acquisition and returns.&lt;br/&gt;