* 0112072
* A Feasible Uniform Standard for Deep Citation of Social Science Data
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Gary King, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2006
* USD 805,102.00

This Political Science Infrastructure project creates a uniform citation
standard for social science data sources. Analogous to the impact of standards
for citing textual sources, this facilitates connections between research and
researchers. It thereby improves the scientific process and advances the
accumulation of knowledge. The use of standard data source citations expands
replication efforts and eases these efforts, increasing researcher productivity
and allowing more resources to be devoted to new research. Science progresses as
scientists create more links with other scientists. Text references are done so
often that they are taken for granted for how fundamentally important they have
become. In the last 50 years, quantitative work has become roughly half of what
journals publish and we there is no comparable citation standard for data. This
project builds a simple yet critical piece of infrastructure, a uniform standard
for deep citation of data, offers startling and significant savings of time and
resources and consequent gains in research
productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One might conclude that the explosive growth
of electronic press and of electronic data dissemination would solve the problem
of linkages between cited and source data. The amount and rate of knowledge in
circulation certainly has increased dramatically, yet in the absence of uniform
standards for citing data the problem is being exacerbated, not resolved. Given
the short average duration of URLs on the web, the growing citation of online
data sets is a problem, or possibly an opportunity, but definitely not an
answer. It is obvious that an online source cited in a manuscript printed out
today may note be the same source available at the web address even tomorrow,
let alone when the manuscript is published or at some future date. Citations to
sources that cannot be retrieved are useless.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deep citation
of text means that one text source can unambiguously reference another source or
any portion of that source in a manner such that the source can be retrieved by
another reader years or decades hence. For books, the author, title, publisher,
and page number is enough to retrieve any specific phrase referenced. Deep
citation of data means the same, but involves new technological issues, issues
that are addressed in this project. Readers need to be able to retrieve the
original data set, in the same version, identify the same variables, use the
same recodes, and in some instances be able to conduct the same analysis. To
facilitate this process, the investigators develop uniform citation standards
for social science publishing and create a test-bed or prototype tools for
electronic linkage of data citations and source
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Political science as a discipline has been in the
forefront historically in the building of social science infrastructure,
including creation of the world's largest archive of social science data (the
ICPSR), development of the first general-purpose commercial statistical packages
(SPSS), and the ongoing data dissemination developments at the Virtual Data
Center. Each development originated from within political science, and greatly
benefited political science research. But each also represents the discipline's
continuing contribution to the infrastructure of scientific research well beyond
the disciplines own intellectual boundaries. This project will have implications
as broad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators proceed on two fronts, first in
the development of a standardized digital signature for cited data, second to
create tools to electronically connect and to retrieve data from source data. In
order to establish uniform data citation standards and create new tools for
electronic linkage of data citations and sources the researchers capitalize on
the digital library work already in progress at the Harvard-MIT Data Center for
development of a virtual data center (VDC). This project can seamlessly extend
the VDC platform at low marginal cost and adds substantial value to the VDC
system as a public good in perpetuity. In this project the VDC is extended to an
area where it was not originallydesigned but for which it proves to be a very
powerful tool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;