* 0112528
* Development and Modification of Behavioral Responses to MHC and Other Odortypes
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Kunio Yamazaki, Monell Chemical Senses Center
* Standard Grant
* Robert Paul Malchow
* 08/31/2005
* USD 420,000.00

Body odor plays a prominent role in regulating social, sexual and endocrine
responses of many species and specialized structures have evolved to produce and
detect odorous signals. Individual recognition, often communicated through body
odors, can be critical in mate choice, parental care, and inter-individual
interactions. The goals of this project are to better understand how odors
signify individuality and in what contexts individual signals modulate social
behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central idea underlying this project was
articulated 25 years ago: Perhaps the same set of genes that code for individual
identity in the immune system (i.e. those genes that insure rejection of foreign
tissue and organ transplants) also provide an animal with a unique odor. These
genes, termed Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC) genes, form a linked set in
most vertebrates and they include the most polymorphic of any known genes. They
are also involved in coding for individuality of odor (providing each animal
with what we have termed an odortype) as has been demonstrated in studies with
mice, rats and humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current project explores three
aspects of odortypes using the inbred domestic mouse as the model organism.
First, studies conducted in the previous funding period documented the role of
MHC odortypes in familial interactions. Maternal mice retrieve pups
preferentially according to their MHC type and, reciprocally, pups are attracted
to familial MHC odortypes. Studies in this project will investigate the roles of
pre- and post-natal learning in modulating preference. Prior studies also
demonstrated, for the first time in any species, that fetal odortypes are
expressed in maternal odors and that the MHC type of the fetus may modulate
adult male and female behavior. Studies described in the second part of the
current proposal will investigate how experience with fetal odor influences
subsequent behavior of the mother and the pup itself after birth. The third part
of this project begins an exploration of a novel aspect of odor signaling
between individual animals. Both male and female mice that are infected with
mouse mammary tumor virus, a virus that causes mammary tumors in females
following one or more pregnancies, develop a distinctive odor in the absence of
tumors. Studies designed to explore the behavioral consequences of this
observation will open a novel area of research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In sum,
this multidisciplinary project links immunology, odors and olfaction, behavior,
and disease to advance our understanding of the regulation of social behavior of
mice and, by extension, other social mammals. It will also shed light on
mechanisms underlying the maintenance of genetic diversity in MHC and other
genes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program will continue to benefit from
technical assistance provided through the Monell Chemical Senses Center's
minority high school and college program. This program, which employs students
from schools throughout the greater Philadelphia area including Camden, NJ, will
provide training at Monell to over 40 students in the summer of 2001. It is
funded by a major grant from the Annenberg Foundation as well as from other
sources including institutional funds. We expect, as has been the case in the
past years, two minority students per year from this program will work on this
NSF project. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;