* 0112213
* A Biomechanical Approach to Xylem Structure and Function
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* John Sperry, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Winner
* 07/31/2004
* USD 241,000.00

0112213 Sperry&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major constraint on plant productivity is
the need to transport water to the foliage. This vital function is performed by
the xylem tissue (wood) of the plant. The proposed research will quantify the
design constraints of xylem in relation to water transport using state-of-the-
art finite element methods developed for applications in fluid and solid
mechanics. Advances in high performance computing make it feasible to apply
these methods to the complex geometries of biological materials, including the
conducting tubes (conduits) of the xylem. The result of the research will be
quantitative links between the microscopic and macroscopic structure of xylem in
relation to water transport and mechanical properties. Knowledge of the
functional significance of wood's structural properties will have a number of
broader implications ranging from the bioengineering of timber, to the
interpretation of the climatic record of tree rings, and the analysis of
evolutionary and ecological trends in xylem structure. The work will be
interdisciplinary, involving graduate students and collaboration across three
departments of the host institution (biology, math, and mechanical engineering).
Hypotheses of structure-function linkages generated by computational analysis
will be tested by direct experiment and with a comparative data set including
xylem from different organs (root-stem-leaf), species from distantly related
vascular plant groups (e.g., conifers vs. flowering plants), and plants of
different growth types (vines vs. trees). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has
four specific objectives. The first objective is to quantify the relationship
between conduit wall structure and reinforcement against the extremely negative
water pressures required for xylem transport. The hypothesis is that conduit
reinforcement will scale with operating pressure so as to minimize investment in
wall material. This hypothesis is supported by preliminary work showing a strong
proportionality between the ratio of conduit wall thickness to lumen diameter
and a proxy of operating pressure across 12 species of conifers and 37 species
of flowering plants. When scaled to the tissue level, this predicts that wood
density must increase with more negative operating pressures, as was observed.
The implication is that wood strength may be more related to conduit
reinforcement than to support of the plant against gravity or wind loading. The
present research will extend these results by using sophisticated finite element
packages to analyze conduit and tissue stresses, allowing us to factor in the
structure of the interconduit pits and surrounding tissue. The second objective
is to quantify the mechanics of the valve function of interconduit pits and
their role in causing transport failure by the air-seeding of cavitation
(vaporizing of water under negative pressure). Preliminary work indicates that
air seeding occurs at a constant wall stress across species. The hypothesis is
that air seeding will also occur at an approximately constant pit membrane
stress, meaning that cavitation resistance will be determined by pit membrane
material properties, and especially by pit geometry. The third objective is to
quantify the link between xylem structure and its conducting capacity. Here we
will use advanced methods in fluid mechanics to solve the complex problem of
flow through the irregular shapes of xylem conduits and their interconnecting
pits. The fourth objective will bring together the individual structure-function
relationships quantified in the first three objectives to evaluate the extent to
which xylem design of diverse species maximizes conducting capacity while
meeting constraints related to conduit support and prevention of cavitation.
&lt;br/&gt;