* 0112391
* A Crosslinguistic Study of Sign Language Classifiers
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Diane Brentari, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2005
* USD 280,915.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Diane Brentari will conduct three
years of linguistic research on the classifier systems of nine sign languages
from three different families. Such systems exist in all known sign languages,
but in only some spoken languages. Classifiers refer to certain properties of
noun arguments but may be expressed in a variety of grammatical units. For
example, they may appear in noun phrases (e.g., "grain" in "a grain of sand" in
English) or verb phrases expressing motion or location (e.g., "3-handshape +
go_by" in American Sign Language; translation: "A bike is going by"). In sign
languages, they are typically expressed as handshapes. This research will ask
whether nine sign languages use similar handshapes to express similar meanings
and how each system compares to the set of all languages that contain well-
developed classifier systems, both spoken and signed. The relatively young
Israeli Sign Language is included to compare to more mature classifier systems.
Dr. Brentari and a linguist in each language community will collect the data.
Elicitation tasks target specific semantic distinctions such as stative/active,
agentive/non-agentive, and telic/atelic. Researchers will analyze how each sign
language uses the components of the total handshape in its classifier system to
express these distinctions. The Prosodic Model of sign language phonology will
provide a theoretical framework within which to organize and analyze the data.

Three scientific questions motivate this study of sign language classifiers.
First, this project will contribute to our knowledge of sign languages by
providing cross-linguistic information about a fundamental structure that is not
yet well understood. Second, this project will add to our knowledge of
morphology and the way that it is expressed, since morphology in sign languages
is expressed predominantly by simultaneously organized phonological units rather
than by sequentially organized units. Finally, this research will contribute to
our understanding of the range of classifier typology in natural languages. In
addition to its scientific merit, this project will recruit native-signing Deaf
undergraduate students to help analyze data, and so provide an opportunity for
these students to engage in first-hand scientific research on their native
languages.