* 0112239
* Scientific Computing Research Environments for the Mathematical Sciences (SCREMS)
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2003
* Mihai Anitescu, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 08/31/2003
* USD 25,000.00

PROJECT SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The Department of Mathematics at University of
Pittsburgh proposes to&lt;br/&gt;build a medium to large-scale scientific
computing environment for&lt;br/&gt;research in the mathematical sciences. The
computer equipment to&lt;br/&gt;be purchased includes an Intel 8 processor
shared memory computational&lt;br/&gt;server, a four node Intel cluster and an
Intel file server, all running&lt;br/&gt;Linux.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This
computing environment will enhance ongoing research in several&lt;br/&gt;ways.
The availability of a local infrastructure for the investigation
of&lt;br/&gt;shared and distributed memory techniques will result in a
significant&lt;br/&gt;reduction in the time needed for developing software. The
currently&lt;br/&gt;available computational power would be substantially
expanded allowing for&lt;br/&gt;increased size and complexity in test problems
and simulations. The&lt;br/&gt;investigators will be able to share a complete,
constantly updated&lt;br/&gt;state-of-the-art computational science
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The computing equipment will support several
research projects, including&lt;br/&gt;in particular: computational methods for
fluid dynamics, numerical&lt;br/&gt;modeling of flow in porous media, numerical
methods for problems with&lt;br/&gt;complementarity constraints, and
computational neuroscience.&lt;br/&gt;