* 0112521
* Committee on National Statistics
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2006
* Constance Citro, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 09/30/2006
* USD 3,494,044.00

This award continues NSF support for the core activities of the Committee on
National Statistics (CNSTAT), a standing committee of the National Academy of
Sciences-National Research Council (NAS-NRC). The committee works to improve,
over the long term, the statistical methods and information on which public
policy decisions are based. It strengthens, directly and indirectly, the
development of data for social, behavioral, and economic science research, makes
such data more accessible for research, and furthers the development of methods
for measurement, collection, and analysis for research and other purposes. On
its own initiative, or at the request of NSF or another agency, the committee
will identify problem areas in which statistical questions are important to
public policy and carry out studies within these areas by itself or by convening
panels of other experts. Most of the Committee's studies will fall under three
major themes: improving and furthering the development of data on social and
economic conditions, including health, social welfare, and the environment;
improving statistical methods and their applications; and integrating and
coordinating national statistics. The Committee will select specific areas for
study, develop expert panels or workshops, select participants, review study
activities and reports, and widely disseminate study results that have been
rigorously peer reviewed under NAS oversight.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Established
in 1972 at the recommendation of the President's Commission on Federal
Statistics, the committee fills a critical gap as an integrative force for a
highly decentralized federal statistical system, in which research interests
often have lower priority than other concerns. Representing more than a series
of research studies, the committee's work also is a unique process of
intellectual development that is critical in a decentralized statistical system.
The committee provides leadership over interdisciplinary areas by bringing
methodologically oriented statisticians and quantitatively oriented social,
behavioral, economic, and physical scientists together with federal agency staff
to work on problems important to public policy. The committee will continue to
(1) improve national statistics and further the development and application of
statistical methods for research, (2) link the science research communities and
federal agencies that depend on scientific methods, (3) involve academic
scientists in research to improve statistics that are used and produced in the
federal government, and (4) provide forums for the exchange of information and
ideas.&lt;br/&gt;