* 0112722
* ITR/SI Collaborative Research: Investigations on CDMA Systems using Multiple Level Sequences and Partitioned Reduced Complexity Multiuser Detection Receivers
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2001,06/30/2005
* John Liu, Oakland University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph B. Evans
* 06/30/2005
* USD 239,416.00

CDMA systems have achieved great commercial success in wireless communications
since the first IS-95 system was deployed in Seattle in 1994. In fact, most of
the future wireless communication systems will be using CDMA technology. Yet, as
far as reaching the great potential of CDMA in terms of higher system capacity,
lower bit error rate, and lower packet loss rate, the problem of demodulation in
the presence of multiple access interference remains as a significant bottleneck
for all CDMA systems. To solve this multiple access interference problem,
researchers and engineers have worked since the early 1980's on so-called
multiuser detectors (MUD). Unfortunately, thus far none of the multiuser
detectors has been implemented in a real CDMA system, because of the prohibitive
complexity of these structures. There are two major factors that contribute to
this situation. First, CDMA systems must use long spreading sequences for
several practical reasons, whereas multiuser detectors must use short spreading
sequences. Second, the complexity of even the simplest multiuser detector is
still too great to be implemented in the fastest electronics, for all but the
smallest of data rates. In this work, we propose to address both of these
problems in a collaborative effort. The collaboration will be organized so that
Dr. Qingchong Liu of Oakland University in Rochester, Michigan, will initially
focus on the first objective, and Dr. David W. Matolak of Ohio University in
Athens, Ohio, will initially (and concurrently) focus on the second objective.
Results will be exchanged frequently, and meetings will be held quarterly. After
some early progress, our collaboration will grow closer as we combine the work
objectives and consider system (transmitter and receiver) performance. We
propose first to extend some recent results obtained for the construction of
long spreading sequences from short sequences. This can be termed the system
objective. These new sequences will be appropriate for both conventional CDMA
systems and for multiuser detectors. This method was invented by one of us and
has been implemented in possibly the fastest wireless network running at 400Mbps
in the Spaceway system by Hughes Electronics. It has significantly reduced
receiver complexity and cost, and gives essentially optimum performance. By
measuring sequence correlations at multiple levels, the method provides new
insights on sequence design and tremendously reduces complexity in signal design
and detection for broadband wireless communications. This method has the
potential to help bridge a gap between current CDMA systems and multiuser
detectors. We also propose to study reduced complexity multiuser receivers from
the perspective of reduced complexity trellis search techniques, combined with
one of the most promising MUD receiver structures, in a partitioned manner. This
can be termed the receiver objective. The MUD receiver of interest is the
minimum mean-squared error (MMSE) receiver, which is attractive for its good
performance and modest complexity. The partitioning approach will aim to share
the detection tasks between the MMSE front-end and the reduced-complexity
trellis processor. These receivers will make use of the new spreading sequences
specified for use in future 3 rd and 4 th -generation CDMA wireless
communication system standards, and the multiple level sequences developed in
the system objective. The reduced complexity trellis search techniques will
explore use of the analogous techniques researched for equalization, but not
fully applied to the problem of CDMA multiuser detection. Our goal for these two
objectives is to create a fundamental bridge to connect the existing and planned
CDMA systems with the theoretical multiuser detectors so that the bottleneck of
the multiple access interference problem in CDMA systems can be surmounted. Both
objectives of this proposed work will employ analysis, followed by computer
simulations. Both objectives will also require the assistance of graduate and
undergraduate students. The modeling work will aim to reconcile theory with
practical implementation and thus provide engineering education in the best
sense: connecting principles and practice. Training students in both system
design and receiver design for CDMA will also naturally be valuable to the
wireless industry. In addition, the research will provide material for inclusion
in several new graduate courses, and in undergraduate design projects, at both
universities.