* 0112508
* ITR/SY+SI (C-CR) Collaborative Research: Signal Processing and Channel Modelling in Low-Dimensional Subspaces for Wireless Communication in Multi-Antenna Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Benjamin Friedlander, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 09/30/2005
* USD 243,569.00

ITR Small Proposal 0112508/ 0112573 Friedlander/Scharf

Title: Signal Processing and Channel Modelling in Low-Dimensional Subspaces for
Wireless Communication in Multi-Antenna Systems

Abstract

The problem of communicating information between a fixed basestation and many
mobile peripherals dominates much of current research in wireless communication.
The problem is tecnologically challenging because the channel that connects the
basestation to the peripherals is random and time-varying. The most general
solution requires space-time coding and signal processing that is "matched" to
the channel. The objective of this research program is to extend the theory of
space-time array processing (STAP) developed for radar applications, to multi-
antenna wireless communication over fading channnels, in order to determine when
and how channel structure can be exploited for space-time signal processing gain
and/or diversity. Theoretically, the results of this research advance the
understanding of multi-antenna wireless communication between antenna arrays.
Practically, they suggest methods for adaptively communicating between fixed
basestations and mobiles and between fixed computers and movable storage area
networks.

Prior results by the principal investigators suggest that only the span of a
low-dimensional channel subspace, and not the detailed physics of its coordinate
representation, is required for the design of signals that optimize transmit
diversity, and tranceivers that optimize the trade off between space-time
processing gain and diversity. Moreover, the optimum transceiver statistics are
just estimators of output signal-to-interference plus noise ratio (SINR),
suggesting that transceiver statistics for decoding data can be used to estimate
and track output SINR and network capacity. This means power and bandwidth may
be adaptively allocated, using only transceiver statistics. So, in broad
outline, this program is addressed to space-time channel modelling, using
subspace methods; subspace signal and transceiver design for gain and diversity;
and estimation of network capacity, using only transceiver statistics.

