* 0112822
* ITR: Simulation and Optimization of Thermal Manufacturing of Materials Under Uncertainty: Application to Optical Fiber Drawing
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Eugene Santos, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Alfonso Ortega
* 08/31/2005
* USD 409,140.00

Advanced materials form the backbone of our everyday life, including the
hardware that supports the information technology (IT) enterprise. Thermal
manufacturing of these materials involves strongly coupled transport phenomena
that occur at multiple temporal and spatial scales. Process simulation models,
based on description of the governing physical phenomena, play an important role
in guiding process understanding and development. However, their complete
potential remains unrealized in practice, for two principal reasons. First, a
fundamental gap exists between simulation capabilities and practice in that
whereas practical processes are carried out amidst a cloud of impreciseness and
uncertainty, the simulation models are deterministic in the way they treat the
process variables. Secondly, process simulations are often computationally
tedious owing to the need for a rigorous resolution of the physical phenomena at
multiple scales. The computational demands are tremendously intensified when the
ability to account for process uncertainty is embedded in the simulation
framework, and further, when the simulation models are used in an optimization
endeavor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research seeks to develop advanced
computational methods aimed at addressing the foregoing challenges. A stochastic
modeling framework will be developed for incorporating the effects of process
uncertainties in the simulations. Towards addressing the challenge of enabling
rapid and efficient computations, agent-based computing strategies in a
heterogeneous environment and an innovative portfolio-based technique for large-
scale optimization under uncertainty will be developed. The advanced
computational methods will be applied to an optical fiber manufacturing process,
which is an important process in the optical networking industry and typifies
the complexities of the multiscale physical phenomena involved in general
thermal manufacturing processes. The methodologies may be readily applied to
other materials processing applications.&lt;br/&gt;