* 0112029
* Political Science Research Infrastructure: Comparative Study of Electoral Systems
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2006
* Russell Dalton, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2006
* USD 825,996.00

The Comparative Study of Electoral Systems (CSES) is an international
collaboration of more than 50 national election studies across the world. It
represents a globally coordinated comparative project to study electoral
behavior under varying institutional conditions. By collecting systematically
comparable survey and associated institutional context information at the time
of national elections and then making the resulting data freely available to the
scholarly community, it provides a unique resource for comparative research on
the ways in which institutions constrain and shape electoral behavior and
attitudes toward democracy.&lt;br/&gt;CSES is a collaborative-survey and macro-
data collection and distribution project. It serves as the mechanism for
planning, merging into a single file, and distributing (a) survey data collected
through a collaboratively developed ten-minute module administered identically
as part of each country's regular survey study; (b) commonly coded social and
economic background variables of the respondents; and (c) collaboratively
specified macro-data on relevant characteristics of each country's government
and electoral system, their political parties, and the candidates. CSES in not
intended to support any individual country's data collection. Rather it provides
the infrastructure for collaboration that allows the project to exist.
Specifically, CSES is the mechanism for collaboration in designing the survey
modules and specifying the macro-data to be collected; the agency for creating
electronically-accessible merged data sets, documentation, and an archive of
related material from the individual submissions of each participating country;
and the medium of communication among participating (and potentially
participating) countries-and thus, a facilitator of cross-national research. The
CSES micro-and macro-datasets are made available to the research community
immediately once they have been processed.&lt;br/&gt;One of the great virtues of
CSES is its efficiency as "big science." All direct costs of data collection are
borne by the individual participating projects which then submit the data at no
cost to CSES for inclusion in the comparative dataset. As a result, funding is
only needed for the centralized functions of the project, including providing
organizational and administrative support to the CSES Planning Committee in
designing and distributing the modules and making sure that as many countries as
possible administer the module in the appropriate way; serving as the chief
information office of the project, including providing organizational and
administrative support to the CSES Planning Committee in designing and
distributing the modules and making sure that as many countries as possible
administer the module in the appropriate way; serving as the chief information
office of the project, including assisting participating countries with
questions they have regarding its administration; creating and distributing the
merged data set and documentation files from the submissions of the
participating countries; maintaining an auxiliary archive of the project; and
maintaining the CSES web site, which is the primary location of the CSES
archive, including further developing its capacities for international
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;