* 0112158
* Affective Processes in Judgment and Decision Making
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2004
* Paul Slovic, Decision Science Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2004
* USD 190,000.00

The research in this proposal attempts to articulate the role of affect in
guiding judgments and decisions. As used here, "affect" means the specific
quality of "goodness" or "badness" (i) experienced as a feeling state (with or
without awareness) and (ii) demarcating a positive or negative quality of a
stimulus. Affective reactions occur rapidly and automatically - note how quickly
one senses the feelings associated with the stimulus word "treasure" or the word
"hate." We have characterized reliance on such feelings when making judgments or
decisions as "the affect heuristic."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theoretical
framework underlying this project comes from research in cognitive and social
psychology and cognitive neuroscience that informs us about two basic modes of
thinking, experiential and analytic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experiential
system is intuitive, automatic, image-based, fast, and intimately associated
with affective feelings. The analytic system is deliberative, reason-based, and
slow. There are strong elements of rationality in both systems. It was the
experiential system that enabled human beings to survive during their long
period of evolution. Long before there was probability theory, risk assessment,
and decision analysis, there were intuition, instinct, and gut feelings to tell
us whether an animal was safe to approach or the water was safe to drink. As
life became more complex and humans gained more control over their environment,
analytic tools were invented to "boost" the rationality of our experiential
thinking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We now recognize that the experiential mode of
thinking and the analytic mode of thinking are continually active, interacting
in what we have characterized as "the dance of affect and reason". While we may
be able to "do the right thing" without analysis (e.g., dodge a falling object),
it is unlikely that we can employ analytic thinking rationally without guidance
from affect. Affect is thus essential to rational
action.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based upon this theoretical framework and
supporting research, we plan in this project to conduct a series of experiments
to better understand the role of affect in decision making and the interaction
between the experiential, affect-based mode of thinking and more analytic and
deliberative processes. We shall also attempt to demonstrate how the findings
from this research provide insight into ways to improve a wide-range of
important practical decisions about matters involving finance, medical
treatments, cigarette smoking, insurance, and risk
perception.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;