* 0112263
* Implantation in the Domestic Ferret (Mustela Putorius)
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Janice Bahr, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ione Hunt Von Herbing
* 08/31/2005
* USD 248,200.00

The goal of this project is to understand better the process by which embryos
implant in the uterus in ferrets. Ferrets are classified in the Arctoideae that
also includes other weasels, bears, raccoons, seals and walruses. A remarkable
characteristic of many arctoidean species is tight control of the timing of
implantation. In the black bear, for example, embryo implantation occurs months
after fertilization. Unfortunately, many arctoidean species, such as the giant
panda and the black-footed ferret are threatened or endangered. It is important
to gain a better understanding of reproduction in these species, including the
process of embryo implantation, in order to improve captive breeding techniques.
Domestic ferrets are an excellent model for the study of embryo implantation in
arctoidean carnivores because they are abundant and domesticated. Preliminary
data indicate that the protein glucose-6-phosphate isomerase (GPI), produced by
the ovary, is crucial for embryo implantation in ferrets. It is already known
that GPI has multiple functions. The protein is necessary to convert sugars to
energy, and it stimulates nerve cell growth. GPI also stimulates movement and
invasion by tumor cells. This action is probably similar to its effect on the
embryo, which must move and invade the uterus to implant there. Therefore, by
studying how GPI functions in embryo implantation, insights may be gained about
GPI function in tumor cells, thus furthering knowledge of cancer biology. To
determine the role of GPI in embryo implantation, we will pursue 5 specific
aims: 1) Is GPI required for implantation in the ferret? We will use two
experiments to answer this question. In the first, ovaries will be surgically
removed from pregnant ferrets. These ferrets will then be injected with GPI to
determine whether GPI can trigger implantation. In the second experiment,
pregnant ferrets will be given an antibody that blocks GPI to determine whether
implantation can occur without GPI. 2) What is the pattern of expression of GPI
by the pregnant ferret ovary? We will remove ovaries from ferrets at different
stages of pregnancy to determine whether the ovaries make GPI in preparation for
implantation. We will use PCR to determine expression levels of the GPI gene as
mRNA, and western blotting to determine how much GPI protein is being made. 3)
Is GPI secreted from the ovary during pregnancy? We will take blood samples from
ferrets at different stages of pregnancy to determine how much GPI is being
secreted into the blood, where it can be carried to the uterus. The amount of
GPI can be measured by measuring its enzyme activity. 4) What are the target
tissues for luteal GPI? To determine where GPI is acting, we will remove the
uterus and embryos at various stages of pregnancy, and look for the GPI receptor
mRNA and protein. We will also label GPI, and add it to uterine samples and
observe where it binds. 5) Is prolactin required for the expression of luteal
GPI? The pituitary hormone prolactin is needed for embryo implantation in
ferrets. Therefore, it may be signaling the ovaries to make GPI. To test this,
we will treat pregnant ferrets with the drug bromocriptine, which blocks
prolactin. We will then determine whether the ferret ovaries still make GPI
protein and mRNA. These studies will improve present knowledge of reproduction
in ferrets and related species, and increase understanding of aspects of cancer
biology.