* 0112742
* ITR/Comp Bio: Computational Tools for Inverse Electromagnetic Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2001,07/31/2006
* Paul Schimpf, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Pinaki Mazumder
* 07/31/2006
* USD 412,000.00

EIA-0112742 Schimpf, Paul Washington State University

ITR/Comp Bio: Computational Tools for Inverse Electromagnetic Problems

The principal investigator previously developed an adaptive algorithm for
solving the Poisson problem in complex three-dimensional domains. This algorithm
found immediate application in modeling the electric field produced by
surgically implanted defibrillators as a guide to electrode placement for the
cardiologist, where the algorithm reduced solution times from 3 hours to less
than 10 minutes.

A logical next step is the pursuit of more demanding applications, such as those
with an inverse problem formulation. The inverse problem seeks to identify
volume energy sources on the basis of electric field measurements on the surface
or magnetic field measurements outside of the modeled domain. In general, there
is no unique solution unless some a-priori knowledge of the sources is
exploited. Inverse problems can be formulated for many applications with domains
governed by partial differential equations. They are computationally intensive
because many forward computations are typically required for a solution to the
inverse problem.

The primary aim of this work is to develop an efficient and practical inverse
algorithm based on a hierarchical spatial decomposition of the domain, integrate
it with the existing forward algorithm, and disseminate it to researchers with a
need to solve such problems. Cardiology and neurology are examples of two fields
that can benefit from the availability of such tools. In clinical applications,
these tools can prove invaluable in the diagnosis and treatment of disease. In
research applications, these tools can improve our knowledge of the fundamental
behavior of the system.

