* 0112223
* Ketene Complexes: Structure, Bonding, Catalysis, and Interconversion with Carbene Complexes
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Douglas Grotjahn, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 07/31/2004
* USD 293,000.00

Dr. Douglas B. Grotjahn, Chemistry Department, San Diego State University, is
supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
of the Chemistry Division for research into the chemistry of metal ketene
complexes. Metal-ketene complexes are important intermediates in unique bond-
forming reactions starting from carbene complexes and they allow rapid access to
a variety of organic products, many of which would require multistep syntheses
using standard organic reactions. However, nearly all of these processes are
stoichiometric in the metal complex. The goal of the project is to develop
catalytic reactions that are likely to become attractive synthetic organic
procedures. To achieve this, new ketene complexes will be prepared and catalytic
systems developed from them. Specifically, unusually stable Ir and Rh ketene
complexes will be prepared, metal-ketene bonding within them will be
characterized by X-ray diffraction and IR and NMR spectroscopy, the
thermodynamic and kinetic relationships between(C,C)and (C,O) linkage isomers
will be delineated, and the interconversion of carbene-CO and ketene complexes
will be studied. Using these data, catalytic carbon-carbon bond-forming
reactions involving ketene or carbene complexes as intermediates will be
developed.

The proposed research will contribute to the fields of organometallic and
organic chemistry and catalysis, relevant to both organic synthesis and
industrial chemistry. Ultimately, more convenient, less-toxic large scale
synthetic preparations of organic compounds will be possible. In addition to the
basic science, underrepresented minority and undergraduate students will be
trained during the course of the project.

