* 0112758
* ITR/AP: Interactive Spatial Physics: Computational Foundations and Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Vadim Shapiro, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Eun K. Park
* 08/31/2005
* USD 317,998.00

The goal of this project is to develop an interactive geometric approach to
creating, editing, transforming, and computing with models of spatially
distributed physical phenomena. The funded effort will involve fleshing out
sound theoretical foundations, developing appropriate data structures and
algorithms, as well as implementing a prototype system for interactive physical
modeling. At the heart of the proposal is a novel use of tools from algebraic
topology and geometric algebra to describe, classify, and unify physical
phenomena. The prototype system will allow users to create models of physical
phenomena through an interactive geometric interface designed in terms of
familiar and intuitive control elements. The created models may be interactively
transformed, modified, combined, visualized, and instantiated.

The successful outcome of the proposed research should have broad technological,
economic, educational, and social impact. The physics editor will allow users to
create, visualize, test, and experiment with new models of physical phenomena
quickly and effortlessly. It could greatly enhance the ability to efficiently
create and modify scientific software that is modular, reusable, and consistent
across the disciplinary boundaries. Engineers may discover a practical tool that
will allow them to communicate with computer-aided design systems in a visual
intuitive language that does not require deep mathematical knowledge and unifies
a multitude of theories and special cases. And perhaps most importantly, the
proposed research could open doors of computational sciences to college and high
school students and others who may have been discouraged or intimidated by
traditional methods of mathematical physics and scientific computing.