* 0112078
* Collaborative Research:  Human Capital Accumulation and Aggregate Labor Supply
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2001,06/30/2006
* Larry Jones, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2006
* USD 237,763.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the last fifty years there has been a dramatic change
in the level and composition of worker hours allocated to market production. The
largest change is the increase in market hours of married females. This has been
accompanied by relative stability in the number of hours worked by single male
and females, and by married males. In addition to the change in hours, there is
a distinctive pattern of decreased fertility, especially among highly educated
women, and increase in the proportion of births after age thirty. To understand
the events that may have caused these substantial changes, this research
constructs dynamic general equilibrium models of the macroeconomy in which
households choose labor supplies, consumption and investment in both human and
physical capital. Both market and non-market consumption enter utility and
require both quality-adjusted time and physical capital to be produced. In our
models, a household can either be a married couple or single individuals living
alone. All the economic agents, single, married, male, or female; interact in
aggregate markets for labor, capital, investment and market consumption. A major
objective of the research is to determine what factors could explain observed
gender-based wage differentials. The research will consider the impact of
several types of technological change including, increased productivity of
household durables, changes in the marriage market, and shocks to the costs of
acquiring human capital.&lt;br/&gt;