* 0112571
* ITR/AP (ENG) Simulation of Multiphase Chemical Reactors using Multi-Fluid Models with Interphase Mass Transport and Complex Chemistry
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Rodney Fox, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 09/30/2005
* USD 399,030.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Rodney O. Fox &lt;br/&gt;Institution: Iowa
State University &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0112571&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Major
advances in the application of information technology to engineering simulation
can be expected at a number of levels. The ultimate impact of such advances on
industrial practice in the chemical process industry (CPI) will depend on their
successful implementation for chemical process design and optimization. In
particular, progress in the field of multiphase chemical reactors will depend on
the development and validation of scalable subgrid-scale models that integrate
transport and chemical processes with widely different temporal and spatial
scales into macroscopic transport models based on computational fluid dynamics
(CFD). The computational cost of solving multi-fluid CFD models is very high and
modeling efforts for complex multiphase systems have been limited by the
available computing resources and numerical algorithms. Multiprocessor computers
now have sufficient memory, bandwidth, and processor speed to permit more
detailed physics and chemistry of micro/mesoscale phenomena to be included in
multiphase CFD simulations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, multi-fluid
CFD codes will be optimized for an Alpha cluster in order to run fully-resolved
simulations of canonical flows. These high-resolution simulations will include
new models for inter/intraphase mass transfer and efficient algorithms for
complex chemistry. The results will then be employed to develop "macroscopic"
CFD models based on Reynolds-averaged multi-fluid models that will be applicable
to full-scale chemical reactors. Code optimization will be carried out in
collaboration with computer scientists at the Scalable Computing Laboratory at
Ames Laboratory on the Iowa Sate university campus. This laboratory has
experience in the application of cluster computers to the numerical simulation
of scientific and engineering problems. As part of the Vision 2020 initiative,
the CPI has identified CFD as an important tool for advanced chemical reactor
design and optimization. This project directly addresses shortcoming of existing
CFD models that were identified in the 1999 DOE report Chemical Industry of the
Future: Technology Roadmap for Computational Fluid Dynamics. The project results
will thus have a direct impact on industrially-relevant issues related to
multiphase reactor design and optimization. &lt;br/&gt;