* 0112631
* ITR:  Heat Transport and Chemical Reactions in Proteins and Clusters
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* David Leitner, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 08/31/2005
* USD 331,830.00

David Leitner of the University of Nevada Reno is supported by the Division of
Chemistry under the Information Technology Research (ITR) program to carry out
computational studies of thermal transport in proteins and nanoscale clusters.
This work will examine central questions directed toward broader goals of
describing the events that control chemical reactions in complex mesoscopic
environments, in particular the role of the energy flow into and away from a
reacting system. Computations exploring the role of scale and disorder in heat
transport properties of proteins and simpler cluster models will be performed,
with the objective of describing thermal conductivity in terms of protein
components. As well, chemical reactions in clusters will be explored, focusing
on trans-stilbene photoisomerization in a glassy cluster as a prototype for
photochemical isomerization reactions in proteins. Research outcomes are
expected to provide detailed mechanistic understanding of events that control
reactions in proteins and nanoscale machines on the picosecond timescale.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the continuing technological drive towards
miniaturization, much effort is directed toward fabricating small devices that
draw at least part of their energy from the same organic molecules as those that
power proteins in living cells. Success with such devices is hoped one day to
lead to the development of molecular machines that could interact with proteins
within biological cells to manufacture medicines or repair cellular damage,
enabling a revolution in the health sciences. The outcomes from these
computational studies of biomolecules and clusters promise insights that will be
important to address critical issues surrounding the design of efficient heat
dissipation capabilities for working nanoscale devices.