* 0112039
* Causes and Remediation of the Predecisional Distortion of Information
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* J. Russo, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Robert E. O'Connor
* 08/31/2005
* USD 393,441.00

When people are committed to one side in an athletic contest, say an American
versus a Russian figure skater in the Olympics, we frequently observe a biased
interpretation of the events. The opponent's small misstep is judged as fatal to
her performance, while the same error by the athlete from one's own country is
dismissed as insignificant. Could this distortion of physical evidence occur not
only when a preference for one side is long standing and deeply held, but also
when it is tentative, private, and fully reversible? The research undertaken in
the present grant demonstrates that the same distortion that drives biased
judgments in the case of strong beliefs seems to lead to substantial and
unrecognized distortion of evidence in the case of newly developing preferences.

Researchers at Cornell University are examining this phenomenon in the ordinary
situation of purchase decisions. They have labeled it "predecisional
distortion," meaning the biased evaluation of new information to favor whichever
product is currently (and tentatively) preferred while the decision is still in
progress. In a consumer choice, as soon as one brand is slightly favored, new
product information tends to be distorted to seem more favorable to that
tentatively leading brand than it should. This, in turn, makes the currently
leading option more likely to become the decision-maker's final choice. The
phenomenon extends beyond consumer choice, having been observed also in
managerial decisions (both by public auditors and by salespersons), and in the
verdicts of mock jurors. Predecisional distortion of new information is also
systematic, with distortion increasing as the commitment to the tentatively
leading alternative increases. Interestingly, individuals who are in a good mood
are more subject to this bias.

What causes and, therefore, makes individuals prone to this bias in situations
where they are genuinely trying to think accurately? The researchers propose
that predecisional distortion is driven by the simple expectation that new
information should be consistent with existing beliefs, combined with the lack
of awareness that distortion is occurring. That is, people expect coherence
between new and old information, so much so that they actually distort new
information to make it more "coherent" with existing beliefs.

The Cornell researchers have investigated a number of methods for ameliorating
the distortion of information, including accountability to others for the
correctness of the decision, increasing the importance of the choice, and
providing financial incentives for accuracy. While these interventions sometimes
help, none has reduced distortion by more than 50%. So far, it has proved
impossible to eradicate, although additional methods to eliminate it are being
explored. However, one major barrier to correcting the bias is that individuals
seem unaware that they are engaging in predecisional distortion until after the
fact. It is difficult for people to fix a mistake if they can't recognize that
it is happening.