* 0112093
* Farm Tenancy in the U.S., 1890-1938: New Evidence from an Old Study for Assessing the 'Agricultural Ladder'
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Lee Alston, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2005
* USD 243,931.00

Mobility up the farm ladder came to be seen as a problem in the United States in
the early decades of the twentieth century as the fraction of farm operators who
were owners fell. Concerns were voiced about the continued viability of American
agriculture as the number of renters, sharecroppers, and laborers rose.
Commentators feared for the quality of the soil and for the quality of the
nation's farmers, as the "agricultural ladder" (the progression from laborer to
cropper to renter to owner) seemingly became more difficult to ascend. Similar
concerns motivate much of the interest in farm tenancy and land reform in
developing countries today. Though these are issues of importance in their own
right, the causes of farm tenancy and the ascent up the agricultural ladder are
also of interest because, in the South, they were an important part of the
context within which black migration to the North occurred. Though much emphasis
has been placed on changing Southern farm technology and Northern employment
opportunities in promoting this migration, not know much is known about the
extent to which limited opportunities for advancement up the agricultural ladder
in the early twentieth century South influenced this massive population
redistribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study addresses these issues. It uses
individual-level data from five counties in the 1920 Census of agriculture along
with a uniquely detailed survey of farmers conducted in 1938 to explore the
dynamics of the agricultural ladder. We will supplement the individual-level
data with county-level data from the 1920 Census. The census data contain
information on: the prior farming experience of tenants and owners, the ages at
which farmers ascended the ladder from wage laborer to tenant to owner, the time
spent on various rungs of the ladder prior to becoming owners, and the
relationship of tenants to owners. The survey data contain information on each
individual's complete career history (their tenure status at each date back as
far as 1890), their location, and a variety of their personal and farm
characteristics. We develop hypotheses to explain the extent of movement up and
down the agricultural ladder and why it changes over time, and across space. The
preliminary examination of the data from 1938 indicate that, contrary to the
pessimism of commentators at the time, we do not find dimmer prospects for
farmers in the 1930s than the previous two decades. For our sample, farmers
fared worse (in terms of job mobility) in the 1920s than the 1930s. Consistent
with expectations, the 1910's proved to be years of general ascent up the
agricultural ladder. &lt;br/&gt;