* 0112849
* ITR/SY(CISE): Cache-Oblivious Data Structures
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Lars Arge, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 08/31/2005
* USD 449,571.00

&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NO.: 0112849&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Arge,
Lars&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION NAME: Duke University&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: ITR/SY(CISE):
Cache-Oblivious Data Structures&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the memory system in
modern computers grows more complex, it is becoming increasingly important to
design algorithms that are sensitive to the structure of the memory. One of the
essential features of modern memory systems is that they are made up of a
hierarchy of several levels of cache, main memory, and disk. While traditional
theoretical memory models have assumed a "flat" memory with uniform access time,
the access times of different levels of memory can vary by several orders of
magnitude in current machines. For example, level-one cache is often around 100
times faster than main memory, while main memory is around&lt;br/&gt;1,000,000
times faster than disks. In order to amortize the large access time of memory
levels far away from the processor, memory systems often transfer data between
memory levels in large blocks. Thus it is becoming increasingly important to
obtain high data locality in memory access patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will focus on the challenging problems encountered when trying to
maintain data locality in irregular and dynamic problems, where by definition
the data flow is continually changing and unpredictable, making it difficult to
organize data locality a priori. In particular, cache-oblivious dynamic data
structures will be developed-such data structures can in turn be used to develop
cache-efficient algorithms. Only very recently was the first (and only) such
dynamic cache-oblivious data structure developed. This structure is a cache-
oblivious&lt;br/&gt;version of a search tree. The ambitious goal of this project
is to develop cache-oblivious structures for other fundamental problems. In the
process general techniques for designing cache-oblivious data structures will be
developed. Data structures with applications in a variety of application areas
will be considered, but there will be a particular focus on geometric
structures. Such structures often have important applications in e.g. spatial
databases and geographic information systems (GIS). The project is high-risk
because almost nothing is known about dynamic cache-oblivious data structures,
but it has the potential to revolutionize the area of&lt;br/&gt;cache- and
I/O-efficient computation and to make a tremendous practical impact. Ultimately
this research could lead to a standard library of cache-oblivious data
structures. Such platform-independent data structures would enable programmers
to easily develop a wide variety of applications that obtain high performance on
all modern memory hierarchies.&lt;br/&gt;