* 0113103
* A Statistical Mechanics Approach to Coase's Theory of the Firm
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* Michael Salinger, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2003
* USD 50,000.00

The project uses modeling techniques originally developed in physics to
understand the growth of business firms. Physicists have analyzed systems in
which the behavior of one "unit" (an atom, perhaps) is affected by the behavior
of a large number of other units. The effect of each individual interaction may
be small, but the aggregate effect is not. By analogy, the growth of each
business firm is affected by a large number of other firms: competitors,
customers, suppliers, and the producers of related products. In 1939, Coase
published a seminal article in which he argued that firms exist to minimize
transaction costs. This article provided the framework that economists still use
to try to understand the size and growth of firms. Even though the logic of this
framework is widely accepted, it has not yielded testable predictions about the
size and growth of individual firms that have been verified empirically. In
other words, it has not passed the fundamental test of a successful scientific
theory. The results in models of physical systems with large numbers of
interacting units are that while the behavior of any one unit is inherently
unpredictable, the statistical properties of the entire system are predictable.
This project develops models that are consistent with the framework suggested by
Coase, that explain well-documented regularities about the distribution of firm
size and growth, and that explain why the growth, size, and composition of
individual firms are inherently unpredictable. While this project is basic
research, the results could ultimately affect antitrust and other aspects of
industrial policy.