* 0113514
* IMR:  Aquisition of a Stress Rheometer for Polymer Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Phillip Messersmith, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 08/31/2002
* USD 40,782.00

This is an award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program in DMR
to Northwestern University. The award is for the acquisition of a controlled
stress rheometer to support a wide array of research at Northwestern University
on polymer materials and other complex fluids. The proposed instrument will be
housed in a central polymer characterization facility, replacing aging equipment
with limited capabilities. In addition, it will provide entirely new
capabilities for controlled stress testing (such as creep/recovery experiments)
that have never been available to the Northwestern community, and that are of
significant potential value for the classes of materials under study by the
major users of the instrument. In addition to its use in research, the
instrument will be used extensively for lab experiments and student projects in
a regularly scheduled course on polymer viscoelasticity and flow. The instrument
will serve the diverse needs of several faculty members who are presently
pursuing research projects that require extensive rheological testing. These
include (i) studies of flow-induced structural changes in ordered polymeric and
surfactant fluids; (ii) studies of block-copolymer gels that provide a matrix
for highly filled gel systems with applications in ceramic processing; (iii)
thermoresponsive polymer solutions and microgels under development as matrices
for advanced biopolymer separations in microchannel devices; and (iv) a variety
of functionalized polymer gels and networks for biomaterials applications. In
addition to the primary user community, there are several other Northwestern
faculty members who are likely to take advantage of this facility intermittently
for miscellaneous polymer &amp; fluid characterization
needs.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Instrumentation for Materials
Research program in DMR supports the acquisition of a rheometer at Northwestern
University. 'Rheology' is the study of the flow properties of so-called complex
fluids, and the primary instrumentation used for such research are rheometers,
which measure the flow behavior of such complicated materials under well-defined
conditions. Many technologically important materials defy simple classification
as either solids or liquids. Instead, their flow properties are more
complicated, frequently combining elements of both solid and liquid character.
Familiar examples from everyday life include food products such as egg whites or
mayonnaise, consumer products such as toothpaste, lotions, and adhesives, and
biological fluids. The new rheometer will serve a broad community of materials
researchers at Northwestern University. Some areas of research that will benefit
from this new instrumentation include: 1. Studies of flow-induced structural
changes in ordered polymeric and surfactant fluids. 2. Studies of block-
copolymer gels that provide a matrix for highly filled gel systems with
applications in ceramic processing. 3. Thermoresponsive polymer solutions and
microgels under development as matrices for advanced biopolymer separations in
microchannel devices. 4. Functionalized polymer gels and networks for
biomaterials applications. New materials for tissue engineering and drug
delivery are being synthesized with 'bio-mimetic' approaches-designed to
simulated nature's strategies for gel and network formation.&lt;br/&gt;