* 0113933
* ITR/SY: Mandatory Human Participation: A New Paradigm for Building Secure Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2004
* Jun Xu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Joseph B. Evans
* 08/31/2004
* USD 288,000.00

Currently, automatic attacks are a major threat to computer security. For
example, the cheapest home PC can try thousands of "probes" against a targeted
system. A brute-force password (or PIN number) guessing program can generate and
try tens of thousands of candidate passwords each second. Or a home PC could
attempt to flood a web site with thousands of "bogus" requests.

While there methods that attempt to stop such attacks they all can be defeated
to some degree. We propose a new approach to this security based on technology
that can tell the difference between robots and humans. Thus, we can disallow
automatic attacks. Our technology allows a new kind of restriction: now systems
can insist that only humans have access to their valuable resources and they can
disallow robots.

The proposed solution to the problem is inspired by Turing's test for artificial
intelligence. The fundamental idea of the solution is for a computer system to
first ask the author of every transaction to solve a puzzle before accepting or
executing the transaction. The content of the puzzle will be based on grand
challenge problems in the domains of pattern recognition, visual interpretation,
and natural language understanding. These problems have the essential property
that people can solve them easily while computers are not likely to solve them
in the foreseeable future. A typical puzzle would consist of the computer system
sending the agent a bit-mapped image and the agent replying with an ascii
string. The image might include a picture and a question and a question about
that picture, such as "Please type the following handwritten word" or "Which of
the objects in this picture are edible?" The computer system determines whether
the transaction author is a human based on the answer supplied.

This puzzle-solving process leads to a new framework for building secure
computer systems. In this framework, a human being has to be directly involved
(by solving the puzzle and typing in the answer) in the authentication or other
processes that are vulnerable to automatic attacks, referred to as Mandatory
Human Participation (MHP). Apparently, no automatic attack to the protected
process would be possible under this framework.

Our proposed research is to build a pilot system that can be used to demonstrate
the basic idea of MHP. This will be based mostly on character based methods. We
then, plan to carefuly test and measure how well our system performs and how
well it is received by users.