* 0113515
* ITR/SI: A Flexible Framework for Secure Information Sharing Among Collaborating Organizations
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Sushil Jajodia, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Sirin Tekinay
* 08/31/2005
* USD 360,000.00

Proposal No: 0113515&lt;br/&gt;ITR/SY: A Flexible Framework for Secure
Information Sharing Among Collaborating Organizations&lt;br/&gt;PI: Jajodia
Sushil&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks to develop a exible framework
for secure information &lt;br/&gt;sharing among collaborating organizations. The
approach will be to extend the Flexible &lt;br/&gt;Authorization Framework (FAF)
designed by the PI and his colleagues. FAF is based on an
&lt;br/&gt;authorization specication language that has rule based syntax and
sound, non-monotonic logic based &lt;br/&gt;semantics. The rst goal of this
proposal is to enhance FAF to include information ow &lt;br/&gt;controls,
provisional authorizations, delegation of authority, and a rather broad sense of
&lt;br/&gt;revocation capabilities of granted permissions. The second
undertaking is to investigate ecient &lt;br/&gt;implementation of the resulting
framework that is based on the best practices of the security
&lt;br/&gt;community. The third goal of this proposal is to investigate the
properties of basic constructs &lt;br/&gt;that are used to compose security
policies.&lt;br/&gt;The main deliverables of this proposal are a reference
architecture, &lt;br/&gt;mathematics and algorithms for security specications of
information access and ow, their ecient &lt;br/&gt;implementation techniques,
and an an algebra for policy compositions.