* 0113665
* Industrialized Nature
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2001,06/30/2004
* Paul Josephson, Colby College
* Continuing Grant
* Ronald Rainger
* 06/30/2004
* USD 42,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;SES 0113665&lt;br/&gt;Paul Josephson, Colby
College&lt;br/&gt;Industrialized Nature: Brute Force Technology and the
Scientific Management of Nature&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on an innovative
approach to the analysis of notions of sustainable development at the juncture
of history of technology and environmental history, this project examines
comparative issues of scientific management of natural resources in the Soviet
Union and Russia, Norway, the United States, Canada and Brazil. The central task
of this historical survey is to track the evolution of "brute-force" technology
in these countries from the 1930s through the present. The focus falls on water,
fish, and forest resources. The study identifies the challenges in adopting
sustainable resource management techniques, designing appropriate technologies,
and providing adequate resources for all citizens. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four
case studies pursue the surprising richness and similarity of the subjects (in
terms of research strategies, biological affinities, political and economic
pressures. The first cases compares a massive Stalinist project to transform the
Volga River basin into a unified transport, irrigation, and hydroelectric power
system, with the taming of the Columbia River basin in Washington state. A
second case study considers the Soviet conquest of Siberia and the so-called
Angara-Enesei cascade in comparison with the development of Amazonia. The third
study explores the role of scientific research in promoting brute force
technology in the Norway and Soviet deep sea fishing industries. The final case
study focuses on the forests of Arkhangelsk region of northwest Russia and the
northern forest of New Hampshire and Maine. National politics, economics,
culture, and science and engineering have had an impact on the genesis of
scientific management and brute force technology. The study evaluates the impact
these national features in shaping notions of scientific management of natural
resources, and nature itself. It also describes the roots of the tendency to
replace biological paradigms with industrial ones in which scientists treat
nature as an efficient machine of monocultures, and look closely at the design
of the technologies that powered the machine. In natural resource management,
the driving force has been the effort to determine where production and biology
meet. Cross-national comparisons will indicate what aspects of resource
management are universal and what aspects reflect national determinants --
economic, political, social, ideological -- of scientific activity.&lt;br/&gt;