* 0113170
* LTREB: Integrated Study of Behavioral and Morphological Development in Free-Living Carnivores
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2006
* Kay Holekamp, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael D. Beecher
* 07/31/2006
* USD 304,850.00

&lt;br/&gt;LTREB: Integrated study of behavioral and morphological development
in free-living carnivores&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
#IBN0113170&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Kay E. Holekamp&lt;br/&gt;Barbara L.
Lundrigan&lt;br/&gt;Kim T. Scribner&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spotted hyenas (Crocuta
crocuta) are long-lived, gregarious carnivores exhibiting a unique suite of
behavioral, endocrine, and morphological characteristics. Since 1988, Dr.
Holekamp and associates have been studying the behavioral ecology of members of
one large spotted hyena population in Kenya, focusing mainly on the development
of social behavior. Age, sex, kin relations, and social status are known for all
natal animals in the study population, and social histories are known for all
hyenas under 13 years of age. Most adult clan members of both sexes wear radio
collars so they can be regularly located and observed. The proposed LTREB
project will support new aspects of long-term research with this study
population. Specifically, Dr. Holekamp will join forces with a morphometrician
(Dr. Lundrigan) and a geneticist (Dr. Scribner) to achieve three new goals. (1)
First, a novel combination of behavioral and morphometric techniques will be
used to examine age-related changes in morphology of the feeding apparatus,
diet, feeding behavior, and feeding performance. This portion of the proposed
work will include documentation (with new and archived data) of age-related
change in chewing, foraging, feeding behavior, and diet; administration of
simple performance tests in the field to assess maximal feeding capabilities at
each age; and quantitative analysis of age-related changes in skull morphology.
(2) The second goal is to start monitoring behavior, growth, and demography in a
second spotted hyena population (one less exposed to humans) to inquire whether
age-related constraints on foraging abilities might make certain age-sex classes
of hyenas more vulnerable than others to effects of anthropogenic disturbance.
(3) Finally, in both hyena populations, genetic markers, in conjunction with
behavioral data, will be used to elucidate the relationship between behavioral
responses to anthropogenic disturbance and fitness decrements associated with
such disturbance. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will shed considerable light on
the natural and anthropogenic selection pressures acting on hyenas during each
stage of life. It will also combine several different data types, all collected
in a natural ecological and evolutionary context, to integrate traditionally
disjunct approaches to the study of life history evolution. The results should
be important not only for understanding the unique suite of traits expressed by
spotted hyenas, but more generally, for understanding the role of age-related
constraints in the evolution of behavior. With the data from the two different
hyena study populations, it will be possible to quantify the effects of
anthropogenic disturbance concurrently on both behavior and fitness, identify
ecological variables that might be responsible for population differences, and
assess the relative effects of these variables on animals in different age, sex,
and rank classes. This is a unique opportunity to document the adaptive
consequences of behavioral change in response to human activity. It is hoped
that the proposed work will serve as a model for understanding the complex
relationships among behavior, morphology, fitness, demography, and human
disturbance in other mammalian carnivores, including those that are rare and
endangered.&lt;br/&gt;