* 0113681
* ITR/SI(SPS)+AP+SY: High Resolution Video and Still Reconstruction with Applications to Visual Communications and Image Enhancement
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2004
* Yucel Altunbasak, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/2004
* USD 210,000.00

ABSTRACT Proposal 0113681 Altunbasak, Yucel GA Tech Res Corp - GIT

ITR/SI(SPS)+AP+SY: High-Resolution High-Precision Video Reconstruction with
Applications to Visual Communications and Image Enhancement

The problem of resolution and bit-depth enhancement from compressed data will
become increasingly important for applications in the emerging, error-prone,
restricted bandwidth, wireless and heterogeneous computing environments. This
research involves enhancing the spatial, temporal and bit-depth resolution of
video signals by means of multi-frame and multi-channel processing. The system
that is developed as part of this work is applicable to various areas of video
communications and multi-media processing.

The number of bits assigned to represent the intensity or color information at
points in an image is usually referred as the bit depth. When the bit depth is
not sufficient, images suffer from ridge-like structures known as false
contours. Bit-depth limitations become important when low-contrast details are
required, as in medical imaging, aerial/satellite photography, and high-quality
scanning applications. Noting the similarity between the bit-depth and spatial
resolution enhancement, this research examines a method for increasing the bit
depth. Specifically, when a sequence of video frames is available, it is
possible to achieve a higher bit depth and higher spatial resolution through a
projections-onto-convex-sets (POCS) based data fusion method.

The multiple-frame video processing algorithms and their multimedia and
communication applications form an integral part of the signal processing
education agenda at Georgia Tech. Motivated and encouraged by the level of
interest in multi-frame processing (by the students), the project constructs a
web-centric demo of image resolution and precision enhancement for the benefit
of the undergraduates as well as the research community.