* 0113480
* ITR/AP: Computational methods for quantitative analysis of X-ray computed tomographic (CT) data for the geosciences
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Richard Ketcham, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2004
* USD 350,000.00

0113480&lt;br/&gt;Ketcham&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant, supported
through funds from both the NSF/Information Technology Research - Small Grants
Program and the Earth Science Instrumentation and Facilities Program, will
facilitate the development of the software infrastructure necessary to fully
exploit the scientific potential of high-resolution X-ray computed tomographic
(CT) data for geological research. Over our four years of experience in
operating a high-resolution X-ray CT scanner dedicated to the geosciences at the
University of Texas, we have identified the types of quantitative analysis whose
necessity arises repeatedly in addressing research questions. These include
identifying, separating, and characterizing up to thousands of individual
objects within a scan volume, quantifying three-dimensional fabrics and
textures, and measuring local and dispersed volume properties such as fracture
apertures and porosity. We have laid the foundation for progress in each of
these areas by developing algorithms and complete software applications in
support of some of our joint research projects with outside investigators. We
propose to build upon this foundation by expanding and generalizing these
programming efforts, creating a suite of tools that will greatly expand the
value and utility of CT data, as well as any other volumetric data set. Graduate
research projects will provide the setting in which these tools are applied and
tested. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;