* 0113371
* ITR/SY: Combinatorial Optimization Algorithms for Informaion Access (Fundamental IT Models)
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Eva Tardos, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* David Du
* 08/31/2004
* USD 300,000.00

Proposal No: 0113371&lt;br/&gt;ITR/SY: Combinatorial Optimization Algorithms for
Information Access (Fundamental IT Models)&lt;br/&gt;PI: Eva
Tardos&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The enormous growth in the amount of information
online makes it vital&lt;br/&gt;to automate the job of searching and organizing
large data collections&lt;br/&gt;while maintaining high accuracy. The research
will consider two&lt;br/&gt;seemingly unrelated tasks:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;.
Searching web pages, and&lt;br/&gt;. Analyzing the content of digital pictures
and movies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite their obvious great importance, and the
large efforts invested,&lt;br/&gt;the currently available solutions for these
tasks are inadequate. The&lt;br/&gt;proposed research will address a difficult
mathematical problem that&lt;br/&gt;underlies both of these tasks, the
classification problem with pair-wise&lt;br/&gt;constraints.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The traditional classification problems consist
of a set of objects to&lt;br/&gt;be classified, and a set of labels (the
classes). Classifying the topics&lt;br/&gt;of documents on the Web, or
individual pixels or regions of an image are&lt;br/&gt;two examples of this
general problem. The proposed research will build&lt;br/&gt;on the PIs recent
successes in applying powerful combinatorial&lt;br/&gt;optimization techniques
to develop algorithms for classification&lt;br/&gt;problems with pair-wise
relationships. Pair-wise constraints can&lt;br/&gt;significantly enhance
classification, by modeling, e.g., the relations&lt;br/&gt;of physically close
objects in an image, or relations implicit in the&lt;br/&gt;hyperlink structure
of the Web. The outcome of this research will be to&lt;br/&gt;provide powerful
new tools for two important tasks in searching and&lt;br/&gt;organizing large
data collections.