* 0113095
* ITR/AP(DEB): Collaborative Research `Computing Optimal Phylogenetic Trees under Genome Rearrangement Metrics'
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Bernard Moret, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2005
* USD 167,903.00

ABSTRACT PI Jansen - #0113654 PI Moret - #0113095

This award provides support for a collaborative project between two biologists
(Jansen and Boore) and three computer scientists (Moret, Warnow, and Bader) to
develop and test new algorithms and software for constructing evolutionary trees
(phylogenies) from the rapidly increasing amount of genomic data. The estimation
of phylogenies is crucial to a wide range of basic and applied biological
problems such as the epidemiology of AIDS, the identification of viral agents,
the analysis of protein structure and function, the prediction of RNA structure;
and, of course, it is the basic tool for inferring evolutionary history. Methods
for the reconstruction of phylogenies are most commonly applied to DNA
sequences. In many cases these sequences change at rates that are too low or too
high for recovering accurate evolutionary trees. One new type data that is fast
gaining favor in the biology community is gene order and content within whole
genomes, but so far very few computational methods have been developed for these
types of data.

The three goals of the project are to: (1) develop algorithms and software for
reconstructing evolutionary trees from gene order and content data; (2) assess
the performance of these algorithms through extensive simulation studies under
parameter-rich models of genome evolution and through application to real
datasets; and (3) develop high-performance implementations of the best
algorithms designed in the project using algorithm engineering techniques and a
flexible approach to parallelization. This project will make significant
contributions in biology, through the development of new models of genome
evolution and an improved understanding of the evolution of chloroplast and
mitochondrial genomes, and in computer science, through the development and
testing of new algorithms for genomic data and the application of high-
performance computing to problems in phylogenetic analysis.

