* 0113105
* IT/SY(CISE):  Designing Microprocessors and Computer Systems for Emerging Workloads
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Lizy John, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2005
* USD 265,000.00

The phenomenal growth of the World Wide Web has resulted in the
emergence&lt;br/&gt;and popularity of several new information technology related
computer&lt;br/&gt;applications. The emerging computer workloads involve the
integration&lt;br/&gt;of a variety of software, protocols, and standards: GUIs,
Java, CORBA, &lt;br/&gt;cgi, perl, TCP/IP, HTTP, and HTML are just a few of
them. Facilitating&lt;br/&gt;smooth use of the internet for emerging
applications involves designing&lt;br/&gt;efficient computer systems and
microprocessors for use in the computers&lt;br/&gt;that serve these
applications. Most of these workloads are just emerging,&lt;br/&gt;and their
behavior is not well-understood by computer designers and&lt;br/&gt;architects.
Many of the microprocessors that run these applications were&lt;br/&gt;designed
before the advent of these workloads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
consists of understanding emerging workloads of the&lt;br/&gt;Information
Technology era and designing microprocessors and computer&lt;br/&gt;systems for
their efficient execution. It involves identifying where the&lt;br/&gt;cycles
are gone during execution of these workloads, and identifying&lt;br/&gt;sources
of loss of performance. The study will pin point bottlenecks,
and&lt;br/&gt;identify architectural enhancements to improve performance.
The&lt;br/&gt;performance monitoring counters present on commercial processors
will be&lt;br/&gt;used for the first level of characterization followed by
detailed complete&lt;br/&gt;system simulations for analyzing design tradeoffs.
The proposed research&lt;br/&gt;will be conducted in close collaboration with
our industrial partners,&lt;br/&gt;IBM, Tivoli, Intel and AMD. The project will
serve as an integral part of&lt;br/&gt;a long term, comprehensive research
program to influence the design of&lt;br/&gt;microprocessors and computer
systems for the information technology era.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;