* 0113037
* ITR/AP:  A Prototype Framework for Globalization of Regional Models of the Atmosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2001,12/31/2004
* Miodrag Rancic, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 12/31/2004
* USD 303,427.00

The objective of this ITR-small award is to develop a prototype for a unified
computational framework able to provide an effective expansion to global
coverage of any regional model based on the grid-point method. This
'Globalization Framework' will be augmented by a capability for local
enhancement of resolution over selected areas of interest and the movement of
the better-resolved domains over the globe. The globalization will be achieved
through application of a class of quasi-uniform spherical grids, that avoids the
well-known problem of over-resolving of the polar regions typical for the
standard longitude-latitude mesh. The technique of grid overlapping will be used
for local enhancement of resolution. The regional model used at National Centers
for Environmental Prediction (NCEP), the eta model, will be used as a prototype
for the project. The framework will be developed for a combined use on a
workstation (in the pre- and post-processing stage) using an object-oriented
paradigm, and on a mainframe distributed memory computer (in the execution
stage). For the benefit of the broader community, the pre/post-processing stage
will also be tested and adjusted to the Linux environment, and the execution
stage to a cluster of PCs. The work is important because it is a novel
application of a numerical technique that will offer new insights into regional
climate studies.