* 0113624
* New Automated thermoluminescence/optically stimulated luminescence (TL/OSL) Reader for Luminescence  Dating
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2002
* James Feathers, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 06/30/2002
* USD 68,738.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, the University of Washington
luminescence dating laboratory headed by Dr. James Feathers will purchase a Riso
automated TL/OLS reader with automated processor which permits single grain
luminescence determinations. Because of its increased efficiency over the
instrument the laboratory currently employs, the Riso machine will both increase
throughput and decrease cost per sample.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Washington
laboratory is the sole facility in the United States which routinely provides
several types of luminescence analysis (TL, OSL, IRSL) for archaeological
samples and the resultant dates have come to play an increasingly important
function for archaeologists. Because organic materials are present in only a
limited number of sites many such occurrences are not amenable to radiocarbon
dating and often luminescence provides the only alternative. Using a range of
approaches it often possible to obtain dates from either ceramics or soil and in
the former case luminescence has an advantage over radiocarbon since it can
directly date the object of interest rather than associated material. Dr.
Feathers has shown that luminescence may be as accurate as radiocarbon.
Traditional luminescence techniques analyze bulk samples comprised of many
individual grains and the results can be problematic since particles of multiple
ages and exposure histories may be present. Machines such as the Riso automated
reader avoid this problem since they can date individual grains. A distribution
of individual readings provides insight into the nature of the sample itself -
both admixture and differential degree of bleaching - and therefore the multiple
determinations allow accuracy to be better determined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr.
Feathers' research is directed at both improvement of the technique itself and
its application to anthropologically significant archaeological sites. He has
addressed questions such as the development of complex societies in the southern
United States, the time of human entry into the New World and the emergence of
modern human behavior in sub Saharan Africa. Acquisition of the Riso instrument
will significantly increase the effectiveness of such research.&lt;br/&gt;