* 0113714
* Acquisition of a Variable Temperature and Magnetic Field Magnetometer for Nanoscience Research and Education
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Mark Meisel, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 08/31/2002
* USD 133,000.00

An interdisciplinary group of four physicists and four chemists have common
research interests in molecular magnetism, new materials synthesis, and
nanotechnology, and in several cases, formal interdisciplinary collaborations
exist. A variety of new magnetic systems and nanodevices are prepared, and they
are presently characterized by magnetotransport, nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR), electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR), atomic force microscopy (AFM),
near-field microscopy (NFM), and other spectroscopies including infrared,
ultraviolet/visible, and Raman techniques. This award from the Instrumentation
for Materials Research program will allow the University of Florida to enhance
its characterization capability with the acquisition of a modern magnetometer, a
Quantum Design MPMS 7 Tesla SQUID magnetometer. The new instrument will have
significant impact on a number of researchers at the University of Florida with
activities related to magnetic phenomena. In addition, this new instrument will
serve as an important interdisciplinary educational and training tool for
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers who will operate the equipment.
Finally, the University of Florida has committed funding which represents 30% of
the total cost of the instrument.

An interdisciplinary group of four physicists and four chemists have common
research interests in molecular magnetism, new materials synthesis, and
nanotechnology, and in several cases, formal interdisciplinary collaborations
exist. A variety of new magnetic systems and nanodevices are prepared, and they
are presently characterized by magnetotransport, nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR), electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR), atomic force microscopy (AFM),
near-field microscopy (NFM), and other spectroscopies including infrared,
ultraviolet/visible, and Raman techniques. This award from the Instrumentation
for Materials Research program will allow the University of Florida to enhance
its characterization capability with the acquisition of a modern magnetometer, a
Quantum Design MPMS 7 Tesla SQUID magnetometer. The new instrument will have
significant impact on a number of researchers at the University of Florida with
activities related to magnetic phenomena. In addition, this new instrument will
serve as an important interdisciplinary educational and training tool for
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers who will operate the equipment.
Finally, the University of Florida has committed funding which represents 30% of
the total cost of the instrument.