* 0113688
* Perning Homo erectus District, East Java-Paleoenvironment and Dating
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2003
* O. Frank Huffman, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joanna E. Lambert
* 06/30/2003
* USD 55,921.00

Project geologists, paleontologists, and anthropologists will use geological
field observations and newly collected fossils to characterize the dietary
resources and habitats that were available to early human ancestors along an
ancient tropical coast in Java. The field area is a 20km2 outcrop of marine
deltaic deposits where the Perning/Mojokerto Homo erectus skull cap was
discovered in 1936. The hominid deposits are made up of material erupted from
nearby volcanoes, and volcanic products from the beds have been dated by
radioisotopic methods at 1.81 +/- 0.04 Ma. New radioisotopic dates will be
obtained in this project to more fully document the age of the hominid-bearing
section, but the Perning hominid is already certain to be the oldest known from
marine coast sediments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Determining the diets of fossil
hominids is one of the primary ways that we track the biological and behavioral
adaptations lying at the core of human evolution. Because of the great age of
the Perning hominid beds, this project addresses diets at a pivotal point in
human development when expansion of early Homo across the Old World doubtlessly
introduced our ancestors to habitats and food resources unknown in the
continental interior of Africa. Considerable information now exists on the
conditions in which early Homo lived in Africa, and from Asia evidence is
mounting for hominid expansion nearly two million years ago. However, the
ecology and behavioral changes associated with the dispersal cannot be fully
understood until there are new paleoenvironmental data from well-dated Asian
sites. Java is among the most valuable places in Asia for information of this
kind, since Homo erectus may have inhabited Javan rainforests and seacoasts for
1.8 million years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Paleoenvironmental reconstruction of
the ancient Perning delta will be based upon pollen-, mollusk-, and vertebrate-
fossils, as well as detailed observations of sedimentary facies. Comparing the
paleoenvironmental results from Perning to those from contemporaneous hominid
localities in Asia and Africa is expected to provide new insights into the
behavioral patterns involved in the expansion of early Homo across the Old
World. The geological observations and fossils collected in the project will be
used, for example, to determine whether the ancient coast at Perning offered
forest/shoreline dietary resources similar to those in modern Indonesia, or was
somehow like the savannas/woodlands in which the ancient hominids of Africa and
Eurasia lived. If the field program leads to new hominid discoveries, they will
likely afford opportunities to radiometrically date some of Asia's earliest
human inhabitants, and link them to specific coastal paleohabitats. New hominid
fossils will also provide much needed information on the physical attributes of
earliest Asians.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;