* 0113761
* ITR/AP(DMR): Billion-Atom Multiscale Simulations of Nanosystems on a Grid
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,10/31/2002
* Aiichiro Nakano, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 10/31/2002
* USD 486,000.00

This award is the result of a proposal submitted to the Information Technology
Research initiative. The goal of the research is to develop a scalable software
infrastructure for large multiscale simulations on a Grid of geographically
distributed, massively parallel supercomputers, as well as on future Petaflop
computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The multiscale simulation approach will combine,
in a single Grid software, finite element (FE) calculation, the coarse-grained
molecular dynamics (CGMD), molecular dynamics (MD) simulation, and quantum
mechanical (QM) calculation based on the density functional theory (DFT).
Continuum mechanics calculation based on the FE method will be performed with
constitutive relations derived from the CGMD method in conjunction with MD
simulations, which in turn will embed QM algorithm described by the DFT. The
following will be developed: (1) Grid-based FE/CGMD/MD/QM algorithms based on
space-time multiresolution algorithms implemented with hierarchical
decomposition on parallel/distributed computers for scalability and constrained-
dynamics-based hybridization for seamless coupling of the hybrid simulation
componets; (2) Space-time partitioned multiscale simulation combined with
kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC) and parallel replica methods to couple disparate
length and time scales; (3) Grid-computation tools including adaptive load
balancing using wavelet-based computational-space decomposition and space-
filling-curve-based adaptive data compression to reduce communication and
storage; (4) Immersive and interactive visualization of the large simulation
data using octree-based visibility culling and parallel/distributed
preprocessing of the visualization data with machine-learning predictive
prefetch.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Gridified software will be used to study
nanosystems of great importance to future information processing. Multiscale
simulations involving 1,000 - 10,000 QM atoms and 100 million - 1 billion MD
atoms will be performed to study atomistically-induced phenomena, with emphasis
on environmental effects where chemical processes play an important role. The
multiscale algorithm will relate the atomistic processes to experimentally
observable quantities, by covering an order-of-magnitude larger length scale (10
micron) through continuum mechanics and extending time scales through the KMC
and replica methods. The simulations will focus on stress domains and their
phonon imaging in Si/Si3N4 and GaAs/Si3N4 nanopixels for sub-0.1 micron
microelectronics applications and oxidation effects on them, and on substrate-
encoded self-organized growth of lattice-mismatched semiconductor quantum dots
(GaAs/InAs). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will involve close collaborations
with scientists at government laboratories (Argonne, NASA Ames, Sandia, Naval
Oceanographic Office), industry (Intel, Motorola) and universities, as well as
international collaborations in Europe, Japan and South America.&lt;br/&gt;%%%
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;