* 0113310
* ITR/PE: Digital Imaging Techniques for the Simulation and Enhancement of Low Vision
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2006
* Donald Greenberg, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2006
* USD 456,799.00

In this project the PIs will carry out a program of research and development to
apply digital imaging techniques to the problem of low vision. The work will
focus on two related thrusts. First, low vision simulation methods will be
developed that accurately show people with normal vision what the world looks
like to people with visual deficits. The goal is to develop simulation tools
that designers can use to understand the visual limitations (and abilities) of
people with low vision and thereby eliminate barriers to access from their
designs. Applications in the areas of architectural design, driving safety, and
the development of graphical user interfaces will be demonstrated. Second, the
PIs will develop low vision image enhancement tools that can be used to
transform images from digital cameras or graphics applications to create new
images that are more comprehensible to people with low vision. The objective is
to use computational models of low vision to develop image enhancement
algorithms that can be incorporated into digital imaging systems to give people
with low vision better access to the visual world. The PIs plan to use these
algorithms to develop two new kinds of assistive technology: image profiling and
enhancement tools for Web browsers to enable low vision access to Web-based
graphical information; and portable augmented vision systems that can facilitate
orientation, mobility and object recognition for people with low vision. The
hope is that the methods developed will provide better understanding of the
challenges facing people with low vision, and lead to effective assistive
technologies that can help people with low vision live easier, fuller and more
productive lives.