* 0113937
* RUI:  Mechanisms of Aging in Saccharomyces cerevisiae
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Laura Hoopes, Pomona College
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Tornow
* 07/31/2005
* USD 322,942.00

In research funded by an NSF POWRE grant awarded to the investigator, the yeast
DNA2 gene was found to be essential for normal life span. DNA2 encodes a
replicative and post replication repair helicase distantly related to SGS1 and
Werner syndrome helicases. Four dna2 mutants have average life spans from 4.9 to
8.9 generations, while wild type is 23.8 generations. The sgs1 and dna2 mutants
do not appear to be epistatic. Other replication mutants also have short life
spans. Two strains with all rDNA deleted and rDNA supplied by plasmids have
shortened life spans. These results led to the replication block model of DNA
aging in yeast, suggesting that replicative senescence can result from
accumulation of blocked replication forks. In addition, Y55 diploids were
recently found to reset their aging clocks in meiosis. This project tests the
model of replicative aging resulting from blocked replication forks and will
begin a search for genes involved in resetting the yeast aging clock. The
replication fork block hypothesis is being tested by observing the aging
phenotypes of size increases, sterility, nucleolar fragmentation, and rDNA
amplification in replication and post replication repair mutants other than dna2
and in ribosomal deletion strains, to see whether or not aspects of normal aging
are accelerated in these mutants. If so, the particular process may be related
to aging pacesetting. If the rDNA deletions appear to age faster, then epistasis
with mutants of the silent information regulators and helicases will be tested.
The structures of the DNA, with particular emphasis on structures that would
result from stalled replication forks, will be examined using fiber-FISH, 2D
gels, and pulsed field and normal electrophoresis combined with nuclease
digestion. In addition, resetting of the aging clock is being examined in
mutants affecting budding asymmetry. Whether meiosis affects clock resetting in
a different meiosis strain, BR3604, will be determined. If the clock is reset in
meiosis, sporulation mutants will be used to test the involvement of specific
steps in meiosis in the resetting.

This novel research promises to further our understanding at the molecular level
of the process of aging. The use of the yeast system enhances the promise of the
project because of the many molecular tools available for yeast and the
extensive existing body of knowledge about the system. This research will be
carried out at Pomona College, an undergraduate institution. The active
involvement of students there in this research is an especially attractive
feature of the project.



