* 0113131
* ITR/SY (CISE): Verification and Supervisory Control of Hybrid Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Michael Lemmon, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2006
* USD 366,698.00

Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #0113131&lt;br/&gt;Antsaklis,
Panos&lt;br/&gt;U of Notre Dame&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project
are to develop algorithms and prototype software for the verification and
supervision of hybrid embedded control systems; also for the identification of
hybrid system models. This project is developing supervisory processors to
supervise and control in real time the operation of large number of control
processors interacting with the outside world. The control processors interact
with the physical world while the supervisory processors are responsible for
monitoring and maintaining the health of the&lt;br/&gt;distributed control
system in a highly autonomous and fault-tolerant manner. The innovative
characteristics of this project are as follows: 1) the development and
application of novel discrete event supervisory methods to supervise hybrid
embedded systems; 2) the development and application of novel approaches to the
verification and supervision of hybrid, piece-wise linear systems; 3) the
development of theory and algorithms to extend these results to a class of
nonlinear hybrid systems; and, 4) the development of novel&lt;br/&gt;model
identification methodologies and algorithms for hybrid systems. The project's
approach will improve the ability of hybrid embedded control systems to deal
with high complexity, undecidability and nonlinearity.&lt;br/&gt;