* 0113972
* RSEC:  Research Sites for Educators in Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2009
* Erach Talaty, Wichita State University
* Continuing Grant
* Wilfredo Colon
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,498,703.00

The Chemistry Department of Wichita State University (WSU) is supported by the
Chemistry Division, the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities, and EPSCOR
under the "Research Sites for Educators in Chemistry" (RSEC) program. Dr. D.
Paul Rillema is the Principal Investigator. The Wichita State RSEC program will
focus its attention on some 30 two- and four- year institutions via the
development of research collaborations. A minimum of two faculty from
institutions will receive support to spend one or two semesters and a summer at
WSU doing research. A second component of the Wichita State RSEC is a program of
teaching postdoctoral fellows who will be involved in research and trained for
teaching in two- or four-year institutions. The training will be provided by a
team of WSU Faculty and the two- and four-year faculty participants. The
teaching postdoctoral fellows will teach one course per semester under the
guidance of a WSU faculty member and from a two- or four-year institution
faculty participant. The faculty participants will also invite one promising
student from their institution to work alongside them as team members in the
laboratory during the summer thus facilitating the continued functioning of the
team at their home institutions. Finally, each teaching postdoctoral fellow will
select an undergraduate student either from WSU or a two- or four-year
institution to learn the ropes of directing undergraduate students in research.

Research Sites for Educators in Chemistry bring together the faculty of
participating two-year colleges, baccalaureate colleges, and master's
universities with faculty at research universities within a geographic region to
enhance the research and educational opportunities at all Academic and research
institutions provide abundant opportunities where individuals may concurrently
assume responsibilities as researchers, educators, and students, and where all
can engage in joint efforts that infuse education with the excitement of
discovery and enrich research through the diversity of learner perspectives.
RSECs such as this one at Wichita State University provide mechanisms for
disseminating the knowledge, skill, practices and ethics of research to a
broader community, including those from underrepresented groups; assist in
developing viable, sustainable research programs at participating institutions;
and involve faculty and students at the participating institutions with a
broader cross-section of faculty and students .