* 0113890
* ITR/AP: Information Technology for Enabling Dynamic Immersive and Interactive Visualization of Construction Operations
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2001,12/31/2006
* Julio Martinez, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Edward John Jaselskis
* 12/31/2006
* USD 319,874.00

&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal:
CMS-0113890&lt;br/&gt;PI: Julio C. Martinez&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Virginia
Polytechnic Institute and State University&lt;br/&gt;Date: June 21,
2001&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT CMS0113890 " ITR/AP: Information
Technology for Enabling Dynamic Immersive and Interactive Visualization of
Construction Operations."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Construction operations are
spatially and temporally complex and dynamic. Virtual dynamic environments that
allow immersion in such operations are invaluable for understanding, and
improving. In the case of operations that have been modeled using discrete-event
simulation, virtual immersive environments promise significant improvements in
their verification and validation, and are essential for their credibility and
subsequent use in decision-making. A proper virtual environment of a
construction operation must show, in addition to the evolving facility being
built, the movements and transformations of the people, machines, and materials
that carry out construction in a spatially and temporally accurate manner. While
most of the dynamics in these environments are continuous in nature, they must
be recreated from discrete and unevenly spaced chunks of information. In
addition, this information must be simple and succinct so that it can be
generated by end-user programmable operations planning tools such as discrete-
event simulation languages. In order to allow the creation of these virtual and
dynamic environments, this research will lead to the design of a spatially and
temporally accurate straight-line animation language, and implementation of this
language in a wide variety of hardware platforms. Success in the design and
implementation of this language is necessary to enable environments that, in
addition to being dynamic and immersive, are interactive. In these environments,
objects under the control of simulation models will be aware of, and react to,
humans and human controlled machines. The impacts to learning, operator
training, and operations design will likely be significant. Benefits extend
beyond construction into other fields such as transportation (especially
aviation), shipbuilding, aerospace, manufacturing, and the service industries,
wherein the necessity to effectively communicate simulations is as acute as in
construction.&lt;br/&gt;