* 0113168
* ITR/AP: Reconfigurable Computing for Real-Time Control Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Robert Veillette, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2004
* USD 206,935.00

0113168&lt;br/&gt;Carletta&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The speed of data processing is
often of critical importance in real-time control systems. The required
complexity of the real-time computations increases with the complexity of the
control system model and the sophistication of the control algorithm. In
addition, the sampling interval (i.e., the length of time within which the
computation must be completed) decreases as the control system bandwidth
increases. Thus, a complex, high-performance control system may require high-
speed computational hardware. Currently, digital control systems universally
rely on general-purpose microprocessors or digital signal processing (DSP) chips
to compute appropriate control inputs from available sensor data. In some
applications, the limits of the control system performance are determined by the
speed of the processor used.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A possible alternative means
of implementing a feedback control algorithm would use the field programmable
gate array. Recent advances in field programmable gate array (FPGA) technology
have completely changed the application area for these inexpensive, off-the-
shelf, reconfigurable hardware devices. Once relegated to small "glue logic"
applications, FPGAs are now capable of implementing complex very large scale
integrated (VLSI) systems. Generally, FPGA implementations can now provide an
order of magnitude faster execution time than microprocessor-based
implementations, without incurring the high cost of fabrication and development
required for application specific integrated circuits. As yet, the potential
for&lt;br/&gt;improved control system performance that FPGAs may allow has not
been exploited or explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal describes work
aimed at starting collaborative, interdisciplinary research in hardware
implementation for real-time controls. It seeks to investigate the role that
reconfigurable computing can play in control systems. This work aims to exploit
reconfigurable computing based on field programmable gate array (FPGA)
technology to provide faster hardware, so that more sophisticated and higher
bandwidth real-time control systems may be implemented. First, novel FPGA
synthesis methods will be developed for the implementation of general adaptive
FIR filters. Such filters are the central elements in digital control systems,
and in many non-control applications as well. Adaptive filters are chosen so as
to exploit the capacity for run-time reconfiguration of the FPGA hardware.
Second, to demonstrate the new synthesis methods, the FPGAs will be used to
implement a stabilizing feedback control on a magnetic-bearing test rig.
Magnetic suspension is an important and interesting control application in its
own right, and will provide a suitable benchmark for FPGA implementation. The
new FPGA-based control will be compared with a standard DSP-based control to
demonstrate the achievable performance gains. The project will train two
graduate students, and is amenable to undergraduate participation. When fully
developed, the FPGA-controlled magnetic suspension system will serve as the
basis for undergraduate laboratory exercises in classes on control and digital
design.&lt;br/&gt;