* 0113574
* ITR/AP, Simulations and Modelling of Carbon Nanotubes: A Study ofElectronic Correlations
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Mark Jarrell, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 08/31/2005
* USD 450,000.00

This award is made under the Information Technology Research initiative.
Electronic devices are the underpinning of information technology. Present
electronic devices are microscale in size. This limits the switching speed at
which information can transfer. Nanoscale systems, including carbon nanotubes,
have a great potential for a new generation of electronic devices with switching
speeds a thousand times faster. However, as the size and dimensionality of
electronic devices approach the nanoscale, the effect of correlations and
disorder become crucial. Despite their importance, the effects of correlations
and disorder remain a significant fundamental challenge to the physics
community. A new computational approach will be developed to address this
problem.

The effects of disorder and correlations are now being studied experimentally in
carbon nanotubes. These nanotubes form the smallest diameter quasi-one-
dimensional conductors yet produced. The rich phenomena which arise from
correlations in nanotubes include Luttinger liquid power law transport observed
in single-wall nanotubes, and the recently observed superconductivity in ropes.
The role of disorder is seen in the wide range of conductivities measured in
metallic tubes.

The dynamical cluster approximation (DCA) will be further developed to simulate
models of carbon nanotubes. This new technique eliminates the finite-sized
errors which can be especially large in one-dimensional systems; allows for the
study of intertube coupling, as well as coupling to the tube environment; and,
when combined with the Maximum Entropy Method, enables the study of the
dynamical response of these systems.

Key objectives of the project include the development of a computational tool
set to study strongly correlated nanotubes and, as a consequence, develop an
understanding of the temperture dependent properties in the two-chain model of a
single-walled nanotube; the competition between disorder and correlations; the
superconductivity in the two-chain modle and the role of intertube coupling; and
the effect of long-range Coulomb forces. %%% This award is made under the
Information Technology Research initiative. Electronic devices are the
underpinning of information technology. Present electronic devices are
microscale in size. This limits the switching speed at which information can
transfer. Nanoscale systems, including carbon nanotubes, have a great potential
for a new generation of electronic devices with switching speeds a thousand
times faster. However, as the size and dimensionality of electronic devices
approach the nanoscale, the effect of correlations and disorder become crucial.
Despite their importance, the effects of correlations and disorder remain a
significant fundamental challenge to the physics community. A new computational
approach will be developed to address this problem.

Key objectives of the project include the development of a computational tool
set to study strongly correlated nanotubes and, as a consequence, develop an
understanding of the temperture dependent properties in the two-chain model of a
single-walled nanotube; the competition between disorder and correlations; the
superconductivity in the two-chain modle and the role of intertube coupling; and
the effect of long-range Coulomb forces. ***