* 0113252
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Migration Agency and Social Change during the Early Horizon in Nasca, Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2002
* Katharina Schreiber, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2002
* USD 11,850.00

Under the direction of Dr. Katharina Schreiber, Mr. Hendrik Van Gijseghem will
collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will undertake archaeological
excavations at the site of La Puntilla in the Nasca drainage of the South Coast
of Peru. This site, dated to the latter part of the Early Horizon (ca. 400 B.C -
1 AD), is part of what may be the earliest known permanent occupation of the
Nasca drainage by sedentary agriculturalists. It is a 2.5 hectare village
composed of small subrectangular rooms aligned on a series of steep terraces
overlooking the Aja river. An abundance of ceramic material at the site
indicates that its inhabitants probably came from further north in the Ica
valley. Local development and trade cannot explain the presence of this material
due to the absence of earlier settlements in the region. La Puntilla, along with
similar sites, is significant both historically and theoretically. It provides
us with a clear archaeological case of post-migratory reorganization that will
shed light on the dynamics of migration in prehistory as well as on the elusive
relationship between the Paracas (Ica Valley donor) culture and the celebrated
Nasca society.

Archaeologists have identified migrations in prehistory, but have only recently
elaborated on their theoretical significance. This work helps define
archaeology's contribution to migration literature in the social sciences by
examining migration's potential effects on the social dynamics of newly-formed
communities. Mr. Van Gijseghem considers that migration may provide
opportunities for individuals to maintain or better their social status through
the creative manipulation of existing social frameworks. Anthropological
literature does suggest that this is a frequent outcome of population movements
because patterns of authority, wealth and power are likely to be reevaluated in
a new social and physical environment. The nature and effects of these
innovations hinge upon the identity and intention of the migrants. Thus,
migrations in sedentary societies represent a fundamental vector of cultural and
social change.

Mr. Van Gijseghem expects to recognize the archaeological correlates of the
post-migration reorganization through a comparative analysis of households at La
Puntilla. He theorizes that patterns of production, distribution and use of
ceramic vessels bearing traditional Paracas symbols diverged from those of
contemporaneous communities in the homeland. Also, the traditional symbols were
likely altered and used in different overall contexts, while new canons were
created and modified patterns of wealth and power emerged.

This research represents one of the first explicit attempts to produce an
archaeological test of models about migrations and their effects on social
organization. It will also help document the transition between Paracas and
Nasca societies of the Peruvian south coast and will assist in training a
promising young scientist.



