* 0113202
* Acquisition of Large Stage Atomic Force Microscope for Undergraduate Teaching and Research
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2002
* Douglas Dennis, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2002
* USD 118,745.00

The award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research and the Major Research
Instrumentation program will enable James Madison University to acquire a large
sample atomic force / scanning tunneling microscope (AFM / STM) for use by
undergraduate research students at JMU in materials science and biomaterials
oriented projects. These projects include in-situ monitoring of the
biodegradation of polymer thin films, electrochemical etching and deposition on
III-V semiconductors, determination of the surface ultrastructure on bacterial
inclusion bodies, microstructural analysis of protein-DNA interactions, and non-
destructive imaging of wafer-scale surface engineering through the use of self
assembled monolayers (SAMs). This instrument will be used in the training of
undergraduate students and local high school teachers in scanning probe
microscopy, surface chemistry and physics and nanotechnology through coursework,
experimental modules and demonstrations, and will help prepare future
generations of scientists in the study of nanometer-scale
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award from the Instrumentation for Materials
Research and the Major Research Instrumentation program will enable James
Madison University to acquire a large sample atomic force / scanning tunneling
microscope (AFM / STM) for use by undergraduate research students at JMU in
materials science and biomaterials oriented projects. These projects include in-
situ monitoring of the biodegradation of polymer thin films, electrochemical
etching and deposition on III-V semiconductors, determination of the surface
ultrastructure on bacterial inclusion bodies, microstructural analysis of
protein-DNA interactions, and non-destructive imaging of wafer-scale surface
engineering through the use of self assembled monolayers (SAMs). This instrument
will be used in the training of undergraduate students and local high school
teachers in scanning probe microscopy, surface chemistry and physics and
nanotechnology through coursework, experimental modules and demonstrations, and
will help prepare future generations of scientists in the study of nanometer-
scale phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;