* 0113555
* ITR/AP (MPS): Collaborative Research on Large-Scale Dislocation Dynamics Simulations for Computational Design of Semiconductor Thin Film Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2001,08/31/2006
* Nasr Ghoniem, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2006
* USD 327,895.00

This is a collaborative research award under the Information Technology Research
initiative. The collaborator (DMR-0113172) is Professor L. Sun at the University
of Iowa. The research involves the development and application of methods for
large-scale dislocation dynamics simulations.

As a result of recent progress in manufacturing and engineering utilization of
nano-and micro-scale structures, there is an urgent need for approaches that are
capable of predicting the reliability and propensity of these structures to
failure. This grant will develop Fortran 90/95 parallel computer software, based
on discrete dislocation dynamics, which will predict plastic deformation and
failure of sub-micron semiconductor microelectronics. Developed software will be
aimed at (1) design of desired mechanical properties of semiconductor thin film-
substrate material systems for optimum reliability; (2) development of new
computer architectures for parallel, large-scale simulations for the dynamics of
topologically complex line defects, which interact through long-range force
fields; and (3) enhanced education training of graduate and undergraduate
students.

The following projects will be undertaken: (1) Investigation of single and
collective dislocation interaction phenomena in anisotropic materials, which
determine plasticity and failure in semiconductor devices; (2) Multiscale
coupling of parametric dislocation dynamics with the finite element and
analytical elasticity methods; (3) Development of unique software on parallel,
scalable computer clusters to simulate the collective behavior of topologically
complex line defects, which interact with a long-range force field; (4)
Application of the developed software to investigate a number of critical
physical mechanisms, including, misfit and threading dislocation loop motion;
dislocation-dislocation interactions; junction and jog formation; dislocation
annihilation and multiplication; dislocation interaction with grain boundaries,
free surfaces and bimaterial elastic interfaces; dislocation interactions with
point defects, precipitates and cracks; influence of thermal residual stress;
computational design of buffer layers and superlattices; and (5) Large-scale
simulation and optimization of semiconductor systems to provide guidelines for
engineering design of new generations of microelectronics.

The research will improve our understanding of plastic flow and failure at the
nano-to-meso scale and represents a challenge to high performance computing and
protocols. Models will be compared to experimental data and will also be used to
design reliable microelectronics. %%% This is a collaborative research award
under the Information Technology Research initiative. The collaborator
(DMR-0113172) is Professor L. Sun at the University of Iowa. The research
involves the development and application of methods for large-scale dislocation
dynamics simulations.

As a result of recent progress in manufacturing and engineering utilization of
nano-and micro-scale structures, there is an urgent need for approaches that are
capable of predicting the reliability and propensity of these structures to
failure. This grant will develop Fortran 90/95 parallel computer software, based
on discrete dislocation dynamics, which will predict plastic deformation and
failure of sub-micron semiconductor microelectronics. Developed software will be
aimed at (1) design of desired mechanical properties of semiconductor thin film-
substrate material systems for optimum reliability; (2) development of new
computer architectures for parallel, large-scale simulations for the dynamics of
topologically complex line defects, which interact through long-range force
fields; and (3) enhanced education training of graduate and undergraduate
students.

The research will improve our understanding of plastic flow and failure at the
nano-to-meso scale and represents a challenge to high performance computing and
protocols. Models will be compared to experimental data and will also be used to
design reliable microelectronics. ***