* 0113654
* ITR/AP(DEB): Collaborative Research `Computing Optimal Phylogenetic Trees under Genome Rearrangement Metrics'
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Robert Jansen, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2005
* USD 288,030.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;PI Jansen - #0113654&lt;br/&gt;PI Moret -
#0113095&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides support for a collaborative
project between two biologists (Jansen and Boore) and three computer scientists
(Moret, Warnow, and Bader) to develop and test new algorithms and software for
constructing evolutionary trees (phylogenies) from the rapidly increasing amount
of genomic data. The estimation of phylogenies is crucial to a wide range of
basic and applied biological problems such as the epidemiology of AIDS, the
identification of viral agents, the analysis of protein structure and function,
the prediction of RNA structure; and, of course, it is the basic tool for
inferring evolutionary history. Methods for the reconstruction of phylogenies
are most commonly applied to DNA sequences. In many cases these sequences change
at rates that are too low or too high for recovering accurate evolutionary
trees. One new type data that is fast gaining favor in the biology community is
gene order and content within whole genomes, but so far very few computational
methods have been developed for these types of data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
three goals of the project are to: (1) develop algorithms and software for
reconstructing evolutionary trees from gene order and content data; (2) assess
the performance of these algorithms through extensive simulation studies under
parameter-rich models of genome evolution and through application to real
datasets; and (3) develop high-performance implementations of the best
algorithms designed in the project using algorithm engineering techniques and a
flexible approach to parallelization. This project will make significant
contributions in biology, through the development of new models of genome
evolution and an improved understanding of the evolution of chloroplast and
mitochondrial genomes, and in computer science, through the development and
testing of new algorithms for genomic data and the application of high-
performance computing to problems in phylogenetic
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;