* 0113091
* Global Terrain Methods for Chemical Process Simulation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2001,02/28/2005
* Angelo Lucia, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 02/28/2005
* USD 234,421.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Angelo Lucia &lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Rhode Island&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0113091&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this research is to find all relevant
solutions and singular points to physical models by dynamically uncovering the
essential features of the terrain of the least-squares function. The central
idea comes from finding intelligent ways of moving both up and down the
landscape of the least-squares function. The foundation of the research rests on
following fundamental observations:&lt;br/&gt;Stationary points are smoothly
connected under twice continuous differentiability;&lt;br/&gt;Valleys, ridges,
ledges, etc., provide a natural and useful characterization of this
&lt;br/&gt;connectedness;&lt;br/&gt;Valleys, ridges, etc., can be characterized
as a collection of constrained minima over a set of level curves;
and&lt;br/&gt;The natural flow of Newton-like vector fields tends to be along
these distinct features of the landscape.&lt;br/&gt;These observations and
conjectures are illustrated using both chemical engineering models and
mathematical benchmarks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methodology based on
exploiting these observations results in algorithms called Global Terrain
Algorithms (GTA) and consist of successive sequences of downhill (i.e.,
equation-solving computations) and uphill movements (i.e., predictor-corrector
calculations). Downhill movement to either a singular point or solution is
established using reliable, norm-reducing (complex domain) trust region methods.
Uphill movement, on the other hand, is necessarily to a singular point and uses
uphill Newton-like predictor steps combined with intermittent corrector steps
defined in terms of neighboring extrema in the gradient norm on the current
level set for the least-squares function. Initial starting points are arbitrary
while starting points for subsequent subproblems defining movement from one
stationary point to another are along appropriately determined eigenvectors.
These eigenvectors are calculated or approximated, provide knowledge about
valleys, ridges, ledges, etc., give good initiations for further downhill or
uphill movement, and can be considered a generalization of the
eigendecomposition (or saddle point theory) of Sridhar and Lucia. Collisions
with boundaries of the feasible region and severed valleys and ridges are also
considered. As the connectedness of stationary points unfolds during problem-
solving, limited connectedness is revealed and used to define the termination
criterion for the GTA. Similar ideas are applicable to chemical process
optimization be replacing the least-squares function with some other objective
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;