* 0113985
* ITR/AP: Realistic Uncertainty Bounds for Complex Dynamic Models
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2001,06/30/2006
* Michael Frenklach, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Westmoreland
* 06/30/2006
* USD 444,950.00

The present problems facing society-such as global warming, earthquake
preparedness, safety of transport of nuclear waste, and pollutant emission from
automobile engines-call for integration of a variety of computer programs, each
solving numerical problems in a different discipline. The overriding concern for
such complex models is their reliability: predictability, authenticity, and
uncertainty. The focus of the present effort is modeling realistic uncertainty
in predictions from multi-response, large-scale, nonlinear dynamic models, using
a new strategy to attack this problem. This work re-examines the concept of a
mathematical model associated with complex physical systems, considering
experiment and theory to be an integral part of the model and treating uncertain
parameters of the model as internal, "state" variables. In this way, the
uncertainties of the experimental and theoretical foundation are transferred
"directly" into uncertainties of model predictions. Establishing this direct
relationship allows one also to address the reverse problem: to identify which
specific data contribute the most to the prediction uncertainty; to determine
the required accuracy of an experiment to bring the prediction uncertainty to a
given level; or to assess whether a planned experiment will be able to improve
the prediction uncertainty. This is accomplished by merging convex relaxations
from control theory with the technique of solution mapping developed and applied
to numerical modeling of chemical kinetics typical of fossil-fuel combustion.
The solution mapping technique uses statistical design of computer experiments
to replace complex ODE models with surrogate polynomial models. These simpler,
though accurate, algebraic models are more suited to numerical optimization. The
convex relaxations allow for optimization problems described by a polynomial
objective and polynomial constraints (generally nonconvex) to be attacked by
convex optimization, namely linear objectives with linear-matrix-inequality
constraints. Nearly twenty years of use in robust control has shown these
relaxations to be remarkably useful in a wide variety of physically motivated
problems and applications. In this approach, surrogate models are developed for
all responses, both from the training set and from the prediction set. Each
surrogate model is expressed as a quadratic form in terms of internal model
parameters, developed in a series of direct ODE integrations performed according
to a factorial design covering a subspace of parameter uncertainties. The
quadratic form of the surrogate response models is then explored by an
optimization algorithm. In the initial effort, the problem of propagation of
uncertainties in a natural-gas-combustion model is cast in the form amenable for
the S-procedure, a method of convex optimization widely used in control theory.
Even more sophisticated convex relaxations have recently been developed,
centering on the observation that determining if a given polynomial is a sum-of-
squares (and hence globally nonnegative), can be cast as a convex feasibility
problem, and verified in polynomial-time (in the order of the polynomial). This
work will investigate such possibilities for exploring novel avenues for
numerically economical assessment of realistic error bounds of complex dynamic
models.