* 0113213
* Family Environment and Intergenerational Mobility
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2001,08/31/2004
* Patrick Mason, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/2004
* USD 20,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Families are crucial institutions for intergenerational mobility.
Family values influence the acquisition of marketable skills by offspring.
Family social and economic status affects both skill acquisition and the next
generation's access to individuals embedded in positions of authority and power.
It has been argued that differences in family and neighborhood characteristics
are ultimately for increasing racial wage inequality that began in the early
1980s and that remains with us today. Researchers have also argued that ethnic
and racial capital, that is, a demographic group's average level of social or
economic wellbeing, interacts with parental and neighborhood socioeconomic
status to determine intergenerational mobility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project unites the literature on family environment (that is, the
combination of family values/behaviors and family socioeconomic status) and
intergenerational inequality with an exploration of the nature and extent of
racial and gender inequality. Accordingly, this paper investigates four
questions. First, do childhood family values and family status matter for young
adult social and economic outcomes? Second, does accounting for individual
differences in childhood family environment eliminate racial and gender
differences in the wellbeing of young adult workers? Third, does the relative
importance of childhood family environment on young adult wellbeing vary across
racial and gender groups? Four, are there racial and gender differences in the
intergenerational transmission of socioeconomic status? To answer these
questions, the research project examines the impact of family values and family
economic and social status on educational attainment, annual earnings, wealth
(home value), and annual hours of employment for four race-sex groups: African
American females and males, white females and
males.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;