* 0113049
* ITR/AP(MPS): Non-Equilibrium Surface Growth and the Scalability of Parallel Discrete-Event Simulations for Large Asynchronous Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2005
* Mark Novotny, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 07/31/2005
* USD 450,000.00

This award is the result of a proposal submitted to the Information Technology
Research initiative. Modeling and simulation of the evolution of natural and
artificial complex systems are of fundamental importance in both sciences and
engineering. In a large class of systems, the underlying dynamic is
asynchronous, the "updates" in the local "configurations" of the system are
discrete events in continuous time. Examples of such systems include
magnetization dynamics in condensed matter, the evolution of financial markets,
call arrivals in cellular communication networks, and the spread of emerging
diseases and epidemics.

To design and develop faithful and scalable parallel algorithms to simulate the
evolution of large asynchronous systems is one of the most challenging areas in
parallel computing. The ultimate goal of this proposal is to better understand
how the scalability of Parallel Discrete-Event Simulation (PDES) algorithms can
be enhanced, to program and run PDES simulations for a few chosen applications
in science and engineering, and to educate junior researchers to allow them to
prepare for careers at the interface between basic sciences and information
technology. These types of PDES can be applied to an extremely wide spectrum of
computational problems in science, engineering, manufacturing, biology, and
economics.

PDES use the concept of local random simulated time as well as a synchronization
scheme. The parallel algorithm must concurrently advance the local simulated
times of each subsystem carried by a processing element (PE), without violating
causality. In a "conservative" PDES scheme, only those PE's which are guaranteed
not to violate causality attempt the updates and increment their local time. The
rest of the PE's must idle. In the "optimistic" approach the PE's do not have to
idle, but since causality is not guaranteed at every update, the simulated
history on certain PE's can become corrupted. This requires a complex "rollback"
protocol to correct erroneous computation. Both simulation approaches lead to an
evolving and fluctuating time horizon during algorithm execution.

The research will exploit a novel connection recently discovered by the PI's and
collaborators between non-equilibrium surface growth phenomena and the evolution
of the fluctuating time horizon of conservative schemes. As the number of
computer nodes available to a computational science and engineering problem
increases to many thousands, questions of scalability of the underlying
algorithms must be answered. These questions include both how well the
algorithms scale asymptotically (in the limit of an infinite number of
processors) and how they approach the asymptotic limit. Recently the PI's
studied the case where each PE is connected to its nearest-neighbor PE's on
regular lattice topologies, and each PE has no additional computation to perform
if it is not advancing time. This is close to a "worst-case" scenario for
scalability of the algorithm. Nevertheless, it was shown that the fraction of
non-idling PE's is finite and bounded away from zero in the asymptotic limit of
infinitely many PE's. Hence the algorithm is scalable as the problem size and
number of PE's increase.

The methodology of the PI's and collaborators used to obtain these results for
PDES is the powerful machinery of non-equilibrium interface/surface physics,
notably finite-size scaling and universality, applied to the fluctuating time
horizon. This research aims to extend this type of investigation. In particular,
the methods of finite-size scaling, universality, renormalization group, coarse-
graining, and mean-field approaches that are commonly applied to physical
surfaces will be applied to both simple model time surfaces and realistic time
surfaces that arise during PDES simulations in science and engineering. Based on
the "morphological" properties of the time horizon, the PI's will design and
develop algorithms that optimize simulation speed and data management at the
same time.

The research is interdisciplinary at the border between computer science, non-
equilibrium surface physics, and the study of complex systems. It will
contribute to the engineering and fine-tuning of scalable massively parallel
algorithms, while actual implementations will help to understand cooperative
behavior in large asynchronous systems. This grant also puts special emphasis on
the education and training of young scientists. %%% ***



