* 0113697
* Cell Interaction-Dependent Neural Development
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Paul Linser, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 08/31/2005
* USD 340,604.00

Cell Interaction-dependent Neural Development PI: Paul J. Linser Abstract

Complex tissues such as the nervous system are composed of numerous distinct
types of cells that work together to produce the net output of that tissue. Two
major sub-categories of cells in the nervous system are neurons and neuroglia.
These are highly specialized cell types that perform complementary but
distinctly different tasks. How it is that these disparate cell types arise
during embryonic development is a central focus of the research in the
laboratory of Professor Paul J. Linser. During the course of over 20 years of
research into the mechanisms that influence an embryonic cell's choice to become
either a neuron or a neurglial cell, Dr. Linser's group discovered a cell
surface glycoprotein that seems to participate in this developmental decision.
The protein is called 5A11/basigin and is found in several tissues but is very
highly expressed in neural retina and brain. A line of mice has been produced in
which the gene for 5A11/basigin has been inactivated. These mice afford a
remarkable opportunity for studying the actual function of this protein. Among
the abnormalities exhibited by the 5A11/basigin knockout mice is blindness.
Although the neural retinas of these mice initially appear to develop normally,
they never actually become functional as receivers and interpreters of image
(light) signals. The focus of Dr. Linser's research is on the use of the
knockout mouse to help understand the specific role that 5A11/basigin plays in
the development of a normal and functioning neural retina. The proposed studies
will combine techniques of molecular biology and biochemistry to examine in
great detail the developmental changes that have arisen in the absence of the
5A11/basigin protein. As this protein is expressed in numerous tissues, the
knockout mice also exhibit a number of other characteristics that greatly
diminish their biological stability. Understanding the function of the
5A11/basigin glycoprotein in the neural retina will lead to fundamental insights
into how this protein and others with similar structure serve in normal animal
development.