* 0113400
* SGER:   Iceberg Lake:   A High Resolution Glacial Record Exposed in an Outburst-Drained Proglacial Lake
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2001,03/31/2002
* Robert Anderson, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 03/31/2002
* USD 34,859.00

A high resolution neoglacial record of glacial sediment yield &lt;br/&gt;exposed
in a jokulhlaup-drained proglacial lake&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Documentation of
the production of sediment by glaciers is critical to our understanding of the
roles of glaciers in the topographic evolution of mountain ranges and in global
geochemical cycles. While proglacial lakes offer an excellent opportunity to
investigate the relationship between sediment source and sink in a non-tidewater
glacier environment, access to their sedimentary record is often poor. We will
examine sediments impounded by "Iceberg Lake," a large, stable, long-lived
proglacial lake in Alaska's Chugach Mountains. Iceberg Lake unexpectedly drained
in 1999 and again in 2000, offering a tremendous (but ephemeral) opportunity to
characterize the lake's accumulated sediments in three dimensions. Although
glacier-dammed, there is no historical record of Iceberg Lake draining prior to
1999. The lake's apparent stability over hundreds of years resulted in 1) a
series of four well-developed shoreline deposits ringing the lake, 2) a series
of four sandy deltas, and 3) strongly-varved lacustrine sediments. As the lake's
main inlet stream is now rapidly cutting down through all of these deposits,
virtually all of Iceberg Lake's neoglacial sedimentary record is currently
exposed. In this small glacial basin, with very tight coupling between source
and sink, these deposits promise a centuries-long sediment record with annual
resolution. By mapping the sediments, and by detailed sampling of the varve
record, we will produce a detailed time-series of coarse and fine-grained
sediment delivery to Iceberg Lake. This will document year-to-year variability
in the volume and type of sediment deposited in Iceberg Lake over hundreds of
years, and will provide insight into glacier dynamics, sediment production and
evacuation, and fluvial transport during, after, and possibly even prior to the
Little Ice Age.&lt;br/&gt;