* 0113539
* ITR/SY+PE: Improving the Education of Software Testers
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Cem Kaner, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 08/31/2006
* USD 469,668.00

0113539 Kaner Florida Institute of Technology&lt;br/&gt;"Improving the Education
of Software Testers"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a project that lays the
groundwork for significant improvements in the quality of academic and
commercial courses in software testing. This is new ground since the skills used
in the field are not well identified and there are few collections of exercises
or drills designed to help polish those skills. Software testing is an important
area of work within information technology, but it has been largely ignored
within the educational community. As a result, the software industry faces a
shortage of appropriately educated people to do this work. This project develops
foundational material for teaching introductory and advanced classes on software
testing, including: a collection of examples of software errors (posted on a web
site, well-described, with screen shots, and suitable for use in class),
identification and descriptions of specific skills involved in software testing
(published at conferences and in articles that are available on the web), sample
exercises for students (for use as course assignments or for self-paced study)
and a smaller separate collection for teachers (for possible use in exams), free
software versions of classroom-level versions of useful testing tools (a
"classroom version" is intended to teach the concept of that kind of tool, and
to handle tasks that are as complex as the student might run into as an
undergraduate), research (and reports on the results of the research) on the
usefulness of Whittaker's software fault model as an organizing structure for
presenting a wide range of key testing techniques in class, extension of Kaner
&amp; Bach's characterizations of testing styles/strategies, bringing together
research and practitioner literature into a structure useful for presenting a
wide range of key testing strategies in class, and workshops (and an email
discussion group) on the teaching of software testing. The core societal benefit
of this work lies in its high potential for improvement of software testing and
through that, software quality.&lt;br/&gt;