* 0113917
* Acquisition of a Measurement System for Research and Education in Magnetic Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2002
* Paul Crowell, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2002
* USD 150,000.00

This is an award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program in DMR
to the University of Minnesota-Twin Cities. The award supports the acquisition
of a measurement system for research and education in magnetic heterostructures.
The instrument will support research in four areas of physics and materials
science: a) new materials for spin transport in magnetic/semiconductor
structures, b) novel magnetic oxide materials and heterostructures, c) exchange
bias in ferromagnet/antiferromagnet multilayers and d) two-dimensional
conduction in organic crystals. The instrument, which incorporates DC and AC
magnetometry and transport over a temperature range of 0.4 to 300 K and in
magnetic fields up to 9 T, will be used by students involved in both growth and
measurements. In particular, new materials for spin transport, including
ferromagnetic semiconductors and half-metallic ferromagnets, will be developed.
A variety of new magnetic oxide materials, including cobaltates such as
La1-x-SrxCoO3, will be explored, and current work on oxides used as spin
injectors will be continued. Microscopic mechanisms for controlling coercivity
in multilayers using exchange-induced anisotropy and exchange spring magnetism
will be investigated. Finally, low-dimensional transport in organic crystals,
with emphasis on superconductivity, will be studied.
&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Instrumentation for Materials
Research program in DMR to the University of Minnesota-Twin Cities supports the
acquisition of a measurement system for research and education in magnetic
heterostructures at the University of Minnesota. Magnetic heterostructures are
"sandwiches" formed by growing thin layers of a magnetic material, such as iron,
in combination with other metals, insulators, or even semiconductors. Depending
on the particular application in mind, the magnetic material can be either the
"meat" or the "bread" in the sandwich. These types of heterostructures are
already in use in the latest generation of hard disk drives, and some of the
research the new instrument will be dedicated to understanding the microscopic
mechanism that is ultimately responsible for the way in which these new drives
work. Furthermore, entirely new types of structures, based on magnetic oxides,
will be investigated. A new generation of structures, combining the
functionality of magnets with those of semiconductors used in transistors, will
also be explored. The instrument will be used by graduate students and
undergraduates in order to enhance their training in the rapidly evolving field
of materials physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;