* 0113193
* ITR/SY (CCR): Implementing Modular Program Analysis via Intersection and Union Types
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Assaf Kfoury, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2005
* USD 460,412.00

Proposal Number: ITR Proposal 0113193

Title: Implementing Modular Program Analysis via Intersection and Union Types.

PI: Assaf J. Kfoury

The proposed research will investigate real-world relevance of a new framework
for modular program-analysis, which uses "intersection" and "union" types. The
starting point of this investigation is a recently designed polymorphic type
system, called System I, for a foundational functional language, the lambda-
calculus. The chief feature of System I is the use of "intersection" types
together with the new technology of "expansion variables", which allow System I
to satisfy a substitution-based principal-typings property. Although fully
modular, the resulting program analysis is now restricted to a foundational
language (the lambda-calculus) missing many standard high-level programming
features such as conditionals, recursive definitions, exceptions, assignments,
input/output, etc. Considerable work is necessary in order to turn System I into
a type system for a full-fledged programming language such as Scheme (now
considered to be the initial target language of proposed research).

The proposed research is largely engineering work, aimed at producing an
efficient prototype implementation, based on appropriate extensions of System I.
The implementation will be evaluated --- or re-designed in parts --- by the
extent to which it produces demonstrably better results in handling large
software systems (enforcing larger classes of safety properties, statically
detecting and ruling out larger classes of run-time errors).

