* 0113186
* 2001 Gordon Research Conference on Condensed Matter Physics; New London, CT; June 17-22, 2001
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2002
* Paul Chaikin, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 05/31/2002
* USD 12,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;The Gordon Conference on Condensed Matter Physics is aimed at
bringing together world leaders, young investigators and students at all levels
to present and discuss exciting new results and the inter-relations between the
diverse subfields in condensed matter physics. The topics covered range from
quantum electronics and transport to soft condensed matter and biophysics. In
this years conference the different areas are tied together by an interest in
organic molecules their properties and assembly. Dramatic new results on
insulting organic crystals doped metallic and superconducting by applying a gate
electrode lead to new insights into transport in carbon based systems. The
results on organic crystals are to be compared/contrasted with those of
nanotubes, polymers and DNA. Transport in DNA is then considered in solution and
leads to an understanding of its dielectric properties and the way it can be
manipulated and self assembled into various structures. The information content
and its value in biological systems is presented. Problems of frustrated
packings and jamming are then discussed also in relation to the glasses and
granular materials. The conference provides lectures, but emphasizes a large
amount of time for formal and informal discussions between lecturers and
students. The students are encouraged to participate directly by presenting
posters on their work to serve as a focal point for interaction with more senior
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Gordon Conference on Condensed Matter
Physics is aimed at bringing together world leaders, young investigators and
students at all levels to present and discuss exciting new results in forefront
areas of the physics of new electronic, structural, organic and biological
materials. The participants will be from academe, industry and government labs.
Organic crystals, polymers, and biological materials have very recently been
shown to be electrical conductors with controllable properties useful for data
storage, light emission, computation, mobility and interesting new structures.
These materials bring new insight into both fundamental science and potential
and present applications. They also illustrate the relative advantages of
organic and inorganic systems. Student participation is encouraged both by the
large amount of time devoted to formal and informal discussion as well as poster
sessions where the students present their results as a focal points for
interaction with more senior researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;