* 0113338
* ITR/SI:Semiconductor Optical Amplifier Based High Capacity Optical Information Device Technologies and Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2006
* Peter Delfyett, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2006
* USD 275,000.00

The goal of this research project is to develop high speed optoelectronic
devices based on semiconductor optical amplifiers, for applications in optical
information technologies, networks, instrumentation and signal processing. The
key devices will be novel ultrahigh speed multiwavelength semiconductor laser
transmitters, modulators , nonlinear optical switches and optical clock recovery
oscillators. These semiconductor optical amplifier based devices will then be
configured together to demonstrate unique high-speed capabilities in next
generation information technology applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
important feature of this research project is that the devices are based on an
identical semiconductor layered structure and common device processing and
fabrication techniques. This is significant because this philosophy allows for
cost effective state-of-the-art device development, with the potential of the
technology becoming readily available for commercial applications, owing to the
ease of fabrication, from a manufacturing perspective. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition, since each of the devices are realized by using a single common
processing procedure on an identical semiconductor layered structure, the
potential for demonstrating fully monolithic ultrahigh-speed information is
great. These two features are critical in that the development of high-speed
optoelectronic technologies are essential elements for commercial applications
of information technology in the global economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1.1
Methods to be employed&lt;br/&gt;The research program will use standard
optoelectronic device fabrication techniques to develop a set of 4
optoelectronic devices, e.g., transmitters, modulators, switches, and clock
recovery oscillators, that will be used in three critical commercial information
technology application areas: 1) high capacity optical links for both access and
wide area networks, 2) high speed optical sampling for analogue to digital
applications, and 3) wideband optical/rf analog information systems using
arbitrary optical waveform generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will exploit
his latest findings on the fundamental physics of ultrashort pulse propagation
in semiconductor optical amplifiers and the associated nonlinear optical
effects, to demonstrate unique modes of operation of these devices, for high
speed photonic functionality. As an example, he will exploit these novel effects
to achieve both temporal and spectral control of ultrafast optical
signals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, he will demonstrate:&lt;br/&gt;o
multiwavelength modelocked operation of semiconductor diode lasers&lt;br/&gt;o
ultra-stable, ultrahigh bit rate, single wavelength 160 Gb/s semiconductor laser
sources&lt;br/&gt;o cost-effective semiconductor optical amplifier modulators
and modulator arrays&lt;br/&gt;o novel high-speed optical clock recovery
oscillators at 40 GHz&lt;br/&gt;o all optical switching and processing of WDM
byte wide parallel data packets, showing the potential for ultrahigh speed
parallel optical signal processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The developed device
functionality will be incorporated to demonstrate&lt;br/&gt;o hybrid WDM-OTDM
links for a) access and b) wide area networks&lt;br/&gt;o optical sampling in
optical analog to digital converters&lt;br/&gt;o arbitrary optical waveform
generation for wideband optical &amp; microwave photonic
applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, he will use commercially available
off the shelf components to realize prototypes that will facilitate technology
transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1.2 Significance to the Advancement of Knowledge:
Educational &amp; Scientific Impact&lt;br/&gt;From an educational perspective,
the students trained in this research program will be exposed to a research
environment that is vertically integrated. For example, the students will learn
the physics and fundamentals of high speed optoelectronic device design and
fabrication, the deployment of novel devices to realize unique high speed
optoelectronic sub-system functionality, and finally, integrate several unique
optoelectronic sub-system functions into a full ultrahigh speed optoelectronic
system that will address needs in the information technology areas of
networking, signal processing and instrumentation. This will allow the students
to provide timely impact for prospective employers upon
graduation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;