* 0113313
* ITR/AP (CISE) Collaborative Research: Best-First Search Algorithms for Sequence Alignment Problems in Computational Biology
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Richard Korf, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2005
* USD 224,000.00

Abstract Zhang 0113618 Korf 0113313

Best-First Search Algorithms for Sequence Alignment Problems in Computational
Biology

Molecular biologists are currently faced with very challenging computational
problems. For example, a draft of the human genome has been completed, a
sequence of about three billion base pairs. A draft of the mouse genome soon
will be completed. We know that mice and men share over 90% of their genetic
material. What we don't know is exactly which parts of the human and mouse
genomes are common to both species. This information can be used to identify
human genes, and to translate results from mouse studies to studies of human
health and disease. The problem of identifying the common elements between these
two DNA sequences is an example of sequence alignment, which is a computational
problem. Other examples of sequence alignment problems include gene
identification, and RNA and protean structure prediction. Current computer
algorithms are either too slow, or require too much memory, to directly solve a
problem as large as the human-mouse genomic sequence alignment. We propose to
develop new algorithms for various sequence-alignment problems, based on
heuristic search algorithms in artificial intelligence. Our goal is to provide
much more efficient sequence-alignment algorithms for use by molecular
biologists.

