* 0113388
* ITR/SI:  Automatic Consistency Checking for IPSec/VPN Security Policy
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2004
* Shyhtsun Wu, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Joseph B. Evans
* 09/30/2004
* USD 388,429.00

Although various IPSec policy issues [2,3,4] have attracted a lot of attention,
within the IETF IPSP (IP Security Policy) working group, there is certain amount
of confusion and concerns about the two fundamental issues: 1) How to ensure the
correctness of a set of distributed security policies? 2) How to systematically
determine the correct set of policies and securely distribute them across the
network? Internet will be more and more dynamic in many aspects. With the
capability of various wireless network technologies, users and even sub-networks
can be mobile. Mobility implies potential changes in the policies or the inter-
relations among distributed policies. Adaptive security is another cause of
policy changes. It will be uncommon in the near future that, in reacting to a
newly detected intrusion, a security management system might on-the-fly
determine to strengthen the security level by modifying the IPSec security
policies. Therefore, it is critically important to have a safe and rigorous
solution to handle the above two issues. Policy Specification Correctness
Currently, in the research community of IPSec/VPN policy, to our best knowledge,
no rigorous definition for IPSec/VPN policy correctness has been developed.
Later in this proposal, we will give a formal and reasonable definition for
correctness such that we will have a basis for policy specification analysis.
Such correctness analysis must be automated such that the security configuration
of a network system can be adaptive to changes, faults/intrusions, and mobility.
On the other hand, if there are inherent constraints and conflicts among the
existing security policies such that it is impossible to have a consistent
policy set, the policy analysis engine should also automatically determine the
impossibility. Inter-domain Secure Policy Distribution The proposed work under
the first issue assumes that we have a perfect and centralized collection of
information related to the policies and security requirements around the whole
Internet. However, in reality, this might not always be possible as Internet is
owned and managed by different administrative domains, while, for trust and
privacy consideration, information regarding local policy and network topology
might not be sharable across domain boundaries. The second objective of this
proposed research is, under some inter-domain related constraints, to develop a
collaborative framework/architecture and a suite of distributed protocols such
that we can still analyze the correctness of a set of decentralized IPSec/VPN
policies. We will study the issue of the minimum amount of policy information
needed for a particular policy domain to determine whether its local policies
and requirements will be consistent with other domains. Once the set of policies
is decided, a policy distribution mechanism is also needed. Under this proposed
research project, we will first focus on the theoretical aspect of policy and
requirement specifications and their analysis. We will develop algorithms and
analytical results to fundamental enhance our current technology in policy-
driven networking systems such as IPSec/VPN. Second, we plan on implementing a
prototype to validate and evaluate our proposed approach on a realistic
networking environment. The first phase will be a small testbed to run the
prototype software, which will be open sourced and available to the community.
Furthermore, we would like to collaborate with industry partners such as
equipment venders and ISPs to further evaluate and validate our approach against
real-world challenges. Furthermore, we will pay special attention to the
application of our solutions in a mobile network environment. In such
environment, the capability of dynamically updating IPSec security policy is
extremely critical. To summarize, we will not only deliver academic publications
about our proposed works but also produce a prototype system and perform
extensive experiments, including the real-world data set if possible, to
evaluate the performance and accuracy and to validate our theoretical model in
handling difficulty issues in Policy-driven networking systems.