* 0113713
* ITR/AP(GEO):  Development of Interactive Web-based Tools for Modeling Deformation at Subduction Zones
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,02/28/2006
* David Spooner, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing grant
* Leonard E. Johnson
* 02/28/2006
* USD 400,000.00

0113713 Williams

Subduction zones comprise a large percentage of the tectonic plate boundaries on
earth and they produce the largest and most devastating earthquakes. Large
amounts of surface geodetic data are collected in these regions to estimate
seismic hazard and to understand the mechanics of convergent margins. The amount
and quality of such data has increased rapidly in recent years but the
development of sophisticated and easy-to-use modeling tools has not proceeded at
a similar pace. Although sophisticated modeling techniques exist, they are not
generally easy to use and are not readily available to the same scientists
collecting geodetic data.

This is a project to develop web-based tools that will provide comprehensive
solutions for geoscientists wishing to model surface deformation at subduction
zones. This will allow general access to more powerful modeling techniques (the
finite element method) while offering significant ease-of-use. Despite the
increase in the quality and quantity of geodetic data, most researchers still
rely on older modeling techniques in their analyses. The goal of this project is
to provide a modeling environment that improves upon current methods while still
being easy to use, thus allowing geoscientists to focus more on interpretation
than on model development. ***