* 0113745
* ITR/AP: Simulation of Machine-Medium Interaction in a Real-Time Virtual Environment
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2005
* Volodymyr Kindratenko, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 07/31/2005
* USD 399,999.00

Ghaboussi&lt;br/&gt;This project is a joint multidisciplinary industry-academia
research effort to develop an advanced virtual reality (VR) environment for
modeling earthmoving equipment interaction with the surrounding medium such as
soil. The project will take advantage of rapid developments in hardware,
software and information technology to develop a real-time virtual environment
for machine-medium interaction that includes realistic force-feed back. The
proposed development will enhance the design of the earthmoving equipment and
improve the design cycle. It will also open up new venues for application of VR
for machine medium interaction. This project will greatly benefit from leveraged
resources provided by Caterpillar, Inc.&lt;br/&gt;The research team will develop
an original neural network (NN) based real-time soil medium model that can be
used to simulate soil response due to manipulation by earthmoving equipment. The
proposed model will be mechanistically accurate and run in real-time. It will
simulate the soil resistance and the interactive forces between the medium and
the earthmoving equipment. The NN model will be trained using data sets
developed from non-real time simulations using the discrete element method. Data
sets of soil and earthmoving equipment response will also be developed from
full-scale field tests at Caterpillar, Inc. proving ground in Peoria, Illinois.
&lt;br/&gt;The research team, in cooperation with the National Center for
Supercomputing Applications (NCSA), will implement the new NN soil model in Cave
Automated Virtual Environment (CAVE). A new object-oriented vehicle prototyping
system (VPS) will be developed in this virtual environment. A force feedback
link will be developed representing the medium resistance provided by the NN
soil model to the vehicle dynamics model. The real-time virtual environment will
enhance the design verification tools available to the earthmoving equipment
manufacturing industry and reduce the number of costly field trials for new
equipment designs. &lt;br/&gt;The ideas and methodology that will be developed
for the real-time VR environment have a wide range of applications such as
simulation of slope failures and avalanches as well as bulk and powder material
handling in agricultural, mining and manufacturing applications. The proposed VR
environment can potentially be used in space exploration of other planets where
it is necessary to troubleshoot a remote controlled vehicle interacting with the
soil medium on the planetary surface in real-time. &lt;br/&gt;This project
brings together specialists in 1) computational intelligence and soil medium
modeling from the Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering at UIUC, 2)
virtual reality and computer science from NCSA at UIUC, and 3) earthmoving
equipment design and control at Caterpillar, Inc. Close coordination among the
team members will ensure a strong exchange of ideas between academia and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;