* 0113361
* ITR/SI: On Robust and Secure Mobile Ad Hoc and Sensor Networks
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2001,02/28/2005
* Dharma Agrawal, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* Venugopal V. Veeravalli
* 02/28/2005
* USD 418,000.00

A Mobile Ad hoc NETwork (MANET) is a collection of mobile autonomous system of
nodes connected by wireless links with multi-hop communication and no underlying
infrastructure. Research in the field of MANET is receiving unprecedented
attention due to their profound impact on human life. The most important
problems in MANET are Routing, Quality of Service, Security, Power management
and Traffic and Mobility modeling and we plan to address many of these issues.
In a MANET, when a mobile node has a packet to send, it first consults its route
cache to determine whether it already has a route to destination, else it
initiates route discovery by broadcasting. Once a route is established, its
continuation and maintenance is of prime concern for efficient communication. A
route could be broken by mobility and is determined by route error packets.
Rather than employing a conventional way of global re-flooding for a new route
search, we address this by Local Route Repair (LLR) approach and achieve re-
connectivity with minimum overhead. Further work is needed to extend our scheme
by increasing the length of patch-up part. We expect this to yield a higher
amount of savings in terms of routing overhead and delay when unidirectional
links are present. We also plan to define an analytical framework for different
protocols and determine their performance. The need for scheduling in a MANET
arises primarily due to limited availability of resources. We plan to study the
impact of packet level scheduling strategies that transmit packets based on a
metric derived from characteristics of the data being transmitted, like the
length of the packets or the length of the route being traversed by the packets
or even the priority of the packets. We plan to test other routing schemes and
define and formulate an analytical model for packet queue at each node so that
we could determine end-to-end delay of different types of packets. Effective
operation of MANETs is dependent on maintaining appropriate routing information
in a distributed fashion. Confidentiality of routing information is important so
that not only the payload data but also the routing message headers carrying,
the location information of the mobile nodes can be exchanged securely. We have
defined an authentication scheme that can prevent the external attacks. We
minimize substantial overhead by performing mutual authentication using
challenge-response mechanism along the reply path only when the route reply is
received. We plan to propose a distributed intrusion detection system to handle
them. We will build these systems based on traffic profiles that we would obtain
after extensive study of the traffic patterns. We are planning to perform a
detailed simulation to obtain metrics that would help us in differentiating
valid and malicious data. Wireless sensor networks can be easily deployed
without any installation costs or pre-planned organization. To increase fault
tolerance, thousands of these sensors might be employed. The traditional routing
protocols defined for wireless ad hoc network do not scale well for sensor
networks as they are data centric and application-specific unlike traditional
networks. Most protocols for sensor network collect data periodically from
environment. We feel that there exists a need for networks geared towards
responding immediately to changes in the sensed attributes. Very recently, we
have proposed a protocol called TEEN for such networks. We are also looking at
ways to combine the best features of both proactive and reactive protocols to
form a hybrid network. We also believe that sensor networks should provide the
end user with the ability to control the three-way trade-off between energy
efficiency, accuracy and response time dynamically. In brief, the proposal
research will have a long-term impact on the robustness and security of MANETs
and sensor networks.