* 0113282
* ITR/AP:  Small-Scale Dynamical Interactions with Chemical Processes in the Terrestrial Upper Atmosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2002
* Michael Hickey, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Sunanda Basu
* 09/30/2002
* USD 240,000.00

A three-year funding period is being requested so that the PI can expand and
modify his existing simulation code in order to relax key assumptions that were
previously implemented only because of computational constraints. His numerical
simulations describing the interaction of small-scale gravity waves with minor
species and related chemical processes in the mesopause region (90 km altitude)
are the most complete and realistic to date. Quite apart from causing large,
highly nonlinear oscillations in minor species number densities, the waves drive
a large downward transport of minor species through the effects of dissipation.
In spite of the fact that the model simulates time-dependent interactions
between dynamics and nonlinear chemistry, the model uses linear (versus
nonlinear) dynamics and a very limited number (or incomplete set) of chemically
active minor species. These simplifications have been necessary in order to be
able to run the code within a reasonable amount of time on stand-alone personal
computers. However, to gain a complete understanding of the interactions and in
order to include both physical and chemical processes that are known to be
important in this region of the atmosphere, these two idealizations will have to
be relaxed. This will increase the computational burden well beyond the limits
of personal computers, requiring multiprocessor computers for faster, efficient
computations. The PI is thus proposing to purchase a relatively inexpensive
"turn-key" multiprocessor machine to assist them in the in-house development and
testing of code required to increase the level of realism in their model, and
subsequently transfer the code to faster super-computers at the National Center
for Atmospheric Research. The proposed work falls into the Applications in
Science and Engineering (AP) section of the small class category of ITR
proposals, and is most closely related to the Aeronomy Program of the
Atmospheric Science Division within the Directorate for Geosciences.