* 0113879
* Acquisition of an Atomic Force Microscope for DNA Nanotechnology Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* Nadrian Seeman, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2003
* USD 90,000.00

This award to New York University is for the acquisition of an Atomic Force
Microscope for DNA nanotechnology research and education. The features of the
AFM include tapping mode, lithography mode and automatic high-resolution
scanning. DNA technology is an area of materials science developed at NYU over
the past two decades. It is based on the combination of stable branched DNA
motifs and their specific associations as directed biotechnological technique,
DNA sticky-ended cohesion. Early projects in this area involved the assembly of
geometrical objects, such as a DNA cube and a DNA truncated octahedron that
could be characterized by gel electrophoresis. The species made at NYU are novel
materials that are expected to have applications in nanoelectronics,
nanorobotics, information storage, and structural biophysics. Experiments are
underway to organize nanoelectronic components in 2D arrays by attaching them to
DNA arrays. The incorporation of the sequence-activated device into an array
will lead to the large numbers of structurally distinct states that characterize
nanorobotics. Mechanical and chemical modification of arrays can lead to
information storage systems. This instrumentation will accelerate significantly
the development of this field. The award will contribute to the training and
education of graduate students and postdocs in this new area of materials
research. %%% This award to New York University is for the acquisition of an
Atomic Force Microscope for DNA nanotechnology research and education. The
features of the AFM include tapping mode, lithography mode and automatic high-
resolution scanning. DNA technology is an area of materials science developed at
NYU over the past two decades. It is based on the combination of stable branched
DNA motifs and their specific associations as directed biotechnological
technique, DNA sticky-ended cohesion. Early projects in this area involved the
assembly of geometrical objects, such as a DNA cube and a DNA truncated
octahedron that could be characterized by gel electrophoresis. The species made
at NYU are novel materials that are expected to have applications in
nanoelectronics, nanorobotics, information storage, and structural biophysics.
Experiments are underway to organize nanoelectronic components in 2D arrays by
attaching them to DNA arrays. The incorporation of the sequence-activated device
into an array will lead to the large numbers of structurally distinct states
that characterize nanorobotics. Mechanical and chemical modification of arrays
can lead to information storage systems. This instrumentation will accelerate
significantly the development of this field. The award will contribute to the
training and education of graduate students and postdocs in this new area of
materials research.

