* 0113974
* ITR/AP: A Motion Planning Approach for Protein Folding Simulation
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Nancy Amato, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Eun K. Park
* 08/31/2006
* USD 330,000.00

This project will develop a framework for studying protein folding that is based
on techniques recently developed in the robotics motion planning community. In
particular, this work uses Probabilistic Roadmap (PRM) motion planning
techniques which have proven to be very successful for problems involving high-
dimensional configuration spaces. The key advance that PRMs offer protein
science is the ability to efficiently explore large conformational transitions
of realistic models of proteins. The work involves research in both protein
science and information technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has two
main research goals related to protein science. First, PRMs are expected to
provide a computational method to predict the folding kinetics of proteins, when
the native structure is already known. This makes PRMs ideal for investigating
classical problems in protein folding kinetics such as kinetic intermediates,
kinetic traps, parallel vs. series folding routes, and general folding mechanism
questions related to potential energy landscapes and zippers processes. Second,
PRM, used in conjunction with a new ENPOP parameter optimization strategy, has
the potential to improve energy models both high-resolution and low-resolution
models for predicting biomolecule conformations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project has two main research goals related to information technology. Both are
motivated by the massive computational requirements of the simulations needed to
investigate the protein folding questions. First, new strategies and
optimization techniques for PRMs will be needed to support the efficient
extraction of high quality paths from the roadmaps for problems with hundreds of
dof. Second, since PRMs are known to be amenable to parallel implementation,
they will utilize high-performance computing. This will include the development
and application of an adaptive parallel version of the C++ STL (Standard
Templates library) called STAPL. With STAPL, the simulations can be optimized
and run on various parallel and distributed systems and yield a performance
approaching that of code manually optimized for each platform&lt;br/&gt;