* 0113236
* ITR/IM Bayesian Data Analysis for Digital Networked Environments
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* David Madigan, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Rong Chen
* 08/31/2005
* USD 245,200.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0113236&lt;br/&gt;Madigan - Rutgers
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Digital networked environments such as the Web
play an increasingly important role in our lives. More than 135 million
Americans have Internet access (Source: eTForecasts) and on average use that
connection 4.2 hours per week (Source: PriceWaterhouseCoopers). All this
activity generates vast and complex "digital traces". Appropriate analyses of
these traces can lead to an unprecedented understanding of online behavior, and,
in turn, to substantial improvements in the design of digital environments.
These data present challenges to traditional statistical methods due to their
complexity and massive scale. We will develop novel statistical technology to
address these challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project will
develop Bayesian statistical methodology for analyzing data from digital
environments. The Bayesian approach to data analysis is uniquely suited to the
kind of multi-level and hierarchically structured data that the project focuses
on. Bayesian methods have a rich history but have only become practicable in
recent years due to advances in computing power and numerical methods. The
methodological research will ground itself in a series of applications. The
essential contribution, however, will be to develop a practical Bayesian
methodology for these data. There exists a significant educational barrier to
the widespread use of Bayesian methods. The project will also develop and
disseminate a graduate-level multidiscipliniary course in Bayesian methods.
&lt;br/&gt;