* 0113669
* Development and Evaluation of an Automatized Comprehension Assessment Tool
* EDU,DRL
* 11/15/2001,10/31/2005
* Richard Golden, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 10/31/2005
* USD 393,793.00

The goal of this project is to develop a nationally available fully automated
web-based diagnostic system called ARCADE (Automated Reading Comprehension and
Diagnostic Evaluation) that will be capable of assessing complex comprehension
based upon student free response data. The technology used will be to combine
information extraction (IE) technologies and advanced psychometric techniques in
novel ways so as to provide detailed assessment and diagnostic information for
use by teachers and students in the service of improving classroom instruction
and learning. The ARCADE system will also contribute to a data infrastructure
useable by other investigators. Specifically, computer scientists interested in
the development of new information extraction technology and cognitive
scientists and educators interested in the development of new theories of
comprehension and assessment would be able to access the database that will be
developed in the course of using ARCADE with students. Thus, in addition to
improving educational effectiveness in classrooms on a national level, the
ARCADE system has the potential to provide a nation-wide resource for
facilitating the advancement of scientific research in both the fields of
reading comprehension and information technology
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific research being pursued is to develop
and empirically test the core mathematical algorithms of the ARCADE system with
respect to their reliability and validity for assessing reading comprehension in
foundational literacy in science and literature. The empirical database will
consist of free response data generated by student examinees in grade school and
junior high school classroom settings in response to open-ended probe questions.
The core ARCADE system employs innovative combinations of information extraction
and psychometric techniques to address a critical educational need, namely, ways
to assess multiple dimensions of complex comprehension. Such dimensions of
comprehension are specified by a set of special semantic networks (called
"knowledge digraphs") which embody meaning relations among ideas in texts and
documents as well as relations to prior knowledge and inferences. A new
statistical model of examinee behavior is then defined which incorporates
techniques from the fields of Item Response Theory (IRT), Hidden Markov Model IE
technology, and Knowledge Digraph Contribution analysis. The important
innovation of this new statistical model is that multiple dimensions of
comprehension in conjunction with their respective standard errors can be
directly estimated from examinee free response data using Monte Carlo simulation
and econometric methods Moreover, using an approach analogous to that developed
in IRT , these assessments of comprehension dimensions can be mathematically
proven to be reliable across a given family of equivalent testing
materials.&lt;br/&gt;