* 0113148
* ITR/AP+IM  (GEO) Reanalysis of the Climate of the Global Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* James Carton, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2005
* USD 498,630.00

0113148 Carton &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide improved
estimates of the historical changes in the climate of the oceans by using direct
and indirect observations to constrain numerical models of the global ocean
circulation, temperature, and salinity through application of sequential
estimation techniques. Application of sequential estimation to the problem of
ocean reanalysis faces a number of problems. Full implementation is impractical
on current computers. Further problems result from the presence of long spatial
and temporal correlation scales in the observation minus forecast model
differences. In addition, the subsurface data sets are limited and non-
stationary. This project will exploit modern developments in computer science
and meteorology to address these challenges. The specific focus is on
variability of the global ocean during the 60-year period 1940-2000. A suite of
preliminary reanalyses of the monthly temperature, salinity, and velocity fields
of the ocean has been conducted using data assimilation, which have helped to
identify a number of problems that must be surmounted. At the same time, there
have been substantial improvements in the database of historical observations.
This project will support an interdisciplinary collaboration between an
oceanographer and meteorologist at University of Maryland (Jim Carton and
Eugenia Kalnay) and an applied mathematician at NASA/GSFC (Dick Dee) to continue
to explore new computational methods and algorithms developed for the problem of
atmospheric data assimilation to explore seasonal to decadal variability of the
oceans. The scientific objectives also address parts of the first of the
scientific objectives of the CLImate Variability and predictability (CLIVAR)
program: to describe and understand the physical processes responsible for
climate variability and predictability on seasonal, interannual, decadal and
centennial time scales, through the collection and analysis of observations and
the development and application of models of the coupled climate system, in
cooperation with other relevant climate research and observing programs (CLIVAR,
1998). Funding is provided through the Information Technology Research
Initiative and the CLIVAR program.&lt;br/&gt;0113148&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;