* 0113046
* Acquisition of Molecular Beam Epitaxy Equipment for Research and Education in High Quality GaAs Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,09/30/2007
* Mansour Shayegan, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 09/30/2007
* USD 61,080.00

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program to Princeton
University supports the acquisition of equipment to enhance the quality of
quantum-confined semiconductor structures grown in a molecular beam epitaxy
(MBE) system. The equipment includes special (all-metal) gate valves and new
effusion cells which will be installed in the MBE growth chamber. It will allow
the growth of extremely clean (low-disorder), selectively doped GaAs/AlGaAs
heterojunction structures in which electron interaction physics dominates. The
MBE grown, high-quality structures will be used in on-going NSF-supported
projects. Such structures provide a crucial and important test-bed for new many-
body physics. The results can also have an impact on the realization of new
devices whose fabrication and/or operation is based on semiconductor structures
of similar type. The improved material will impact positively the research of
several collaborators who receive high-quality GaAs/AlGaAs heterostructures from
the PI. The equipment will be used primarily by the students and will therefore
be crucial for their education and training. The award will strengthen high
quality education integrated into forefront research. In addition, fabrication
and the physics of advanced layered semiconductor structures are at the
forefront of today's science and technology. Well-trained and educated students
in this field will be invaluable resources for the US as well as the rest of the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Instrumentation for Materials
Research program to Princeton University supports the acquisition of equipment
to enhance the quality of quantum-confined semiconductor structures grown in a
molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) system. The equipment will improve the growth of
extremely clean (low-disorder), selectively doped GaAs/AlGaAs heterojunction
structures in which electron interaction physics dominates. The MBE grown, high-
quality structures will be used in on-going NSF-supported projects. Such
structures provide a crucial and important test-bed for new many-body physics.
The results can also have an impact on the realization of new devices whose
fabrication and/or operation is based on semiconductor structures of similar
type. The improved material will impact positively the research of several
collaborators who receive high-quality GaAs/AlGaAs heterostructures from the PI.
The equipment will be used primarily by the students and will therefore be
crucial for their education and training. The award will strengthen high quality
education integrated into forefront research. In addition, fabrication and the
physics of advanced layered semiconductor structures are at the forefront of
today's science and technology. Well-trained and educated students in this field
will be invaluable resources for the US as well as the rest of the
world.&lt;br/&gt;