* 0113894
* An RSEC at the University of Minnesota
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2007
* Jeffrey Roberts, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2007
* USD 2,000,000.00

The Chemistry Department of Minnesota University (MU) is supported by the
Chemistry Division, and the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities under the
"Research Sites for Educators in Chemistry" (RSEC) program. Dr. Jeffrey Roberts
is the Principal Investigator. The Minnesota RSEC program will be oriented
around four interdisciplinary areas: chemical biology, computational chemistry,
environmental chemistry, and materials chemistry. The RSEC will support a broad
range of collective modes, from standard sabbatical visits, to distance-
collaborations with faculty and undergraduates from nearby colleges, to group
visits involving three or more faculty from a single department. An Executive
Committee consisting of Two University of Minnesota chemistry professors and two
professors from undergraduate institutions will assist Dr.Roberts. Plans are for
the RSEC leadership team to recruit a group of approximately 20 undergraduate
chemistry departments as RSEC participants. The program will draw from
institutions in the upper Midwest. The assessment and evaluation of the program
will be facilitated by an Advisory Committee of five faculty form both UM and
small-school departments.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Research Sites for Educators in
Chemistry bring together the faculty of participating two-year colleges,
baccalaureate colleges, and master's universities with faculty at research
universities within a geographic region, to enhance the research and educational
opportunities at all participants. Academic and research institutions provide
abundant opportunities where individuals may concurrently assume
responsibilities as researchers, educators, and students, and where all can
engage in joint efforts that infuse education with the excitement of discovery
and enrich research through the diversity of learning perspectives. RSECs such
as this one at the University of Minnesota provide mechanisms for disseminating
the knowledge, skill, practices and ethics of research to a broader community,
including those from underrepresented groups; assist in developing viable,
sustainable research programs at participating institutions; and involve faculty
and students at the participating institutions with a broader cross-section of
faculty and students.&lt;br/&gt;