* 0113243
* Reading Across Writing Systems: Basic Processes and Learning
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Charles Perfetti, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Guy Van Orden
* 08/31/2004
* USD 551,320.00

The goals of this project are to discover the universal character of reading and
the specific ways that writing systems affect reading processes. It will focus
on the comparison of two highly contrastive writing systems, i.e., English,
representative of the world's alphabetic writing systems, and Chinese, usually
considered to be a unique logographic system. Alphabetic systems use meaningless
graphs (letters) as the basic unit in the system and map these units onto
meaningless units in the spoken language (phonemes). Thus, the letter b maps to
the sound /b/. In Chinese, there are no units in the writing system that
correspond to phonemes. Instead, the basic graphs (characters) correspond to
syllables, most of which are words. This allows written Chinese to link graphic
units directly with meaning. Along with the fact that early Chinese characters
had pictographic content, this fact has encouraged the hypothesis that Chinese
reading occurs without reference to speech (phonology). However, recent
research, including Perfetti's current NSF-funded research, has discovered that
readers of Chinese make use of spoken word forms, just as readers of alphabetic
systems do. In a wide variety of tasks that expose processes of word
identification, Chinese readers use the pronunciations in silent reading. For
example, when readers make decisions about word meanings, the pronunciation of
the words interferes with the meaning judgment. To use an English example, a
reader who is asked to decide whether an item is a kind of plant, may make a
mistake on the word "flour" (or take longer to make a decision) because the word
shares a pronunciation with a word that is a kind of plant ("flower"). If the
reader could avoid the pronunciation, such an effect would not occur. Similar
results have now been found for Chinese, suggesting that reading for meaning in
both Chinese and English involves activation of pronunciations. Now the question
becomes how the rapid events of word identification unfold in a fraction of a
second from graphic input to pronunciation and meaning. What differences and
similarities occur across the two writing systems? Are there differences in
their visual processing demands? In the route from graphic form to meaning?
These questions will be addressed in studies of Event Related Potentials (ERP),
the electrical activity of the brain that can provide information about the time
course of word reading events. The project will also include fMRI studies to add
more specific information about underlying brain structures used in reading
Chinese compared with those used in reading English. In addition, the project
will study the important question of how a learner comes to acquire reading
skill in a second writing system. American students learning to read Chinese
will be studied in a range of behavioral and ERP tasks that will provide
information on the course of learning and on some of the brain activities
associated with this new learning.