* 0113239
* Adaptive Identification and Control of Dynamical Systems Using Neural Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Kumpati Narendra, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 06/30/2005
* USD 419,866.00

0113239&lt;br/&gt;Narendra&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mathematical difficulties
encountered in designing controllers for dynamical systems can be broadly
classified under four headings: (i) uncertainty (ii) nonlinearity (iii)
complexity, and (iv) time-variations. Adaptive control is the discipline which
deals with uncertainty in systems, and the adaptive control of linear systems is
currently well understood. The problem of control becomes substantially more
complex when the plant characteristics are known but nonlinear, and becomes
truly formidable when they are unknown and/or vary with time. All four classes
of problems are encountered when neural networks are used to control nonlinear
plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the past ten years considerable progress has
been made in understanding the problems that arise in neurocontrol [1]- [18].
Mathematical modeling, system identification, and synthesis of controllers to
track desired output signals have all been extensively studied. The effect of
different classes of disturbances have also been investigated, and the methods
developed have been applied to a wide class of practical problems. In spite of
this, many important questions remain unanswered, and the design of neural
controllers remains in many cases more an art than a
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal addresses three fundamental and
closely related questions in the adaptive control of nonlinear dynamical
systems. The first concerns questions of stability and convergence of neural
network based control and deals with both the structure of the controllers and
the tools used for proving stability. The second question deals with the
important problem of generating optimal control inputs for general classes of
nonlinear systems. Such problems are arising with increasing frequency in both
well established areas such as process control and aircraft control, as well as
new areas such as robotics and space technology. Finally, the third problem
deals with the use of multiple models for controlling efficiently nonlinear
systems in rapidly varying environments. In all three cases the principal
questions are stated, the mathematical difficulties are discussed in detail, and
potentially fruitful avenues for research are proposed. It is the opinion of the
PI that, in the present state of development of neurocontrol, the three parts of
the proposal represent three closely related and important aspects of nonlinear
adaptive control using neural networks.&lt;br/&gt;