* 0113425
* ITR/SI(CISE):Optimal and Robust TCP Congestion Control
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2004
* John Doyle, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Gurudatta M. Parulkar
* 08/31/2004
* USD 455,757.00

Internet is undergoing an overhaul unprecedented in size, diversity, and reach,
with profound im-&lt;br/&gt;pact in all aspects of our scientific, social,
economic and political life through the integration of&lt;br/&gt;networks of
communication, transportation, entertainment, utilities, and finance. The
stability&lt;br/&gt;and robustness of this vital infrastructure demands a
rigorous theory to understand the current&lt;br/&gt;protocols and evolve them to
meet emerging challenges. We propose to develop such a theory for&lt;br/&gt;TCP
congestion control, and use it to drastically improve the stability, robustness
and optimality&lt;br/&gt;of the current protocols.&lt;br/&gt;A key insight is to
view congestion control as a distributed asynchronous computation to
maxi-&lt;br/&gt;mize aggregate source utility over the Internet; different TCP
and active queue management (AQM)&lt;br/&gt;schemes correspond to different
utility functions and different algorithms to maximize them.&lt;br/&gt;Our
research hastwo components. First, we will develop a new theoretical model of
TCP&lt;br/&gt;congestion control based on duality in optimization and
multivariate robust control. The theory will&lt;br/&gt;clarify the role of
source algorithms, such as Tahoe, Reno and Vegas, and active queue
management,&lt;br/&gt;such as DropTail, RED and REM, in the control of networks
and establish performance limits of&lt;br/&gt;the current protocols; it will
explain the effect on stability when delay, topology, capacity, and
load&lt;br/&gt;scale up; and it will provide conditions under which the feedback
stability ofTCP/AQM algorithms&lt;br/&gt;are invariant to these effects. Indeed,
such a theory is already emerging from our recent works.&lt;br/&gt;Even in its
currently preliminary stage, it already provides a fundamental understanding on
some&lt;br/&gt;widely observed performance and fairness behavior of the current
protocols, and uncovers new and&lt;br/&gt;surprising stability problems. For
example, it shows that the current protocols become unstable
and&lt;br/&gt;exhibit bifurcation when network capacity increases. Moreover,
maintaining stability as capacity&lt;br/&gt;scales up arbitrarily imposes severe
constraints on how sources adjust their rates (TCP) and
what&lt;br/&gt;congestion information is fed back (AQM). The current protocol
does not satisfy the condition&lt;br/&gt;for such stability invariance, and
hence may be ill suited for future networks where, pulled
by&lt;br/&gt;application demand and pushed by technological advances, the
capacity will be large.&lt;br/&gt;The second component of our research is the
design of practical TCP and AQM protocols&lt;br/&gt;based on the theory, and the
development of prototypes and experiments to demonstrate
their&lt;br/&gt;effectiveness. We will use the theory to identify the sources of
instability in the current protocols&lt;br/&gt;when delay, network size,
capacity, and traffic load scale up. We will design both enhancements
that&lt;br/&gt;incrementally evolve the current protocols, and drastically new
protocols that have the strongly&lt;br/&gt;robust stability property promised by
theory. As a concrete application of our algorithms, we will&lt;br/&gt;apply
them to improve TCP performance over wireless links, both because they are
ubiquitous and&lt;br/&gt;because they are likely to remain the most important
bottlenecks in future networks.&lt;br/&gt;