* 0113295
* Development of a Robust Computational Design Simulator for Industrial Deformation Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Nicholas Zabaras, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 07/31/2005
* USD 359,640.00

The objective of the research project is the development and application of
mathematically and computationally rigorous gradient-based optimization
methodologies for a virtual materials process design that is based on quantified
product quality and accounts for process targets and constraints including
economic aspects. A framework for preform as well as process parameter
optimization of multi-stage metal forming processes is considered. The design of
each individual process is performed using gradient-optimization techniques that
are based on an innovative continuum sensitivity analysis. Optimal
microstructure evolution paths, ideal forming techniques and knowledge based
expert systems are used to select the required sequence of processes and to
develop feasible initial designs.

If successful, the computational design simulator under development can be
applied to select the necessary sequence of forming and intermediate thermal-
stage processes, select appropriate dies and preforms and control/design the
various process parameters such that, for a given raw material with a given
initial geometry, one can obtain a final product with desired microstructure and
shape under various process constraints and with minimal utilization rates and
overall cost. These developments will lead to a virtual process laboratory that
will assist industry in reducing lead time for process and product development,
in trimming the cost of an extensive experimental trial-and-error process
development effort, in developing processes for tailored material properties and
in increasing volume/time yield.