* 0113181
* ITR/SY: Modular Interface Violation Checking Using Formally-Specified Contracts
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2007
* Gary Leavens, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 07/31/2007
* USD 412,099.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #0113181&lt;br/&gt;Sitaraman&lt;br/&gt;Clemson
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental goal of software engineering is to
enable predictable and modular construction of software systems by assembling
components. Any component-based approach works on the basic premise that
participating components respect each other's contracts. If this premise is
violated, the consequences can be both dangerous and expensive, because the
problems may not surface until integration time. Even worse, a system may behave
properly on test cases, though internal interface contracts are violated.
Undetected failures from internal violations may be revealed ultimately only as
accidents to component-based and embedded systems after
deployment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project offers a modular approach for
detecting and isolating internal contractual violations. The approach allows
checking at suitable levels of abstraction using formal specifications. It
permits checking to be turned "on" or "off" selectively to facilitate effective
regression testing, and it addresses violations of performance contracts in
addition to functionality for parameterized and object-oriented components. To
minimize errors in the violation checking process, the project will use and
experimentally evaluate alternative combinations of automation, formal
verification, model checking, and testing techniques.&lt;br/&gt;