* 0113826
* The influence of West African languages on two Surinamese creoles
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2004
* Donald Winford, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 09/30/2004
* USD 139,217.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Donald Winford and his colleague
Bettina Migge will conduct two years of linguistic research on the role of West
African languages in the creation of Sranan Tongo and Paamaka, two creole
languages of Suriname. The focus of this investigation is how time (e.g., past
and future tense) and aspect (e.g., 'habitual' and 'completed') are expressed in
the creoles. The hypothesis is that the West African languages of the Gbe family
exerted the primary influence on tense and aspect in the creoles, with some
influence from Kikongo and Akan. Other factors (e.g., internal changes in the
creoles themselves) were also relevant. If the hypothesis is supported, the
project will show that the creole languages were created by African slaves who
selectively adapted and restructured materials from English and their own native
languages. The data for the project will emphasize conversational speech and
native speaker judgements. These will be tape recorded in Benin with speakers of
five Gbe languages and in Suriname with speakers of the two creole languages.
Data from Kikongo and Akan will be drawn from published studies of their tense
and aspect systems. The tense and aspect systems of the languages will be
compared, using methods of analysis that can reveal degrees of similarity
between the West African languages and the creoles.

The blending of different linguistic traditions into a new language is one of
the most intriguing manifestations of the human language faculty. The processes
by which elements from distinct languages can be restructured and the principles
that regulate the processes challenge linguistic theory, especially theories of
language mixture and contact-induced change. Creole languages represent an
extreme case of such mixture, and the study of their origins can contribute much
to our understanding of the cognitive and social factors that regulate this kind
of language restructuring. Research on creole genesis provides insight into both
language acquisition and language change, since similar processes and principles
are involved. Such research can help us better understand the universal
principles that regulate the structure of human language. This project will also
contribute to greater recognition of creole languages as valid instruments of
communication for the communities they serve. The creole communities of Suriname
have traditionally suffered the same neglect and disparagement as their
languages. This research can help legitimize these neglected languages.
Objective analysis and description can provide a basis for their acceptance and
instrumentalization in education and other public