* 0113756
* Experimental and Theoretical Studies of Polymer Miscibility in Confined Environments
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,05/31/2003
* Sanat Kumar, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2003
* USD 276,000.00

The phase behavior of confined, multicomponent polymer mixtures is interesting
in the context of application, e.g., paints and packaging, since important film
properties, such as surface roughness and hence the optical quality and friction
of the film surface, change dramatically when the mixture phase separates. While
this problem has been the focus of theoretical interest for the last two
decades, very little experimental work exists due to the challenges in obtaining
reliable data from films in the 0.01-1nm thickness range. The PI has recently
extended a standard characterization technique, small angle neutron scattering,
to films as thin as D=10 nm and finds that experimental measures of thin film
coexistence are in qualitative disagreement with past experiments and theory on
comparable systems. Resolving these discrepancies is a primary thrust of the
proposed research.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;An important element in the proper
delineation of thin film behavior is a quantitative understanding of their bulk
miscibility. While there is considerable research on these issues, it remains
hard to a - priori predict the miscibility of two arbitrarily chosen polymers.
For example, current molecular simulations which account for all of the chemical
details of the molecules are limited to chain lengths which are too short to be
in the range where normal polymer mixtures phase separate. As part of this
research the PI has developed a quantitative lattice-based method which
alleviates these concerns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary focus of the
proposed work, which exploits the availability of these novel and complementary
theoretical and experimental tools, is to quantitatively understand the bulk
phase behavior of model polymer blends, and how they are modified by the
constraints and surface interactions in a thin film geometry in an integrated
manner.&lt;br/&gt;