* 0113670
* ITR/AP: Expressive software for multiscale ab initio investigation of surface reactions in dielectric environments
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Angeliki Rigos, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 08/31/2005
* USD 499,881.00

Thomas Arias of Cornell University and Angeliki Rigos of Merrimack College are
supported by the Division of Chemistry under the Information Technology Research
(ITR) program to use expressive software to bring quantum computational
techniques to the study of surface reactions in dielectric environments. This
research is inherently interdisciplinary in nature, utilizing both surface
physics and solution chemistry, and will be the first effort to include not only
the surface but also reactants and solvents to enable a realistic description of
experimental systems. Specific aims of this project are to: (1) develop a
framework for an ab initio capability for extended systems in solution, (2)
implement the dielectric continuum description with ultrasoft pseudopotential
capability within the density functional theory (DFT++) framework, (3) apply the
resulting software to study correction initiation reactions at the surface of
chromium (III) oxide, (4) teach workshops on using the new methods and software
to the research, industrial, and educational communities, and (5) expose high
school and undergraduate students to quantum computing capabilities. The
research outcomes are expected to enable new insights into corrosion of high-
performance stainless steel alloys in high-temperature aqueous-salinated
environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most high performance stainless steels
contain chromium, which forms an oxide layer on the surface that protects the
metal under ordinary conditions. However, stainless steel is often used at high
temperatures and in salt solutions where damaging corrosion to the metal can
occur rapidly, causing expensive industrial equipment failures. The outcomes
from this project may lead to new insights into chemical corrosion processes,
and help to enable technological developments that can improve the industrial
utility of stainless steel under a variety of extreme environmental conditions.
Free internet distribution of new computational software, workshops, and student
exposure to computational quantum mechanics will enhance the broader research
community.