* 0113030
* ITR/PE/SY(SBE): Dialogue-Assisted Visual Environment for Geoinformation: Enabling Collaborative Information Access and Decision-Making Through a Natural, Multimodal Interface
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2006
* Rajeev Sharma, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2006
* USD 500,885.00

Current computing systems do not support human work effectively. They restrict
human-computer interaction to one mode at a time (through a keyboard or a mouse)
and are designed with an assumption that use will be by individuals (rather than
groups), directing (rather than interacting) with the system. To support the
ways in which humans work and interact, a new paradigm for computing is required
that is multimodal, rather than unimodal, collaborative, rather than personal,
and dialogue-enabled, rather than unidirectional. This research will develop
principles for, implement, and assess natural, multimodal, multiuser, dialogue-
enabled interfaces to geographic information systems (GIS) that make use of
large-screen displays and virtual environment technology. These interfaces will
support a two-way iterative dialogue between human and machine in which the
human participant can use three modalities, speech, gesture, and gaze, in
natural ways. Progress toward multimodal human-computer interfaces will require
both an understanding of individual modalities and the fusion of information at
various levels. The project is concerned, specifically, with the use of computer
vision and speech processing as a means of interpreting and integrating
information from spoken words, free hand gestures and gaze. It is also concerned
with how to enable a human-computer dialogue with an interactive, multi-layered
map in the context of a GIS and with how to enable map-mediated dialogue between
human collaborators. The work will be bootstrapped through use of an existing
test-bed that integrates gesture and speech for simple map queries. The research
will investigate how characteristics of tasks, information, and users influence
the nature of human-computer and computer-mediated human-human dialogue. In
doing so, the research will determine how these factors influence the strategies
required to achieve an effective easy-to-use interface that supports information
access and productive work by individuals and groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will advance the science of natural, multimodal human-computer
interaction, while addressing, directly, the challenges of developing new
knowledge through which advances in information technology can enable universal
participation in geospatial information access and applications. Estimates
suggest that as much as 80% of all digital data contain some form of
georeferencing (coordinates, addresses, zip codes). As a result, GIS have become
an important tool for managing and analyzing data across a range of science,
policy analysis, resource management, business planning, and educational
applications. In spite of the potential applications for GIS and the growing
availability of geospatial data, GIS are underutilized because current systems
are hard to use. There is a substantial gap between current GIS applications and
the promise of GIS to facilitate public access to the large volume of geospatial
information and to support public as well as expert input to important decisions
affecting their communities and environments. Achieving the research goals
outlined will, thus, enable more effective decision-making about risks to public
safety and health and will support input to important public decisions by a
wider range of participants. &lt;br/&gt;