* 0113422
* ITR/SI:  Data Retrieval and Instrument Control for Remote Locations
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Todd Valentic, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Robinson
* 08/31/2006
* USD 270,000.00

This is Information Technology Research award to develop an innovative approach
by which scientists and engineers can gain access to remote instruments and data
sources. This capability enables more general access to remote instrumentation
that can be used for training and education without the unnecessary burden of
placing students or researchers in the field. The need for such a mechanism is
fundamental as each instrument deployed to a remote field site contends with
similar issues of remote data storage, retrieval, transport, and control. The
investigators will develop an integrated set of IT tools that will move data to
and from the remote field site, irrespective of the communications link, in a
reliable and robust manner. It will also quickly facilitate the exchange of data
among researchers, provide data storage, and publish web-based displays. The
approach is founded on an Internet-based system call Network New Transport
Protocol (NNTP) that noninvasively retrieves data from instruments over a
variety of communication links. The system delivers data from the remote
instrument to the end user's home institution while transparently handling
network outages and low-bandwidth situations. These capabilities enhance the
science by notifying researchers of unique and interesting events, allowing the
researcher to modify their instruments to record data optimally, providing more
ready access to other instrument users, and working quickly with other
researchers during real-time events. For engineering activities, the data
transport service would serve to check the health and status of the instruments
continuously and enable instrument control. This enabling technology would then
facilitate student training and education within classroom and laboratory
environments.