* 0113345
* Technician Support for Geoscience Research in Transmission Electron Microscopy
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2001,11/30/2004
* Peter Buseck, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 11/30/2004
* USD 210,000.00

0113345&lt;br/&gt;Buseck&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides partial salary
support for an electron microscopist who will help maximize the geological,
mineralogical, and geochemical capabilities of two TEMs that will be installed
in 2001 within the ASU Center for High Resolution Electron Microscopy. These
instruments were obtained to develop new techniques and measurements in
materials science and physics, and the goal of the new position is to become
familiar with those techniques and adapt them for research in the geological
sciences. One of the instruments will have an electron beam that can be made
less than 0. 2 nm in diameter. We will use this capability to analyze grain
boundaries, dislocation cores, and surface layers on the atomic scale and will
obtain crystallographic data from within unit cells through electron
nanodiffraction. The other instrument will contain a Gatan imaging filter for
measurements that will allow elemental mapping on the sub-nanometer scale. It
will also have an environmental cell for studies under controlled atmospheres.
This cell will maintain a relatively high gas pressure of up to 50 torr in the
sample chamber, while retaining the high-resolution capabilities of the TEM.
Specimen heating and dynamic image recording will allow chemical reactions to be
followed at close to the atomic scale. We will use this to study minerals that
are unstable in the vacuum of the electron microscopes. These include clay
minerals, the green rusts, gypsum and related hydrated sulfates as well as
dehydroxylation reactions and valence changes in
minerals.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;