* 0113603
* Constraints on Performance and Pelagic Periods of Larvae
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2005
* Richard Strathmann, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 06/30/2005
* USD 235,000.00

Constraints on Performance and Pelagic Periods of
Larvae&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Richard R. Strathmann&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Many
marine animals live on the sea bed as sedentary adults but swim
and&lt;br/&gt;are carried by ocean currents as planktonic larvae. Many of these
larvae&lt;br/&gt;feed and grow for weeks or months before they can settle on the
bottom.&lt;br/&gt;Larval feeding supports growth from a small egg to a larger
size at&lt;br/&gt;metamorphosis. There are costs to this means of supporting
early growth and&lt;br/&gt;development, however. The longer the period of larval
growth, the more&lt;br/&gt;larvae are eaten by predators or carried by currents
away from areas of good&lt;br/&gt;habitat on the sea bed.&lt;br/&gt; Many larvae
feed by concentrating algal cells and other small particles&lt;br/&gt;of food
This food can be scarce, and food-limited growth has
been&lt;br/&gt;demonstrated. Maximum rates of concentrating scarce food from
suspension&lt;br/&gt;depend on traits of larvae that differ among major groups
(phyla) of marine&lt;br/&gt;animals. Because food is often in limiting supply,
one might expect larvae&lt;br/&gt;in the same waters, whatever their other
differences, to increase their&lt;br/&gt;capacity to concentrate scarce
planktonic food as they increase in weight&lt;br/&gt;and energy requirements and
in order to achieve greater growth rates as they&lt;br/&gt;develop.
Surprisingly, some animals' larvae appear to be poorly adapted to&lt;br/&gt;low
concentrations of food. They have a very limited capacity
to&lt;br/&gt;concentrate scarce planktonic food, even though they grow from tiny
eggs to&lt;br/&gt;much larger juveniles at metamorphosis. Moreover, these larval
forms have&lt;br/&gt;remained unchanged during much of animal
evolution.&lt;br/&gt; The proposed research tests the hypothesis that food-
limited growth&lt;br/&gt;rates depend on highly conserved traits of larvae. The
prediction is that&lt;br/&gt;some forms are particularly constrained to slower
growth when food is&lt;br/&gt;scarce. Some of these larvae feed with short
ciliary bands throughout their&lt;br/&gt;development. These include the larval
forms of bryozoans, which are&lt;br/&gt;colonial animals that live on rocks and
seaweeds, and nemerteans (ribbon&lt;br/&gt;worms), which are common predators on
other small marine animals. The&lt;br/&gt;bryozoan and nemertean larvae do not
seem to fit predictions based on the&lt;br/&gt;more extensively studied larvae
of molluscs and sea urchins and thus&lt;br/&gt;challenge biologists'
understanding of the ecology and evolution of&lt;br/&gt;planktonic larvae. The
growth of bryozoan and nemertean larvae at limiting&lt;br/&gt;and satiating
concentrations of food will be compared to growth of sea&lt;br/&gt;urchin
larvae, whose maximum rates of clearing food from suspension
are&lt;br/&gt;greater and increase more nearly in proportion to body mass. If
the&lt;br/&gt;hypothesis is correct, then major groups of animals differ
in&lt;br/&gt;food-limitation for their larvae, with consequences for death rates
and&lt;br/&gt;dispersal of their larvae.&lt;br/&gt; Another case of an
apparently ill-equipped feeding larva is the planula&lt;br/&gt;larva of sea
anemones. These larvae lack ciliary bands entirely and
are&lt;br/&gt;anatomically the simplest feeding larval forms, yet some of them
grow&lt;br/&gt;substantially before metamorphosis. In other groups of animals,
larvae that&lt;br/&gt;are this simple do not catch particulate food. Analyses of
feeding capacity&lt;br/&gt;and growth rates of larval sea anemones will indicate
the capabilities of&lt;br/&gt;the simplest feeding larvae. The results will
indicate constraints on the&lt;br/&gt;origination of ciliated feeding larvae in
other groups of animals.