* 0113643
* RSEC:  Polymer Chemistry Research in Western Massachusetts
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2007
* Thomas McCarthy, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 09/30/2007
* USD 1,967,042.00

The Polymer Science and Engineering Department of the University of
Massachusetts-Amherst (Umass) is supported by the Chemistry Division, the
Division of Undergraduate Education, and the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities under the "Research Sites for Educators in Chemistry" (RSEC) program.
The Prinicipal Investigator,. Thomas McCarthy is joined by Sandra Burkett of
Amherst College, Wei Chen of Mount Holyoke College, and Kate Queeney of Smith
College. This Western Massachusetts RSEC will integrate their research efforts.
The planned research themes are (1) rational heterogenation of homogeneous
catalyst, (2) molecular imprinting of polymeric materials, (3) surface
modification to control wettability and biocompatibility, and (4) control of
protein adsorption through chemistry and topography. To expand the RSEC, the
program will focus its attention on nine other two- and four-year institutions
in the local area. One of the goals of this RSEC is to increase the number of
undergraduate chemistry majors at the participating institutions by injecting
polymer and materials chemistry into existing courses at all levels, and by
developing a one-semester course in polymer chemistry complete with notes and
instructor's guide. Central to the formation of these collaborations is a series
sabbaticals, and summer research appointments for faculty and undergraduate
students at the four core institutions. This RSEC will be managed by a Director
and an Advisory Board made up of representatives from each participating
institution. There will also be an Executive Advisory Board made up of
administrators from the institutions and outside experts in polymer research.

Research Sites for Educators in Chemistry bring together the faculty of
participating two-year colleges, baccalaureate colleges, and master's
universities with faculty at research universities within a geographic region,
for the purpose of enhancing the research and educational opportunities for all
participants. Academic and research institutions provide abundant opportunities
where individuals may concurrently assume responsibilities as researchers,
educators, and students, and where all can engage in joint efforts that infuse
education with the excitement of discovery and enrich research through the
diversity of learning perspectives. RSECs such as this one at the University of
Massachusetts-Amherst provide mechanisms for disseminating the knowledge, skill,
practices and ethics of research to a broader community, including those from
underrepresented groups; assist in developing viable, sustainable research
programs at participating institutions; and involve faculty and students at the
participating institutions with a broader cross-section of faculty and students.

