* 0113918
* ITR/IM: An Internet Environment for BioDiversity Survey Collaboration and Verification
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,05/31/2006
* Patrick Heidorn, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Manfred D. Zorn
* 05/31/2006
* USD 500,066.00

Much field data for ecology and biodiversity studies uses data collected from
hundreds of mostly novice collaborators. In order to address the issues of
distributed intelligence, field support, mobile computing, remote training, data
quality and coordination of information across time and space, with real-time
expert feedback, a BioDiversity Collaboration Environment (BDCE) will be
developed.

Information technology could fundamentally change the way we understand the
world and the way science in done. Substantial improvements in science can be
made if the information technology is carefully developed and integrated. The
system will integrate collaboration, collection development, information
retrieval, and information creation and management. A key component of the
technology is the development of software agents that will analyze the needs of
survey members, prior surveys of the same site, museum record and other
resources to create a customized collection of digital support material that can
be put on disk and taken to the field, thereby overcoming bandwidth problems.

The DBCE will be developed within the framework of a project being conducted by
the Illinois Department of Natural Resources, which increases the impact of the
research by it use in hundreds of surveys across Illinois. This is a largely
volunteer effort, including high school students, for the data collection. The
education to students and other non-scientists provides significant impact,
beyond the information technology impact of smart devices.