* 0113173
* LTREB: Linking Individual and Spatial Variation to Demography and Population Dynamics of a Neotropical Parrotlet
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2001,09/30/2008
* Steven Beissinger, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* daniel wiegmann
* 09/30/2008
* USD 312,000.00

LTREB: Linking Individual and Spatial Variation to Demography and Population
Dynamics of a Neotropical Parrot&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Steven R.
Beissinger&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This long-term research project will continue
studies of a South American parrot, the Green-rumped Parrotlet (Forpus
passerinus), to address marked variation among individuals and across small
distances in behavior, demography and population dynamics. Continued long-term
studies, which have been conducted since in Venezuela since 1988, will link
social system, dispersal and demography to population dynamics. Thirteen years
of similar work has revealed a complex social system dominated by large numbers
of nonbreeding males which occur in various social groupings, a low rate extra-
pair fertilizations that are often assigned to males residing far from the
nesting pair, and unusual spatial variation in the onset of breeding between two
populations (upland and lowland) located only 500 m apart and differing in
elevation by 1-2 meters. They have also found different patterns of population
growth in the two populations that can be attributed to: (1) higher reproductive
success in the upland population, (2) young females dispersing much farther than
males, often leaving the study area altogether, and (3) young males dispersing
from the poorer quality lowland habitat to the better quality upland
habitat.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific objectives of the study are to: (1)
determine movement patterns and affiliations of breeders and nonbreeders, and
dispersal of young to understand how they might account for extra-pair parentage
patterns, small-scale variation in the onset of breeding, and differences among
the sexes and populations; (2) document annual variation in the onset of
breeding among populations of parrotlets that occurs at small spatial scales and
measure food availability to see how this affects timing of laying; and (3)
understand the effects of the individual and spatial differences in demography
and population dynamics by developing population models that integrate behavior
with sexual- and habitat-related differences in demography. Study goals will be
accomplished by expanding the number of parrotlet populations under study; using
radio-telemetry to track the daily movements and interactions of breeding pairs
and nonbreeding males; and continuing behavioral, demographic and environmental
monitoring to refine our understanding of the social system and to estimate
vital rates.&lt;br/&gt;