* 0113792
* ITR/PE: Aligning Societal Values, Privacy Policy, and IT Requirements
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Colin Potts, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2004
* USD 334,866.00

NSF PROPOSAL #0113792

ITR: Aligning Societal Values, Privacy Policy, and IT Requirements

Colin Potts, Georgia Institute of Technology Annie I. Anton, North Carolina
State University

The guarantee and assurance of privacy must be included in the design of
information technologies from the onset. This research focuses on how society
uses, values, and protects citizens' personal information. From the perspective
of system design, software engineers need methods and tools to enable them to
design systems that reflect those values and protect personal information,
accordingly. This research examines how privacy considerations and value systems
influence the design, deployment and consequences of IT. Investigations will
include study of the motivations and barriers to the use of IT when use of these
technologies requires the user to provide Personally Identifiable Information
(PII). In essence, this work focuses on: societal values, web site policies, and
the operational functioning of web-based e-commerce systems, which are often
misaligned. The goal is to develop concepts, tools and techniques that help IT
professionals and policy makers bring policies and system requirements into
better alignment. An action-oriented set of conceptual tools, including
guidelines and privacy-relevant policy templates will be constructed and
validated. The tools will be fully documented and illustrated on a web site
developed for the purpose of conducting the proposed project and disseminating
results and recommendations.

