* 0113083
* ITR/IM: Methodologies Managing Large Geophysical Datasets
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2004
* Anton Kruger, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 09/30/2004
* USD 240,000.00

Geophysical data sets are typically very large. For example, an operational
weather radar can generate almost 0.9 terabyte of data per year. Developing
continental-scale, multiyear data sets can become a major and potentially very
costly undertaking. Similar statements are true for geophysical satellite
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in information technology, particularly
rapid increases in disk storage capacity alleviate some data access problems,
but accentuate others. It may be possible to get a terabyte of geophysical data
online but visualizing and analyzing the data in their native/distribution
format remains extremely difficult. Approaches such as data compression or using
derived products sometimes work, but are simplistic and ultimately
counterproductive. The problem is clearly multifaceted, but the focus of this
project is on researching and developing methods for dealing with the data after
distribution to the user. Specifically the Principal Investigator will develop a
client-server architecture that hides the complexities of the data set
management from the user. A major component is a data query language or DQL for
manipulating a data set. Through DQL a user can easily and efficiently add,
delete, or modify, subsets of a data set, and rapidly search for subsets that
match certain criteria. The DQL client-server includes resource management so
that a user may control the impact of an analysis on the client CPU, network
utilization, and other computing resources. Part of the project is the
completion of a multiyear, multisite data set of weather radar data. This will
serve as a test bed for the research and will have tremendous intrinsic value
for many other future research efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When technology and
data become available to users other than the original audience, they often find
exciting applications. The many innovative applications of the global
positioning system are one example. Another more pertinent example is the novel
application of weather radar data to such fields as hydrology, bird and insect
studies, and climatology, to name a few. There would be many new uses if these
data sets were easily usable in the way this project address.