* 0113559
* Acquisition of Scanning Electron Microscope with Electron Backscatter Diffraction System for Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Linda Vanasupa, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2004
* USD 150,000.00

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program and the Major
Research Instrumentation program supports California Polytechnic State
University with the acquisition of a scanning electron microscope with electron
backscatter diffraction capabilities. The research that will utilize the
equipment spans the disciplines of soil science, tribology, biomaterials, thin
film science, metal-joining technology and the development of intermetallic
alloys. The instrument will be used in undergraduate and Master's-level -science
and engineering research and education programs. The goal is to expand the
research opportunities for undergraduates, enhance the current courses and
laboratories, seed a greater awareness of the benefits of materials research
within industry and expand the opportunities for professional development of the
faculty. This will be accomplished using four mechanisms: (1) Well-structured,
yearlong research teams that target involving 50% females and 50% males; (2)
Short-term industry-related projects aimed at promoting research for "real-
world" challenges; (3) Senior-level and Master's-level research projects based
on individual faculty research interests; and (4) Laboratory experiments
incorporated into the curriculum for the purpose of educating the students on
the use of an increasingly important materials characterization tool.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research
program and the Major Research Instrumentation program supports California
Polytechnic State University with the acquisition of a scanning electron
microscope with electron backscatter diffraction capabilities. The research that
will utilize the equipment spans the disciplines of soil science, tribology,
biomaterials, thin film science, metal-joining technology and the development of
intermetallic alloys. The instrument will be used in undergraduate and
Master's-level -science and engineering research and education programs. The
goal is to expand the research opportunities for undergraduates, enhance the
current courses and laboratories, seed a greater awareness of the benefits of
materials research within industry and expand the opportunities for professional
development of the faculty. &lt;br/&gt;