* 0113172
* ITR/AP(MPS): Collaborative Research on Large-Scale Dislocation Dynamics Simulations for Computational Design of Semiconductor Thin Film Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Lizhi Sun, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 08/31/2005
* USD 195,405.00

This is a collaborative research award under the Information Technology Research
initiative. The collaborator (DMR-0113555) is Professor N. Ghoniem of UCLA. The
research involves the development and application of methods for large-scale
dislocation dynamics simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a result of recent
progress in manufacturing and engineering utilization of nano-and micro-scale
structures, there is an urgent need for approaches that are capable of
predicting the reliability and propensity of these structures to failure. This
grant will develop Fortran 90/95 parallel computer software, based on discrete
dislocation dynamics, which will predict plastic deformation and failure of sub-
micron semiconductor microelectronics. Developed software will be aimed at (1)
design of desired mechanical properties of semiconductor thin film-substrate
material systems for optimum reliability; (2) development of new computer
architectures for parallel, large-scale simulations for the dynamics of
topologically complex line defects, which interact through long-range force
fields; and (3) enhanced education training of graduate and undergraduate
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The following projects will be undertaken: (1)
Investigation of single and collective dislocation interaction phenomena in
anisotropic materials, which determine plasticity and failure in semiconductor
devices; (2) Multiscale coupling of parametric dislocation dynamics with the
finite element and analytical elasticity methods; (3) Development of unique
software on parallel, scalable computer clusters to simulate the collective
behavior of topologically complex line defects, which interact with a long-range
force field; (4) Application of the developed software to investigate a number
of critical physical mechanisms, including, misfit and threading dislocation
loop motion; dislocation-dislocation interactions; junction and jog formation;
dislocation annihilation and multiplication; dislocation interaction with grain
boundaries, free surfaces and bimaterial elastic interfaces; dislocation
interactions with point defects, precipitates and cracks; influence of thermal
residual stress; computational design of buffer layers and superlattices; and
(5) Large-scale simulation and optimization of semiconductor systems to provide
guidelines for engineering design of new generations of
microelectronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will improve our
understanding of plastic flow and failure at the nano-to-meso scale and
represents a challenge to high performance computing and protocols. Models will
be compared to experimental data and will also be used to design reliable
microelectronics.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This is a collaborative research award
under the Information Technology Research initiative. The collaborator
(DMR-0113555) is Professor N. Ghoniem at UCLA. The research involves the
development and application of methods for large-scale dislocation dynamics
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a result of recent progress in
manufacturing and engineering utilization of nano-and micro-scale structures,
there is an urgent need for approaches that are capable of predicting the
reliability and propensity of these structures to failure. This grant will
develop Fortran 90/95 parallel computer software, based on discrete dislocation
dynamics, which will predict plastic deformation and failure of sub-micron
semiconductor microelectronics. Developed software will be aimed at (1) design
of desired mechanical properties of semiconductor thin film-substrate material
systems for optimum reliability; (2) development of new computer architectures
for parallel, large-scale simulations for the dynamics of topologically complex
line defects, which interact through long-range force fields; and (3) enhanced
education training of graduate and undergraduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will improve our understanding of plastic
flow and failure at the nano-to-meso scale and represents a challenge to high
performance computing and protocols. Models will be compared to experimental
data and will also be used to design reliable
microelectronics.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;