* 0113829
* ITR/SY: Data Parallel Component Software Components
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Steven Parker, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 07/31/2005
* USD 443,400.00

This project envisions an environment where a scientist can easily combine
existing software components to create an efficient, highly parallel scientific
simulation. To accomplish this, it will develop new software component
technologies for high performance computing environments, including a high
performance component framework and a new parallel Interface Definition Language
(IDL). It will use those tools to investigate mechanisms for integrating high
performance (often data parallel) computing with distributed software
components. Success of this project will be measured by providing acceptable
performance on at least two scientific applications using the new component
framework. The applications chosen for the first test of this work (whose
development has already started under separate funding) are bioelectric source
localization and a combustion simulation of a high-energy material placed in a
pool fire. Both applications will stress the capabilities and efficiencies of
the proposed work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As software systems, including high
performance parallel programs, become more complex, the use of component
architectures can help manage many aspects of this complexity. However, such
mechanisms are not prevalent in parallel scientific computing applications due
to limitations of existing component systems. These include inefficient handling
of large amounts of data, inability to express parallelism in the data or within
a component, and difficulty matching parallelism in one component with
parallelism in another. The new component architecture research will help
overcome many of these limitations. It will, among other features, provide
efficient mapping of components to processors, provide efficient communication
between parallel components, facilitate migration of components (including
checkpoint/restart capabilities), and facilitate redistribution of components
for dynamic load balancing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;