* 0113025
* Fine Tuning the Timing in the Sequential Reaction Time Task
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Arthur Reber, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher T. Kello
* 07/31/2005
* USD 286,888.00

One of the essential characteristics of human action is that people constantly
carry on two or more overlapping behavioral sequences simultaneously. For most
the part, such actions are based on well-learned and smoothly run behavioral
repertoires. We drive a car, carry on conversations, and manage not to collide
with others who are doing the same thing. However, when attentional resources
are diverted to one of these tasks, perhaps the conversation becomes deeply
personal or highly emotional or a pelting storm makes driving hazardous, the
other behavioral actions become error prone, slow down dramatically, or even
cease altogether. Exactly what takes place during these periods where processing
resources must be diverted is complex and only partly understood. This research
will explore the impact that introducing a secondary task has on performance of
the primary task and will examine the temporal relations between the two. The
primary task will be one in which individuals must learn the order of a complex
sequence of events, such as a series of lights appearing in any of several
physically separate locations on a computer monitor. The secondary task will
consist of a series of tones of varying pitch, where the participants will be
required to keep a running count of how many tones of a particular pitch
occurred. Recent experimental results have shown a surprising but critical
relationship between exactly when an individual responds to the primary stimulus
and when the secondary event occurs. Specifically, the closer together in time
the two occur, the less disruptive the secondary stimulus is, provided that a
successful response has already been made to the primary stimulus. The
implication of this finding is that the secondary task doesn't disrupt
performance simply because it is a "secondary" task. The degree to which
performance is compromised is directly related to the difficulty of each task,
to the amount of time it takes to process each stimulus and respond to it, and
critically related to the temporal relationships between the two. The
experiments will explore in detail these temporal relationships and use the
results to test a variety of theoretical models of human performance. As is
clear from a moment's reflection on just what takes place in a wide variety of
work place settings, from assembly-line workers to airline pilots, these
seemingly mundane issues are of critical importance. Understanding and learning
how to fine-tune the timing between tasks in these multiple-tasking settings
will go a long way toward increases in safety and performance.