* 0113881
* ITR/AP: Auction Mechanisms for Complex Resource Allocation Problems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Anton Kleywegt, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen G. Nash
* 08/31/2006
* USD 504,498.00

In this Information Technology Research (ITR) research project, a study of the
design and use of auction mechanisms for the allocation of scarce resources in
complex settings will be performed. The research includes four specific goals:
(1) the design and development of appropriate bidding environments, (2) the
identification of participants bidding strategies under well defined bidding
environments, (3) the development of an understanding of the tradeoffs between
computational complexity and "goodness" of solution under various bidding
environments, and (4) the development of an educational program and educational
tools for teaching the theory and practice of auctions. Amid the wide range of
settings where bidding mechanisms are utilized, attention will be focused on
four important applications spanning the range of issues that can arise in a
bidding environment: (1) simple multi-unit auctions in e-commerce, (2)
combinatorial auctions in industrial procurement, (3) coordination and control
of multiple robots in uncertain environments, and (4) task allocation on a
logistics network for ocean carriers. In essence, an auction is a mechanism by
which a set of participants communicates information so as to result in a set of
allocations taking place. Information that is communicated by a participant is
called a bid. The auction designer strives to design a mechanism that has
desirable characteristics, appropriate for the situation at hand. Auctions can
particularly benefit environments with the following two characteristics: (1)
the absence of complete information about the participants and (2) problems
which cannot be solved centrally due to their high computational complexity.
While the use of auctions has been applied in numerous market settings, the
research in auction theory has severely lagged behind. There is little in the
literature to guide bidders on how to "optimally" bid or to aid auctioneers in
evaluating the performance of various auction formats. Even the auction
consultants will admit that much of their advice is based on logic and past
experiences, rather than rooted in analytical findings. It is the goal of this
research to close the gap between practice and theory by advancing the state of
the knowledge in the design of auction mechanisms for the allocation of scarce
resources in complex settings.

The successful completion of this research will broaden the understanding and
use of multi-unit auctions as a transaction medium and increase the efficacy of
such transactions. Since the researchers will be working closely with industry
partners including IBM, Home Depot, Schneider Logistics, and Orient Overseas
Container Line (OOCL), the research will be focused on realistic applications.
There will also be a significant educational impact in terms of case study
development, new course offerings, and the development of classroom bidding
games.