* 0113111
* ITR/AP (GEO): High Resolution Parallel Coastal Ocean Modeling
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Robert Street, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas F. Russell
* 12/31/2005
* USD 482,200.00

0113111 Street &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A number of computational and numerical
tools will be synthesized to produce an innovative and powerful coastal ocean
simulation tool. The primary goal of the project is to employ numerical large-
eddy simulation to generate accurate predictions of motions and transport in
coastal oceans under conditions when a non-hydrostatic and terrain-following
representation is essential. The model should be able to handle all processes
from the free surface to the bed so that the whole range from surface waves
through internal waves to sediment motions can be simulated. The second goal is
to apply the best algorithms available to create a simulation code that is
capable or representing the physical processes at high resolution and capable of
very high speed on multiple processor parallel computer.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project code will evolve from an existing semi-
implicit numerical code for nonhydrostatic free-surface flows on unstructured
grids. The code is based on the three-dimensional unsteady Navier-Stokes
equations and utilizes a semi-implicit algorithm that is robust, stable, and
very efficient. However, the existing code was developed for serial machines and
lacks a number of important elements for the coastal ocean application, e.g., a
scalar or material transport module, state-of-the-art subfilter-scale models for
large-eddy simulation, and a highly-resolved treatment of the bathymetric or
coastal boundaries. The focus of this work is to parallelize the code and
install appropriate algorithms to meet both the need to represent the physics
accurately and the need to produce a fast and robust production code for the
coastal zone. A fundamental concept will be to seamlessly imbed the coastal
simulations in larger-scale simulations so that natural boundary conditions
would be applied around the entire domain. No artificial devices would be used
to filter the simulations to avoid code instabilities or boundary reflections.
The unstructured grid will be employed in horizontal planes allowing accurate
representation of bathymetric and coastal features, which require severe changes
in grid density from one subdomain to another. The composite grid method will be
employed to fit a terrain-following highly resolved grid over the bathymetry and
linked to the interior domain. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two specific applications
of the completed code are planned. Both involve nonhydrostatic evolution of
internal tides. The first is in Monterey Bay, California, where solitons are
expected to form and the internal tide signal is intensified in the bottom of
the Monterey Canyon. The second is in Mamala Bay, Hawaii, where high-amplitude
and nonlinear internal tides are observed and there are key questions to be
answered about the nature of these waves and their behavior in the Bay.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The contributions on this work include: High performance:
Parallel implementation using MPI, the message passing interface; Optimized
unstructured-grid, 3D parallel-solver for the nonhydrostatic pressure; Code
Features: Accurate advection based on the TVD method for unstructured grids;
Nonhydrostatic large-eddy simulation with a fully-validated velocity estimation
method for subfilter-scale motions; State-of-the-art grid generation
[unstructured in the horizontal] for accurate resolution of complex bathymetry
and shore boundaries and an embedded bottom following grid; Free surface using a
semi-implicit treatment; and Production-style: Detailed users' manual that
illustrates the use of the code for coastal-ocean scale simulations&lt;br/&gt;