* 0113765
* ITR/AP:  Inversion of Multidimensional Remotely Sensed Data to Obtain Evaporation and Other Meteorologic Parameters
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2004
* William Eichinger, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Johannes Verlinde
* 08/31/2004
* USD 400,000.00

This is an award supported jointly by the Information Technology Research
program in Geosciences and the Physical Meteorology program. The objective is to
use archival data from the Los Alamos Scanning Raman Lidar on the spatial
distribution of water vapor to develop a remote-sensing-based method for
determining the evaporation rate as a function of position on the ground. More
generally, the procedure may be extended to estimate the surface distribution of
emission rates for any measurable conservative passive additive. It is an
inverse problem in geophysical data analysis, because the distribution of the
surface evaporation rate is determined from the measured three- dimensional
pattern of vapor concentration and its variation with time. The project is
planned in two phases. First the forward problem will be analyzed, in which
various distributions of upwind emission rates will be assumed and the resulting
vertical distributions of concentration calculated, for different combinations
of stability and wind speed. Next, the solution of the forward problem will be
used to develop a mathematical inversion technique, whereby the spatial
distribution of emission sources and their strengths will be determined from the
lidar-observed 3D pattern. The research holds the promise of discovering new
ways to use remotely-sensed data for atmospheric observation, analysis, and
modeling.