* 0113718
* ITR/PE:Digital Citizenship: Expanding Information Technology Literacy with a Service-Learning Approach
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Stuart Shulman, Drake University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Brandt
* 08/31/2005
* USD 449,204.00

EIA-0113718&lt;br/&gt;Drake University&lt;br/&gt;Stuart
Shulman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: ITR/PE: Digital Citizenship: Expanding
Information Technology&lt;br/&gt;Literacy with a Service-Learning Approach
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a proposal for a grant to promote service-learning
as a model for the dissemination of Information Technology Literacy (ITL).
Service-learning promotes mutually beneficial partnerships between academic
institutions and communities. One goal is to empower communities to identify ITL
needs that students can fulfill as part of their education. This grant would
enable two central Iowa universities--Drake and Iowa State--to reach out to
communities in need of ITL training and to assess the efficacy of service-
learning interventions. Citizens are increasingly expected to interface with
government using IT (ex. firstgov.gov). A number of studies have identified
unequal levels of ITL as a significant barrier to equity in citizenship. While
access to the Internet steadily expands, the ability to take advantage of
increasing access hinges on the level of ITL among citizens. Community members,
particularly in certain more vulnerable groups, often lack basic skills and
concepts required when navigating an expanding electronic interface with
government. Whereas IT should make it easier for all citizens to conduct their
routine business with the government, in fact, it appears to be widening the gap
between the IT literate and those without basic navigational skills. The primary
objective of this research project is to test the efficacy of service-learning
programs that seek to universalize digital citizenship. Three related objectives
are to:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Define Information Technology Literacy (ITL) using
broad and systematic criteria.&lt;br/&gt; Develop, implement, and evaluate "best
practices" for using service-learning in the dissemination of ITL.&lt;br/&gt;
Test the hypothesis that service-learning lessens the digital
divide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed methodology uses experimental and
control groups representing varying&lt;br/&gt;degrees of urbanization. A
service-learning ITL class and fieldwork laboratory will establish links between
undergraduates and the experimental groups. Researchers, students, and the
serviced communities will develop and refine taxonomy of ITL skills.
Experimental groups will be exposed to the service-learning treatment.
Structured citizen surveys and focus groups will be used to analyze the data on
program impact. Statistical analysis of covariance at specific points and
variance over time will be employed to lay the groundwork for a predictive
causal model. Several additional outcomes are expected as a result of this
research. First, the study will model a new pedagogical intervention that links
research, education, and community involvement in an effort to lessen the
digital divide. Second, it makes the recipients of service the focus of
scholarship. Most studies in this area focus on outcomes for the students rather
than the recipients. Third, it focuses attention on the important distinction
between IT access and IT literacy. Fourth, it promotes interdisciplinary
research and training, as well as collaboration between public and private
institutions seeking to incorporate IT into the campus curricula. Finally, it
promotes innovation in the political science and education disciplines with the
potential for a far-reaching impact on the basic definition of
citizenship.&lt;br/&gt;