* 0113565
* Chronology of the Middle and Later Stone Age in East Africa
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2001,01/31/2006
* Stanley Ambrose, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 01/31/2006
* USD 237,745.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Stanley H. Ambrose and his
colleagues will conduct three field seasons of archaeological and geological
research in the central and southern Rift Valley of Kenya to conduct a
coordinated investigation into the origins and evolution of modern human
behavior in East Africa. The team brings together American, Australian and
Kenyan specialists in archaeology, geology, geochemistry, geochronology and
paleontology. Many scholars now believe that transition from archaic
(neanderthal-like) to modern behavior occurred in eastern Africa between 250,000
and 50,000 years ago. The transition from the Middle Stone Age (MSA) to the
Later Stone Age (LSA) is widely considered to mark the change from "archaic" to
"fully-modern" human behavior. Moreover, there are several behavioral
innovations during the later MSA in eastern and southern Africa that are
considered components of modern behavior that do not occur in the Middle
Paleolithic of Eurasia. They include intensive long distance trade of fine-
grained stone tool raw materials, microlithic blade technologies, ornamental
artifacts, formal shaped bone tools and effective predation. Technological
innovations seem to accumulate gradually, suggesting development in Africa,
rather diffusion from an earlier area of origin elsewhere. However, this period
lies beyond the range of radiocarbon dating, and most other dating techniques
for this time span are inaccurate and unreliable. The central and southern Kenya
Rift Valley region contains a rich archaeological record spanning the past
250,000 years. Recently active volcanoes have deposited layers of ash in most
archaeological sites. Argon isotope dating of volcanics is one of the only
methods that can provide reliable and accurate dates for sites between 250,000
and 40,000 years old. Volcanic layers can also be chemically "fingerprinted",
and dating a volcanic ash once dates every site in which it occurs.

Genetic and fossil evidence suggests that anatomically modern humans dispersed
from eastern Africa several times during the last 100,000 years. Behavioral and
technological innovations during the MSA in eastern Africa may have facilitated
the expansion of modern humans out of Africa. This important era of human
evolutionary history is extremely poorly documented and dated in Africa. The
presence of abundant archaeological sites with stratified volcanics for dating
now allows us to test the model of an eastern African origin of modern human
behavior.

Dr. Ambrose and his collaborators will focus on four questions: 1. How old are
MSA and early LSA archaeological occurrences in the central Rift Valley?
Advances in methods for single crystal laser fusion argon isotope dating and
chemical correlation of young volcanics permit us to address this issue. 2. How
does stone tool technology change during this transition? This will be
investigated by analysis of the tool production strategies and the tool types
that were produced. 3. How did stone tool raw material source use change during
the transition? Expansion and contraction of trade networks and sizes of home
ranges will be evaluated by chemical fingerprinting of obsidian artifacts. This
prized material was widely traded. Most sources of obsidian are located in a
restricted area and have unique geochemical fingerprints. 4. How did faunal
resource exploitation patterns change? Were MSA hunters like modern humans, who
were able to take large, healthy, mature and dangerous prey. Age structure and
body part data from archaeological faunas provide insights into predation
patterns. 5. What were the environmental contexts of the sites? How did
settlement systems differ between the MSA and LSA Geoarchaeological approaches
to reconstructing the environmental settings of archaeological sites will be
employed.

This research is important for several reasons. (1). It will provide the first
accurate geochronology for the Middle Stone Age of Africa; (2) It will provide
insights into the nature and dynamics of the transitions in technology, economy,
land use and social and territorial organization; (3) It will help test models
of the African origin of modern human behavior and the dispersal of modern
humans from Africa.