* 0113022
* Conference: Microbial Cell-Cell Signalling, to be held in Snowbird, Utah, July 6-9, 2001.
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2002
* Stephen Winans, American Society For Microbiology
* Standard Grant
* Gerald A. Berkowitz
* 06/30/2002
* USD 8,000.00

Only a few years ago, the exchange of chemical signals, or pheromones, between
bacteria was considered the exception rather than the rule. A small number of
examples of cell-cell signaling had been well described, including the
bioluminescence regulatory systems of Vibrio fischeri and Vibrio harveyi, the
conjugal transfer system of Enterococcus faecalis, the production of antibiotics
by Streptomyces spp., and the development of multicellular fruiting bodies of
Myxococcus xanthus. It was assumed that cell-cell communication was not used by
most bacteria. Cell-cell signaling in bacteria was considered an interesting
subject of research, but not one of fundamental importance. In the past ten
years, an enormous number of new examples of inter-bacterial signaling have been
reported. These systems regulate a number of processes as diverse as virulence,
sporulation, antibiotic production, DNA exchange, and development of
multicellular structures. It is now understood that, in fact, most bacteria
communicate with one another using secreted chemical molecules. Inter-cellular
communication systems are fascinating because they allow bacteria to
coordinately control the gene expression of the entire community. This ability
fundamentally blurs the distinction between unicellular and multicellular forms
of life. Several of these signaling systems are also extremely important to
human health and the health of plants and animals in our environment, because
they regulate the virulence determinants of bacterial pathogens. Because of the
recent explosion in research in the area of bacterial communication, the ASM
decided to provide an opportunity for scientists in the field to meet and
discuss their research, by sponsoring a scientific conference on this topic. The
conference will be held at Snowbird, Utah, in July of 2001. The NSF has
generously supported many of the investigators that study cell-cell
communication in bacteria, and now joins ASM in providing financial assistance
for this conference.