* 0113545
* A Longitudinal Analysis of Internet-Based Research Communication in Developing Areas
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2009
* Wesley Shrum, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2009
* USD 505,379.00

This project examines the effects of new information technology on science in
developing areas over a five year period. The project team will study the impact
of the Internet on research communication within the developing world and with
the international scientific community through an analysis of the conditions
associated with interpersonal networking and information search behavior. The
study population consists of 360 scientists in three developing areas with
different levels of research capacity (Ghana, Kenya, and the Indian state of
Kerala) in two organizational contexts (universities, government research
institutes). Each of these areas was the subject of a comprehensive 1994 study
of research communication just prior to the rapid expansion of the Internet.
These scientists are located in twelve organizational sites: two universities
and two research institutes in each of the three areas (Ghana, Kerala, Kenya)
for a total of 120 scientists in each country. Several kinds of data will be
collected for each scientist (conventional survey, network survey, Internet
usage data, and email data). The project will (1) enhance basic connectivity by
providing local area networks to research organizations with point connections,
(2) assess the professional relationships, information search behavior, and
changes in research practice over a five year period, (3) train faculty and
graduate students in the social analysis of science and technology. The results
will have a direct impact on scientific capacity through increased connectivity
and decreased isolation of scientists in developing countries, a direct impact
through training of scholars in the social analysis of science and technology,
and an indirect impact through increased understanding of the types of linkages
that are most likely to be utilized and sustained.