* 0113767
* A Broad Information Security Curriculum:  Integrating Technologies and Practices
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2004
* Jun Xu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Diana B. Gant
* 06/30/2004
* USD 243,304.00

This project develops an information security curriculum to serve students from
a broad range of backgrounds. It takes an integrated approach to information
security education that covers both technological and policy issues. It includes
a partnership with Clark-Atlanta University to design and development of an
innovative and broad curriculum that could be used to train future information
security professionals. The curriculum starts with a gateway course that
provides a broad introduction to the field. This is followed by an initial set
of courses, each of which focuses on a coherent body of knowledge. Each course
introduces students to core concepts that cover a particular aspect of
information security and includes projects that provide hands-on experience with
the tools and techniques that can be used to build high assurance systems. A key
component of the project is the creation and testing of teaching materials and
projects for the courses. The curriculum development and its implementation is
part of the development of a variety of programs in the information security
area for a diverse body of students. These include an undergraduate
specialization and a masters certificate and a concentration area for doctoral
students. The courses that support these programs are available to students from
Georgia Tech, Clark-Atlanta and other institutions that are located in the
Atlanta area. This enables students to meet the critical needs for information
assurance specialists in our country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;