* 0113675
* Acquisition of Video Camera and 5-Watt Laser for Turbulence Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Walter Goldburg, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 08/31/2002
* USD 100,000.00

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research Program will allow
the University of Pittsburgh to purchase a video imaging system that will allow
the principal investigators to follow individual particle motion and spreading
of dyes in a 2D flowing soap film. The video system consists of a high-speed
(1000 fps) video camera and a 5Watt solid-state laser. The latter serves as an
intense light source for illuminating the particles and for excitation of the
dye. The system is one of general utility and will serve to train graduate as
well as undergraduate students in fluid dynamics and state-of-the-art
measurement techniques. The idea of using topology to study 2D turbulence is
entirely new and promising results just beginning to emerge. The requested video
system will further our fundamental understanding of turbulence phenomena which
are important for a wide range of practical problems, such as weather patterns,
dispersion of biological agents in air and in water, chemical reactions, and
crystal growth..&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Instrumentation for
Materials Research program will allow the University of Pittsburgh to purchase a
video imaging system that will allow the principal investigators to follow
individual particle motion and spreading of dyes in a 2D flowing soap film. The
video system consists of a high-speed video camera and a 5Watt solid-state
laser. The latter serves as an intense light source for illuminating the
particles and for excitation of the dye. The system is one of general utility
and will serve to train graduate as well as undergraduate students in fluid
dynamics and state-of-the-art measurement techniques. The idea of using topology
to study 2D turbulence is entirely new and promising results just beginning to
emerge. The requested video system will further our fundamental understanding of
turbulence phenomena which are important for a wide range of practical problems,
such as weather patterns, dispersion of biological agents in air and in water,
chemical reactions, and crystal growth.&lt;br/&gt;