* 0113519
* ITR/IM: Digital Government: Infrastructure for Data Sharing, Spatial Analysis, Resource Decision-Making, and Societal Impact: The Oregon Coastal Atlas
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2001,02/28/2005
* Dawn Wright, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Brandt
* 02/28/2005
* USD 507,965.00

EIA-0113519 Dawn J. Wright Oregon State University

Title: ITR/IM: Infrastructure for Data Sharing, Spatial Analysis, Resource
Decision-Making, and Societal Impact

The goal of this project is to address the problems of the public resource
manager in making effective use of discipline-specific data within the
inherently interdisciplinary context of the coastal zone. Initially the focus
will be on local users on the Oregon Coast. However, there is great potential
that the technologies can serve as a general model for similar efforts
throughout North America, by developing an interactive, Internet-accessible
information management system that incorporates a variety of geospatial data and
analysis tools within a common framework. End-user training and direct technical
assistance are incorporated into the development of this system, as are back-end
system maintenance tools to ensure system longevity. This will enable coastal
decision-makers at all government levels, the public, and research scientists to
more easily find and use relevant, timely geospatial information. In this way
universal participation in coastal decision making among coastal communities can
be improved by extending community-expanding infrastructure to public offices
that would otherwise face difficulties accessing IT services and resources.

Specifically, a web-based data sharing depot will be built, with integrated
Internet mapping and tool building capabilities to provide the coordination that
resource managers and scientists need to tackle the interdisciplinary topic-
based issues characteristic of the coastal zone. The infrastructure will be
designed so that it is scalable over time both in size and in audience and
encouraging of 2-way contributions by more advanced participant users. Much of
this infrastructure will be generic, of use to many areas of interdisciplinary
research in the natural sciences. The infrastructure, called the Oregon Coastal
Atlas (OCA) will include: 1. A web-based electronic repository that will hold
not only physical observations (traditional data),text, video and graphics, but
also information about computational elements (programs, models, tools, and
scripts for computational processing); 2. A set of tools that facilitate the
entry of new data and metadata as well as the transformation between supported
formats; and 3. A new form of XML, called Coastal XML or CML, that will improve
the exportability of data archive structures and tools.