* 0114624
* US-Turkey Cooperative Research:  Growth of Thin Film Materials by Electrochemical Atomic Layer Epitaxy
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Curtis Shannon, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/2004
* USD 20,920.00

0114624&lt;br/&gt;Shannon&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award supports
a collaborative research project between Dr. Curtis Shannon, Department of
Chemistry, Auburn University, Auburn, Alabama and Dr. Unit Demir, Department of
Chemistry, Ataturk University, Erzurum, Turkey. These investigators plan to
study fundamental aspects of thin film structure and growth kinetics in
materials grown by electrochemical atomic layer epitaxy (EC-ALE). This is a room
temperature technique for materials growth that can be used to produce high
quality, epitaxially oriented polycrystalline deposits in a layer-by-layer
fashion on a wide variety of conducting substrates. They will specifically use
in their studies two goals for better understanding of the growth mechanism.
These are scanning probe microscopy studies of thin film structure and
chronoamperometric studies of the rate of deposition processes during the EC-ALE
growth cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: This award will allow a US scientist
and a Turkish scientist with complementary expertise to pool their resources in
a mutually beneficial study. Dr. Shannon is an established researcher in the
electrosynthesis of thin film materials and their characterization by scanning
probe techniques. Dr. Demir is a young scientist with expertise in the kinetics
of electrodeposition. The project will involve a US graduate student from Auburn
University who will work with the foreign collaborating scientist. &lt;br/&gt;