* 0114123
* Gas Adsorption in Nanoporous Materials:  Molecular Structure and Recognition
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Lloyd Lee, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/2004
* USD 159,975.00

ABSTRACT &lt;br/&gt;CTS-0114123&lt;br/&gt;Lee, Lloyd L/ U of Oklahoma
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanostructured materials are currently being developed for
use in molecular adsorption and molecular recognition. The design and selection
of sensor materials [65,66] in commercial use have been mostly done by trial and
error and qualitative thinking, rather than with tailor-made specificity and
quantitative principles. With the development of the nanostructured materials,
such as self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) and dendritic structures, there have
been created a vast menu of chemical and physical properties for selection. We
need to have a molecular level understanding of the nature and consequence of
the molecular interactions at play. This research is aimed at establishing a
microscopic framework, using molecular theory and computer simulation, for gas
adsorption in three typical nanomaterials: aerogels, zeolites, and starburst
dendrimers. This furnishes a quantitative principle rooted in the molecular
level that shall aid in the design and development of gas adsorption and
molecular recognition devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are, broadly speaking,
older nanomaterials (e.g., zeolites, membranes, aerogels, activated carbons,
etc.) and newer ones (e.g., star polymers, dendrimers, etc.)
What&lt;br/&gt;happens to the gases (fluids) included in these substrates with
respect to their molecular distributions, isosteric heats of adsorption, phase
behavior, thermodynamic properties, adsorption isotherms, separation efficiency
(for mixtures), selective adsorption, and partition coefficients? An accurate
molecular theory and well-targeted molecular simulation are needed that give the
probabilistic densities of distribution of the&lt;br/&gt;confined gases around
the ordered substrates, as well as their theoretical connections to the
thermodynamic properties. This is properly the task for our statistical
mechanics of adsorption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator will
develop a new integral equation (IE) theory and perform molecular computer
simulation to determine the gas structures (distribution functions) and
thermodynamic properties of inclusion gases and gas mixtures around
nanostructures. He uses the existing replica Ornsterin-Zernike (ROZ) equations
as a&lt;br/&gt;starting point. New forms will be developed for the inclusion gas
in random as well as regular media, and in rigid as well as deformable
adsorbents. The conventional ROZ can treat only inrigidlo matrices. He uses a
two-temperature quench procedure to formulate a new equation for responsive
systems. In addition, consistency is achieved by designing a new closure
relation satisfying a set of exact self-consistency principles. The principal
investigator stresses that without this closure relation, a good one at that, no
integral equations can achieve high consistency, nor accuracy. Monte Carlo
molecular simulations and molecular dynamics will be carried out to determine
the mechanism of adsorption and to test the theories.&lt;br/&gt;