* 0114797
* Exceptions to the Canonical Genetic Code in a Methanogenic Archaeon
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Joseph Krzycki, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2005
* USD 370,000.00

Methanogenesis (the synthesis of methane) from methylamines is initiated in
microbes by one of three methylamine methyltransferases that methylate corrinoid
cofactors specifically using either trimethylamine (TMA), dimethylamine (DMA),
or monomethylamine (MMA). The genes encoding the TMA, DMA, and MMA
methyltransferases are non-homologous, yet each gene contains a single in-frame
amber codon. If amber codons were read as stop codons, each methylamine
methyltransferase gene would produce an amber termination product markedly
truncated relative to the isolated and characterized methyltransferase.
Sequencing of the tryptic fragments of the MMA methyltransferase revealed that
readthrough occurs without a frameshift, and that the amber codon is translated
as lysine in a representative methyltransferase. No editing or changes are
evident in transcripts, indicating direct translation of the amber codon as
lysine occurs. Two phylogenetically distinct lys-tRNA synthetase (lysRS) genes
were found in Methanosarcina barkeri. A class I lysRS synthetase is found
downstream of an operon with two of the amber containing methyltransferase genes
and is co-regulated with the MMA methyltransferase gene. A constitutive class II
synthetase is also encoded in the genome. A possible role of the class I enzyme
is charging an amber lys-tRNA for translation of amber as lysine. Working
hypotheses are that the amber codons are required for either proper folding
and/or translational processing of the methyltransferase proteins, or are
involved in controlling methyltransferase transcription and translation. The
regulation of amber codon readthrough, as well as cis requirements for amber
translation, will be examined using either an in vitro amber readthrough assay,
or alternatively, using in vivo reporters of amber translation. A mutant strain
will be constructed in which the amber codon of a methylamine methyltransferase
gene is changed to a canonical lysine codon, and the effect on transcripts,
protein levels and enzyme activity determined. The amber lys-tRNA will be
identified by one of several alternate approaches and characterized. The two
lysRS enzymes will either be expressed recombinantly or isolated from the native
host in order to characterize their behavior with respect to lysine and
different lys-tRNAs. These studies will shed light on the function of a change
in the usual genetic code found in these methane producing microorganisms. In a
select group of their genes a signal that usually stops biosynthesis of a
protein, instead directs the insertion of an amino acid into the protein. Since
the genetic code is universal such changes in the genetic code are relatively
rare. This research project will in part explain the biological driving force
behind this change in the genetic code. This is expected to provide new insights
into the process of protein biosynthesis, gene regulation, and the catalytic
activities of enzymes in methane-producing microbes. Understanding these
processes is important because methanogenesis is an essential component of the
global carbon cycle.