* 0114309
* Ultrasonic Rapid Manufacturing of Meso/Microscale Functional and Active Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Charalabos Doumanidis, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Lynn Realff
* 08/31/2006
* USD 430,641.00

This program will introduce and analyze a new rapid manufacturing technology for
fabrication of functional miniature devices with integrated intelligent
structures and encapsulated components. This will be based on the ultrasonic
welding (USW) process, a solid-state, cold joining technique, yielding strong
bonding between dissimilar metals and other materials. Ultrasonic rapid
manufacturing (URM) will utilize multiple material foils and fibers, that will
be bonded in subsequent layers, followed by ultrasonically assisted diamond
scribing to the proper contours. Fundamental understanding and comprehensive
modeling of microscale USW, will be addressed by a hybrid experimental and
computational process analysis. Extensive characterization of the joint
structure and properties of aluminum bonds to other selected metal alloys will
be performed in the laboratory. Knowledge gained from this research will define
optimal process conditions, allow intensive study of microscale material
effects, making it accessible through incorporation in a continuous ultrasonic
transformation database. Numerical simulation of the interdependent mechanical,
thermal and diffusion distributions during the USW process will be conducted in
concert with the experimental work. Researchers at Tufts University and
Northeastern University will collaborate on this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This URM research will be connected with the
engineering curriculum to leverage rapid manufacturing education. This will be
promoted by a new undergraduate/graduate course on Rapid Prototyping, Tooling
and Manufacturing, as a basis for a future Rapid Manufacturing minor; a new SFF
and Microfabrication Seminar series with invited industry experts; and an annual
Rapid Manufacturing Contest for undergraduate student groups nationwide. The
program will involve close collaboration of the partnering institutions.
Industrial sponsorship through in-kind equipment and technical support will also
be provided by Axcelis Technologies, Honda R&amp;D Americas and Stapla
Ultrasonics. The benefits of the new technology will be harnessed in the design
and fabrication of miniature multi-material internal structures, with embedded
prefabricated elements (sensors, actuators, processors, MEMS etc), providing
multi-domain functionality in mechatronic, optoelectronic, microfluidic,
biomedical microdevices etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;