* 0114586
* LSAMP: Puerto Rico-Louis Stokes  Alliance for Minority Participation, Phase III:  Constructing Permanent Pathways to Graduate Studies
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2001,10/31/2007
* Manuel Gomez, University of Puerto Rico
* Cooperative Agreement
* A.  Hicks
* 10/31/2007
* USD 5,419,071.00

The Puerto Rico Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (PR-LSAMP) is
an &lt;br/&gt;alliance of the Resource Center for Science and Engineering of the
University of Puerto &lt;br/&gt;Rico, the University of Puerto Rico System, the
Inter American University System, &lt;br/&gt;Pontifical Catholic University of
Puerto Rico, and Polytechnic University of Puerto Rico.&lt;br/&gt;During the
academic year 1999-00, these institutions had a SMET enrollment of
27,441,&lt;br/&gt;or 90% of the SMET undergraduate population on the Island.
Ninety-nine percent of the &lt;br/&gt;student population is Hispanic and 80% are
low-income students. The goal of the&lt;br/&gt;PR-LSAMP is to increase the
quantity and quality of minority college students who &lt;br/&gt;successfully
complete a BS/BE degree and enter and complete a graduate degree in&lt;br/&gt;a
SMET field. During Phase I and II (1991-92 to 1999-00), PR-LSAMP
institutions&lt;br/&gt;awarded 21,878 BS degrees in SMET, with a 62% annual
increment from baseline year,&lt;br/&gt;from 1,709 annual degrees in 1991 to
2,771 in 1999-2000. This was achieved&lt;br/&gt;following a two-prong approach:
(1) increasing enrollment in SMET disciplines, and&lt;br/&gt;(2) improving
retention and graduation rates by implementing a series of strategies
&lt;br/&gt;to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of SMET programs. In
Phase III, PR-LSAMP&lt;br/&gt;will build upon these achievements to: (1) further
increase the SMET production curve &lt;br/&gt;from 2,771 to 3,600, which more
than doubles the Phase I baseline figure of 1,709; &lt;br/&gt;(2) increase to
50% the percent of BS SMET graduates from UPR institutions who
enter&lt;br/&gt;graduate school, and to 25% for those graduating from the
private institutions, and (3) &lt;br/&gt;increase the number of BS graduates
from PR-LSAMP institutions that complete a PhD&lt;br/&gt;degree in SMET, either
locally or nationally, from 239 to 300 by the end of year
5.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During Phase I and Phase II the core of PR-LSAMP was the
revision of the SMET&lt;br/&gt;curriculum to emphasize for depth of
understanding with a "less is more approach",&lt;br/&gt;to promote active
learning based on inquiry and the use of interactive demonstrations,
&lt;br/&gt;to incorporate technology to the learning process, and the
development of broad-based &lt;br/&gt;mathematics skills. Teaching strategies
such as cooperative learning and the&lt;br/&gt;development of Study/Learning
Skills within the Context of a Course were also&lt;br/&gt;implemented across
SMET disciplines. Jointly with this curriculum revision,&lt;br/&gt;PR-LSAMP
offered undergraduate SMET students mentoring and research
opportunities&lt;br/&gt;to increase their motivation to remain in SMET careers
and enhance their qualification&lt;br/&gt;for pursuing graduate studies. During
Phase I and II a total of 2,363 research stipends &lt;br/&gt;were awarded, for
an average of 262 stipends per year. As a result of these
sustained&lt;br/&gt;efforts, the Index of Course Efficiency (the average number
of times students have to &lt;br/&gt;take a SMET course to satisfactorily pass
it), was reduced from an average of 2.5 to &lt;br/&gt;1.7. The average
graduation rate at UPR institutions increased from 48% to 62% in
&lt;br/&gt;science, while the average graduation rate for engineering at UPR
increased from&lt;br/&gt; 53% to 81%. At private institutions the average
graduation rate increased to 49%.&lt;br/&gt;Also the weighted average for
satisfactory grades in science and mathematics &lt;br/&gt;courses increased from
47.5% to 59.3%. In the case of Engineering courses, &lt;br/&gt;the weighted
average increased from 74% to 83%.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For Phase III PR-LSAMP
proposes the following additional strategies to complete&lt;br/&gt;the
construction of permanent pathways to graduate studies in SMET: 1)
the&lt;br/&gt;development of interactive web-based learning to master hard to
teach concepts in &lt;br/&gt;science and mathematics; (2) the development of
electronic modules to expand the&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary capabilities of
undergraduate SMET students to further enhance&lt;br/&gt;their preparation for
graduate studies; 3) the scaling-up of the teaching/learning
&lt;br/&gt;strategies that have proven successful in improving student
performance in&lt;br/&gt;SMET courses, through ongoing academic and technical
assistance to faculty and &lt;br/&gt;an Annual Best Practices Conference; and 4)
the development of Information Technology &lt;br/&gt;skills in SMET students so
they are capable of making effective and more critical use of&lt;br/&gt;accurate
and valid information in their professional lives. To increase the number
of&lt;br/&gt;students pursuing undergraduate degrees in SMET, PR-LSAMP will
develop a Pre-College&lt;br/&gt;to College Bridging Component that will induct
students into research experiences, and &lt;br/&gt;to further enhance the number
of students entering graduate school and completing a &lt;br/&gt;PhD in SMET,
PR-LSAMP will expand its research and mentoring program to&lt;br/&gt;provide a
larger number of students with key skills and guidance to improve their
&lt;br/&gt;preparation and motivation for graduate studies, in coordination with
the Alliance&lt;br/&gt;for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (AGEP)
Program. The results of the&lt;br/&gt;project will be disseminated widely in the
professional community through presentations&lt;br/&gt;at regional and national
scientific meetings. Curricular materials developed&lt;br/&gt;will be available
to other institutions through CD format and the WWW. The
general&lt;br/&gt;public will have access to updated information on the PR-LSAMP
through its website.