* 0114262
* Technician Support for the Arizona State University Multiple Anvil High Pressure Laboratory (Phase I)
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Thomas Sharp, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2005
* USD 210,000.00

0114262 &lt;br/&gt;Tyburczy &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides three
years partial salary support for a technician to supervise the Multiple Anvil
High Pressure Laboratory at Arizona State University (ASU). This laboratory
currently consists of three Walker-type multiple anvil devices plus sample
preparation stations and ancillary support equipment in a 2500 square foot
space. The Laboratory Supervisor will maintain and improve the high pressure
equipment, supervise laboratory usage by ASU researchers and visitors, and aid
ASU researchers in development of novel experimental approaches. A Lab
Supervisor is essential to proper functioning of the lab in light of the great
number of earth scientists and students working in the lab and the varied nature
of their of their projects. The current Laboratory Supervisor, Dr. Kurt D.
Leinenweber, is a respected and significant member of the Earth Science high
pressure and crystallographic communities as well as a superb supervisor,
innovator and teacher of high pressure technology. He has been Laboratory
Supervisor for this facility for the past 6 years. This support will facilitate
important new research on high pressure synthesis and phase equilibria of earth
materials, including novel work on hydrous high pressure phases, and
measurements of physical properties of earth materials at high pressures,
including rheological and electrical properties. In addition to Earth Science
utilization, this facility will be used by chemists, materials scientists, and
physicists from ASU and other institutions for synthesis and characterization of
novel materials. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;