* 0114716
* The Regulation of Ca2+-Gated and Voltage-Gated K+ Channel Genes in the Nervous System
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Nigel Atkinson, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 08/31/2006
* USD 755,310.00

PI: Nigel Atkinson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Different types of
neurons must have different patterns of electrical activity for the nervous
system to function properly. For example, neurons that initiate movement often
"fire" high frequency bursts of action potentials, whereas neurons that control
slow, rhythmic behaviors may fire only slowly, but with very precise timing. A
neuron's ability to generate specific activity patterns is determined by the
types and numbers of ion channels it expresses. Nerve cells pick and choose
which channels to express by transcriptional regulation. Our understanding of
how cells make this decision is very immature. Furthermore, our ability to
inspect the sequence of a gene and to then predict its expression pattern is
nonexistent. Presently, the purpose of DNA sequences that regulate gene
expression (control elements) can only be empirically ascertained. Dr. Atkinson
and his students will utilize the genome project, evolutionary studies and
functional testing to determine the grammar of regulatory sequences that control
ion channel gene expression.&lt;br/&gt; Using Drosophila melanogaster as a model
system, Dr. Atkinson has had substantial success describing how the slowpoke
Ca2+-activated K+ channel gene is transcriptionally regulated. It has an
extremely complex control region. The Atkinson lab has described control
elements that specify the developmental- and tissue-specific expression pattern.
Most notable was the identification of control elements that differentially
activate one promoter in four different muscle subtypes and the identification
of an intronic region that modulates developmental specificity.&lt;br/&gt; In
the this project Dr. Atkinson will add the Shaker gene to their list of channel
genes to be studied. Shaker encodes a voltage-gated K+ channel. Work on slowpoke
will also continue. Work on these to genes will enable a comparison of how genes
encoding two major classes of K+ channels, the voltage-gated and Ca2+-gated K+
channels, regulate gene expression. In all cases, the focus will be on the
regulation of the genes in the nervous system. Transcriptional start sites
(~promoters) will be physically mapped and their expression pattern determined
using transgenic animals. Because the entire fly is the expression system, the
group can study expression in all tissues and organs in their natural
developmental context. To identify the control elements the group will make use
of the fact that important DNA sequences tend to be conserved over evolutionary
time. For each gene, the transcriptional control regions from four different
insect species will be sequenced and compared. Small sequences conserved in both
sequence and position will be assumed to be control elements. The candidate
elements will be tested for function by deleting them from a transgene and then
asking how expression had been altered. These methods have been very successful
in dissecting the regulation of the slowpoke gene. Furthermore, it will be
determined whether the slowpoke and Shaker K+ channels genes show evidence of
coordinate regulation; that is, do some of the same combinations of control
elements regulate their expression. Because each control element is recognized
by a specific transcription factor(s), it will be possible to infer which
transcription factors are involved.&lt;br/&gt; Drosophila have the same families
of ion channel genes found in vertebrates. In addition, most of the important
regulatory cascades affecting developmental gene expression were originally
discovered in or shown to exist in Drosophila. Therefore, it is expected that
the description of the regulation of channel gene expression in Drosophila will
also be relevant to the understanding of the same process in other
organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;