* 0114801
* Multi-Scale Mechanics Issues in Ferroelectric Ceramics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* George Weng, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 08/31/2005
* USD 250,000.00

0114801&lt;br/&gt;Weng&lt;br/&gt;Ferroelectric ceramics are an important class
of engineering materials that have wide applications as sensors, actuators,
transducers, and ultrasonic medical imaging. This class of materials can exist
or can be fabricated in several scales: single crystals, polycrystals,
composites, and thin films, but their distinctive properties are not clearly
known. In order to explore the full potential for each of them and to provide a
guideline for material design and selection, a research project will be
undertaken to study their properties, and to develop for each of them the unique
constitutive models for their nonlinear, coupled electromechanical behaviors. In
this process, the change of crystal structures from the high temperature
paraelectric to the low temperature ferroelectric state will be considered, and
domain switch from one poled state to another under application of an electric
field and/or mechanical stress will be investigated. This will be carried out by
consideration of the mechanics, physics, and irreversible thermodynamics
involved during phase transformation and domain switch. In particular, the
thermodynamics driving force arising from the change in Gibbs free energy of a
heterogeneous system and the resistance force associated with the domain wall
movement will be used to construct the kinetic equations. On the single crystal
level, domains with lamellar structures for all potential variants will be
identified under a given electromechanical field, while on the polycrystal level
it will be addressed for the constituent grains considering grain interactions.
For ferroelectric composites actuated with ferroelectric/piezoelectric particles
or rods, or spheroidal inclusions in general, the effect of microstructural
features, such as particle shape, volume concentration, and distribution, will
be examined. For the thin films whose thickness direction usually contains
columnar grains with some preferred texture, their distinctive characteristics
from the bulks will be emphasized. The theory will be checked with experimental
data, some from open literature and others from work of two collaborators. The
outcome of the proposed study will be a set of physically based, experimentally
verified constitutive models that reveal the unique features of the
electromechanical behavior for each scale. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The proposed
problems touch upon several novel aspects not commonly encountered
simultaneously: micromechanics of heterogeneous materials, electric-mechanical
coupling, nonlinear response, evolution of microstructures, irreversible
thermodynamics, physics of phase transformation and domain switch, and scale-
transition. As such, it will contribute to the basic advancement of scientific
knowledge in this important field. The research program will be integrated into
both graduate and undergraduate teaching at Rutgers. At the graduate level a new
focus on the coupled phenomena in solids will be initiated. This will include
the electromechanical coupling in piezoelectricity and ferroelectricity as
proposed, and electrostriction, ferromagnetic behavior, magnetostriction, and
shape-memory alloys. At the undergraduate level a project for the seniors with
an interest in both mechanics and electronic materials will be offered through
Rutgers' J. J. Slade Scholars program. Participants of this project will have
the unique opportunity to learn both, and gain experience to write a thesis on
this interdisciplinary topic. In this process, minority and under-privileged
students will be actively sought to participate. &lt;br/&gt;***