* 0114395
* Collaborative Research: Reconfiguring Economies, Communities, and Regions in Post-Socialist Europe: A Study of the Apparel Industry
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2001,04/30/2002
* Adrian Smith, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Richard J. Aspinall
* 04/30/2002
* USD 57,529.00

This project focuses on the changing economic geographies of apparel production
in Central and Eastern Europe (CEE). After an initial period of rapid industrial
collapse and only limited persistence of apparel firms, there has been a more
recent 'rebirth' of production throughout the region, linked primarily to
changes in the international structure of the industry and in European Union
legislation and markets. The project investigates four aspects of these changes.
First, using international trade, production, and employment data, the project
documents the emergence of these complex new geographies of apparel production
and trade, and assess the specific roles played by changes in the international
structure of the industry and by changes in international trade regulations.
Second, through interviews with brand-name manufacturers, retailers, marketers,
and national buying firms in Western Europe, the U.S., and CEE, the study
analyzes the important role of buyer-driven commodity chains in sourcing and
controlling suppliers in CEE under conditions of intensely competitive pricing
and rapidly changing demand. Third, through detailed case studies in six regions
in Slovakia and Bulgaria, the project examines the ways in which international
sourcing restructures existing national industries, impacts upon the creation of
new firms, and produces a variety of industrial forms and practices. Fourth, in
seeking to explain this diversity of apparel production, the project examines
the ways in which existing social, institutional, and community conditions in
different regions of each country are shaping the enterprises and regional
economies that are emerging. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The pace of new firm creation
in these regions is astonishing and the regional impacts of these firms and the
scope of their integration with European markets surprising. Through this
research we hope to contribute to our understanding of the specific forms and
practices of what has been more generally characterized as low-wage, assembly
production for export. In particular, we hope to contribute to the literatures
in economic geography, globalization debates, and post-socialist restructuring
about the roles of national suppliers and markets in the operation of the new
firms, the extent to which uniform or differentiated production and marketing
strategies are emerging, and the impacts local conditions have on the operation
of primarily international contract and assembly production. The proposed
research will enable us to examine more fully the conditions and contradictions
associated with international integration and local economic reconfiguration in
post-socialist Europe. The project will enable us to move beyond single-region
and single-country case studies by providing a cross-national and cross-regional
analysis of local economic transformations in apparel producing areas. Finally,
the research will contribute to our understanding of the role of other economic
and social practices in shaping the internationalization of the post-socialist
apparel industry and its producing regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;