* 0114400
* IGERT:  Signals in the Sea
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2008
* Patricia Sobecky, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Melur Ramasubramanian
* 08/31/2008
* USD 3,278,280.00

The importance of chemical and hydromechanical signaling is broadly recognized
but inadequately studied. In marine and freshwater systems, chemical signals
affect critical processes such as feeding, competition, mate recognition,
habitat choice, host-symbiont and host-pathogen interactions. These chemical
signals not only directly affect organisms but also produce a cascade of
indirect effects on population structure, community organization, and ecosystem
function. Numerous investigations indicate that chemical signals mediate many of
these ecological interactions in aquatic systems, but exceedingly few
investigations have coupled aquatic chemical ecology with microbiology, sensory
biology, physiology, or an understanding of the fluid dynamics that mediate the
transmission and reception of signals. Few scientists have the requisite breadth
and cross-disciplinary training in ecology, chemistry, sensory biology,
microbiology, physiology and small-scale hydrodynamics necessary to advance the
field of chemical signaling in aquatic systems. The recent NSF workshop on
challenges and opportunities in biological oceanography (OEUVRE) identified a
mechanistic understanding of these small-scale chemically and physically
mediated processes as a major challenge facing this diverse field. Georgia
Institute of Technology, in collaboration with Skidaway and Scripps Institutions
of Oceanography, is uniquely positioned to train students to meet these
challenges. Under this IGERT program, graduate training at Georgia Tech will
consist of a unique series of integrated core courses, an intensive, hands-on
class in aquatic signaling where interdisciplinary student teams will
experimentally investigate projects of their own design, intemships, and
mentoring by a multidisciplinary graduate committee. Seminars will be conducted
on biological, chemical and physical interactions affecting aquatic signaling,
scientific ethics, special issues faced by under-represented groups and women in
science, and the practical aspects of professional development in science and
engineering. During the project, IGERT funds will support over 40 graduate
students, produce about 26 PhDs, and start a permanent center for aquatic
signaling at Georgia Tech.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program
intended to meet the challenges of educating Ph.D. scientists and engineers with
the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical, professional, and personal
skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing new, innovative
models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for
collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries. In
the fourth year of the program, awards are being made to twenty-two institutions
for programs that collectively span all areas of science and engineering
supported by NSF. The intellectual foci of this specific award reside in the
Directorates for Biological Sciences; Geosciences; Mathematical and Physical
Sciences; Engineering; Education and Human Resources; and the Office of Polar
Programs.&lt;br/&gt;