* 0114474
* Dividing Reason: Mathematics and Spirit in the World of Augustus and Sophia De Morgan
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2001,09/30/2003
* Joan Richards, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Ronald Rainger
* 09/30/2003
* USD 15,000.00

ABSTRACT SES 0114474 Joan Richards, Brown University Dividing Reason:
Mathematics and Spirit in the World of Augustus and Sophia De Morgan

The principal investigator is preparing a paired intellectual biography of the
early Victorian couple, Augustus and Sophia De Morgan. An in-depth study that
links the lives of Augustus and Sophia De Morgan will contribute to our
understanding of the historical roots of modern secular society. Augustus taught
mathematics at the secular University College in London; all of his prolific
writings on mathematics and logic were motivated by his desire to establish a
public world of reason that would transcend religious difference. The approach
to truth that Sophia drew out of her experiences producing and raising their
seven children was very different from those Augustus developed in his
University classes. Whereas Augustus tried to capture truth through a purifying
rational program, Sophia found it in empathetic listening. The contrast between
the views of this husband and wife team reflects the deep structure of a secular
world that mandated a strict separation between the private and public spheres;
revisiting that world promises to shed light on the epistemological implications
of the sharp distinctions between public and private on which many modern
secular societies are built.

NSF support supplements a Guggenheim Fellowship, and covers research travel in
England. The investigator will examine materials in London, Oxford and Cambridge
to supplement an already substantial knowledge of Augustus's work with research
into Sophia. Outcomes include a scholarly monograph and presentations to the
History of Science Society.