* 0114017
* GOALI:  High-Power Optical Materials for Micro- and Nanofabrication
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Douglas Keszler, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 06/30/2005
* USD 300,000.00

The purpose of this project is to advance our understanding of the properties
that limit both high-power and short-wavelength operation of laser and nonlinear
optical (NLO) crystals. In addition, new and improved materials will be
developed. At present, lack of a suitable combination of high birefringence and
high transparency in NLO materials is limiting direct second-harmonic conversion
to deep UV and VUV wavelengths. In the future, nonlinear absorption and thermal
properties are likely to become limiting factors for performance at very high-
power levels. To study and address these materials issues, the optical and
thermal properties of several wide bandgap oxides will be examined. Linear
optical properties, thermal conductivity, and thermo-optic coefficients will be
studied for high-transparency nonlinear optical crystals that will allow either
direct second-harmonic conversion to wavelengths shorter than 200 nm or
frequency mixing for generation of tunable VUV light.

The production of high powers in solid-state lasers is largely a thermal-
management issue. Substantial improvements in solid-state laser output powers
and efficiencies are certainly attainable by incorporating the small energy-
defect emission of Yb3+ in a very high thermal-conductivity host. To achieve
this combination of properties, several new materials that are rich in Y203 and
BeO will be studied and developed. Detailed spectroscopic examinations will be
made on the emitting Yb3+ ion; large single crystals will be grown; thermal
conductivities will be assessed; and laser properties will be established.

The effects of the proposed program extend well beyond optical science and
engineering, as the work has direct relevance to manufacturing and
micromachining of most of the high-technology devices that are currently being
produced in the electronics and telecommunications industries. Moreover, in the
future, such laser systems will play important roles in connecting pico-, nano-,
meso-, and microscale functions to our everyday world through the fabrication of
microelectromechanical devices (MEMs,) microelectrochemical systems (MECs,) and
other small photonic and biodevices.

The proposed project is also important for the development of human resources in
science and engineering; the area is growing rapidly and experienced scientists
and engineers are needed. The program involves an international collection of
researchers from a variety of disciplines in both academia and industry.
Graduate and undergraduate students will be exposed to many different areas of
the materials and laser sciences, providing unique research and education
opportunities.