* 0114094
* Development of Monochromators for Wiggler-Based Synchrotron X-ray Studies of Materials and Student Training
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2005
* Joel Brock, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 02/28/2005
* USD 415,908.00

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program supports
instrument development at the Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS).
Thee goals of this project are: (1) to develop a transmission-mode focusing
x-ray monochromator optimized for the relatively large spot size and angular
divergence of the x-ray beams produced by a high power wiggler; (2) to develop
the electronics required to synthesize locally a high-quality timing signal that
can be used to synchronize (ultrafast) laser pulses with the electron bunch
structure of the synchrotron; and (3), to develop a focusing asymmetric-cut
Bragg monochromator to compress the x-ray beam for small angle x-ray scattering
applications. These devices will be used to perform time-resolved structural
measurements on dynamically evolving materials and will be permanently installed
on the new synchrotron x-ray beam lines currently under construction at CHESS
(the G-lines). The central campus location of this facility allows it to be
staffed primarily by graduate students from a wide variety of disciplines,
creating a comprehensive educational and outreach environment.

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program supports
instrument development at the Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS).The
goal of this project is to develop x-ray optics designed to take full advantage
of the powerful x-ray beams produced by three new beam lines (the G-lines) at
CHESS. These devices will be used to perform time-resolved measurements of the
atomic scale structure of dynamically evolving materials. CHESS's location on
the central campus of Cornell University enables a level of hands-on training
and involvement of all levels of students which is difficult to achieve
elsewhere. Indeed, the G-lines are staffed primarily by graduate students from a
wide variety of scientific and engineering disciplines, working on a wide
variety of materials research projects. These students have been involved in all
phases of the construction of the beam lines and are heavily involved in
outreach to the local community, working primarily with K-12 students and their
teachers. The final result is a comprehensive educational and multi-disciplinary
research environment that is accessible to students of all levels.

