* 0114142
* Acquisition of a Vector High Field Magnet System for Magnetic Nanostructure Research and Student Training
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* Marc Walters, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2003
* USD 96,708.00

With this award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research Program, the
Department of Physics at New York University will acquire an automated vector
high field superconducting magnet system. This system will be used to study
magnetic nanostructures and, in particular, quantum tunneling of the magnetic
moment (QTM). Understanding such characteristics of magnetic nanostructures is a
major scientific challenge with important implications for the miniaturization
of magnetic storage technology. This system will be used with high sensitivity
Hall-effect magnetometers, that have sensitivities many orders of magnitude
better than commercially available magnetometers. This sensitivity, coupled with
a wide operating temperature, 0.3 K to 300 K, and the new ability to vary the
field magnitude and orientation rapidly, will permit unique and advanced
characterization of the magnetic properties of materials. In particular, it will
greatly enhance interdisciplinary projects focused on understanding QTM in
chemically synthesized nanometer-sized magnets. The equipment will also enhance
the research and educational opportunities at NYU and the research capabilities
available to a multi-university interdisciplinary scientific collaboration.
Graduate students will use this instrument in their research. Undergraduates
will also participate in the synthesis of magnetic nanostructures and their
characterization at this advanced experimental facility. %%%

With this award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research Program, the
Department of Physics at New York University will acquire an automated vector
high field superconducting magnet system. This system will be used to study
magnetic nanostructures. The miniaturization of magnetic devices to this size is
critical to advances in magnetic information storage, which is an important
industry in the United States. For instance, nanoscale magnets exhibit quantum
tunneling of the magnetic moment (QTM), that may seriously limit their
usefulness in conventional magnetic information storage, but at the same time,
could provide a medium for a much faster type of information processing known as
quantum computing. This system will be used to conduct high sensitivity magnetic
measurements over a wide range of magnetic fields and temperatures, not possible
with commercially available instruments. In particular, it will greatly enhance
interdisciplinary projects focused on understanding QTM in chemically
synthesized nanometer-sized magnets. The equipment will also enhance the
research and educational opportunities at NYU and the research capabilities
available to a multi-university interdisciplinary scientific collaboration.

