* 0114570
* Environment, Health, and Place in Global Perspective: Conference at the University of Wisconsin-Madison,  April 2002
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Christopher Sellers, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Keith R. Benson
* 08/31/2002
* USD 15,158.00

Proposal Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Greg Mitman&lt;br/&gt;Environment, Health and Place
in Global Perspective: Conference Proposal&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is a two-day workshop-style conference devoted to "Environment, Health,
and Place in Global Perspective," in April 2002 at the University of Wisconsin-
Madison. The conference aims to bring together an interdisciplinary group of
scholars drawing from the fields of environmental history, history of science,
history of medicine, the social studies of science, and medical geography to
explore the relationships between environment and health from a global
perspective. One of the central theoretical questions of this conference is to
explore how considerations of materiality, environment, and place can contribute
to new historiographic perspectives within the history of science that move us
beyond debates generated by social constructivism and its critics. A companion
purpose of this conference is to discuss questions and frameworks that link the
local to more global and comparative historical
narratives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the 1990's, many creative contributions
to the history of science, as elsewhere in science studies, have revolved around
the sociocultural dimensions of scientific work. These explorations, whether of
scientists' language, practices, or social relations have been attacked for
neglecting the material engagements and interventions of science, as well as
scientists' own, often more naturalistic accounts of what they do. Over the last
few years, within the history of science itself as well as within neighboring
fields such as environmental and medical history, scholars have grown impatient
with the ideological polarity of these debates. Largely granting the
constructivists' points about the importance of society and culture to natural
knowledge, these scholars have sought new ways of reconciling these insights
with a greater appreciation of the material dimensions of science. Within the
history of science, this trend has led to a growing appreciation of the
importance of geography and place in scientific work and in this and other
fields, of the ways in which histories of place or environment both involve and
invoke the human body. This conference will bring together individuals from each
of these fields to discuss and chart frameworks for this new methodological
terrain toward which they have been converging. Organizers also hope to steer
conferees toward international comparisons and questions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Topically centered upon the history of environment, place
and health, conference participants include scholars whose work ranges through
two centuries and across America and Europe as well as the Third World. The case
studies reexamine older world-scale narratives, such as colonialism and
modernization, often invoked in the history of science and its disciplinary
neighbors. Organizers also anticipate discussion about newer ones like
globalization, which have sparked scholarly interests but whose implications for
the history of science and these other fields have been less
explored.&lt;br/&gt;