* 0114103
* Acquisition of a Fourier Transform Infrared Imaging System for Multicomponent Polymer Dynamics Research and Student Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2002
* Joseph Kennedy, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2002
* USD 150,000.00

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program supports
instrument acquisition of a Fourier Transform Infrared Imaging System for
Multicomponent Polymer Dynamics Research and Student Education at the University
of Akron. The investigators will assemble one of the world's most powerful FTIR
imaging systems that will have unprecedented sensitivity and speed for spatially
resolved spectroscopic measurements and be a uniquely powerful technique for
studying all types of polymer diffusion in various materials including nano-
networks and nanocomposites and for studying phase separations and confinement
effects. The acquisition of the proposed instrument will provide the timely
training of a future generation of scientists skillful in vibrational
spectroscopic imaging that will soon replace the existing 5,000 infrared
microscopes in the world. The research will provide a novel learning experience
in polymer science and engineering, enabling the largest interdisciplinary
polymer program at University of Akron to be the first to possess this emerging
technology for research and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the
Instrumentation for Materials Research program supports instrument acquisition
of a Fourier Transform Infrared Imaging System for Multicomponent Polymer
Dynamics Research and Student Education at the University of Akron. The
investigators will assemble one of the world's most powerful FTIR imaging
systems that will have unprecedented sensitivity and speed for spatially
resolved spectroscopic measurements and be a uniquely powerful technique for
studying all types of polymer diffusion in various materials including nano-
networks and nanocomposites and for studying phase separations and confinement
effects. The acquisition of the proposed instrument will provide the timely
training of a future generation of scientists skillful in vibrational
spectroscopic imaging that will soon replace the existing 5,000 infrared
microscopes in the world. The research will provide a novel learning experience
in polymer science and engineering, enabling the largest interdisciplinary
polymer program at University of Akron to be the first to possess this emerging
technology for research and education.&lt;br/&gt;