* 0114598
* GOALI:  Principle-Based Knowledge Management System for Cellular Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Larry Birnbaum, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 09/30/2005
* USD 372,000.00

This research project has two thrusts. First, the research aims to develop a set
of benchmarking and diagnostic modes based on queuing, material flow, and
stochastic optimization models for generic manufacturing cells. These will be
used to evaluate the current performance of a system relative to both external
(industry) and internal (theoretical) standards. Second, the research will use
models to classify improvement areas into broad categories and use these to
develop a fundamentally new framework for organizing experiential information
related to the design and improvement of cellular production systems. The
ultimate goal is to create a prototype web-based knowledge management tool that
will diagnose problems, suggest improvement options, and accumulate and classify
information for future shared use by the organization. In theory, modern
information technology makes it possible to place information previously
available only to experts in the hands of users throughout the firm. But
converting data to useful information presumes an ability to capture, organize,
and link knowledge to the practical concerns of decision-makers. Evolving
methods of artificial intelligence provide exciting new ways to search and
retrieve text-based information, based largely on matching documents to user
interests on the basis of keywords. However, such an approach is not entirely
suited to many production environments because users do not necessarily know
what keywords they should be interested in to find help with their problems.
What is needed is a more proactive system for diagnosing problems and leading
users to relevant information. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The need for knowledge
creation and sharing systems is becoming even more crucial as manufacturing
systems emphasize highly customized products and quick response to customer
demands. Agile manufacturing relies on production in small scale, often modular,
flexible manufacturing cells that use multi-functional machinery and cross-
trained workers. While there has been some recent modeling research into the
design and control of agile manufacturing systems, almost nothing has been done
on linking models to the information needs of managers trying to evaluate and
improve their systems. This research will develop models of cellular systems and
use them to establish a framework for organizing information in a knowledge
management system to support the process of continual improvement in agile
manufacturing systems&lt;br/&gt;