* 0114104
* Acquisition of X-ray Photoelectron Spectrometer for Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* David Allara, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 08/31/2002
* USD 220,000.00

X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) is one of the most useful methods for the
analysis of surfaces, interfaces and thin films; with sensitivity at the
nanometer scale. It is a critical tool for basic and applied research and
development of new semiconductors, biomaterials, fuel cells, gene chips,
amorphous metals, optical fibers, and optical/electronic polymers. This
materials research is enabling to the advancement of telecommunications,
computers, energy and biotechnology where XPS plays an additional role in
manufacturing science and quality control. This award from the Instrumentation
for Material research program will allow Penn State to purchase a new state-of-
the-art XPS, increasing the availability for undergraduate students, graduate
students, faculty and staff various fields of materials and engineering
research. The instrument will also be vital to teaching a number of courses that
detail the theory and practice of XPS, and for hands on training with access to
modern equipment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy (XPS) is one of the most useful methods for the analysis of
surfaces, interfaces and thin films; with sensitivity at the nanometer scale. It
is a critical tool for basic and applied research and development of new
semiconductors, biomaterials, fuel cells, gene chips, amorphous metals, optical
fibers, and optical/electronic polymers. This materials research is enabling to
the advancement of telecommunications, computers, energy and biotechnology where
XPS plays an additional role in manufacturing science and quality control. This
award from the Instrumentation for Material research program will allow Penn
State to purchase a new state-of-the-art XPS, increasing the availability for
undergraduate students, graduate students, faculty and staff various fields of
materials and engineering research. The instrument will also be vital to
teaching a number of courses that detail the theory and practice of XPS, and for
hands on training with access to modern equipment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;