* 0114500
* Symbolic Stability and Bifurcation Analysis of Time-Periodic Differential-Delay Equations: Applications to High-Speed Machining Models
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2001,01/31/2006
* Edward Bueler, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 01/31/2006
* USD 259,660.00

PIs: Eric A. Butcher and Edward Bueler University of Alaska,
Fairbanks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal # 0114500&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Symbolic
Stability and Bifurcation Analysis of Time-Periodic Differential-Delay
Equations: Applications to High-Speed Machining
Models&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project
concerns the development and application of a unique method for the symbolic
computation of linear stability boundaries in time-periodic differential-delay
equations (DDEs). Such equations arise in several linearized models of chatter
instability in high-speed machining, including milling with arbitrary immersion
level and turning with modulated speed or impedance, as well as in other
important engineering and scientific applications. In addition, the local
nonlinear bifurcation analysis for the full nonlinear models is also performed.
These objectives are accomplished by combining some important topics and recent
methodologies in high-speed machining, symbolic computation, and nonlinear
dynamics into a single research thrust. By incorporating time-delay into an
existing symbolic algorithm for stability analysis of time-periodic systems, the
stability boundaries (for example, in the two-parameter plane of spindle speed
and depth of cut) which predict chatter in machining operations are obtained
analytically. This task constitutes the first phase of the work plan and
represents a significant design tool since, given a value of one parameter (say
spindle speed), the critical value of the other (cutting depth) is easily
obtained. Consequently, this approach provides an attractive alternative to
designers who often try to operate in a narrow spindle speed range on the
stability chart while retaining as high a cutting speed as possible. Since
recent research on chatter instability in turning indicates that linear
stability analysis alone is inadequate and should be accompanied by a full
nonlinear analysis, the second phase of the work plan, namely the analytical
bifurcation analysis for the time-periodic milling models, is accomplished by
combining existing computational tools for time-periodic systems with the Hopf
bifurcation algorithm for DDEs. The results thus obtained allows the
determination of the critical parameter set for loss of global stability and the
domain of attraction just prior to loss of local stability. Experimental
validation of the theoretical results is made by collaborators at NIST. This
project fosters cross-disciplinary education in engineering and mathematics
through training graduate students and bringing current research and practice
(including symbolic computation) into undergraduate classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;