* 0114975
* Managing Uncertainty in Bilevel Robust Design Optimization
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* John Renaud, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing grant
* Judy M. Vance
* 08/31/2006
* USD 315,831.00

This grant provides funding for the development of a collaborative optimization
framework for the robust design of complex engineering systems such as
automobiles, aircraft or consumer products. The collaborative optimization
framework will account for and manage the uncertainties in the performance
predictions generated by the computer simulation tools used for the design of
these systems. Each computer simulation model is an abstraction of reality and
has some uncertainty associated with its performance predictions. This
uncertainty must be accounted for in the simulation based design process. An
implicit method for estimating system performance uncertainties within a bilevel
optimization algorithm that employs decomposition techniques to facilitate
distributed computation will be developed. The methodology will account for both
the uncertainty associated with design inputs and the uncertainty of performance
predictions from each of the simulation tools. A mathematical proof of
convergence will be developed to validate the bilevel optimization algorithm
being developed in this investigation. The framework will be implemented in a
distributed computing environment providing for parallel computation and
concurrent design. Industry partners will test the framework and measure the
computational improvements using a suite of benchmark test problems.

It is anticipated that the use of the collaborative optimization framework
developed in this research will lead to reduced product development times at
reduced cost and risk. The collaborative optimization framework will facilitate
the concurrent design of complex engineering systems in a parallel-computing
environment. The benefits of parallel computation lead to reductions in product
development times. The ability to manage uncertainty and risk in this parallel
design environment will ensure robust performance of the resulting system. The
development of the non-deterministic collaborative optimization framework will
demonstrate that designers can effectively manage both the uncertainty and risk
associated with the simulation based design of new products in a parallel
computing environment.