* 0114176
* Development of Advanced Ferromagnetic Resonance Microscopes for Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2003
* Samuel Lofland, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2003
* USD 99,999.00

With this award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research Program in the
Division of Materials Research, scientists at the University of Maryland will
develop a microwave microscope based on the phenomenon of ferromagnetic
resonance. Using a novel hemispherical cavity design, which focuses the
microwave field, they will attain the spatial resolution of 5 micron or better
with an ultimate goal of less than 1 micron. The instrument will allow mapping
out many different magnetic properties including magnetization, spin-orbit
coupling, and magnetic anisotropy. It will also measure magnetic homogeneity and
image local stresses via magnetoelastic coupling. In addition, by using multiple
cavity resonance, which range from 5 to 50 GHz, we will also be able to
investigate local spin relaxation dynamics. The instrument will play a key role
in the education and training of the next generation of students studying
magnetic materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Instrumentation for
Materials Research Program in the Division of Materials Research is for
instrument development at the University of Maryland. Scientists at the
university of Maryland will develop an innovative scanning probe microscope,
which allows mapping of a variety of magnetic properties of materials. Magnetism
plays a critical role in many technological applications including magnetic
storage and magneto-optic switches for high-speed communications. The microscope
will be invaluable for investigating properties that are difficult to study by
conventional magnetic techniques. This will also be used to screen combinatorial
libraries to aid in the search for novel magnetic materials. This new type of
scanning probe microscope will become a useful educational tool by providing
spatially resolved images of various
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;