* 0114622
* SGER: Evaluation and Modeling of Interlayer Forces in Montmorillonite For Development of a Particulate Based Model for Swelling Clays
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2001,11/30/2002
* Dinesh Katti, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 11/30/2002
* USD 41,313.00

The understanding, modeling and prediction of interaction of clays with water
and other environmental fluids is an important issue in the field of
geotechnical engineering, geoenvironmental engineering as well as industrial
applications such as muds for oil well drilling and water treatment. The
swelling response of saturated montmorillonite and the corresponding development
of swelling pressure when swelling is restrained is the result of fairly complex
interactions a) within the interlayers of the clay particle and b) the
interactions between the particles. The recent advances in experimental,
analytical and computational mechanics areas will allow the PIs to model and
simulate these complex interactions and allow for prediction of the swelling
response using Discrete Element Method (DEM). The PIs plan to consider both the
interlayer and interparticle interactions. The interlayer interactions will
include silica-water interactions including hydrogen bonding at silica-water
interface and the hydrogen bonding between water molecules in the
interlayers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This focus of this work is to understand and
model the significant interlayer forces in montmorillonite clay during hydration
and swelling to provide a foundation for the development of particulate based
models for swelling clays. A combination of analytical characterization
techniques [Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), X-ray diffraction
and scanning electron microscopy (SEM)] and analytical description of forces
from classical physics will be used for implementation into DEM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;