* 0114212
* Participant Support, Gordon Research Conference on Thin Film and Crystal Growth Mechanisms; Williamstown, MA; July 1-6, 2001
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2002
* David Cahill, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 05/31/2002
* USD 5,000.00

A Gordon Research Conference on Thin Film and Crystal Growth Mechanisms will be
held at Williams College, Williamstown, Massachusetts, July 1-6, 2001. The
conference will cover liquid-phase crystal growth, vapor-phase crystal growth,
thin film deposition, materials chemistry, and surface physics research. An aim
of the conference is to develop strong interactions between these disciplines
and emphasize how understanding of fundamental chemical and physical processes
can be used to develop novel methods for the growth of
nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;The program is organized around invited speakers,
discussion leaders, a chair, and vice-chair; both contributed papers and posters
are scheduled. Special efforts have been made to recruit a diverse group of
participants, including foreign and American scientists, younger and older
researchers, and industrial, national laboratory and academic researchers.
Objectives are to stimulate communications among the broad community of
researchers addressing crystal growth from a variety of disciplinary backgrounds
--chemistry, physics, engineering and materials science, and to formulate and
delineate critical research necessary to further basic understanding.
&lt;br/&gt;The conference is expected to provide an effective forum for
discussion of critical scientific issues in crystal growth. Topics include:
Crystal Growth from Solution; Novel Assembly; Organic Thin Films; Fundamentals
of Nucleation and Growth; Dynamics of Structure Evolution; and Nanoscale Metals
and Silicides. Along with the opportunity to assess the field and future
directions, it is expected that new ties will be established between
universities, research institutions, and industry.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;An
evaluation of the progress and status of crystal growth research issues along
with current assessments of the most important developments will be of
significant value to the understanding and enhanced utilization of electronic
materials in computing, data processing, and communications.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;