* 0114329
* IGERT:  Multidisciplinary Training in Reliability and Risk Engineering, Analysis, and Management
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2008
* Bruce Cooil, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Melur Ramasubramanian
* 08/31/2008
* USD 2,980,324.00

This IGERT project will establish a multidisciplinary graduate program in
reliability and risk engineering, analysis, and management at Vanderbilt
University. Twenty-five faculty participants in this program are drawn from
three different schools: Engineering (Civil, Mechanical, Chemical, Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science, and Management of Technology), Management, and
Arts and Sciences (Mathematics). The research theme consists of three inter-
linked areas: (i) large systems reliability and risk, (ii) device- and
component-level reliability, and (iii) uncertainty analysis methods. As
engineering systems grow in size, complexity and cost, reliability and risk
assessment is increasingly dependent on modeling and simulation, rather than on
expensive (or impossible) traditional test-based methods. Therefore, the unique
features of the research theme are: (i) development of the modeling and
simulation-based methodology for reliability and risk assessment, (ii)
systematic integration of models and tools across disciplines, and (iii)
inclusion of economic, legal, regulatory, and social perspectives in risk
assessment and management. The research projects will apply these concepts to
infrastructure, environmental, network, mechanical, and electronic systems. The
educational goals are to broaden the training with multidisciplinary
perspectives, embed information technology, include model integration and high
performance computing technologies, and increase the number and diversity of
reliability and risk engineers and managers trained in the modeling and
simulation methodology. A number of strategies are proposed to achieve these
objectives: multidisciplinary coursework and dissertation topics, laboratory
rotations, industry and government laboratory internships, seminars, workshops,
case studies, training in professional communication and ethics, undergraduate
and high school teacher participants, aggressive recruitment (especially among
underrepresented groups), and systematic evaluation by industry, government and
academia. The program will include strong participation and support from several
industries, government agencies and national laboratories, through internships,
workshop and seminar participation, educational and research collaboration, and
advisory committee. Through these efforts, the graduate program aims to become a
self-sustaining center of national and international leadership. The IGERT award
will lead to 35 Ph.D.'s over 9 years, fulfilling a critical need of the American
industry in this important field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide
program intended to meet the challenges of educating Ph.D. scientists and
engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical,
professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of the future.
The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by
establishing new, innovative models for graduate education and training in a
fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends traditional
disciplinary boundaries. In the fourth year of the program, awards are being
made to twenty-two institutions for programs that collectively span all areas of
science and engineering supported by NSF. The intellectual foci of this specific
award reside in the Directorates for Engineering; Social, Behavioral, and
Economic Sciences; Computer and Information Science and Engineering;
Mathematical and Physical Sciences; and Education and Human Resources.