* 0114859
* Program for Gender Equity in Science, Mathematics, Engineering and Technology (PGE): Girls Online: GO Team!
* EDU,EES
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2004
* Jennifer Blitz, Chicago Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Ruta Sevo
* 05/31/2004
* USD 562,484.00

Through funding provided by the National Science Foundation, the Nature Museum
of the &lt;br/&gt;Chicago Academy of Sciences, in collaboration with El Valor
and James Ward School &lt;br/&gt;will create Girls Online: GO Team! , an
innovative after-school science and technology &lt;br/&gt;program that targets
girls between the ages of eleven and thirteen living in &lt;br/&gt;underserved
areas of Chicago. This pilot program will offer engaging science
activities&lt;br/&gt;and real-world applications to teachhands-on science and
technology to approximately&lt;br/&gt;450 girls over a three-year period. Each
semester, between forty-five and ninety girls&lt;br/&gt; will join the GO Team!
at locations in their own neighborhoods. Of the girls who excel &lt;br/&gt;in
this after-school program, six will be selected every semester to return and
team &lt;br/&gt;teach with Academy staff to a new group of participating girls.
As the girls grow in &lt;br/&gt;competency and skills, they can attend a more
advanced GO Team! the following&lt;br/&gt; semester. The participating girls
will attend weekly lab sessions taught by &lt;br/&gt;educators and scientists
from the Academy, have fun with their families at a &lt;br/&gt;Kick -Off
celebration and a Graduation Ceremony, learn about science and technology
&lt;br/&gt;careers during a job shadow day with museum staff and outside
professionals, and&lt;br/&gt;learn how science and technology impact their
everyday lives. Successful women &lt;br/&gt;mentors will function as teachers
and role models to help build the girls' science &lt;br/&gt;knowledge, career
choices, and self-esteem.&lt;br/&gt;