* 0114784
* SDEST: Toward A Better Theory of Public Participation in Environmental Decision-Making
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2001,06/30/2003
* Thomas Webler, Social and Environmental Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 06/30/2003
* USD 143,904.00

This research proposes to advance theoretical understanding of public
participation in decision-making about environmental and risk policies that are
contentious and non-routine. Theories on public participation have emerged out
of management sciences, decision theory, political science, philosophy,
communication studies, and small group psychology. A recent National Research
Council committee report on risk characterization advanced the idea of public
participation as an iterative, non-linear combination of analysis and
deliberation. However, despite these theoretical developments and wise
practitioner reflections, there is little systematic research on public
participation processes. What is needed is theory that captures the full breadth
of principles that are important to understanding public participation and
integrates insights from these different disciplines and different units of
analysis. One key assumption of this project is that research must also tap the
knowledge of people who actually take part in public participation processes.
Theory of public participation also needs to understand how the historical and
social context or the characteristics of the people involved can influence
performance. The same participation model (e.g. citizen juries) may not yield
the same outcomes in two different social settings. Certain handbooks for
practitioners give hints as to what context features planners should pay
attention to, but there is no theory that adequately explains how context
matters. This research undertakes a systematic comparison of public
participation processes in three different policy issue arenas: forest policy-
making, watershed planning, and radiation health effects protection. For each
arena researchers will inquire into participants' ideas of what matters in a
public participation process. By selecting individuals with vastly different
points of view about the process, they will gather a wide breath of principles
that theory of public participation should incorporate. To make sense of these
different points of view, they will use a combination of in-depth interview
methods and Q methodology. Q methodology is a way of revealing the presence of
pre-existing social discourses about a topic. The researchers will also conduct
a second order Q analysis across the case studies to explore whether there are
stable discourses about good public participation process that are independent
of characteristics of the policy venue. The analysis will involve comparing
results within and between policy arenas. The interviews will be used primarily
to explore the relationships between contextual features of a policy issue,
personal characteristics, and beliefs about good process. Results will enable
progress on theory of public participation and generation of hypotheses for
future research. Such theory will be useful to planners and organizers of public
participation processes and can thereby lead to improved decisions about
environmental and risk issues.