* 0114368
* IGERT:  Socio-Technical Infrastructure for Electronic Transactions
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2008
* Michael Gordon, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Holly K. Given
* 08/31/2008
* USD 3,180,127.00

This IGERT program is a multi-disciplinary doctoral traineeship in Socio-
Technical Infrastructure for Electronic Transactions (STIET). The
extraordinarily rapid changes in communications and computing technology, and in
the uses and requirements people have for these technologies, have given rise to
problems that are not well-suited to narrow, traditional solutions. That these
problems are important should be self-evident: electronic transactions are
increasingly central to social, economic and political activity in nearly every
realm of human endeavor, within and between nearly every location on the planet.
The infrastructure to support safe, meaningful, efficient, equitable and
productive transactions will determine the extent to which the information
revolution is socially beneficial. STIET will offer a comprehensive program from
matriculation to graduation that will focus on the interaction between social
and technical mechanisms in order to respond to these needs through current
research and the training of a corps of scholars to carry forward teaching and
research in this area. The program will: (i) provide fellowships for the first
two years of graduate study; (ii) require 3 STIET core courses and 2 advanced
STIET electives; (iii) provide a weekly research seminar and biannual day-long
workshops; (iv) develop a multi-disciplinary, cross-school community of scholars
within Michigan through collective and collaborative activities, both
synchronous and asynchronous (with computer-supported community and
collaboration technologies); and (v) build connections to the external multi-
disciplinary research community through its Web site, conference travel, and
research experiences at industrial partner facilities. When fully implemented,
the program is expected to engage about 35 doctoral students at various stages
of their degree. Through the resources and activities of STIET, the students
will be encouraged and supported so that they receive serious preparation for
multi-disciplinary research and pursue multi-disciplinary approaches to
understanding and solving important socio-technical problems in their
dissertation research. A large group of faculty are involved from several
disciplines (computer science, economics, information, business, public policy)
with a long-standing commitment to multi-disciplinary and collaborative
research. The team includes collaborative research partners from prominent
industrial labs. A professional Master's programs in this area is already in
place, which provide a graduate student community, a student services
infrastructure, and a fertile recruiting ground for promising doctoral
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the
challenges of educating Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical, professional, and personal
skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing new, innovative
models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for
collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries. In
the fourth year of the program, awards are being made to twenty-two institutions
for programs that collectively span all areas of science and engineering
supported by NSF. The intellectual foci of this specific award reside in the
Directorates for Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences; Computer and
Information Science and Engineering; and Education and Human
Resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;