* 0114939
* The State, the Family and Redistribution
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2002
* Lena Edlund, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory N. Price
* 07/31/2002
* USD 40,005.00

&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research project is to provide an economic analysis
of the political ramifications of the decline in marriage. Arguably, the most
significant development in the recent history of the family is the decline in
marriage, and the rise in the proportion of single individuals in most Western
countries. In the US, between 1964 and 1996, the proportion of currently married
individuals fell by a quarter (from 84 to 58 percent) while the fraction
currently divorced increased threefold (from 3 to 10 percent). In so far as
marriage is one of the most important institutions for resource redistribution
between individuals, and redistributive preferences are central to many
political choices it is relevant to examine how the decline in marriage has
affected political outcomes. &lt;br/&gt; Our research develops a theoretical
model which demonstrates that under reasonable assumptions on the underlying
income distributions, marriage patterns and income-sharing within households,
changes in the extent of marriage alter the income distribution and thereby
political outcomes. We use the model to identify how increased non-marriage
affects (i) the divergence of male and female political preferences, the so
called gender gap; (ii) the aggregate demand for redistribution; (iii) the
demographic and economic profile of swing voters; and (iv) the divergence in
preferences between married and not married voters, the so called marriage gap.
A key assumption underlying our analysis is that in general women marry men who
are richer then themselves. Hence, relative to being single, marriage makes men
poorer and women richer. This suggests that the decline in marriage could
explain the political gender gap. The change in the overall demand for
redistribution is less clear since for each woman who turns left, a man turns
right. We show that if non-marriage is first prevalent amongst poor individuals,
and then ``creeps up'' the income distribution, then initially non-marriage
reduces the support for redistribution as male erstwhile left-leaning voters
shift to supporting the right (cf. Reagan Democrats). As non-marriage increases
amongst relatively well off groups, women in this group will start to vote at
variance with their socio-economic profile (cf. Soccer moms). This finding is
consistent with the marriage gap, i.e. that, relative to unmarried individuals,
married individuals support the right to a greater extent.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We use US data to test our hypotheses. First, using
longitudinal data from the Youth-Parent Socialization survey (1973 and 1982
waves) we investigate whether realized changes in an individual's marital status
affect his/her political preferences in the hypothesized direction. Second, we
examine how changes in a US state's ``marriage market'' over the period 1964-96
have affected male and female political preferences. We measure changes in the
state marriage market in two ways: first, by the stock of currently divorced
individuals in a state (computed from the annual Current Population Survey); and
second, by state divorce law changes. Our information about individual political
preferences in from the National Election Survey studies
(1964-96).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;