* 0114545
* Acquisition of Ultra High Speed Framing Camera to be used for Investigations of Laboratory Simulations of Solar Prominence Dynamics
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Paul Bellan, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Paul Bellaire
* 08/31/2003
* USD 197,233.00

The investigators will purchase an advanced high-speed camera to make sixteen
frame movies of single plasma "shots". The main objective is to be able to
follow magnetic reconnection and the propagation of ripples of magnetic twist
(such as Alfven waves) away from regions of reconnection. The framing rate will
be between 8 million and 200 million frames per second. Shot-to-shot
reproducibility will no longer be a constraint because the entire fine structure
evolution will be captured in a single shot. Data throughput will be increased
16-fold enabling many more experiments and investigation of many important
phenomena not being pursued at present. Simulated solar prominences in the
laboratory have recently been demonstrated using a unique, specially designed
experimental facility at Caltech. The facility uses pulsed power plasma
technology to produce a short-lived plasma (10 microseconds) with large magnetic
fields (several kilogauss), high currents (tens of kiloamps), and modest
dimensions (tens of centimeters). This plasma has the morphology and dynamics of
a solar prominence. A program is underway to investigate the topological
evolution of these simulated prominences. Topological evolution involves the
breaking and reconnection of magnetic field lines and is believed to be a
critical process in solar prominence eruptions. The present method for
diagnosing the solar prominence simulation experiments uses a single-frame high-
speed digital camera, that is a camera that takes a single photograph at a time.
The technique consists of creating a sequence of identical plasma shots and then
making a single ten nanosecond photo of each shot, but with increasing time
offsets of a few hundred nanoseconds. The shot-to-shot reproducibility is
sufficient to follow the gross variation in morphology, but not the details.
Because it takes about 2 minutes to recharge the pulse power capacitor banks
between plasma shots, this single-shot accumulation technique is both tedious
and time consuming.&lt;br/&gt;