* 0114427
* IGERT:  Earth's Subsurface Biosphere: Coupling of Microbial, Geophysical and Geochemical Processes
* EHR,DGE
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2008
* Peter Bottomley, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Melur Ramasubramanian
* 09/30/2008
* USD 3,296,002.00

The biosphere is usually thought of as plants and animals near the Earth's
surface, but the Earth's habitable zone extends to depths of hundreds or
thousands of meters. The Earth's subsurface biosphere is composed mostly of
bacteria, and collectively these bacteria may have a mass equivalent to that of
all life in the near-surface biosphere. The emerging study of the subsurface
biosphere could solve major environmental, agricultural, and industrial
problems, and lead to products that will improve human health and prosperity.
The key to success in this field will be an understanding of the links between
subsurface microbiology and the Earth's physical and chemical environments and
processes. This understanding is applicable to the transformation of toxic waste
into harmless byproducts, safer drinking water, increased mining efficiency,
increased flow of oil from wells, confining nuclear waste in storage facilities,
improving soil and crops, reutilization of animal and human wastes, and the
basics the Earth's global and local chemical cycles. To prepare graduate
students for these challenges we will coordinate the training of students by
internationally recognized engineers, microbiologists, geologists,
oceanographers, geochemists, soil scientists, and hydrologists. Students'
preparation will be broadened with a new subsurface biosphere integrated minor
with five related components. Some of these are: a group training effort,
courses that link microbial with physical and chemical processes from molecular
to global scales, and international and national internships, field programs,
and symposia. Ethical and cultural issues related to subsurface science,
bioengineering, and the environment will be included in courses, seminars and
workshops.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating Ph.D.
scientists and engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
education by establishing new, innovative models for graduate education and
training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries. In the fourth year of the program, awards
are being made to twenty-two institutions for programs that collectively span
all areas of science and engineering supported by NSF. The intellectual foci of
this specific award reside in the Directorates for Geosciences; Biological
Sciences; Engineering; Education and Human Resources; and the Office of Polar
Programs.