* 0114208
* Acquisition of a Micro-Thermal Analysis Microscope for Studying Novel Materials and Student Training
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Yue Wu, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 08/31/2002
* USD 88,600.00

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program will provide
support to the University of North Carolina Chapel Hill for the acquisition of a
micro-thermal analysis (mTA) system which is an atomic force microscope with the
capabilities of thermal and thermal mechanical analysis. The local heating and
local measurements of thermal properties are two critical features for the
research of bulk metallic glass (BMG)-based films produced by combinatorial
synthesis. In addition, local processing and manipulation of nanostructures can
also be accomplished. Spatial patterning of magnetic properties could arise from
locally induced nanocrystallization of magnetic BMG and patterning of carbon
nanotubes can be accomplished by nano-welding on BMG substrate. In addition to
graduate and undergraduate research, the mTA system will be used for outreach
activities with local school systems providing a unique platform for hands-on
experiences in nanoscale thermal
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Instrumentation
for Materials Research program will provide support to the University of North
Carolina Chapel Hill for the acquisition of a micro-thermal analysis (mTA)
system which is an atomic force microscope with the capabilities of thermal and
thermal mechanical analysis. The local heating and local measurements of thermal
properties are two critical features for the research of bulk metallic glass
(BMG)-based films produced by combinatorial synthesis. In addition, local
processing and manipulation of nanostructures can also be accomplished. Spatial
patterning of magnetic properties could arise from locally induced
nanocrystallization of magnetic BMG and patterning of carbon nanotubes can be
accomplished by nano-welding on BMG substrate. In addition to graduate and
undergraduate research, the mTA system will be used for outreach activities with
local school systems providing a unique platform for hands-on experiences in
nanoscale thermal properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;