* 0114741
* Program for Gender Equity in Science, Mathematics, Engineering and Technology (PGE): Dis: Science, Gender and After School: Creating a Research/Action Agenda
* EDU,EES
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2003
* Barbara Sprung, Educational Equity Concepts Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 05/31/2003
* USD 100,249.00

Program for Gender Equity in Science, Mathematics, Engineering and Technology
(PGE): Dis: Science, Gender and After School: Creating a Research/Action
Agenda&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational Equity Concepts, Inc. (EEC), in
collaboration with the Directorate for &lt;br/&gt;Human Resources and Education
at the American Association for the Advancement&lt;br/&gt;of Science (AAAS), and
the Academy for Educational Development (AED) requests &lt;br/&gt;$100,000 over
18 months from the National Science Foundation Program for
Gender&lt;br/&gt;Equity for a dissemination project to create a research/action
agenda around SMET&lt;br/&gt;programming for girls in the informal, out-of-
school learning arena. The overall &lt;br/&gt;goal of the project is to use
after-school programming as a vehicle to both engage &lt;br/&gt;and sustain
girls= interest in pursuing education and careers in SMET. Specific
&lt;br/&gt;objectives are to: (1) bring together a multi-disciplinary group of
researchers and &lt;br/&gt;practitioners in a working conference setting; (2)
develop a research/action agenda; &lt;br/&gt;(3) develop an action plan to carry
out the agenda; and (4) disseminate the&lt;br/&gt;conference proceedings to
researchers, practitioners, gender equity activists, &lt;br/&gt;policy-makers,
and funders who are involved in informal and SMET education. &lt;br/&gt;Research
focusing on girls at this juncture is critical because although there are
&lt;br/&gt;a growing number of SMET programs, we do not know which programs are
effective&lt;br/&gt;and which are not, especially with regard to engaging and
supporting girls interest in &lt;br/&gt;SMET. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The out-of-
school learning arena encompasses community and school-based
after-&lt;br/&gt;school programs; summer camp and Saturday/weekend programs;
museum programs; &lt;br/&gt;programs at community technology centers;
college/university science programs; &lt;br/&gt;on-line science clubs and
competitions; and programs offered by girl-specific&lt;br/&gt;organizations.
After-school as an educational field (rather than child-minding&lt;br/&gt;or
purely recreational) is both new and growing. Moreover, we are moving rapidly
&lt;br/&gt;toward a technology-based economy where women are an increasing part
of the&lt;br/&gt;workforce. This conference will take advantage of a ground
floor opportunity &lt;br/&gt;to create a research/action agenda and inform the
development of SMET programs&lt;br/&gt;that are free of gender and other forms
of bias--race, ethnicity and disability &lt;br/&gt;that have traditionally
contributed to educational inequality. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The agenda created
at the conference will be distributed to a broad audience of
&lt;br/&gt;researchers, practitioners, gender equity activists, policy-makers,
and funders. &lt;br/&gt;In doing so, the conference will extend awareness and
information about the &lt;br/&gt;participation of girls and women in SMET
education; catalyze new thinking on&lt;br/&gt;the subject; and serve as a
springboard for research and action. Dissemination&lt;br/&gt;will take place via
journals, publications, web sites, listservs, and professional
&lt;br/&gt;association conferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;