* 0114950
* Phenomenology and the Mind Sciences: 'Hybrid Intellectuals' in German and American Culture
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* NONE NONE, Trustees of Boston University
* Fellowship Award
* Keith R. Benson
* 08/31/2003
* USD 84,000.00

SES 01214950&lt;br/&gt;Alfred Tauber/Susan Lanzoni, Boston
University&lt;br/&gt;Phenomenology and the Mind Sciences: "Hybrid Intellectuals"
in German and&lt;br/&gt;American Culture&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a
postdoctoral fellowship that focuses on the phenomenological psychiatrist and
psychologist, "hybrid intellectuals" native to German-speaking lands in the
early twentieth century who became influential in the United States in the
middle of the century. Phenomenological philosophy is the study of
consciousness, with roots in Franz Brentano's path breaking work on empirical
psychology, but most fully identified with the work of Edmund Husserl, and then
given an existential flavor by Martin Heidegger. As an approach that gave
precedence to the analysis of conscious experience, it was not only an extremely
influential philosophy in early twentieth century Europe, but one that a number
of contemporary psychiatrists and psychologists found could be applied in
scientific domains. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The postdoctoral fellow explored the
meeting of these two worlds in a dissertation that is a case study of Ludwig
Binswanger (1881-1966), the Swiss psychiatrist who turned to phenomenology to
explicate psychotic experience. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Alfred I. Tauber at
the Center for Philosophy and History of Science at Boston University, the co-PI
will strengthen her philosophical understanding of phenomenology, while
conducting research on the history of phenomenological psychiatry in Germany.
Further training in philosophy should assist her in comprehending the
intricacies of different variants of phenomenological philosophy. The research
focuses on three other hybrid intellectuals of the period, Erwin Straus, V.E.
von Gebsattel and Eugene Minkowski, all of whom found merit in using
phenomenological methods in psychology and psychiatry. The fact that Binswanger
was not alone in creating this interdisciplinary approach demonstrates that
there were specific intellectual and cultural resources in the German-speaking
world that enabled such projects to flourish. While examining the uses of
phenomenology for these other practitioners, the PI sets their work within the
larger intellectual currents of the period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A second part
of the research project tracks the influence of these practitioners and their
ideas in the United States. The co-PI follows both the movement of German
emigrants to the US in the 1930s and the influence of newly translated European
texts in the 1950s. The ways in which these European ideas were received on
American soil demonstrates the critical importance of cultural and institutional
factors in promoting different forms of interdisciplinarity. The American
setting was quite different from the German: disciplinary lines between
philosophy and psychology had grown more rigid, and American psychologists and
psychiatrists were oriented to practical outcomes and therapeutic solutions.
Therefore, American phenomenological psychiatrists and psychologists had
distinct agendas, and encountered different obstacles in comparison to their
earlier European counterparts. This project track these "hybrid intellectuals"
along an historical and cultural trajectory in order to illuminate the shifting
possibilities of interdisciplinarity as an historically mediated
phenomenon.&lt;br/&gt;