* 0114748
* Arabidopsis 2010: Functional Analysis of the Arabidopsis Yellow Stripe-Like (YSL) Family:  Heavy Metal Transport and Partitioning Via Metal-nicotianamine Complexes
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2006
* Elsbeth Walker, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 07/31/2006
* USD 659,911.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project concerns a family of metal
transporters called YELLOW STRIPE-LIKE (YSL), which have been identified based
on their very strong sequence similarity to the YS1 protein of maize. The
function of YS1 is in the primary uptake of iron from the soil. However, unlike
other known plant iron transporters, YS1 transports iron that is complexed by
specific plant-derived Fe(III) chelators called phytosiderophores. There are
eight YSL proteins encoded in the Arabidopsis thaliana genome
(http://www.bio.umass.edu/biology/ewalker), but they cannot function in
phytosiderophore uptake, since Arabidopsis (like all non-grasses) can neither
synthesize nor use phytosiderophores. Arabidopsis does make and use a related
compound, nicotianamine, which is the biosynthetic precursor to
phytosiderophores. Preliminary evidence suggests that YSL proteins mediate
transport of metals bound to nicotianamine. The many roles of nicotianamine in
achieving proper metal ion allocation in plants are incompletely understood, but
there is strong evidence that nicotianamine is necessary for distribution of Fe,
Zn, and Mn via phloem, and that it is required for transport of Cu in xylem.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The functions of the eight Arabidopsis thaliana YSL genes
will be determined from the narrowest definition of function-biochemical
function, to the broadest definition of function-the role of these proteins in
the growth and development of the plant. A comprehensive description of the
function of each YSL protein will be formed that will answer these questions:
Which metals are transported by YSL proteins? Which cells express each YSL and
therefore are involved in transporting these metals? Which nutrient conditions
affect expression of each YSL family member? In what way(s) does abolishing
specific YSL genes affect the pattern of metal ion distribution in the plant? By
integrating this specific information for all eight YSL genes, our understanding
of the metal ion allocation mechanisms used by plants will be greatly improved.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sequence information will be made immediately available
through Genbank and on the project website. The website will also be updated
with experimental data for each YSL gene as it becomes
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;