* 0114976
* Arabidopsis 2010:  A Systematic Approach to Automated Production of Recombinant Inbred Lines
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Alan Lloyd, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 08/31/2004
* USD 472,072.00

The goal of this project is to develop a resource for the scientific community
that promotes expanded use of natural genetic variation in reaching the 2010
Project objective of assigning a function to each Arabidopsis gene. At least
four new sets of mapped Recombinant Inbred Lines (RILs) will be produced.
Potential pairs of parents from hundreds of available wild type accessions will
be systematically screened for genetic and phenotypic variance and pairwise
distances. The chosen parents will include wild lines not previously exploited.
Simple Sequence Length DNA Polymorphisms (SSLPs) will be used as much as
possible for mapping. Ninety-five individuals, from sets of 400 RI lines will be
mapped at one hundred loci, generating a map with a density of approximately 6
centiMorgans. Seeds for all RILs will be publicly available through the
Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center (http://www.biosci.ohio-
state.edu/~plantbio/Facilities/abrc/ABRCHOME.HTM) and maps and mapping data will
be available online through The Arabidopsis Information Resource
(http://www.arabidopsis.org/) by January 2004. During the course of this
project, undergraduate and graduate students and technicians will be trained in
robotics, molecular biology, genetics, and quantitative trait mapping. In
addition, students in the Biotechnology Program at the Austin Community College
will receive similar training through an outreach program. Conventional genetics
used in a small number of laboratory strains of Arabidopsis, will not be able to
reach the 2010 Project goal of complete knowledge of every plant gene's
function. This project will provide a way to map and identify genes in local
wild populations of Arabidopsis that are important for adaptation to many
different environments and are the result of many different evolutionary
histories. These different environments will include different soil types, day
lengths, pest populations, moisture levels, temperatures, and other factors.
This will eventually lead to a better understanding of important adaptations to
incorporate into the world's crops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;