* 0114769
* Arabidopsis 2010:  Developing Paradigms for Functional Genomics of Protein Kinases and Phosphoproteins Using the CDPK Superfamily
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2007
* Michael Sussman, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* John C. Rogers
* 08/31/2007
* USD 2,926,737.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Protein phosphorylation is a major mode of
regulation of metabolism, gene expression, and cellular architecture in
eukaryotic cells, and defining phosphorylation-based regulatory networks is
essential for understanding the function of the Arabidopsis genome. The goal of
this project is to define phosphorylation networks that are related to the
function of calcium-dependent protein kinases (CDPKs) and four closely related
families; CDPK-related kinases (CRKs), phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase kinases
(PPCKs), PPCK-related kinases (PEPRKs), and SNF-1 related kinases (SnRKs). These
88 kinases, which represent about 9% of all the protein kinases in the
Arabidopsis genome, are involved in all aspects of plant development and
physiology and participate in the coupling of cellular responses to
environmental and developmental signals. A list of these protein kinases
including gene identification numbers is available at
http://www.arabidopsis.org, and further information including links to database
records is available at http://plantsp.sdsc.edu. This research will investigate
the function of 64 members of these families through determination of the
subcellular location of each kinase and identification of downstream targets and
other proteins with which the kinases associate. This information will give
insight into the physiological roles of each kinase by identifying signaling
networks in which each participates. This research will also determine the
target sequences in substrate proteins that are phosphorylated by each kinase,
and these results will contribute to understanding the overlap in kinase
function and cross-talk between signaling pathways. The results of this work
will be made available on a yearly basis at the two URLs given above.
&lt;br/&gt;