* 0114626
* Dissertation Improvement Grant- Archaeological and Geophysical Investigations of the Grove's Creek Site (09CH71), Skidaway Island, Georgia
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2001,12/31/2002
* Ervan Garrison, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2002
* USD 10,670.00

With National Science Foundation support, Ms. Deborah Keene will conduct
doctoral dissertation research under the direction of Dr. Ervan Garrison. The
project centers on the Grove's Creek Site, a Native American Village dating to
the Mississippian period (AD 1000-1580). The Grove's Creek Site is on Skidaway
Island, near Savannah, Georgia. There are two objectives to this project. The
first is to combine geophysical data with a geographic information system (GIS)
and create a subsurface map of the site. The second is to determine whether the
inhabitants of the Grove's Creek Site lived there year round or seasonally.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current archaeological methods are inherently destructive;
therefore, any information that is lost can never be recovered. The refinement
of a mapping procedure using a limited amount of excavation will result in
greater preservation of archaeological sites. The first step of this mapping
procedure is to collect shallow geophysical data. During the Grove's Creek
project both the conductivity and magnetism of the soil were measured.
Archaeologically significant remains such as cooking hearths and burned clay
will cause the conductivity and magnetism of the surrounding soil to be higher.
When all of the data are plotted, contour maps are created in which these higher
readings are visible. The size and shape of the contours give clues as to what
subsurface features created them. We use this information to predict the types
of archaeological remains and will then excavate to test several of these
predictions. Ultimately, this process can be used to map an archaeological site
with very little digging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although there are many important
Mississippian sites along the Georgia coast, they are still not fully
understood. There is currently considerable disagreement about whether
Mississippian peoples were true agriculturists and could live in their village
year round or still had to do some hunting and gathering and so traveled for
part of the year. Three methods shall be employed to determine whether the
inhabitants of Grove's Creek lived there year round or seasonally. The first is
to look at the plant and animal remains at the site. Different animals and
plants are available at different times of the year. For example, certain fruits
are available only in the fall and certain fish migrate nearby in particular
months. By identifying the animals and plants at the site and the times that
they were available for consumption, we can determine when the site was
occupied. The second is to study site architecture. In many Mississippian
communities, there is evidence for both summer and winter houses. Two winter
houses have already been found at the site, and if a summer house is found, that
would show that the site was occupied year round. The last way to determine
occupation is by isotopic analysis of oyster shells. By measuring the oxygen
isotopes in the growth layers of the shell, it is possible to determine water
temperature and therefore the time of year when the animal was killed. Analysis
of multiple shells will determine what seasons the site was
occupied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will not only develop a mapping
procedure that will protect archaeological sites; it will also address
questions, which are important to the understanding of coastal subsistence and
settlement patterns of Native American cultures.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;