* 0114882
* Program for Gender Equity in Science, Mathematics, Engineering and Technology (PGE): LCP:  Middle School Students' REALM (Really Exploring and Learning Meteorology)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Paul Ruscher, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ruta Sevo
* 08/31/2004
* USD 887,322.00

The Meteorology Department and Science Education program of Florida State
&lt;br/&gt;University, in collaboration with the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration &lt;br/&gt;(NOAA), will carry out a school-site
meteorological project to be located in Miami/Dade &lt;br/&gt;County Public
Schools. This new collaborative project is entitled Middle School
&lt;br/&gt;Students' REALM (Really Exploring And Learning Meteorology). The
project's foci &lt;br/&gt;are: (1) to expose more middle school girls to
meteorological science content, (2) to &lt;br/&gt;develop a positive and
supportive learning environment for participating girls and boys, &lt;br/&gt;(3)
to provide on site technical assistance to participating science teachers for
content &lt;br/&gt;implementation, and (4) to provide a vehicle for greater
parent-girl participation in &lt;br/&gt;science activities. In order to maximize
resources, available &lt;br/&gt;meteorology resources (weather stations) that
are in demographically dispersed middle &lt;br/&gt;schools will be used.
Involvement in this project will enhance girls' awareness of career
opportunities &lt;br/&gt;for women in the field of science in general and
meteorology in particular. This project &lt;br/&gt;will also increase middle
school girls' self-esteem and confidence in learning science
&lt;br/&gt;concepts, which integrate the use of mathematics and technology. This
project model &lt;br/&gt;aims to reduce the attrition in advanced level science,
mathematics and technology &lt;br/&gt;coursework that typically occurs as girls
move from middle school to high school, &lt;br/&gt;which carries over into
higher education.