* 0114186
* Advanced Instrumentation Development for Research and Education on Plasma Coating Crack Formation Fundamentals and Control
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2004
* Soumendra Basu, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2004
* USD 88,900.00

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research Program to Boston
University will enable constructing the first of its kind instrumentation for
insitu and real-time characterization and control of coating microstructure. A
deeper understanding crack formation mechanisms will enable custom tailoring of
coating structure for different applications through use of the advanced closed
loop control system. Plasma spray is a widely used deposition process since it
can be economically used to engineer coating attributes. As such, it is an
enabling technology in many applications in aerospace, engines, power systems,
electronics, and biomedical applications. This custom designed system includes
sensors for measuring the particle state, the thermal distribution and roughness
characteristics of the deposit surface, as well as the actuators needed to
implement real-time control of the process.

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research Program supports
instrument development at Boston University. The instrument will enable a better
understanding of microstructural development and crack formation in plasma
sprayed coatings, as well as design of an advanced process control system that
is expected to enable manufacture of new coating structures. The
interdisciplinary research team includes researchers in materials, heat
transfer, mechanics, and control. Broad educational impact is planned, including
the direct research experience of undergraduate and graduate students, and by
incorporation of the equipment and results obtained into the course work of not
only materials courses but the related process control, heat transfer, and
experimental courses offered by the College.