* 0114183
* Development of a Variable Temperature Near-field Scanning Acoustic Microscope with  Rapid Sample Access
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Bellave Shivaram, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 155,776.00

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program will enable
the University of Virginia to develop a variable temperature near field scanning
acoustic microscope to map elastic properties on a nanometer scale on solids of
interest to physics, chemistry, materials science, biology and engineering and
to enhance teaching in the physics undergraduate laboratory. The microscope will
use custom designed scanning heads with integrated cantilever sensors capable of
operation at low temperatures and interfaced to existing control electronics. A
low vibration refrigerator of the pulse tube type (which has no moving parts)
will be acquired and used to cool the scanning head. The choice of the pulse
tube refrigerator (which operate in any physical orientation) enables the
positioning of the scanning head on top facilitating rapid sample access. The
integrated cantilever sensing scheme will simplify the future marriage of the
microscope to other instruments such as electron microscopes. It will also
enable study of biological samples and solid liquid interfaces where optical
detection schemes do not work.. The integrated detection scheme should also be
attractive to emerging industrial microelectronics where rapid nanometer scale
flaw detection is desired.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the
Instrumentation for Materials Research program, the University of Virginia will
develop a new microscope using high frequency sound waves and operating over a
wide temperature range to map elastic features on a nanometer length scale in
solid state materials of interest to physics, materials science, biology and
engineering as well as to enhance teaching in the physics undergraduate
laboratory. The microscope will be of the scanning type and images will be
obtained digitally. The acoustic sensor for the microscope will be fabricated
using integrated microelectronic technologies. This integrated sensor scheme
simplifies the future marriage of the proposed microscope to other instruments
such as electron microscopes. It will also enable the imaging of biological
samples and solid liquid interfaces with resolution better than that obtained
optically. The development of this new scanning acoustic microscope will benefit
the study of crystalline and non-crystalline solids and will have a wide ranging
impact including in the area of emerging microelectronic processes where rapid
nanometer scale flaw detection is desired.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;