* 0114177
* Acquisition of a Variable Temperature Automated X-Ray Diffractometer for Materials Science Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* John Wagner, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 08/31/2002
* USD 149,537.00

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research will allow the
University of North Dakota (UND) to purchase a variable temperature automated
x-ray diffractometer. UND is presently in the process of expanding and improving
its materials science related research and teaching activities. The instrument
permits collecting high-resolution x-ray diffraction data for specimens in the
temperature range of 300 to 2000 K under a wide range of environmental
conditions. In addition, this system will allow for accurate and efficient
analysis of the acquired data using the latest software and databases available.
This diffractometer will support research on a wide range of materials such as
nano-structured materials, superconductors, magnetic materials, shape-selective
catalysts, photocatalytic oxidizers, and smart materials such as Terfenol-D and
Invar. As UND's only modern x-ray diffractometer that provides hands-on,
affordable access to its researchers, the proposed instrument is expected to
facilitate the research activities of at least three academic departments and
two colleges at UND. Through participation in related research projects,
graduate and undergraduate research students will have the opportunity to train
in modern aspects of x-ray diffraction technique. In addition, through the
incorporation of laboratory experiments into existing and new classes, academic
students will also benefit from the proposed facility. Finally, because UND has
one of the largest Native American student populations in the nation, the
instrument will present an opportunity for UND students belonging to an under-
represented ethnic group to experience one of the most versatile and widely used
experimental techniques in materials
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Instrumentation for
Materials Research will allow the University of North Dakota (UND) to purchase a
variable temperature automated x-ray diffractometer. UND is presently in the
process of expanding and improving its materials science related research and
teaching activities. The instrument permits collecting high-resolution x-ray
diffraction data for specimens in the temperature range of 300 to 2000 K under a
wide range of environmental conditions. In addition, this system will allow for
accurate and efficient analysis of the acquired data using the latest software
and databases available. This diffractometer will support research on a wide
range of materials such as nano-structured materials, superconductors, magnetic
materials, shape-selective catalysts, photocatalytic oxidizers, and smart
materials such as Terfenol-D and Invar. As UND's only modern x-ray
diffractometer that provides hands-on, affordable access to its researchers, the
proposed instrument is expected to facilitate the research activities of at
least three academic departments and two colleges at UND. Through participation
in related research projects, graduate and undergraduate research students will
have the opportunity to train in modern aspects of x-ray diffraction technique.
In addition, through the incorporation of laboratory experiments into existing
and new classes, academic students will also benefit from the proposed facility.
Finally, because UND has one of the largest Native American student populations
in the nation, the instrument will present an opportunity for UND students
belonging to an under-represented ethnic group to experience one of the most
versatile and widely used experimental techniques in materials
science.&lt;br/&gt;