* 0114213
* RUI: Acquisition of an X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy System for Materials Science Research and Undergraduate Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,05/31/2004
* Marcus McEllistrem, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 05/31/2004
* USD 203,614.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program and the
Instrumentation for Materials Research Program to the University of Wisconsin-
Eau Claire provides partial support for the acquisition of a x-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy system for research and undergraduate education and training. The
instrument will be used to investigate the physics and chemistry of
semiconductors, thin films, and metallic alloys. Several different systems will
be studied. These include: 1) the electronic, chemical, and structural
properties of compound IV-IV semiconductors, including the passivation,
oxidation, oxynitridation and metallization; 2) the chemistry of the molecular
precursors typically used in gallium-nitride and indium-gallium-nitride film
growth, as well as the chemistry of the molecular fragments from such
precursors; 3) the growth mechanisms and structures of thin metal films on
semiconductors; and 4) corrosion processes of metal alloys and thin films. Since
undergraduate research is a critical component of the educational system at the
University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire, students will perform research with the new
instrument. It will be used in course work and will be used to educate and train
students in materials research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Major
Research Instrumentation program and the Instrumentation for Materials Research
Program to the University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire provides partial support for
the acquisition of an x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) system for research
and undergraduate education and training. Semiconductors, metals, and insulators
are the materials that make microelectronic chips possible. Nearly all computer
chips, for example, are fabricated from silicon. Similar materials and used in
electro-optic devices, such as light-emitting diodes used in many consumer
electronics and increasingly in the automotive industry and roadway signing, and
diode lasers, which form the heart of laser printers and compact disc players.
The successful fabrication of computer chip and electro-optic devices requires a
detailed understanding of the physics and chemistry of the interface between two
materials, as well as fundamental processes occurring on the surface of these
materials. Surface properties and composition are therefore important to the
fabrication of useful devices. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) is a
technique that provides information about surface composition and is capable of
providing information about the "chemical state" in which surface atoms exist.
The instrument will be used to: 1) investigate semiconductor and metal surfaces,
and how varying surface composition of either material influences the interface
that forms between two dissimilar materials; 2) follow surface chemical
reactions relevant to growing thin films of materials and how etching reactions
proceed at semiconductor and metal surfaces; and 3) study how surface
composition influences surface structure and morphology during film growth and
etching. Undergraduate students, including students from physical sciences as
well as life sciences, will be involved in all research projects and will
operate and help to maintain the new instrument as part of their collaborative
research projects with faculty research mentors.&lt;br/&gt;