* 0114726
* Functional Analysis of the BAS1 Gene and Its Product: CYP 72B1
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2005
* Michael Neff, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 07/31/2005
* USD 384,000.00

Brassinosteroids are growth-promoting hormones involved in modulating plant
plasticity in response to changes in the environment. Previous studies of
brassinosteroids have concentrated on either the metabolic or reception pathways
for these hormones. A novel gene affecting brassinosteroid responses in plants,
CYP72B1, has recently been identified. This gene appears to be involved in
brassinosteroid inactivation rather than biosynthesis or perception acting as a
brassinosteroid hydroxylase that catabolizes the most active form of the
hormone, brassinolide, into an inactive form, 26-hydroxybrassinolide. By
regulating the active levels of brassinolide in certain tissues or at certain
times, CYP72B1 may be acting as a modulator of brassinosteroid responses during
plant development. One hypothesis is that CYP72B1 uses brassinolide as an enzyme
substrate generating the less-active brassinosteroid, 26-hydroxybrassinolide.
Heterologous expression of CYP72B1 in yeast coupled with feeding experiments
using radiolabeled brassinolide will test whether CYP72B1 uses brassinolide as
an enzyme substrate. Physiological analysis will also be used to further
characterize 26-hydroxybrassinolide activity. A second hypothesis is that
CYP72B1 expression affects growth in Arabidopsis by regulating brassinolide
levels. A T-DNA knockout mutation in the CYP72B1 gene will allow a detailed
analysis of the role this gene plays in development. A third hypothesis is that
CYP72B1 activity is regulated transcriptionally and post translationally at the
tissue specific level. RT-PCR experiments show that CYP72B1 transcripts
accumulate greater in the rosettes vsersus the hypocotyls of developing
seedlings. CYP72B1 transcript accumulation measurements will be expanded to many
different tissues of both juvenile and adult plants. CYP72B1 translational
fusions with reporter genes will also be used to examine CYP72B1 protein levels
in different tissues during plant development. Together, this research will
increase the understanding of CYP72B1's role in modulating brassinosteroid
levels and perception during plant development. In addition to the training of
one graduate student and one postdoctoral fellow, several undergraduates are
likely to participate in this project. Findings from this research will be
incorporated, when appropriate, into an undergraduate laboratory course on DNA
manipulation taught by the Principal Investigator, Professor Michael Neff.