* 0114330
* IGERT:  Biophotonics Materials and Applications
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2008
* Paras Prasad, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Holly K. Given
* 08/31/2008
* USD 3,077,334.00

The thrust of this IGERT program in biophotonics is to produce graduates capable
of crossing the existing boundaries between Physics, Chemistry, Biology,
Medicine and Engineering, the combination of which constitutes the
multidisciplinary research environments necessary for advancing biophotonics.
Novel applications and/or solutions to technological problems involving the use
of photonics (lasers and optics) in biology and medicine, and the use of
biological materials in photonic applications, have been slow to develop due to
the lack of a common ground upon which the current researchers, who come from a
variety of disciplines, can interact. Specifically, this program emphasizes
graduate research, education and training through the extension of on-going
integrative research that includes: (i) nanotechnology (fabrication and
application) as a tool in developing new, and improving existing, optical
imaging techniques for real-time imaging of cells and cellular processes, (ii)
developing the next generation of biosensors and improving sensing applications,
(iii) using nanotechnology and laser technology for targeting and treatment in
cancer therapy, (iv) applying computer and information technologies in the
development of new models and data analysis for understanding cellular
mechanisms, (v) developing new photonic devices and systems that are hybrids of
traditional polymeric and semiconductor materials with biological materials, and
(vi) molding the existing curriculum to provide students with maximum exposure
to the diversity of biophotonics and prepare them to operate effectively in this
rapidly advancing and changing field. The program will involve graduate students
and faculty from Engineering, Chemistry, Physics, Biological Sciences, and the
Medical School at the University at Buffalo (State University of New York), from
Roswell Park Cancer Institute, and from Hauptman-Woodward Medical Institute (all
located in Buffalo, NY). A cross-disciplinary curriculum will be developed that
will provide Ph.D and Masters degree graduates with the ability to cross the
existing boundaries between the many areas of biophotonics. This program builds
upon the strengths of the Institute for Lasers, Photonics and Biophotonics
(ILPB), at the University at Buffalo, which has as one of its goals to create a
multidisciplinary environment using the common thread of photonics. Moreover,
this program will capitalize on recent investments in the ILPB for the
development of biophotonics: equipment, laboratory space, and educational
training facilities.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating Ph.D.
scientists and engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
education by establishing new, innovative models for graduate education and
training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries. In the fourth year of the program, awards
are being made to twenty-two institutions for programs that collectively span
all areas of science and engineering supported by NSF. The intellectual foci of
this specific award reside in the Directorates for Engineering; Biological
Sciences; Mathematical and Physical Sciences; and Education and Human Resources.