* 0114437
* IGERT:  Economics of the Environment
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2008
* Thomas Dunne, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Melur Ramasubramanian
* 08/31/2008
* USD 3,198,358.00

This IGERT award supports the establishment of a multidisciplinary graduate
training program of education and research in environmental economics (including
resource economics), integrating environmental science with economics. The
vision of the Program is to provide the first truly multidisciplinary Ph.D.
program in environmental economics, a program that does not compromise the depth
of economics education nor the depth of education in a companion natural science
discipline. Most Ph.D. programs in environmental economics are either very
narrowly economic in orientation or disciplinarily broad, with some strength in
a variety of disciplines, including economics. This new IGERT program seeks a
third path, producing Ph.D.s who are as well trained in economics as any
graduating from a good economics department but who also have Ph.D. level depth
in one of four complementary fields of natural science: climate, conservation
biology, hydrology and marine science. The complementary science fields
specified are not intended to be comprehensive but rather to reflect faculty
strengths at UCSB. IGERT fellowship support facilitates the additional
curricular burden of significant coursework in a companion area of natural
science. During the first half of their nominal five years in the Program,
students acquire strength in economics and their companion natural science
discipline, primarily through coursework. As students move into the second half
of their tenure in the Program, they become absorbed in research and research
workshops, culminating in the writing of the dissertation. In addition to
coursework, three features of the curriculum are designed to build
multidisciplinary strength: (i) research seminars in environmental policy,
environmental economics, and the chosen complementary field of natural science;
(ii) development of an original empirical paper as an intermediate step to the
dissertation; and (iii) assisting faculty with the supervision of Masters
students involved in group thesis work. Other aspects of the program are
designed to strengthen student research skills, introduce issues of ethics in
research and develop skills for entering the job market. It is the goal of this
IGERT Program to train the next generation of environmental economists, people
who can truly bridge the gap between economics and the natural sciences that
underlie environmental problems. The program described is comprehensive,
designed to turn out research leaders and innovative thinkers. These graduates
will enrich the workplace, both academic and nonacademic.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating Ph.D.
scientists and engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
education by establishing new, innovative models for graduate education and
training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries. In the fourth year of the program, awards
are being made to twenty-two institutions for programs that collectively span
all areas of science and engineering supported by NSF. The intellectual foci of
this specific award reside in the Directorates for Social, Behavioral, and
Economic Sciences; Geosciences; Biological Sciences; and Education and Human
Resources.