* 0114923
* US-South Africa Dissertation Enhancement:   Argentine Ants in the South African Fynbos:  Effects on Proteas and Their Arthropod Visitors
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2001,02/29/2004
* Richard Root, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 02/29/2004
* USD 27,378.00

0114923&lt;br/&gt;Root &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation enhancement grant
supports a US graduate student, Ms. Lori Lach, working under the guidance of
Professor Richard Root, with the Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology
at Cornell University, to conduct a study in South Africa on Argentine ants in
the South African fynbos, and their effects on proteas and their arthropod
visitors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Invasive species are a threat not only to
agricultural and economic systems, but also to the conservation of native flora
and fauna. Argentine ants in particular are a worldwide problem. In the protea-
rich South African fynbos native ants and the seeds they disperse are being
endangered by the invasive Argentine ant. Ms. Lach will experimentally test the
hypotheses that: 1) an invasive species, the Argentine ant, has detrimental
effects on pollination in the biologically fragile area of the South African
fynbos; 2) that a facultative mutualism may facilitate impacts of this invader;
and 3) that the invader may be exerting these effects because it is able to
escape floral defenses used on the native ant species. Dr. Michael Picker, of
the Zoology Department at the University of Cape Town, will provide guidance on
this project to Ms. Lach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results are expected to
increase the current knowledge about Argentine ants and their impact on fynbos
flowers and their arthropod visitors, and provide additional information on the
effects of invasive species on ant/plant interactions. The findings should also
have broad application to conservation biology and invasion
ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly funded by the
Division of International Programs and the Division of Environmental
Biology.&lt;br/&gt;