* 0114224
* Acquisition of Tunable Narrow-line Laser for Photonic Band Gap and Disordered Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2002
* Azriel Genack, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 07/31/2002
* USD 102,442.00

This is an instrument acquisition award from the Major Research Instrumentation
program and the Instrumentation for Materials Research program to the City
University of New York Queens College. The award will allow CUNY Queens College
to purchase a Coherent 899-29 Autoscan II single frequency scanning laser for
the study of the statistics of optical propagation in random and nearly periodic
materials and photonic devices. The instrument will allow the principal
investigators to extend the coherent technique developed in the microwave region
of the spectrum to visible and infrared frequencies. It will allow them to
characterize the statistics of transport using statistical measures of the
transmitted fields and intensity, and to use the variance of intensity
fluctuations as a sure test of phonon localization free of ambiguities arising
from absorption of microwave resonance. Band edge and localized modes in
cholesteric liquid crystals will be characterized. The objective is to clarify
the conjunction of lasing and localization and guide development of homogeneous
cholesteric materials in which ultra-low lasing threshold will be observed. The
instrument will provide students preparing for careers in physics with a sound
mix of microwave and optical techniques as well as exposure to industrial
research laboratories engaged in forefront research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
is an instrument acquisition award from the Major Research Instrumentation
program and the Instrumentation for Materials Research program to the City
University of New York Queens College. The award will allow CUNY Queens College
to purchase a Coherent 899-29 Autoscan II single frequency scanning laser for
the study of the statistics of optical propagation in random and nearly periodic
materials and photonic devices. The instrument will allow the principal
investigators to extend the coherent technique developed in the microwave region
of the spectrum to visible and infrared frequencies. The instrument will provide
students preparing for careers in physics with a sound mix of microwave and
optical techniques as well as exposure to industrial research laboratories
engaged in forefront research.&lt;br/&gt;