* 0114184
* Structure/Function Investigation of Gamma-Carboxyglutamic Acid-Containing Conotoxins
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2001,04/30/2005
* Alan Rigby, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 04/30/2005
* USD 319,595.00

Marine snails of the genus Conus produce conotoxins that target voltage- or
ligand-gated ion channels in addition to G-protein coupled receptor subtypes
with unprecedented selectivity and specificity. This project is a
structure/function investigation of two novel g-carboxyglutamic acid
(Gla)-containing conotoxins, isolated from Conus textile. Gla is a metal-ion
binding amino acid that plays a critical structural role in defining the
membrane binding properties of mammalian vitamin K-dependent blood coagulation
proteins. This phylogenic preservation of the enzymatic machinery necessary to
synthesize Gla suggests an important role for Gla within the animal kingdom.
Initially, potentiometry and fluorescence spectroscopy will be used to determine
the metal-ion binding constants and number of binding sites possessed by these
conotoxins. Simultaneously, metal-ion induced structural perturbations of the
peptide backbone and Gla residue side chain will be monitored using circular
dichroism and 1H NMR spectroscopy. The three-dimensional structure of these
conotoxins in their calcium-induced conformation will be determined with NMR
spectroscopy. Finally, the project will examine the structure/function
significance conferred upon these peptides by the disulfide bond scaffold and
other post-translationally modified amino acids including; brominated tryptophan
and glycosylated threonine. The current paucity of structure/function
information pertaining to Gla and other post-translationally modified amino
acids within the genus Conus has prevented neuroscientists, pharmacologists and
structural biologists from understanding the refined mechanism of protein-
receptor recognition that is innate to conotoxins. Insight into the structural
and functional implications of post-translational modifications has become
increasingly important in this post-genomic era, as scientists attempt to
understand if "function follows form".