* 0114689
* Transforming NASA: Space Technology in the Goldin Years
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* W. Henry Lambright, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Ronald Rainger
* 09/30/2005
* USD 85,001.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;SES 0114689, &lt;br/&gt;Henry Lambright, Syracuse
University&lt;br/&gt;Transforming NASA: Space Technology in the Golden
Years&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What role does the administrative leader play in
change in a federal science and technology agency? There are some scholars who
say that role is trivial and others who say the opposite. The answer lies in
understanding the relationship between the leader and organization and
circumstances in the political environment at the time the leader serves. To
explore and analyze that complex relationship, the PI examines Daniel Goldin at
NASA in the period 1992 to 2001. Goldin has served longer than any administrator
in NASA history, in terms of continuous service. Appointed by George Bush,
retained by Bill Clinton, he has been asked by George W. Bush to stay on while
the President recruits a replacement. With this much time in office, Goldin has
had the opportunity to make a difference. What has he done with that
time?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study tracks Goldin's role in the organizational
and technological change process at NASA. During his tour, he has helped get the
Space Station redesigned and linked with the Russians. Called International
Space Station, this facility is currently being assembled in space. He has also
used a "faster, better, cheaper," management approach to bring down the cost and
speed the launch rate of robotic spacecraft, particularly those associated with
Mars missions. That approach has had successes (Mars Global Surveyor,
Pathfinder) and failures (Mars Climate Orbiter, Mars Polar Lander). He has
initiated a host of new programs, reorganized frequently and downsized his
agency dramatically. Throughout his tenure, he has worked against the budgetary
wind, fought one conflict after another, and become probably the most
controversial administrator NASA has had.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a policy
process model, this project studies the circumstances prior to Goldin's
appointment that caused President Bush to bring an "outsider" to NASA with a
mandate for change. The PI tracks Goldin's evolution as an administrator over
the years as this business executive/engineer developed political skills to
operate in Washington. The project also examines how the ever-shifting political
environment impacted his decisions and how Goldin, in turn, influenced that
environment. A key issue is how NASA administrator shaped not only an
organization but its technologies, imparting to them his values. The PI also
examines which of Goldin's changes have had results that were successful,
unsuccessful, and mixed, and the reasons why. Finally, the study extends past
Goldin's departure to investigate any policy innovations that survived him. This
three-year research project culminates in a book on administrative and
governmental leadership and change in the contemporary science and technology
context. &lt;br/&gt;