* 0114194
* Genetic Analysis of the Role of Pro-opiomelanocortin Peptides in Mouse Adrenal Development
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Ute Hochgeschwender, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ione Hunt Von Herbing
* 07/31/2004
* USD 295,735.00

The adrenal gland regulates essential physiological functions in the adult
mammalian organism through producing gluco- and mineralocorticoids. Furthermore,
through production of steroid hormones, the adrenal gland contributes to the
normal maturation of fetal organ systems, including lung, liver, pancreas,
brain, retina, and gastrointestinal tract. Several distinct signals have been
implicated as critical for pre- and postnatal development and for maintenance of
the mammalian adrenal gland. These include signals from the pituitary, such as
pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC)-derived peptides, and signals derived from the cells
of the adrenal itself, such as corticosterone. It is essential to know more
specifically which factors are required for which aspects of adrenal development
and maintenance. The principal investigator recently developed a strain of
genetically engineered mutant mice lacking all POMC-derived peptides. These POMC
null mice develop non-functional adrenal structures that completely disappear in
the adult, thus affording a new opportunity to study the role of POMC peptides
in adrenal development, maintenance, and function. In this proposal the
investigators will systematically exploit the POMC knockout mouse to probe the
molecular mechanisms regulating mammalian adrenal development and maintenance.
The first objective is to determine whether POMC-derived peptides, either
supplied from the mother or from the fetus, are essential for the prenatal
development of the adrenal structure. To this end the investigators will analyze
prenatal adrenal development in embryos when either the mother or the fetus or
both lack POMC-derived peptides. The second objective is to determine whether
POMC-derived peptides are essential for postnatal adrenal development and
differentiation. The investigators will analyze postnatal adrenal development in
pups lacking POMC-derived peptides, in POMC null mutant pups, which are
pharmacologically reconstituted with individual or combinations of POMC
peptides, and by postnatal transplantation of adrenals from wildtype and mutant
donors to recipients having or lacking POMC peptides. The third objective is to
assess the role of POMC-derived peptides in maintaining adult adrenal structure
and function. The investigators will assess the maintenance of adrenal glands in
mice lacking POMC peptides by transplanting normal adrenal tissue into POMC null
mutant mice and reconstituting these mice with individual POMC peptides, and by
subtraction of individual POMC peptides in POMC null mutants which have
developed adrenals through postnatal reconstitution with POMC peptides. This
genetic dissection of the role of POMC peptides in pre-and postnatal adrenal
development and maintenance will provide a detailed and necessary framework for
the study of the molecular mechanisms generating and maintaining this important
organ.