* 0114216
* Development of High Efficiency High Resolution Cryogenic Detector for X-ray Fluorescence Applications and  Student Training
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Stephen Cramer, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2005
* USD 249,999.00

X-ray detection is often the limiting factor in modern synchrotron-based
fluorescence experiments in material science and biophysics. The brightness
available from synchrotron radiation sources has increased by nearly 10 orders
of magnitude in the past 20 years, but our ability to collect and discriminate
emitted x-rays has not kept pace. This award from the Instrumentation for
Materials Research program to the University of California Davis will support
new detector development which will greatly enhance the sensitivity of existing
instrumentation for fluorescence analysis of thin films or dilute samples in
material science and biophysics. This instrument development will adapt existing
cryogenic detectors to the specific needs of synchrotron experiments. The origin
of the spectral artifacts that presently limit the sensitivity to certain
emission lines will be studied and addressed. The current detector's usable
energy range will be extended beyond one kilo electronvolt by adding thick
absorber films of high Z materials. The total area and count rate capabilities
of the sensor will be increased by increasing This development will be done by
graduate students and postdoctoral fellows in collaboration with the Advanced
Detector Group at Lawrence Livermore. The cryogenic spectrometer will be
available to collaborators on a proposal basis. Combining such high-sensitivity
high-resolution detectors with the intensity of undulator radiation of third
generation synchrotrons will open up a range of new experimental methods for
previously unfeasible science. Graduate students will focus on two sets of
experiments. They will develop angle-resolved soft x-ray fluorescence
spectroscopy for non-destructive depth profiling of thin film samples. They will
also extend fluorescence-detected L-edge absorption spectroscopy to vanadium and
manganese-containing metalloenzymes to determine the chemical oxidation state of
the metal site during the catalytic cycle. The long-term goal is to combine non-
destructive depth profiling and in-situ chemical characterization of samples
with part per million level sensitivity.

X-ray detection is often the limiting factor in modern synchrotron-based
fluorescence experiments in material science and biophysics. The brightness
available from synchrotron radiation sources has increased by nearly 10 orders
of magnitude in the past 20 years, but our ability to collect and discriminate
emitted x-rays has not kept pace. This award from the Instrumentation for
Materials Research program to the University of California Davis will support
new detector development which will greatly enhance the sensitivity of existing
instrumentation for fluorescence analysis of thin films or dilute samples in
material science and biophysics. This instrument development will adapt existing
cryogenic detectors to the specific needs of synchrotron experiments. The
development will be done by graduate students and postdoctoral fellows in
collaboration with the Advanced Detector Group at Lawrence Livermore. The
cryogenic spectrometer will be available to collaborators on a proposal basis.
Combining such high-sensitivity high-resolution detectors with the intensity of
undulator radiation of third generation synchrotrons will open up a range of new
experimental methods for previously unfeasible science. Graduate students will
focus on two sets of experiments. The long-term goal is to combine non-
destructive depth profiling and in-situ chemical characterization of samples
with part per million level sensitivity.