* 0114304
* IGERT:  Ecosystem Management in Tropical and Temperate Regions: Integrating Education in Sustainable Production and Biodiversity conservation
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2008
* Lisette Waits, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Holly K. Given
* 08/31/2008
* USD 3,094,040.00

This IGERT award will establish an interdisciplinary, multi-institution graduate
research and education program in conservation biology and sustainability of
agricultural and forest systems. The need is acute for better disciplinary
integration to achieve biodiversity conservation and sustainable productivity in
anthropogenically fragmented landscapes. To achieve this, a new generation of
professionals must be educated in a holistic fashion. Students in this program
will work in interdisciplinary teams to study aspects of biodiversity
conservation and sustainable productivity in three distinct geographic regions
characterized by habitat fragmentation. A highly productive group of educators
and researchers from three Colleges and seven Departments at the University of
Idaho and four Research Areas at the Tropical Agricultural Research and Higher
Education Center (CATIE), an international institution headquartered in Costa
Rica, will participate in the project. These faculty will provide mentoring in
agricultural ecology, forest ecology and management, conservation biology and
biodiversity assessment, ecological genetics, soil science, watershed sciences,
ethics, rural sociology, policy, social impact assessment, and environmental
economics. The IGERT program will differ from traditional doctoral programs at
UI in five major ways. First, graduate education will be multi-institutional
with course work conducted at UI and CATIE, and dual-institution graduate
committee membership. Second, student teams will address similar research
questions in temperate and tropical ecosystems and will complete a research
internship with their teammates in the country that is not their primary field
site. Third, students working in interdisciplinary teams will produce
dissertation sets that will include some co-authored chapters. Fourth, students
will complete an interdisciplinary graduate curriculum including biophysical and
social sciences. Fifth, students will participate in professional development
activities including joint annual research symposia and interdisciplinary
training workshops. Special efforts are planned to recruit Hispanic, Native
American, and African American students. Professionals educated through this
program will have the expertise to work effectively in interdisciplinary teams
addressing the pressing scientific problems concerning management of the
biosphere. Students will gain cross-cultural experience and geographic exposure
to enhance their international perspective. These professionals will be uniquely
prepared to pursue careers in academia, government agencies, and international
research and development institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide
program intended to meet the challenges of educating Ph.D. scientists and
engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical,
professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of the future.
The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by
establishing new, innovative models for graduate education and training in a
fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends traditional
disciplinary boundaries. In the fourth year of the program, awards are being
made to twenty-two institutions for programs that collectively span all areas of
science and engineering supported by NSF. The intellectual foci of this specific
award reside in the Directorates for Biological Sciences; Social, Behavioral,
and Economic Sciences; and Education and Human Resources.&lt;br/&gt;