* 0114501
* Arabidopsis 2010: Identifying Clients of 14-3-3 Phosphoregulation
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Robert Ferl, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jermelina Tupas
* 08/31/2005
* USD 635,756.00

This project seeks to characterize the entire range of Arabidopsis proteins that
are regulated by interaction with 14-3-3 proteins; to identify components from
metabolic and signal transduction pathways that utilize 14-3-3 regulators, and
to address fundamental aspects of 14-3-3 function in plants. 14-3-3s have
emerged as critical regulators of important and diverse cellular processes that
extend to every tissue and organ. Indeed, 14-3-3s appear to be intrinsically
necessary for regulatory events that are absolutely crucial to normal growth and
development in many species, and especially in plants. Initial searches of the
Arabidopsis genome predict that 14-3-3s interact with fully 10 to 20 percent of
the Arabidopsis gene products. The most recognized of 14-3-3 activities involve
protein kinases, phosphorylation events and signal transduction pathways
involved in growth and development, with one underlying theme being that 14-3-3s
bind to specific phosphorylated client proteins in order to influence the
regulation of the target activity. The goals of the present project are to
identify in the Arabidopsis genome client proteins that possess 14-3-3 docking
sites and to assay the interaction strength of the potential docking site
against the family of 14-3-3 proteins in order to provide a tested, predictive
algorithm for determining of the spectrum of 14-3-3 interactions that should be
expected for each client protein. These data, combined with emerging data from
14-3-3 knockouts and 14-3-3 isoform expression patterns, should provide key
insights into the potential regulatory functions of the 14-3-3 signal mediating
molecules, and a central, fully characterized database for predicting 14-3-3
mediated signaling in diverse pathways. By highlighting potential regulatory
sites across diverse gene families and metabolic pathways, this project will
provide an integrating effect on the many projects identifying specific
functional aspects of Arabidopsis gene families. As genes are functionally
characterized, the 14-3-3 client database will provide immediate predictions of
phosphorylation and 14-3-3 dependent regulation that will accelerate the
understanding of the regulation of many gene families and metabolic and
signaling pathways.