* 0114434
* IGERT:   Optical Biomolecular Devices: From Natural Paradigms to Practical Applications
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2008
* Willem Vermaas, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Melur Ramasubramanian
* 08/31/2008
* USD 3,164,163.00

This IGERT brings together Arizona State University's well known basic research
program in photosynthesis and photobiology with two other major research thrusts
on campus: the Nanostructures Research Group in the Center for Solid State
Electronics Research and the Bioengineering thrust within the Engineering
College led by the newly formed Bioengineering Department. The research theme is
the design and fabrication of molecular-scale devices based on the principles
learned from photobiology. This effort represents a major expansion of the
current NSF funded RTG training program in this area, shifting the educational
and research focus towards the applied realm by including new faculty from four
Engineering Departments and Physics as well as several industrial and
international partners at Motorola, Lockheed/Martin, Kodak, QTL, CEA-Saclay, Max
Planck-Muelheim, and the University of Glasgow. In order to form an integrated
graduate education program between these different disciplines, the IGERT
includes the creation of a Ph.D. emphasis program that will normalize the
curriculum requirements across colleges. Industry will also play a major role
through scientific collaborations, student internships and classroom discussion.
The IGERT curriculum includes a series of courses that center on research and
discovery based learning. Students will solve problems by drawing on an
extensive dynamic resource infrastructure that includes both well-equipped
instrument facilities, including a new biohybrid fabrication facility, and high
level personnel. In addition, the program includes a major educational thrust in
science policy, science ethics, and societal impact, culminating in a two week
workshop at the Center for Science, Policy and Outcomes in Washington DC. Here
students will have the opportunity to consider the impact that research and
development in the molecular device area will have on society and to hear the
thoughts of scholars who have considered the ethical and political aspects of
this expanding area of science. Students will also have the opportunity to
participate in research abroad and in the "Preparing Future Faculty" or
"Preparing Future Professionals" programs run by the ASU Graduate College.
Finally, the three IGERTs on the ASU campus will be coordinated within a
superstructure run by the Dean of the Graduate College. This will facilitate
common mechanisms for recruiting and evaluation, and provide a formal avenue for
information exchange between IGERT faculty and students. This larger scale
integration among the ASU IGERTs should result in a practical model of
interdisciplinary graduate education that can be used in the future both at ASU
and elsewhere. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to
meet the challenges of educating Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical, professional, and personal
skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing new, innovative
models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for
collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries. In
the fourth year of the program, awards are being made to twenty-two institutions
for programs that collectively span all areas of science and engineering
supported by NSF. The intellectual foci of this specific award reside in the
Directorates for Biological Sciences; Engineering; Mathematical and Physical
Sciences; and Education and Human Resources.&lt;br/&gt;