* 0114965
* Arabidopsis 2010:  Analysis of Two-Component Signaling Elements from Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Robert Pope, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Jacqueline Banks
* 08/31/2006
* USD 2,118,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two-component systems are the
primary means by which bacteria sense and respond to environmental stimuli.
These systems are comprised of a number of distinct elements, namely histidine
kinases, response regulators and in the case of phosphorelays, histidine
phosphotransfer proteins (HPts). Genes encoding similar proteins to each of
these elements have been identified in Arabidopsis, and for the majority of the
35 such genes no function has yet been definitively ascribed. An integrated
approach to elucidate the function of these proteins in Arabidopsis is proposed.
A combination of gene knockouts and inducible overexpression will be used to
assess the roles of these genes in plant growth and development. The mutant
plant lines will be characterized in terms of their response to biotic and
abiotic factors such as hormones, light, and osmotic stress, and for their
pattern of gene expression. Where in the plants these genes are expressed will
be determined using a combination of GUS fusions and in situ RNA analysis. The
location of the cognate proteins within the cell will also be delineated. To
facilitate this localization, a series of 10 monoclonal antibodies will be
generated to marker proteins, each of which resides on a distinct membrane.
Protein complexes from Arabidopsis will be purified and analyzed to determine
the interactions among these elements and to identify novel interacting
proteins. Together, these studies will illuminate the signaling pathways in
which each of these Arabidopsis two-component signaling elements function and
how they interact to control plant growth and development.&lt;br/&gt;The data
from these studies will be deposited on a publicly accessible web page that is
currently under construction at UNC (http://www.bio.unc.edu/research/two-
component/). A link to this web site will be established on the TAIR database,
and we will coordinate with TAIR to deposit data as appropriate. The knockout
seeds will be made publicly available through deposition in the ABRC Stock
Center at Ohio State. The monoclonals raised against the membrane marker
proteins will be available for the cost of shipping through UNH and the cell
lines will also be deposited with the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC).
&lt;br/&gt;In keeping with the goals of the 2010 project, functional analysis of
the two-component signaling elements will aid in our understanding of plants at
the organismal, cellular, and evolutionary levels. The research will provide
functional information on the role of Arabidopsis two-component signaling
systems in plant growth and development. The research will serve to define the
subcellular location of the two-component signal transduction pathways, the
interactions between the two-component signaling elements, and the downstream
targets of the pathways. The research should clarify how a signal transduction
mechanism that arose in bacteria has been adapted to plant signal
transduction.&lt;br/&gt;These studies should uncover the functions of several
gene families in Arabidopsis. The proteins encoded by these gene families are
predicted to interact and thus our studies should aid in the development of a
paradigm for signaling specificity among interacting members of large gene
families. In addition, tools will be developed that will be generally applicable
in defining the subcellular location of proteins in Arabidopsis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;