* 0114917
* Program for Gender Equity in Science, Mathematics, Engineering and Technology (PGE): (DEM) Bringing Up Girls in Science
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Tandra Tyler-Wood, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 07/31/2005
* USD 900,001.00

Bringing Up Girls in Science (BUGS) is a demonstration project in the Department
of Technology &lt;br/&gt;and Cognition at the University of North Texas (UNT).
The goal of this project is to provide &lt;br/&gt;educational experiences in an
outdoor learning lab for girls in grades four and five that
will&lt;br/&gt;increase girls' interest, participation, self-concept, knowledge,
and achievement in the &lt;br/&gt;environmental sciences. During Year One,
thirty 4 th and 5 th grade girls (BUGS participants) &lt;br/&gt;will participate
in an after school outdoor science lab at Sam Houston Elementary in the
&lt;br/&gt;Denton Independent School District in Denton, TX. Participants for
the project will be &lt;br/&gt;recruited from across the district. BUGS
participants will be mentored by female &lt;br/&gt;high students enrolled in the
Texas Academy for Mathematics and Science (TAMS). &lt;br/&gt;BUGS participants
and mentors will be joined the second and third year of the project&lt;br/&gt;by
girls in special populations at distance sites through the use &lt;br/&gt;of
two-way audio-visual desktop conferencing tools, a project WEB site, chat rooms,
and &lt;br/&gt;computer ``pen-pals''. For the second and third year special
populations joining the project &lt;br/&gt;will include: (1) students with
emotional and behavioral problems attending Rose Street &lt;br/&gt;Day Program
and Therapeutic School in Wichita Falls, TX; (2) a school district which serves
&lt;br/&gt;large numbers of Hispanic and Native American students in Bernalillo,
New Mexico; and&lt;br/&gt;(3) students from a rural school district in Decatur,
Texas. BUGS participants at distance &lt;br/&gt;sites will be able to use
``electronic field trips'' developed from activities that were
&lt;br/&gt;videotaped during Year One to increase their opportunities to
participate in the ``outdoor&lt;br/&gt;science lab experience.'' Family
involvement will be ongoing throughout the project.&lt;br/&gt;Career awareness
and educational opportunities materials will be housed by a
local&lt;br/&gt;public library for the parents of BUGS participants. Three
parent &lt;br/&gt;meetings per year will be provided to ``showcase'' student
work and provide educational &lt;br/&gt;and career
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;