* 0114796
* Development of a Database for the Discovery and Annotation of Functional Sites in Protein Structures
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Lydia Kavraki, Baylor College of Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Manfred D. Zorn
* 08/31/2004
* USD 350,000.00

This proposal aims to develop novel and general computational tools to discover
functional sites in protein structures. These sites control nearly all aspects
of cellular chemistry and their identification has important applications, such
as to understand the basis of protein function, and to modify cellular pathways
by engineering protein mimetics or inhibitors. Until now, however, functional
sites could be identified reliably only after exhaustive mutational analysis: a
laboratory process that is slow, labor intensive, limited by assay sensitivity,
and which is protein specific. Here, we propose instead to identify functional
sites with new algorithms for sequence analysis and for the efficient geometric
comparison of important features in protein structures. This builds on our
preliminary work on the Evolutionary Trace (ET) method. First, in proteins with
sufficient evolutionary information, we will use ET to identify the key
geometric and chemical features of active sites and summarize these into
3-dimensional molds. Second, in protein structures lacking sufficient
evolutionary information, we will search for look-alike areas that mimic these
molds. At a time when the outpour of raw sequence and structure date overwhelms
conventional means of analysis, this low-cost strategy will reveal the regions
of protein structures that are most relevant to function, and therefore to
experimentation. &lt;br/&gt;