* 0114200
* Acquisition of 12 Tesla Magnet for Electron Paramagnetic Resonance Facility for Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2001,12/31/2004
* Tatyana Smirnova, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 12/31/2004
* USD 130,371.00

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program will enable
North Carolina State University to purchase a specialized wide-bore 12 Tesla
superconducting magnet for a High Field Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (HF EPR)
Laboratory. The instrument will be used primarily in ongoing research programs
at North Carolina State University that are focused on exploiting paramagnetic
properties of novel materials. The new Cryogenic 12 T EPR magnet will have
specialized cryostat/accessories and will enable key experiments in: (1) spin-
polarization experiments with novel magnetic materials; (2) measurements of
zero-field splitting for effective integer spin-systems of coupled spins that
are EPR-silent at lower magnetic fields; (3) quantum computing experiments with
essentially pure quantum state for an ensemble of quantum dots; (4) high
accuracy measurements of zero-field splitting from field dependence of EPR
spectra to determine the nature of magnetic interactions; (5) studies of phase
separation phenomena; (5) and cluster nanostructure in lanthanide-doped
optically-active glasses. This state-of-art HF EPR facility will be available
for education of students in modern magnetic resonance techniques, and will be
accessible to users from the UNC-Chapel Hill and Duke as well as to researchers
from the Research Triangle Park. Thus, this magnet acquisition will provide new
measurement capabilities, improve the research infrastructure, and enhance
student education, improve the research infrastructure, and enhance student
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Instrumentation for
Materials Research program will enable North Carolina State University to
purchase a specialized wide-bore 12 Tesla superconducting magnet for a High
Field Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (HF EPR) Laboratory. The instrument will
be used primarily in ongoing research programs at North Carolina State
University that are focused on exploiting paramagnetic properties of novel
materials. The new Cryogenic 12 T EPR magnet will have specialized
cryostat/accessories and will enable a wide range of experiments from including
quantum computing and cluster nanostructure in lanthanide-doped optically-active
glasses. This state-of-art HF EPR facility will be available for education of
students in modern magnetic resonance techniques, and will be accessible to
users from the UNC-Chapel Hill and Duke as well as to researchers from the
Research Triangle Park. Thus, this magnet acquisition will provide new
measurement capabilities, improve the research infrastructure, and enhance
student education, improve the research infrastructure, and enhance student
education.&lt;br/&gt;