* 0114387
* IGERT:  Computational Phylogenetics and Applications to Biology
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2008
* Tandy Warnow, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Holly K. Given
* 08/31/2008
* USD 3,175,735.00

Phylogenetics , the study of the relationships among genes, individuals,
populations, and species, forms the basis for all of comparative biology. This
IGERT grant will support a comprehensive, interdisciplinary graduate training
program in Computational Phylogenetics and Applications to Biology. The program
involves 27 faculty participants from the computational and biological sciences
at the University of Texas at Austin, and it will support 12 graduate trainees
each year for five years. Two major research areas will be emphasized:
computational phylogenetics and applied phylogenetics. Phylogenies provide a
fundamental framework for all of biology, and present the computational
scientist with many technical challenges. Computational phylogenetics is
concerned with the computational aspects of phylogenetic inference, and applied
phylogenetics uses estimated phylogenies to address a wide diversity of
biological questions. The training program will involve a series of new and
existing courses and seminars, a summer training program for students from
underrepresented areas of science, co-advisement of each graduate student by one
computational and one biological faculty participant, placement of students into
well-established research groups in biology and computer science, participation
in spring recruitment conferences and fall phylogenetics retreats, and
opportunities for internships in the bioinformatics industry, national
laboratories, and non-government organizations. The goals of this project are:
(i) design and implement an interdisciplinary training curriculum for graduate
students across computational and biological sciences that prepares students to
understand and contribute to both sides of computational biology; (ii) stimulate
interdisciplinary graduate research and interdisciplinary interactions in
general between computational scientists and biological scientists that will
lead to development and testing of novel approaches to unsolved problems in
phylogenetics and their application to problems in biology; (iii) prepare
trainees for their careers beyond graduate school and help them achieve
visibility in the larger research community; and (iv) evaluate and improve the
program in computational and applied phylogenetics to ensure its success beyond
the proposed IGERT project. This program will create a unique collaborative
environment for graduate students and faculty from the computational and
biological sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended
to meet the challenges of educating Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical, professional, and personal
skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing new, innovative
models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for
collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries. In
the fourth year of the program, awards are being made to twenty-two institutions
for programs that collectively span all areas of science and engineering
supported by NSF. The intellectual foci of this specific award reside in the
Directorates for Biological Sciences; Computer and Information Science and
Engineering; and Education and Human Resources.