* 0114632
* Collaborative Research: Ecological Physiology of Plant Chloroplast Small Heat-Shock Proteins
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Dawn Luthe, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Winner
* 07/31/2005
* USD 113,727.00

Heat-shock proteins (Hsps) are types of general stress proteins produced by
virtually all organisms in response to most environmental and biological
stresses, and are thought to protect cells from damage during stress or
facilitate recovery. The importance of variation in the cellular quantity or
biochemical efficiency of Hsps is unknown, particularly for plants and for the
category of Hsps referred to as the low-molecular-weight or "small" Hsps.
Progress in understanding Hsps has been hampered by the lack of appropriate
biomolecular probes for specific Hsps and methods to experimentally manipulate
and assess the effect of variation in Hsps. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs have
developed molecular probes specific to the small Hsps in chloroplasts, the cell
compartment where photosynthesis takes place in plants, as well as assays to
assess Hsp effectiveness. Using these tools, they have shown that chloroplast
small Hsps protect photosynthesis during heat and other environmental stresses,
by protecting a key stress-sensitive step of photosynthesis (electron transport
in Photosystem II). However, differences among plants in the ability of
chloroplast small Hsp to protect photosynthesis during stress, such as predicted
differences between heat-tolerant wild plants and heat-sensitive crops, have not
been examined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this series of studies, the PIs will
examine chloroplast small Hsps in stress-sensitive vs. stress-tolerant wild
plants to determine how they differ in the cellular quantity and biochemical
efficiency of small Hsps and how this affects the protection of photosynthesis
during heat stress. This would be the first such investigation for plant Hsps.
They will explore molecular and biochemical variation in small Hsps across a
range of species, they will examine correlations between small Hsp content and
plant performance, and they will carry out experiments in vitro, using Hsps
purified from a range of species, to determine how qualitative and quantitative
variation in chloroplast small Hsps affects their protective function. These
results will contribute both to understanding factors that affect stress-
tolerance of plants in nature and to understanding factors that may be useful in
agricultural research. Given the importance of chloroplast small Hsps in
protecting photosynthesis during many stresses, the central role of
photosynthesis in plants, and the high sensitivity of photosynthesis to
environmental stress, the results should be especially useful for the
bioengineering and breeding of more stress-tolerant crops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;