* 0114135
* Workshop on Advanced Methods of Mapping Surficial Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2001,10/31/2002
* David Bloomquist, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 10/31/2002
* USD 61,147.00

This workshop will bring together leading academic practitioners of Airborne
Laser Swath Mapping (ALSM, LIDAR), Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR), Airborne
Digital Imaging (ADI), Infrared (IR), and Hyperspectral Imaging (HI) with a
cross section of both the engineering and scientific communities. The intent is
to provide a forum to discuss how best to incorporate data collected by these
powerful techniques into the monitoring and study of geo-surficial processes.
The overall objective of the workshop is to increase the awareness of the
potential uses of these advanced technologies and to obtain from the engineering
and scientific communities research needs and activities that could benefit from
their usage, both short and long term.

The workshop will take place over two and one half days. The first two days will
contain a half-day each on ALSM technology, and a half-day on a mix of the
complementary technologies, including SAR, ADI, IR and HI. Each of these
sessions will open with invited papers to provide the participants a state-of-
the-art update on each specific technology. The second day will begin with a
session on current applications, new applications expected to emerge in the
immediate future and the research needs of the engineering and scientific
communities. After the invited summary papers, there will be panel led
discussions to maximize the exchange of information between the particular
experts and researchers that have ongoing projects utilizing these innovative
technologies, as well as those considering the use of them in current or future
research.

In addition to the invited oral presentations, participants will be invited to
submit poster presentations that will be on display for the attendees to view
and discuss during breaks in the formal sessions. The UF/FIU ALSM aircraft will
be available for viewing by the participants.

The morning of the third day will be devoted to an open session with the
Steering Committee serving as a panel to outline the final draft report and
discuss the preliminary findings and recommendations to be included in that
report. All participants will have the opportunity to provide input, and members
of the Committee will be asked to draft specific sections of the final report to
meet a schedule agreed to by the Committee.