* 0114712
* Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMO): Phase III: Western Alliance to Expand Student Opportunities
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2001,10/31/2007
* Milton Glick, Arizona State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* A.  Hicks
* 10/31/2007
* USD 5,244,000.00

Phase III Western Alliance to Expand Student Opportunities (WAESO)
LSAMP&lt;br/&gt;proposes to (1) institutionalize its highly successful LSAMP
Phase II activities,&lt;br/&gt;(2) double once again the degree rate from our
current baseline to achieve 2,260 &lt;br/&gt;underrepresented minority science,
mathematics, engineering, andtechnology (SMET)&lt;br/&gt;BS degrees in the year
2006, and (3) expand and link LSAMP graduates and Phase III&lt;br/&gt;LSAMP
participating underrepresented minority SMET undergraduate students to our
&lt;br/&gt;MGE@MSA AGEP and other AGEPs with high technology products that will
help our &lt;br/&gt;students and graduates both in our service region and
nationally. The Phase III WAESO&lt;br/&gt;LSAMP is the undergraduate component
of a comprehensive, concerted, sequenced &lt;br/&gt;effort that helps students
beginning in secondary school throughundergraduate, graduate&lt;br/&gt;school,
and beyond, including the transition of college sophomores, juniors, and seniors
&lt;br/&gt;toward graduate school and the development of high technology
products with &lt;br/&gt;application or dissemination both regionally and
nationally. Although, our LSAMP &lt;br/&gt;NSF funds will focus solely on
undergraduate students, we will use non-NSF funds &lt;br/&gt;to support
thousands of pre-college students and use both NSF AGEP and non-NSF
&lt;br/&gt;funds to help hundreds of graduate students and graduates of Ph.D. or
Master level &lt;br/&gt;programs beginning in the 7th grade and going through
the doctorate and even beyond &lt;br/&gt;to faculty status or careers in the
corporate or government sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some of the unique and
highly effective features of our Phase II LSAMP that will &lt;br/&gt;be
institutionalized in Phase III WAESO lie within the sequence and integration of
&lt;br/&gt;the various levels of the project. For example, (1) Integrating pre-
college and&lt;br/&gt;graduate study with our core undergraduate project in a
coherent and&lt;br/&gt;effective way; (2) Giving scientists, specifically
faculty members who are &lt;br/&gt;currently working with students in classrooms
and laboratories and who review and &lt;br/&gt;rank projects which in turn also
come from the field and need to compete for funds, &lt;br/&gt;primary control
over project activities and the allocation of funds, including&lt;br/&gt;the
flexibility to make mid-course corrections in the funding of
deserving&lt;br/&gt;(or undeserving) projects, through their participation in
the operational committees;&lt;br/&gt;(3) Using high-technology to produce and
distribute underrepresented minority-focused&lt;br/&gt;SMET materials as well as
to coordinate project components over great distances &lt;br/&gt;through the use
of DVDs, CD-ROMs, the Internet, and the World Wide Web; and
(4)&lt;br/&gt;Developing and maintain special programmatic initiatives directed
toward each of&lt;br/&gt;our participating student populations, including
American Indians. Thanks to strong&lt;br/&gt;long-term institutional support, we
have the ability to not only meet the basic &lt;br/&gt;LSAMP cost-sharing
requirements but, even more importantly, to meet
the&lt;br/&gt;institutionalization costs of the new, third phase of the LSAMP
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on the successes of Phase I in doubling the
number of graduates per year of our&lt;br/&gt;target population and being above
a similar doubling goal in Phase II, we propose to take &lt;br/&gt;on the
formidable task of achieving B.S. degree rates reflective of the substantial
&lt;br/&gt;underrepresented minority population of our region which is 25.8%
American Indian,&lt;br/&gt;African American, and Hispanic. Thus, our long-term
numerical goal in the year&lt;br/&gt;2011 of 2,858 SMET B.S. degrees awarded to
American Indian, African American, and&lt;br/&gt;Hispanics as accomplishing
parity with our regional population of these Americans.&lt;br/&gt;For the
purposes of Phase III, we are establishing a goal of doubling the degree rate
&lt;br/&gt;once again from our current baseline to achieve 2,260 degrees in the
year 2006,&lt;br/&gt;which is well on the way to achieving parity.&lt;br/&gt;