* 0114419
* IGERT:  Doctoral Training at the Interface of Chemistry and Physics:  New Materials for Electronics and Optics through Control of Nanoscale Structure
* EHR,DGE
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2007
* David Johnson, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* Melur Ramasubramanian
* 08/31/2007
* USD 3,448,460.00

This IGERT program offers a nationally-unique, comprehensive package of new and
tested approaches to graduate education in materials chemistry and physics. It
is designed to prepare the next generation of graduate students for the
challenges of an increasingly interdisciplinary and rapidly evolving research
and development arena. The research and education activities of this IGERT
program are unified by the study of the structure/property relationships in
electronic and optical materials whose properties are dominated by their
nanoscale structure. The proposed research builds upon established activities in
three major thrust areas to address the: (i) synthesis and properties of
superlattice materials; (ii) preparation and study of metal and semiconductor
nanoparticles, quantum dots and assemblies; and (iii) fabrication and properties
of molecular assemblies. These research topics provide outstanding opportunities
for interdisciplinary graduate training because both the chemistry and physics
of short-length-scale systems are intertwined. This initiative has received
wide-ranging support within the University and among our industrial affiliates
because it provides a multidisciplinary research experience, stimulates
industrial/academic relations and prepares students to be successful
participants in diverse and changing job markets. Our student-focused program is
designed to address three goals: (i) help each student acquire diverse,
adaptable and portable technical skills and the knowledge base to succeed in
rapidly evolving career markets; (ii) help each student develop the critical
thinking skills necessary to solve complex problems and understand new
phenomena; and (iii) provide each student with comprehensive career training,
i.e. development of professional skills, exposure to many career opportunities,
and training tailored to specific career paths. To achieve these goals, a
comprehensive and fully integrated graduate training program has been developed.
Key activities of the training program include: new interdisciplinary courses,
core engineering courses, research rotations during the first year,
interdisciplinary research opportunities, targeted internships in industry or
academia, and comprehensive career preparation.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating Ph.D.
scientists and engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
education by establishing new, innovative models for graduate education and
training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries. In the fourth year of the program, awards
are being made to twenty-two institutions for programs that collectively span
all areas of science and engineering supported by NSF. The intellectual foci of
this specific award reside in the Directorates for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences; Engineering; and Education and Human Resources.