* 0114054
* MRI:  Acquisition of Funds for NMR Instrumentation to Enhance Undergraduate Research and Course Instruction at Two Institutions in South Jersey
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Robert Newland, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Joan M. Frye
* 12/31/2004
* USD 280,140.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, the
Department of Chemistry at Rowan University will acquire a 400 MHz NMR
Spectrometer. In addition, funds are awarded to upgrade a 200 MHz NMR, which
Rowan will donate to Richard Stockton College. The 400 MHz instrument will be
used to support at least nine active investigations in two departments at Rowan
University; a) the investigation of silica/silicate networks in acqueous
solutions of silicic acid; b) characterization of fluoroacrylate-acrylate and
-methacrylate co-polymers; c) magnetization-transfer NMR analysis of network
formation in polymer gels; d) studying biomolecular recognition; e) 13C NMR-
supported pyrolysis studies; f) development of solid polymer electrolytes for
Li+ and H+ transport; g) silicon carbide fiber processing; h) protein structure
determination; and i) controlled drug release studies. The upgraded 200 MHz
instrument will be used at Richard Stockton College to support laboratory
instruction and the synthesis and characterization of unique surfactants.

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is the most powerful tool
available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is
used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of
atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between
molecules in solution. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential
to chemists who are carrying out frontier research. The results from these NMR
studies will have an impact in a number of areas including materials chemistry,
biochemistry and chemical engineering.