* 0114527
* Mechanisms of Concentration Polarization and Cake Formation in Crossflow Membrane Filtration of Aqueous Colloidal Particles
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2004
* Menachem Elimelech, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas D. Waite
* 07/31/2004
* USD 287,159.00

0114527 Elimelech The objective of this research is to provide a comprehensive
microscopic-level understanding of the thermodynamics and micro-hydrodynamics of
concentration polarization and cake formation in crossflow membrane filtration.
A major emphasis will be placed on the identification of the transition point
from a disordered liquid-like phase in the concentration polarization layer to
an ordered solid-like cake layer. The research will involve the following tasks:
1) Prediction of the equilibrium structure of a colloidal dispersion, 2)
Evaluation of the osmotic pressure, sedimentation coefficient and diffusion
coefficient, 3) Prediction of the liquid-solid transition point in colloidal
systems under crossflow membrane filtration conditions, 4) Prediction of the
extent of concentration polarization and/or cake formation and the resulting
permeate flux decline behavior, 5) Selection of a model experimental system for
validation of the theory and 6) Experimental validation of the above theoretical
approach using model colloidal dispersions at various background electrolyte
concentrations, particle concentrations, pH, crossflow velocities and operating
pressures. This research is expected to lead to a sound theoretical basis for
quantification of permeate flux decline behavior in crossflow membrane
filtration of colloidal dispersions. These results will become increasingly
important as membrane processes, particularly nanofiltration and
ultrafiltration, become more viable for treatment of natural and waste waters
because these technologies offer a comprehensive approach to meeting multiple
water quality objectives for a myriad of dissolved and colloidal contaminants.
***