* 0114210
* Acquisition of a Multi-Probe Scanning Tunneling Microscope with SEM for Student Training in Research
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Ellen Williams, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2003
* USD 400,000.00

With this award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program and the
Major Research Instrumentation program, the University of Maryland will be able
to acquire a combined scanning probe/scanning electron microscope. The
instrument will be used to address critical issues of nano-electronics due to
the variability of nano-device electronic properties with structure. This issue
is critical, for instance, in assessing how or whether electrical contacts to
nano-devices, structural defects in the devices, or even thermal fluctuations
will limit nano-device performance and reproducibility. It is also key to
developing applications of nano-structures that derive from their intrinsic
properties: i.e. where strong variations of device properties with structure
and/or local environment are a natural characteristic, these properties may be
exploited as response mechanisms. Techniques to image the atomic structure of
nanostructures while simultaneously measuring electronic transport properties
will be developed. These experiments will establish the correlations between
structure and the electronic properties of nanodevices, by probing the effects
of dynamic changes in structure (driven by temperature, electric field, current
and chemical potential) on the electrical transport properties of the
nanodevices. The relationship between structure and the electrical response of
nanostructures will also be investigated theoretically. The new instrument, a
combined scanning probe/scanning electron microscope will also be used for
graduate student training in the research areas described
above.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Important new technological properties are expected
to occur in materials structures as their size approaches the nanoscale.
Location of such small structures to allow the direct measurement of their
properties is a serious technical challenge, as is the measurement itself. This
award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program and the Major
Research Instrumentation program will help the University of Maryland with the
purchase of an instrument that combines two microscopes and a fine positioning
stage. One microscope will be used to locate small structures, and the scanning
stage will be used to move the small structures into the measurement range of
the second microscope. The second microscope will be an ultra-high resolution
microscope with the capability of imaging the positions of individual atoms.
Experiments will be performed in which the effect of changes in the positions of
individual atoms in small structures are correlated with the electrical
properties (e.g. the ability to carry electrical current) of the small
structures. The new instrument will also be used for graduate student training
in the research areas described above. &lt;br/&gt;