* 0114452
* SGER: Light and Enlightenment, A Digital Variorum Edition of Newton's Opticks -- Workshop, June 15-16, 2001
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/2001,03/31/2002
* Robert Kargon, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce E. Seely
* 03/31/2002
* USD 29,730.00

ABSTRACT SGER Kargon and Anderson, Light and Enlightenment, A Digital Variorum
Edition of Newton's Opticks SES 01-14452

This project supports a two-day workshop to bring together representatives of
various disciplines. The goal is to lay a secure foundation for a multi-year
effort to bring into existence a digital variorum edition of Newton's Opticks.
Such an edition is intended to clearly represent the changes over time in
Newton's work, for during Newton's lifetime, the Opticks appeared in three
English, two Latin and two French editions. The evolution of this text is a key
indicator of changes in Newton's thinking about important concepts such as the
aether and force, and provides important clues to Newton's views on the rapidly
changing experimental sciences of chemistry and electricity over the last
quarter century of his life. Variorum editions are notoriously difficult to
effect. Print versions that attempt to collate changes over several versions are
complicated, sometimes confusing and always difficult to use.

This workshop is intended to discuss avenues for solving some of these problems,
so that a scholarly instrument can be developed. This instrument will make of
use of digital techniques to enable researchers in the history of science and
technology to perform analyses of Newton's Opticks hitherto not possible. Most
digitization work in our area of concern either (1) transfers existing patterns
of research to the screen and allows text searching, or (2) makes useful
materials available at a distance. This work has been useful and worthy but does
not tap the power and range of digital environments. The PIs wish to develop a
software tool that will enable us, though digitization, to allow our research to
go beyond the paper world and to ask and answer questions not now possible. This
project will require the efforts of historians of science, language specialists,
historians of publishing, and software designers. Putting together such a
diverse team, asking the right questions, designing an instrument useful to its
intended audience, and managing the dissemination of the product is a very
complex task and entails large risks: risks of our time and effort, and
substantial funds for the development of technical tools that do not now exist.