* 0114649
* Program for Gender Equity in Science, Mathematics, Engineering and Technology (PGE): Girls for Planet Earth (DEM)
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Annette Berkovits, Wildlife Conservation Society
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2005
* USD 601,461.00

&lt;br/&gt;The Wildlife Conservation Society/Bronx Zoo seeks NSF funding to
develop an exciting &lt;br/&gt;new three-year program designed to engage girls
and young women in science. Operated with the &lt;br/&gt;Girl Scouts of the USA,
the National 4-H Council, the Boys and Girls Clubs of America, Girls Inc.,
&lt;br/&gt;and the Children's Aid Society, the program will reach thousands of
girls across the U.S. over the &lt;br/&gt;grant period and thousands more
thereafter. The WCS is uniquely qualified to run this program, &lt;br/&gt;having
on its staff many women science professionals who are national and international
leaders &lt;br/&gt;in their fields, and having conducted a number of pioneering
programs for young women in the &lt;br/&gt;recent past. The 36-month program
will consist of: &lt;br/&gt;- An Annual Earth Summit that will introduce 80
girls ages 14-17 to environmental science, &lt;br/&gt;including key
environmental issues in regions across the U.S., as well as to careers and women
&lt;br/&gt;role models in environmental science. (The girls will attend the
Summit in teams of two or &lt;br/&gt;three.) &lt;br/&gt;-A series of service-
learning projects through which the Earth Summit participants will be
&lt;br/&gt;strongly encouraged to apply what they have learned in a community-
based project that &lt;br/&gt;combines knowledge, service and reflection.
&lt;br/&gt;-A program of technical assistance, through which the participants
will be provided with &lt;br/&gt;ongoing assistance that will enable them to
more effectively plan and implement their service- &lt;br/&gt;learning projects;
and &lt;br/&gt;- A ``Virtual Club House,'' through which the girls will be able
to communicate with each other &lt;br/&gt;and WCS staff about the program and
environmental issues. The clubhouse will also showcase &lt;br/&gt;projects that
the Earth Summit participants will conduct and explain how other young people
&lt;br/&gt;might undertake similar community outreach and research projects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed program represents a unique means of
increasing the participation of girls &lt;br/&gt;and young women in science. It
will capitalize on the enthusiasm young people have for animals,
&lt;br/&gt;nature, and for visiting informal science centers, such as the Bronx
Zoo, to excite girls and young &lt;br/&gt;women about science learning. The
program will also seek to increase involvement through a &lt;br/&gt;focus on
ecology and environmental science, subjects that are of immediate relevance to
students. &lt;br/&gt;With their world being increasingly altered by human
activity, what happens to the environment &lt;br/&gt;is of tremendous importance
to the daily lives of girls and young women today and will become
&lt;br/&gt;even more so in the future. By focusing on content that is
immediately relevant, we believe the &lt;br/&gt;program will significantly
increase participant involvement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program will build
on a hugely successful Wildlife Science Careers Program that the
&lt;br/&gt;Wildlife Conservation Society has been undertaking over the past
three years in conjunction with &lt;br/&gt;the Girl Scout Council of Greater New
York. This extremely popular program has involved 315 &lt;br/&gt;eighth- and
ninth-grade Girl Scouts and trained many of them to introduce thousands of
younger &lt;br/&gt;Girl Scouts in New York City to career opportunities in
science. The new program will allow the &lt;br/&gt;WCS to reach girls across the
U.S., to involve girls in science projects that will be of benefit to local
&lt;br/&gt;communities, and to broaden the emphasis of the Wildlife Science
Careers Program from science &lt;br/&gt;careers to a more general focus on
environmental science and local environmental issues.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;