* 0114002
* Acquisition of a Phase-Modulated Fluorimeter for Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2002
* Fred Wudl, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2002
* USD 96,000.00

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program will support
the University of California Los Angeles (UCLA) with the acquisition of a
Fluorolog 3-22 Lifetime System from ISA/Jobin Yvon. The instrument consists of
single excitation and double collection monochromators, with fully automated
entrance and exit slit control. The instrument will have an immediate impact on
the research projects of four research groups at UCLA. The first group will
investigate interactions between chains of semiconducting polymers and the
dynamics of energy flow in aligned conjugated polymer/mesoporous silica hybrid
materials. The work should provide a new understanding of these important
materials that will enhance the possibility of application in organic-based
displays or photovoltaic devices. The second group will study the properties of
newly synthesized molecular compasses and gyroscopes, as well as explore the
effects of aromatic ring rotation in conjugated molecules. The information
learned from these experiments will have direct application in the production of
new organic materials that should have switching properties that are faster than
the fastest known ferroelectric liquid crystals. The third group will explore
the synthesis and properties of novel heteroacenes, which also will have unique
applications in electroluminescent and photovoltaic devices. Finally, the fourth
group will use time-resolved resonance energy transfer to study the spatial
distributions of molecules deliberately placed in mesostructured silicas, and
time-resolved fluorescence depolarization as an in situ probe of the formation
dynamics of mesostructured silica films. The information gained in these
experiments will improve our understanding of how the formation of
mesostructured materials can be controlled and directed. The simplicity of the
instrument will ensure routine usage and great productivity, especially in an
undergraduate educational environment. Undergraduate students in the physical
chemistry and analytical laboratory classes will be able to routinely measure
the fluorescence lifetimes of dyes and other molecules, allowing them to explore
the dynamics of intramolecular electron transfer and other important
photochemical reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the
Instrumentation for Materials Research program will support the University of
California Los Angeles (UCLA) with the acquisition of a Fluorolog 3-22 Lifetime
System from ISA/Jobin Yvon. The instrument consists of single excitation and
double collection monochromators, with fully automated entrance and exit slit
control. The instrument will have an immediate impact on the research projects
of four research groups at UCLA. The information gained in these experiments
will improve our understanding of how the formation of mesostructured materials
can be controlled and directed. The simplicity of the instrument will ensure
routine usage and great productivity, especially in an undergraduate educational
environment. Undergraduate students in the physical chemistry and analytical
laboratory classes will be able to routinely measure the fluorescence lifetimes
of dyes and other molecules, allowing them to explore the dynamics of
intramolecular electron transfer and other important photochemical
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;