* 0114734
* Urban Systemic Program in Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education (USP): St. Louis Urban Systemic Program (SLUSP)
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2008
* Cleveland Hammonds, Board of Education City of Saint Louis
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joseph Reed
* 08/31/2008
* USD 5,801,500.00

The St. Louis Public Schools (SLPS) serving 42,673 students, of which 81.7% are
eligible for free/reduced lunch, 15.3% are students with disabilities, 80% are
African American, 17.4% White-non-Hispanic, 1.5% Asian/Pacific Islander, and
1.1% Hispanic, through the St. Louis Urban Systemic Program (SLUSP), proposes to
build upon the substantial accomplishments realized under the St. Louis Urban
Systemic Initiative (USI) to implement strategies that ensure effective teaching
and student success in science and mathematics in all schools throughout the
District. The District's policies bearing on mathematics and science graduation
requirements, teacher and other staff professional development, and
accountability programs conjoined to student achievement, student assessment and
program evaluation, curriculum designs objectives/indicators coupled to explicit
student learning outcomes, the annual performance standards for each school,
school-based management, and infusion of technology into the delivery of
instruction serve as the framework, enablers and direction for the overall
reform process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the SLUSP include improving
the implementation of standards-based, inquiry-centered science and mathematics
education with technology infusion for all students, pre-K-12; increasing the
competency of the science and mathematics instructional workforce; expanding the
collaborations with colleges and universities for the production of science and
mathematics teachers; and increasing the number of skilled entrants into the
technology-based workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The District's program is
informed by an implementation strategy that includes the following
elements:&lt;br/&gt;- Full implementation of the standards-based, inquiry-
centered science and mathematics education program with technology infusion for
all students, pre-K-12;&lt;br/&gt;- Ensuring that the fully implemented program
is a seamless, unitary teaching and learning sequence with regard to the
continuum of the standards-based curriculum, instruction, and assessments with
distributed accountability for student learning;&lt;br/&gt;- Increasing the
competency of the science and mathematics instructional workforce through
professional development and teacher education programs characterized by
demanding content and performance standards; and&lt;br/&gt;- Enhancing teaching
and learning outcomes through the use of state-of-the-art technologies and
student support programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SLUSP has defined Student
Achievement Benchmarks/Targets, inclusive of baseline data, to be attained in
four areas of student achievement:&lt;br/&gt;1) performance on the mathematics
and science portions of the statewide tests administered by the Missouri
Achievement Program (MAP), &lt;br/&gt;2) performance on the mathematics and
science portions of the District-wide TerraNova achievement tests, &lt;br/&gt;3)
numbers enrolling in, and the percentage completing, selected advanced high
school courses in mathematics and science, and&lt;br/&gt;4) numbers taking, and
the scores achieved on, college placement exams such as the SAT and ACT.
&lt;br/&gt;In addition, even higher improvement benchmarks for the District's
black students were formulated explicitly in order to narrow the existing
differences between white and black students on higher level math and science
courses and on college placement exams.&lt;br/&gt;