* 0114672
* The Cold War and the Rise of Geographic Information Systems (GIS)
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2003
* John Cloud, Cornell University
* Fellowship
* Keith R. Benson
* 06/30/2003
* USD 75,000.00

SES 0114672 Judith Reppy/John Cloud, Cornell University The Cold War and the
Rise of GIS

Most of the fundamental technologies of contemporary geography were devised in
the last half of the 20th century and were shaped by the exigencies and
opportunities of the Cold War. The technologies and their data sources were
initially often deeply secret. Out of this has emerged a large and complex
industry of geographic and allied technologies, at the center of which are
geographic information systems (GIS), that integrate geo-referenced data by
techniques of overlay. Prior research by the co-PI suggests that GIS emerged
from the convergence of the geographic sciences during the Cold War. This new
system of technologies and practices developed not despite, but rather through a
complex and enormously productive system of classified knowledge production that
transformed American scientific institutions and practices, but also thoroughly
disguised the nature and sources of the exchanges. Standard histories of GIS
acknowledge earlier initiatives in overlay technique, but do not pursue them.
Where, how, when, and by whom did geographic integration by overlay develop? How
did overlay change from analog to digital systems, and how did these systems
transfer to civilian use? And why have these earlier stages of the history of
GIS been ignored? Integration by overlay has complex roots in prewar regional
planning, but the major part of the analog-to-digital transition occurred in
near-real-time mapping systems using reconnaissance imagery that was among the
most closely guarded secrets of the U.S. government. These Military Geographic
Information Systems (MGIS) lost their initial "M" to emerge from classified
programs as-GIS. The chronologies and emphasis of standard histories of GIS
constitute part of the surviving cover story.

This project explores the history of GIS within a framework informed by science
and technology studies and the literature on dual use. Through interviews,
archival research, and examination of previously classified or deliberately
suppressed records the project reveals a history of GIS that is longer, darker,
and altogether more interesting that previous accounts have suggested. The
project advances the geographic sciences by illuminating a significant period in
GIS development that has been overlooked or ignored. Examining these
technological transitions in grounded detail provides an important case study in
Cold War science and technology. And it discloses early applications of overlay
linked to public involvement in analysis and planning with important
implications for contemporary initiatives to broaden public participation in
GIS. Products of the study include presentations at appropriate conferences,
publications in peer-reviewed journals in the disciplines of geographic
information science and studies of science and technology, a web publication
with historically significant data sets from the "pre-history" of GIS; and an
augmented essay for the Exploratory Essays Initiative of the "History of
Twentieth Century Cartography Project." This research recovers one of the most
important stories of the secret geography of the Cold War