* 0114375
* Center for Gravitational Wave Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2008
* Gabriela Gonzalez, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Cooperative Agreement
* C.  Caldwell
* 07/31/2008
* USD 6,320,000.00

This award supports the formation of The Center for Gravitational
Wave&lt;br/&gt;Physics. This Physics Frontier Center is devoted to development
of&lt;br/&gt;gravitational wave phenomenology: the physics and astrophysics that
can&lt;br/&gt;be explored by gravitational wave observations in all wavebands.
It is&lt;br/&gt;organized in three tightly-linked Major Research Components:
i)&lt;br/&gt;learning how to exploit the fundamentally new perspective that
gravitational&lt;br/&gt;waves offer, when compared to electromagnetic
observations; ii) using&lt;br/&gt;gravitational wave observations to test and
contribute to the&lt;br/&gt;understanding of strong-field, dynamical gravity;
and iii) developing&lt;br/&gt;modeling tools that combine detector and source
science to provide&lt;br/&gt;quantitative assessments of the ``science reach''
of advanced detector&lt;br/&gt;designs. To achieve its goal of crystalizing the
formation of this new&lt;br/&gt;field, the Center functions as a National
Facility with a substantial&lt;br/&gt;visitor program; workshops, conferences
and institutes devoted to&lt;br/&gt;critical research areas where the focused
attention of experts can be&lt;br/&gt;expected to lead to breakthroughs or rapid
advancements; and a&lt;br/&gt;substantial, interactive interface to Center
activities (seminar,&lt;br/&gt;colloquia, workshops and research group meetings)
for off-site Center&lt;br/&gt;members and program participants. The Center's
education program&lt;br/&gt;emphasizes middle school children nationwide,
through an affiliation&lt;br/&gt;with the educational public television program
"What's In The News?".&lt;br/&gt;Three special programs form the core of its
outreach program: to&lt;br/&gt;women, through its participation in the Women In
Science and&lt;br/&gt;Engineering "Expanding Your Horizons" workshop (focused on
grades 7--9)&lt;br/&gt;and the Women In Science and Engineering Research
mentoring program&lt;br/&gt;(focused on first and second year undergraduate
women), and to upper&lt;br/&gt;division and graduate Hispanic students, through
a special liaison with&lt;br/&gt;the University of Texas,
Brownsville.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The forthcoming generation of ground and
space-based gravitational wave&lt;br/&gt;detectors have unleashed exciting
challenges and opportunities at the&lt;br/&gt;interface of general relativity,
astrophysics, and experimental&lt;br/&gt;physics. The waves they will detect
arise in strong, dynamical&lt;br/&gt;gravitational fields, offering the first
opportunities to test the&lt;br/&gt;understanding of fully non-linear
relativistic gravity.&lt;br/&gt;Simultaneously, the observations' astrophysical
implications are likely&lt;br/&gt;to be novel, diverse and rich as they reveal
the inner dynamics of&lt;br/&gt;processes hidden from electromagnetic astronomy:
e.g., the collision of&lt;br/&gt;black holes in the center of a galaxy at high
redshift. A new field of&lt;br/&gt;physics --- gravitational wave phenomenology
--- is thus poised to&lt;br/&gt;emerge; however, lacking a tradition of large
experiments,&lt;br/&gt;gravitational physics lacks also a community of
phenomenologists ready&lt;br/&gt;to fully exploit the rich physics that the
forthcoming observations&lt;br/&gt;offer. The Center for Gravitational Wave
Physics provides the&lt;br/&gt;intellectual platform upon which existing
expertise can be combined and&lt;br/&gt;focused in a synergistic manner,
crystallizing the formation of a&lt;br/&gt;coherent, flourishing field that can
fully realize the promise that&lt;br/&gt;gravitational wave observations
hold.&lt;br/&gt;