* 0114516
* PGE: PLN  Girls' Career-Relevant Interests in Science, Mathematics, Engineering, and Technology: Examining Outcome Expectations, Perceived Barriers, and Perceived Supports
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2001,12/31/2002
* Carolyn Callahan, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 12/31/2002
* USD 29,665.00

&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this research is to increase our understanding of the
early career&lt;br/&gt;development of girls as they form opinions, develop
belief structures, and make &lt;br/&gt;decisions about career options in
science, mathematics, engineering, and/or technology &lt;br/&gt;careers by
expanding our theoretical framework and empirical base to include a
more&lt;br/&gt;direct focus on the influence of outcome expectations, perceived
barriers, and &lt;br/&gt;perceived support.&lt;br/&gt;The need to conduct
inquiry into the role of outcome beliefs in the development,
stability,&lt;br/&gt; and change in career interests, and to examine contextual
factors that&lt;br/&gt; impact the eventual entry of young girls and women into
the pipeline toward pursuing &lt;br/&gt;scientific and technical careers
provides the framework for the research.&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant involves
the recruitment and commitment of several &lt;br/&gt;collaborating researchers,
research institutions, and school systems. Collaborative&lt;br/&gt; researchers
will provide the expertise across the disciplines of counseling,
&lt;br/&gt;educational psychology , and science. Collaboration across
institutions will provide &lt;br/&gt;the opportunity for multiple sites to bring
existing resources to bear on the problem&lt;br/&gt; and allow for research
across widely varying demographics and locations. Multiple&lt;br/&gt; school
systems will contribute to the opportunity to generalize to populations of
rural, &lt;br/&gt;suburban, and urban youth, as well as varying socioeconomic
groups.&lt;br/&gt;The planning year will include the identification of a
sufficiently large and diverse&lt;br/&gt; sample of girls, and the design and
pilot testing of both qualitative and quantitative&lt;br/&gt; instrumentation.
This study will use a multimethod approach to examine the outcome
&lt;br/&gt;expectations and perceived barriers and supports ofgirls, ages 10-14,
the impact of&lt;br/&gt; these expectations on career-related interests, and, if
funded through a future grant,&lt;br/&gt;the development of these interestS and
outcome expectations over time. Focus groups&lt;br/&gt;will be used to identify
factors to be used in the development of items for several &lt;br/&gt;Q-sorts
and to be incorporated into assessment tools. Quantitative instruments
that&lt;br/&gt;will measure the constructs of interest will be designed, when
necessary , revised&lt;br/&gt;when appropriate, and then pilot tested with
middle school youth.