* 0114478
* US-Turkey Workshop:  The Tectonics of Eastern Turkey and Northern Arabian Plate, Istanbul, Turkey, May 2002
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Dogan Seber, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2003
* USD 30,000.00

0114478&lt;br/&gt;Barazangi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award
supports a joint workshop and cooperative research project on the Tectonics of
Eastern Turkey. The workshop will be held in Istanbul, Turkey, in May 2002. The
co-organizers are Dr. Muawia Barazangi, Department of Geological Sciences,
Cornell University, Ithaca, New York and Dr. Niyazi Turkelli, Professor of
Geophysics at the Kandilli Observatory and Earthquake Research Institute
(KOERI), Bogazici University, Istanbul. The workshop will focus on the evolution
and origin of the Eastern Anatolian Plateau, Bitlis suture, and East Anatolian
Fault Zone (EAFZ). Scientists from Cornell and the KOERI have recently deployed
a temporary NSF-funded PASSCAL array in eastern Turkey. The array is designed to
improve understanding of the Bitlis/Zagros thrust zones as well as the nature of
continental escape along the EAFZ and North Anatolian Fault Zone (NAFZ), imaging
upper mantle and crustal structure in these two fairly different tectonic
environments. In order to interpret these seismic images, it is necessary to
incorporate geochemical, geomorphic, and geologic observations from the region.
Ten US scientists and at least six Turkish scientists are expected to
participate. KOERI seismologists will make several trips to Cornell for close
collaboration on the analysis of data collected from a recent broadband array in
eastern Turkey. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: This award will encourage
discussion among US and Turkish scientists on several important geological
questions in light of data already collected. These questions include: Is the
Arabian plate being subducted, delaminated, or neither? Is the Anatolian plateau
supported dynamically or isostatically? What are the current earthquake hazards
in eastern Turkey? Appropriate Turkish government officials will be invited to a
special session on the implications of the results concerning the evaluation of
earthquake hazard in eastern Turkey. Funding for this project is provided by the
Division of International Programs and the Division of Earth
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;