* 0114818
* First Principles Theory of Complex Compounds
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2001,05/31/2005
* Warren Pickett, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 05/31/2005
* USD 292,820.00

0114818 Pickett Discovery or fabrication of new materials with unexpected and
fascinating properties is a continuing, perhaps accelerating, process. A very
good example of such a discovery within the past year is that the ferromagnet
UGe2 becomes superconducting while remaining magnetic. This type of coexistence
was not supposed to happen according to Ginzburg in 1957, and it had not been
questioned seriously until the last couple of years (RuSr2GdCu2O8 has related
properties for quite different reasons). Another example is the spin glass
compound Y2Mo2O7 which is structurally ordered whereas before its discovery
structural disorder was expected to be required for spin glass behavior.

Such discoveries attract great interest among materials physicists, and seem
invariably to impact strongly subsequent developments in the field, viz.
superconductivity, Kondo effect, quantum Hall effect. In each of the materials
mentioned above, the unanticipated behavior could not have arisen in simpler
(either structurally, or in terms of interactions) systems, because the
requisite degrees of freedom are not present. Coexistence of superconductivity
and magnetism in RuSr2GdCu2O8 , although not at all understood, is allowed only
because of the separation of magnetic and superconducting layers; in Y2Mo2O7 it
is thought probable that spin glassiness results from a combination of
ferromagnetic exchange coupling, strong single ion anisotropy, and frustrating
topology of the pyrochlore sublattice that hosts the magnetic Mo ions.

This theoretical project is concerned primarily with behavior that involves the
spin degrees of freedom in an essential way, and in progressing toward a first
principles theory. Novel magnetic phenomena keep appearing: two areas that
concern this grant directly are spin gap behavior in low dimensional insulators
and half metallic behavior in conductors. The case of CaV4O9 (CaVO) is
impressive in the speed in which its behavior has been solved within a five year
time span. CaVO has a 1/5-th depleted 'square' lattice of V ions with S=1/2, and
displays spin gap (or quantum spin liquid) behavior, the first two dimensional
(2D) material to do so. Through a combination of experimental probes and
applications of several theoretical methods from a variety of groups, the
behavior of CaVO is understood.

The objective of the grant is to obtain a microscopic description, based on
first principles (parameter-free) methods, that is detailed enough to provide an
understanding of the observed behavior. Once the description becomes good
enough, the theory may be used in a predictive fashion to determine
computationally, rather than experimentally, what a material's behavior will be.
Becasue it is possible to 'look into' the simulation in a much more detailed way
than is possible experimentally, this approach leads to insights that are not
available otherwise, and will enable materials physicists to design new
materials that have desired properties. %%%



Theoretical research will be conducted on a variety of complex materials of
current interest in order to understand their properties from a fundamental
approach and, at the same time, to develop techniques which will provide the
tools needed to design materials with specified propoerties. ***



