* 0114267
* Acquisition of Gel Permeation Chromatographic Instrumentation for Materials Research and Eucation
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Dominic McGrath, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program in the
Division of Materials Research will allow the University of Arizona to acquire a
new Gel Permeation Chromatography instrument for research and education in the
Department of Chemistry. The proposed GPC system will replace current outdated
equipment and will be housed in the new Molecular Characterization Facility in
the Department of Chemistry. This instrument will be used by students at the
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral levels to improve the quality and
scope of integration of research and education into our curricula. Consisting of
a separations module accompanied by Ultra-violet-Vis, refractive index, multi-
angle laser light scattering, and viscometric detectors, this instrument will
allow for more accurate and complete characterization of the organic and
inorganic materials currently being synthesized by research groups within the
Department. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Instrumentation
for Materials Research program in the Division of Materials Research will allow
the University of Arizona to acquire a new Gel Permeation Chromatography (GPC)
instrument for research and education. The instrument will be housed in the
Department of Chemistry and will be used to characterize new polymeric
materials, in particular measure their molecular weight, or size. The molecular
weight of polymers is a critical factor in their strength, behavior, and
ultimate performance. This instrument will allow for more accurate and complete
characterization of the polymeric materials currently being developed by
research groups within the Department of Chemistry for such emerging
technologies as biological sensors, organic light-emitting diodes, and drug
delivery systems. Students at the undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
levels will use the instrument. This will improve the quality and scope of
student training, thus impacting the scientific workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;