* 0114483
* Missing Sensor Data Restoration: Computationally Intelligent Discovery of Reading Dependencies
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2006
* Robert Marks, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2006
* USD 252,003.00

0114483&lt;br/&gt;El-Sharkawi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore the
possibility of using new techniques from computational intelligence in order to
address the task of imputing missing values in data collected by complex arrays
of sensors. Sensors in a restricted environment can have readings relating to
each other in such a matter that missing data from a set of failed sensors can
be restored from the measurement of those remaining. When the reconstructed
sensor readings are supplied as input to a process, the operation of the system
is therefore still possible. Overall performance will degrade gracefully, if at
all. Discovery of data constraints can be achieved by training an autoencoder
using sensor data. The trained encoder, having empirically discovered
interrelations among data, can then be used to restore lost readings from failed
sensors. This is achieved through either application of an alternating
projection onto convex set (POCS) algorithm or a more conventional
search.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful development of missing sensor data
(MISED) restoration will have significant impact on a number of current
technologies. The project will focus on applications to currently open and
important problem in energy and avionics. The project has strong support from
both industries.&lt;br/&gt;