* 0114446
* RUI:  How do the snoA and snoB Suppressors Modify Function of the Aspergillus NimODbf4 Initiator of DNA Synthesis?
* BIO,MCB
* 11/15/2001,10/31/2006
* Steven James, Gettysburg College
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 10/31/2006
* USD 463,119.00

In eukaryotes, the Dbf4-dependent kinase (DDK) triggers DNA synthesis at origins
of&lt;br/&gt;replication by phosphorylating at least one component of the
replicative DNA helicase, Mcm2p.&lt;br/&gt;This in turn leads to unwinding of
DNA and establishment of the replication fork. In the&lt;br/&gt;filamentous
fungus Aspergillus nidulans, DDK is composed of a regulatory subunit, nimO Dbf4
,&lt;br/&gt;and a kinase catalytic subunit, cdc7 asp . The substrate of nimOp-
cdc7p kinase is encoded by the&lt;br/&gt;nimQ Mcm2 gene. Mutations in two newly
identified genes, snoA and snoB (suppressor-of-nimO),&lt;br/&gt;partially
alleviate the heat sensitivity of the nimO18 mutation. snoA suppressors act
indirectly by&lt;br/&gt;stabilizing nimO18p or by elevating nimO18p levels,
whereas snoB suppression may occur&lt;br/&gt;through direct association with
nimO18p. This project is devoted to isolating the snoA and snoB&lt;br/&gt;genes,
and to defining the molecular mechanisms by which snoAp and snoBp influence
nimOp&lt;br/&gt;function. The specific aims of the research are as follows: (1)
use a combination of walking,&lt;br/&gt;sequencing, and functional
complementation to isolate and molecularly characterize the snoA&lt;br/&gt;and
snoB genes; and (2) use cell biological and biochemical tools to investigate
mechanisms by&lt;br/&gt;which snoA and snoB suppressors modify nimO function.
For example, in vivo DNA labeling&lt;br/&gt;will be used to measure DNA
synthesis, and northern blotting will be used to assess nimO&lt;br/&gt;mRNA
levels. Epitope-tagged nimO and/or cdc7 asp alleles will be used to characterize
nimOp&lt;br/&gt;cell cycle dynamics, including turnover, phosphorylation,
localization, and the influence of snoA&lt;br/&gt;and snoB suppressors. A nimOp-
Cdc7p kinase assay will employ the tagged alleles and&lt;br/&gt;Mcm2p nimQ as a
substrate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enhance the understanding of
eukaryotic DNA synthesis and cell cycle regulation by defining the functions of
two genes that interact with an initiator of DNA synthesis. These discoveries
may in turn provide new insights about cell division. In addition, this project
will provide undergraduate students with the opportunity to play an active,
substantive role in an ongoing, scientifically rigorous research project.