* 0114597
* The Blue Crab Exoskeleton - A Model System for Studying the Control of Biomineralization
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Robert Roer, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Ione Hunt Von Herbing
* 08/31/2005
* USD 312,873.00

Mineralized skeletons, whether they are bones, teeth, mollusc shells or
crustacean exoskeletons, are all comprised of two structural components: an
organic matrix and the minerals that impregnate it. The organic matrix is a
complex mixture of proteins and carbohydrates; sometimes the proteins have
carbohydrates attached to them and are referred to as glycoproteins,
proteoglycans or mucins. The minerals may be crystalline forms of calcium
phosphate, like the hydroxyapatite of bones and teeth, or calcium carbonate,
like the calcite of crab exoskeletons. One of the central and most basic
questions in the field of skeleton formation (biomineralization) is which of the
complex of matrix molecules are the ones that actually control the initiation of
skeletal hardening and control the location and form of the mineral. This
project utilizes the blue crab as a model for the control of biomineralization.
Because crabs molt in order to grow, they provide an ideal system in which to
study the biological control of mineralization and the interaction between the
organic and mineral components of the skeleton. The outer two layers (epi- and
exocuticle) of the new exoskeleton of the carapace of the crab are deposited
beneath the old exoskeleton in preparation for the molt (premolt). They must
remain unmineralized until after the crab emerges and expands. Subsequently
(postmolt), the inner and thickest layer of the exoskeleton (endocuticle) is
deposited and mineralized. The same temporal sequence occurs in the exoskeleton
covering the joints (arthrodial membrane), but it never mineralizes in order to
remain flexible. A number of biochemical changes that occur in the epi- and
exocuticle of the carapace exoskeleton that coincide with their postmolt
mineralization were previously catalogued by our laboratory. To determine if
these changes are really important to this process, the arthrodial membrane will
be similarly analyzed during the same time period. The same biochemical changes
should not occur in the arthrodial membrane if, in fact, they are associated
with the initiation of mineralization. A new approach to be taken in this grant
is to compare the proteins that are manufactured by the tissue that makes the
mineralized cuticle to those proteins that are manufactured by the non-
mineralizing arthrodial membrane. In this way, it can definitively be determined
which proteins are the ones that are involved in mineralization. With the modern
molecular biological tools now available, the most efficient way to see what
proteins are being made by a tissue is to extract the genetic blueprint for the
proteins in the form of the messenger RNAs (mRNA). The plan is to extract the
mRNA from the tissues of premolt crabs that are making proteins of the new epi-
and exocuticle. This will be done for the tissues underlying both the
mineralizing carapace exoskeleton and the non-mineralizing arthrodial membrane.
The mRNA will be extracted from the same tissues of postmolt crabs when they are
synthesizing the endocuticle. The mRNAs will be compared using a technique
termed differential display of expression. In essence, this technique allows the
identification of those pieces of mRNA that are found in the carapace tissue but
not in the arthrodial membrane tissue. The ones that are identified from premolt
tissue are the likely candidates for the messages for the proteins that are
intimately involved in the mineralization process of epi- and exocuticle. Those
that are identified from postmolt tissue will similarly be involved in
endocuticle mineralization. A large part, if not the entire sequence, of the
message can be reconstructed and these candidate proteins can be synthesized.
Antibodies to these proteins will be made, which, when labeled, will allow the
microscopic localization of these proteins spatially and temporally within the
exoskeleton and the comparison of their presence to the sites of initial
mineralization. To date, no one has firmly identified all of the components of
an organic matrix that are actually responsible for initiating and controlling
mineralization. The crustacean exoskeleton affords a unique system in which this
can be accomplished and will provide basic information that can be applied to
other mineralizing tissues.