* 0114083
* SDEST: Doctoral Dissertation Research: An ethnography of the social ethics of Catholic healthcare
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* Simon Lee, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 07/31/2003
* USD 7,989.00

This dissertation project is a multi-sited ethnographic analysis of the
interplay of Catholic social ethics and technological advances in healthcare
science at the fourth largest US hospital system. This 48-facility corporation
is the flagship of Catholic healthcare but serves diverse California
constituencies. This project investigates situations where developments in
medical science and technology result in conflicting ethics and value systems
between Catholic hospitals and the communities they care for. It seeks to
understand how these values are articulated and how conflicting demands are
negotiated between people and between organizational structures. This research
will focus on how values affect actual behavior within institutions and how
policy is developed to respond to conflicting values systems. Ethnographic
research methods in this 15 month project include: 1) daily participant
observation in meetings and hospital practice, 2) modified life history
interviews with 10-15 informants involved in ethics issues and policy design, 3)
review and analysis of documents produced by the hospital system since 1997.
Field sites reflect an explicit effort to work in facilities where new
technologies challenge operative value systems, as in secular hospitals now
affiliated with the Catholic system. This research will contribute to the study
of science and religious pluralism, particularly how ethics and social values
affect group behavior. The results will be of interest to bioethicists,
theologians, healthcare service providers and policy makers, and community
groups working with faith-based organizations.

