* 0114903
* Modeling Accelerated Degradation Data for Product Reliability Improvement and Warranty Analysis
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Jye-Chyi Lu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Suvrajeet Sen
* 08/31/2004
* USD 275,451.00

This grant supports research for deriving new methods for accelerated
degradation testing, or ADT, which involves analyzing product or system
degradation in various high stress environments in order to predict product
lifetime or system performance. The research concentrates on existing gaps in
current test methods used in industry, and works to extend these current methods
to a larger domain of problems, including non standard degradation models that
describe more realistic product degradation scenarios in manufacturing. Initial
work is based on applied problems with vacuum fluorescent displays (VFDs),
light-emitting diodes, and fiber optics manufacturing. VFD performance helps to
motivate such models. Emitted electrons from its cathode serve to eliminate
impurities in the vacuum, and VFD light intensity actually increases up to a
certain point of time before it decreases due to age-induced degradation.
Standard ADT models cannot characterize this phenomenon. Specific developments
of this research include: (1) A general framework for stress dependent
degradation models based on physically motivated degradation paths; (2) Building
formulas for failure times of various complex (non-linear) ADT models, along
with uncertainty estimates based on statistical resampling methods; (3)
Combining failure time data with separate sets of degradation data to improve
product lifetime estimates; and (4) Finding optimal test procedures (in terms of
information gained) based on time and cost constraints associated with product
development. The ADT models include (non linear) random coefficients to reflect
variability between test units. Bootstrap resampling procedures are derived to
ascertain uncertainty because simpler variance approximations are not generally
available with such random coefficient degradation models.

With degradation data, the proposed estimates of the product failure time
distribution serves as a key quality measure for evaluating a company's process
improvement in highly reliable products, and can help company managers decide
their product warranty policy. If successful, the results of this research can
strongly affect process condition changes, material selections, equipment
innovations, maintenance schedule revisions and other production operation
changes. Thus, the research provides valuable information for companies to
improve their operation efficiency and profitability.