* 0114798
* Quantum Critical Behavior at Metal-Insulator and Magnetic Transitions
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Thomas Rosenbaum, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 07/31/2005
* USD 330,000.00

Phase transitions at zero temperature involve fundamentally new physics. The
Heisenberg uncertainty principle inextricably intertwines the static and
dynamical response of the material changing state, introducing new critical
exponents, new scaling laws, and a new relationship between interactions and
disorder. This project will probe the fundamental nature of the quantum phase
transition in two model experimental systems. The first is the metal-insulator
transition in hydrogenated films of elemental Y and La. Rare earth hydride films
can be converted reversibly from metallic mirrors to transparent, insulating
windows simply by changing the hydrogen content or via UV exposure. The physics
of the Mott-Hubbard MI transition in metal hydride films will be pursued with an
emphasis on the roles played by electron-electron interactions, by different
types of disorder, and by the (non-linear) dynamical response in electric and
magnetic fields. The second model system involves single crystals of the only
elemental antiferromagnet, Cr. Dilution of chromium with small amounts of
vanadium, smoothly depresses Cr's spin-density-wave transition to T = 0. Will a
simple antiferromagnet display the anomalous behavior demonstrated by the
related high-Tc superconductors and heavy fermion compounds? The experimental
focus will be on high resolution pressure studies at ultra-low temperatures,
broadly developing the technical skills of students at the undergraduate,
doctoral and postdoctoral levels. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;Materials most
commonly undergo changes of state with changing temperature. Non-thermal
processes like pressure and magnetic field also can induce magnetic, electronic,
and optical changes. When these transitions occur at absolute zero, where all
motion stops, new quantum physics arises. Moreover, the effects can be felt up
to surprisingly high temperatures. This proposal aims to probe the fundamental
nature of the quantum phase transition in two model experimental systems. The
first of these is the metal-insulator transition in hydrogenated films of
elemental Y and La. Rare earth hydride films can be converted reversibly from
metallic mirrors to transparent, insulating windows simply by changing the
surrounding hydrogen gas pressure or through illumination with ultraviolet
light. Switchable mirrors with both homogeneous and pixilated optical properties
will be investigated, with applications in mind. The second model system
involves single crystals of the only elemental antiferromagnet, Cr. Dilution of
chromium with small amounts of vanadium, its neighboring element in the Periodic
Table, smoothly depresses the magnetic transition temperature to absolute zero.
Will a simple antiferromagnet display the anomalous behavior demonstrated by the
related high-temperature superconductors? The experimental focus will be on high
resolution pressure studies at ultra-low temperatures, broadly developing the
technical skills of students at the undergraduate, doctoral and postdoctoral
levels.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;