* 0114971
* Circuit Design and CAD for System Applications of Silicon-Based Quantum-Effect Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Pinaki Mazumder, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Olufemi Olowolafe
* 08/31/2006
* USD 210,000.00

The Semiconductor Industries Association (SIA) projects that the accrued
benefits of the device shrinking era will continue for another decade or so,
until feature sizes reach their ultimate limit of around 70 nm. Beyond then,
during the post-shrinking era, newer electronic, photonic and molecular
technologies must emerge to push the demands for higher system integration on a
chip (SOC) and lower energy dissipation. At the present time, substantial
research initia-tive focused on quantum-effect devices has demonstrated that
these devices offer the best solution for next generation high-performance
integrated circuits. Simulation results have shown that circuits designed using
resonant-tunneling diodes (RTDs) and complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor
(CMOS) transistors can offer an order of magnitude improvement in area-power-
delay performance over conventional CMOS. These circuits alleviate the
performance saturation that will limit conventional technologies due to
diminishing returns from device- and feature-size scaling. While RTDs have been
demonstrated for niche small-scale, high-speed (&gt; 40 GHz) circuit
applications using III-V process technology, no system-level designs have been
fabricated that use RTD-based circuit design. The disadvantage of III-V
technology is higher power dissipation and very low integration levels as
compared to CMOS. However, the unique negative differential-resistance (NDR)
characteristics of RTDs coupled with their high tunneling speeds lead to very
compact and fast circuit topologies. Thus it is very attractive to envision
these compact, high-functionality circuits implemented in a technology such as
CMOS that offers low power dissipation and very large integration lev-els. Also,
while transport properties of quantum-effect devices are substantially different
from conventional devices, their fabrication and processing framework can be
considered an extension of the current state-of-the-art, rather than a radical
departure. This makes it possible to envision a synergism between conventional
and quantum-effect circuits that will bridge the transition to giga-scale
integration and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum electronic devices such as
double-barrier resonant tunneling diodes and transistors offer the promise of
increased speed and circuit compaction. However, the folded 1-V or negative
differential resistance (NDR) charac-teristic of these devices implies that
conventional circuit design techniques are not adequate to tackle the problem of
optimal circuit design using these devices. Preliminary work, using ad-hoc
circuit design techniques, has demonstrated the possibility of building
innovative, ultrafast and compact circuits using resonant tunneling devices.
This proposal seeks to develop the theory of circuit design using quantum-effect
devices, to design accurate and fast circuit simu-lation models and algorithms
for the quantum-effect devices, and to study system-level issues in the design
of large computational, communication system, and signal processing circuits
using quantum-effect devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work is divided
into three tasks. In the first task, circuit simulation models and algorithms
will be developed for quantum-effect resonant tunneling devices. These models,
based on values obtained from quantum simulation, and other physics-based
models, will be enhanced with algorithms to ensure the convergence of table-
driven simulation. In the second task, essential circuit theory for quantum-
effect circuits will be developed. This will include stability analysis and
optimization techniques for bistable and combinational logic circuits using
quantum-effect devices. In the third task, the basic circuit techniques
developed in the second task will be applied to the design of nanopipelined and
multiple-valued logic systems using quantum-effect devices. The simulation work
done in the first task will be used for performance projection of system-level
application of quantum-effect devices. Circuit fabrication for QMOS prototypes
will be carried out to demonstrate the advantages of the new
technology.&lt;br/&gt;