* 0114937
* Exploring the Potentials of an All DC (ADC) Bulk Power System
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* John Zaborszky, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* James Momoh
* 08/31/2002
* USD 100,000.00

0114937 Zaborszky

It is proposed to compute in the Control Center, virtually instantly, the
desired steady state condition of each building block and then subtract it from
the existing state in each building block. This difference is the excess or
transient energy within each building block. Then in each block utilize the
series and shunt controls to eliminate this difference in voltage and current at
the controlled end of each line. If this is accomplished then the transient
energy of the block is drained into or out of the capacitors available for this
purpose. If accomplished this would mean that the desired system state is
realized virtually instantaneously at all times without transients, in a
distributed manner. This idealized situation may be acceptably approximated
provided the control process i is virtually instantaneous compared to the rate
of variation of the desired state.

Observe that the question asked here is not how to utilize newly developing
technology and its tools to improve existing practice, but the converse: how to
utilize existing and developing technology to solve the existing problems in the
most favorable way. This then raises the question of how a transition can be
found.

Given the present riches of power electronics, computing and communication
equipment and facilities, the question of how the total power system could be
constructed for the best reliability, security, efficiency and other features.
Of course, to be practical, it would be expected that current facilities such as
transmission lines, generators, transformers capacitor bank etc. would be used,
sometimes in novel roles. The innovation would involve a new structuring of the
system e.g. an all DC bulk power system and a novel approach to controlling the
restructured system.