* 0114669
* Program for Gender Equity in Science, Mathematics, Engineering and Technology (PGE): Girls Re-designing and Excelling in Advanced Technology (GREAT!)
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2001,11/30/2004
* Judy Brown, Museum of Science, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Ruta Sevo
* 11/30/2004
* USD 899,960.00

The Miami Museum of Science proposes to design and implement an innovative model
&lt;br/&gt;program to increase the confidence, interest and preparedness of
girls to pursue &lt;br/&gt;academic and employment opportunities related to high
end careers in the field of &lt;br/&gt;information technology (IT). Titled
GREAT! (Girls Redesigning and Excelling in &lt;br/&gt;Advanced Technology), the
project will build on the body of research related to girls&lt;br/&gt;and IT to
develop and model effective methodologies for engaging girls as designers
-&lt;br/&gt;- as opposed to simply users -- of IT applications. The overall goal
of GREAT! is to &lt;br/&gt;raise interest and skills in advanced technology
applications among middle school &lt;br/&gt;girls, particularly girls of color,
resulting in increased representation of females in&lt;br/&gt;academic programs
and employment opportunities leading to high end IT careers. &lt;br/&gt;Specific
objectives of GREAT! are to build girls' confidence and expertise with
&lt;br/&gt;advanced technology applications; to engage them in the use of
advanced technology to &lt;br/&gt;solve real world problems; to strengthen
girls' communication and presentation skills; &lt;br/&gt;to contribute to and
inform the field through a comprehensive evaluation of
project&lt;br/&gt;outcomes, and to disseminate project methodologies and
findings among informal &lt;br/&gt;science education institutions and other
interested parties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Museum will collaborate with Miami
Dade County Public School's Urban Systemic&lt;br/&gt;Program to recruit 40
middle school girls each year, for a total of 120 girls over
the&lt;br/&gt;duration of the project. Over the course of a two year period,
participants will assume &lt;br/&gt;the roles of IT designers, acquiring
progressively complex technology skills &lt;br/&gt;culminating in the creation
of a fully interactive 3 D virtual Museum exhibit experience.&lt;br/&gt;Girls
will begin by participating in a 12 week Saturday Technology Workshop which will
&lt;br/&gt;take place over the course of the academic year. Following completion
of the Technology &lt;br/&gt;Workshop series, girls will take part in a 4 week
intensive summer Design Studio in &lt;br/&gt;which they will use state of the
art virtual reality (VR) technology to create a VR&lt;br/&gt;production
showcasing an invention of their own design. Girls will work in teams of four,
&lt;br/&gt;with each team assigned a mentor (a female college student majoring
in computer&lt;br/&gt;technology or a related field) who will provide technical
guidance and serve as a role&lt;br/&gt;model. Upon completing their productions,
girls will strengthen their presentation skills&lt;br/&gt;and increase self
esteem and self confidence through Family Night presentations and by
&lt;br/&gt;exhibiting and interpreting their work to visitors in the Museum
galleries for a one month &lt;br/&gt;period during the subsequent academic year.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Museum will contract with VR Visions and the Center
for Children and Technology&lt;br/&gt;to provide design support. Kathleen Tyner
of Media Analysis &amp; Practice will serve &lt;br/&gt;as the project's external
evaluator, responsible for formative and summative evaluation &lt;br/&gt;of
project activities.