* 0114378
* IGERT:  A Unified Approach to Sequential Decision-Making in Cognitive Science
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2008
* Fernanda Ferreira, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Melur Ramasubramanian
* 09/30/2008
* USD 2,798,478.00

This IGERT project examines the problem of sequential decision-making as a
unifying framework for the study of several central topics in cognitive science:
selective attention, navigation, language processing, and the coordination of
action in multiple-agent groups. The overarching question our students are
trained to investigate is the following: how is it possible for an agent to
decide what actions to take to achieve long-term goals? We recognize that
decision-making in complex environments is a sequential process, involving a
series of episodes in which an agent, based on information available through its
senses and stored in memory, selects the action appropriate for its goals. The
problem is made difficult by perceptual uncertainty arising from sensory
limitations and environmental complexity, by the challenge of sorting through
the large space of actions available, and by inherent delays in feedback about
the long-term consequences of actions. A wide variety of fundamental cognitive
tasks can be cast as sequential decision-making problems. Understanding how such
problems may be solved will be a critical component of a general theory of
intelligent behavior in organisms, and will be essential for the design of truly
intelligent machines. To study these problems, we adopt a comparative approach,
combining insights from a range of model systems, including humans, non-human
animals, robots, and intelligent software agents. This multidisciplinary
framework will enable students to integrate ideas and methods from different
fields that have been concerned with the study of sequential decision-making
(psychology, behavioral biology, linguistics, and computer science), but that
have so far remained largely separate. The training program is designed to
create a new generation of scientists trained in this innovative,
multidisciplinary approach. Graduate training will be focused on fundamental
disciplinary education, a common set of courses focused on the sequential
decision-making framework, and a strong emphasis on mentored, interdisciplinary
research activities that span each student's entire graduate
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the
challenges of educating Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical, professional, and personal
skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing new, innovative
models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for
collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries. In
the fourth year of the program, awards are being made to twenty-two institutions
for programs that collectively span all areas of science and engineering
supported by NSF. The intellectual foci of this specific award reside in the
Directorates for Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences; Computer and
Information Science and Engineering; Engineering; Biological Sciences; and
Education and Human Resources.&lt;br/&gt;