* 0114432
* IGERT:  Biological Invasions:  From Genes to Ecosystems, From Science to Society
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2009
* Kevin Rice, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Melur Ramasubramanian
* 09/30/2009
* USD 2,999,984.00

Unprecedented and accelerating rates of biological invasion are creating a
unique set of environmental, economic, and social challenges. Modern
agricultural societies would not exist were it not for human-mediated
introductions of crops and livestock. Yet, as a result of the globalization of
human commerce and travel, invasions are rapidly and profoundly changing the
environment. The effects of invasions are felt at all biological scales, from
genes to ecosystems, with enormous ecological and economic consequences. From
every perspective, biological invasions epitomize the rapidly growing array of
environmental challenges that no single discipline or constituency can solve
individually. This IGERT award supports the establishment of a new
multidisciplinary graduate program that includes trainers and students from ten
multidisciplinary graduate groups and professional schools at UC Davis, as well
as non-faculty participants from state, federal and national organizations who
will strengthen ties to policymakers, legislators, regulators, and other
stakeholders. In addition, the program emphasizes the global ramifications of
invasions through the participation of international authorities, and provides
support for international research collaborations and individual projects.
Trainees will be required to satisfy the degree requirements of the graduate
group to which they are admitted, as well as the specific requirements of the
IGERT program that aim to build a multidisciplinary perspective and teamwork.
Trainees supported for their dissertations must develop a project that
integrates two or more of the IGERT core disciplines (life sciences, social
sciences, law, humanities, and physical sciences), and have a similarly diverse
guidance committee. The formal training program begins with an integrative
first-year foundation curriculum, consisting of a lecture/seminar series,
discussion groups, and hands-on technical demonstrations. This foundation
program will be followed by a second-year group collaborative research project,
involving trainees and faculty, that analyzes an invaded habitat or ecosystem
from biological, social, historical, economic, and legal perspectives, and
develops a comprehensive management plan. This project will lead to an annual
spring workshop, with participants from academia, the private and public
sectors, and relevant stakeholders speaking directly to the problem addressed.
Other key elements of the training program include requirements for
collaborative internships outside the university and participation in an
extensive mentorship network. This program will build multidisciplinary research
teams that span the natural sciences, social sciences, engineering and
humanities and that will train the next generation of environmental scientists
to be conversant in the ethical, political, legal, and economic, and scientific
issues pertinent to the analysis and remediation of biological
invasions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet
the challenges of educating Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical, professional, and personal
skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing new, innovative
models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for
collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries. In
the fourth year of the program, awards are being made to twenty-two institutions
for programs that collectively span all areas of science and engineering
supported by NSF. The intellectual foci of this specific award reside in the
Directorates for Biological Sciences; Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences;
Mathematical and Physical Sciences; Engineering; and Education and Human
Resources.&lt;br/&gt;