* 0114629
* The Creation of a Wireless Exchange using an Enabling Multiple Access Technology
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2003
* Carl Nassar, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 09/30/2003
* USD 143,554.00

0114629 Nassar

Wireless networks are getting clogged in high-use areas like New York and Los
Angeles. That congestion will grow almost without end over the next few years,
and by 2003, (1) more than one in every 10 individuals worldwide will carry a
cell phone; (2) 126 million hand held devices will demand high data rate
services; and (3) 600 million of the cell phones in use will cry out for access
to the Internet.

It's no wonder then that the demand for spectrum far outpaces supply, and FCC
chairman William Kennard has been inviting companies to come up with more and
more innovative ways to utilize the existing bandwidth. Proposing one powerful
solution to the wireless bandwidth problem, William Kennard recently suggested
that wireless companies start trading bits and pieces of their unused wireless
spectrum, so that these scarce pieces don't go to waste. Such an idea, still far
from reality in wireless, is in the testing stages in the fiber-optic market.
There, companies are already suggesting that a fiber-optic bandwidth exchange
could handle $12 billion worth of orders within a five year period. In a world
where wireless spectrum is in short supply, a wireless exchange may be the only
way to meet the rapidly growing consumer demands.

To capitalize on the idea of a wireless bandwidth exchange between companies, an
enabling multiple-access technology must be developed at the physical layer.
This technology must be capable of using non-contiguous bands of the frequency
spectrum in an optimal fashion. In this research, the PI will develop a novel
form of DS-CDMA (direct sequence code division multiple access) offering the
following far reaching benefits:

o The technology is well suited to support wireless bandwidth exchange between
companies; through this wireless exchange o Companies can best meet their
consumer demands, generate additional revenues, and best use the limited
wireless resource licensed to them. o Groups of companies can agree to work
together to allow customers of all companies to experience the benefits of very
large bandwidths

In a world where spectrum is in short supply, we see a wireless world based on
cooperation not competition as the only way to meet consumer demands. This
research lays the foundation for such future collaborations.