* 0114706
* STS: Mainstreaming Gender Analytics in Science and Technology Studies
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2007
* Robert Proctor, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2007
* USD 295,659.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Londa Schiebinger, Pennsylvania State
University&lt;br/&gt;Mainstreaming Gender Analytics in Science and Technology
Studies&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With a Small Grant for Training and Research, the
Science, Medicine, and Technology in Culture (SMTC) program at Penn State
supports sustained research and graduate student training focused on
mainstreaming gender analysis in STS. SMTC at Penn State already has a strong
gender studies focus; this proposal requests funds to reconfigure that focus in
ways that facilitate training a cohort of graduate students in a new generation
of interdisciplinary gender analytics. With this award, Penn State is poised to
further research, teaching, and intervention in these areas. This project
investigates how both working scientists and scholars in the field of STS
understand how gender structures the personnel, methodologies, and results of
science. The SMTC program includes a graduate course that makes gender analysis
a foundational methodology to all fields of STS, examining how it might apply to
areas even where sexual dimorphisms (both biological and cultural) are not
immediately present. Three research applications are highlighted, one in each
year of the award: 1) human origins research, 2) colonial science, and 3) the
cultural production of ignorance. The award allows SMTC to support three
graduate students per year for three years, a one-time workshop, and a two-year
post-doctoral student. Course developments are to be disseminated to the STS
community in article form, through sessions sponsored by the Committees on
Education of the History of Science Society, Society for Social Studies of
Science, Society for the History of Technology, and Society for Literature and
Science at their annual meetings, and as part of the HSS Syllabus Samplers and
similar organs. Additional outcomes include two edited volumes: one drawn from a
lecture series that will explore applying gender analysis to central research
fields in STS, and one drawn from the workshop on how gender analysis is
changing various aspects of the natural sciences.&lt;br/&gt;