* 0114093
* Acquisition of an Integrated Scanning Electron Microscope System
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* John Chandler, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2003
* USD 300,000.00

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program and the Major
Research Instrumentation program to Colorado state University will fund the
purchase of an integrated field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM)
system for the central Electron Microscopy Center at Colorado State University.
The equipment requested will allow imaging specimens at high resolution,
providing resolution of structures as small as 1.5 nanometers. An energy
dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) system will allow chemical identification, with
the capability of precisely mapping multiple elements over a wide area. A third
component of the instrumentation will enable investigators to produce nanoscale
devices using electron beam lithography. This technique, in conjunction with the
high resolution FE-SEM will allow generation of structures as small as 10 nm for
applications in optoelectronic materials, superconductors, and sensors. The
instrumentation will support the research efforts of seven primary investigators
from five departments across campus. In addition, it will be useed by research
groups in 8 other departments at CSU as well as several other investigators
(both academic and industrial) from along the Colorado Front Range. Finally, the
FE-SEM will be used to support and extend the teaching mission of the EM center
and the University through hands-on instruction and telepresence
microscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Instrumentation for
Material Research program and the Major Research Instrumentation program to
Colorado State University will fund the purchase of an integrated system of
imaging and analytical tools that will greatly expand the capabilities of the
Electron Microscopy (EM) Center at Colorado State University. The state-of-the-
art scanning electron microscope (SEM) will allow imaging of both biological and
materials specimens at the highest magnifications currently possible. In
addition, an x-ray analyzer attached to the microscope will provide
identification of most elements in the periodic table and will map their
locations with high precision on specimen surfaces. The electron beam
lithography system, coupled with the SEM will allow production of micro- and
nanoscopic structures that will be used in a variety of optical and electrical
devices, such as light emitting diodes, semiconductor lasers, and highly
efficient sensors and detectors. The educational mission of science and
engineering departments across the CSU campus will also be enhanced by the
acquisition of this instrumentation through hands-on instruction and remote
access via telepresence microscopy. &lt;br/&gt;