* 0114098
* Acquistion of Multiuser X-Ray Photoelectron Spectrometer for Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,02/28/2003
* Arthur Epstein, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 02/28/2003
* USD 300,000.00

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program and the Major
Research Instrumentation program will allow Ohio State University to replace the
existing obsolete X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (XPS) with an new system
having higher sensitivity, spatial resolution and novel sample handling
features. The system will be located at the Center for Materials Research (CMR)
and is designed for use by a variety of investigators in science and engineering
departments, Chemistry, Chemical Engineering, Physics, Materials Science and
Engineering, and Electrical Engineering. The XPS systems will support a variety
of federally funded projects, including investigations of carbon based molecular
electronic devices (NSF), corrosion of light weight alloys (AFOSR, SERDP),
conducting polymers and light emitting diodes (DARPA), zeolite based chemical
sensors (NSF, DOE), and oxidation catalysts for exhaust gases (DOE). In addition
to examining research problems from various research projects, the facility will
be used to instruct undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students on the
applications of XPS for surface characterization. OSU has a long history of
education and outreach activities involving local and visiting students,
including summer research projects for undergraduates and science education
programs for K-12 students and teachers.

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program and the Major
Research Instrumentation program will allow Ohio State University to replace the
existing obsolete X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (XPS) with an new system
having higher sensitivity, spatial resolution and novel sample handling
features. The system will be located at the Center for Materials Research (CMR)
and is designed for use by a variety of investigators in science and engineering
departments, Chemistry, Chemical Engineering, Physics, Materials Science and
Engineering, and Electrical Engineering. The XPS systems will support a variety
of federally funded projects, including investigations of carbon based molecular
electronic devices (NSF), corrosion of light weight alloys (AFOSR, SERDP),
conducting polymers and light emitting diodes (DARPA), zeolite based chemical
sensors (NSF, DOE), and oxidation catalysts for exhaust gases (DOE). In addition
to examining research problems from various research projects, the facility will
be used to instruct undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students on the
applications of XPS for surface characterization. OSU has a long history of
education and outreach activities involving local and visiting students,
including summer research projects for undergraduates and science education
programs for K-12 students and teachers.