* 0114372
* IGERT:  Nanoparticle Science and Engineering
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2008
* Jeffrey Roberts, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Holly K. Given
* 09/30/2008
* USD 3,330,226.00

This IGERT program focuses on nanoparticle science and engineering, an
inherently highly interdisciplinary field that requires researchers with a broad
knowledge base of both fundamental scientific and engineering issues. The
program addresses the lack of a coherent and well-organized Ph.D. training in
this field. Faculty from five departments and six graduate programs at the
University of Minnesota have come together to develop an interdisciplinary
program transcending departmental boundaries to meet this challenge. At the core
of the educational approach is the establishment of a new graduate degree
program - a freestanding graduate minor program in Nanoparticle Science and
Engineering. Several new interdisciplinary core courses will be developed to
offer students a coherent and comprehensive set of courses. Students enrolled in
the IGERT program will participate in interdisciplinary research training in
research groups that include faculty and students from various departments.
Nanoparticle research will be conducted in five focus areas: Two areas will
address the development of enabling computational and characterization tools.
These areas will form the foundation for research in application oriented areas
focusing on new materials, devices, and the environment. Exceptional career
development opportunities will add to the appeal of the IGERT program. These
include an internship program in corporate and government laboratories,
international exchange opportunities, attendance of scientific meetings at an
early stage in the career, an annual interdisciplinary symposium, leadership and
technology management courses, and training in ethical conduct of research.
IGERT Fellows will use the excellent infrastructure at the University of
Minnesota, such as its Supercomputing Institute, its Microtechnology Laboratory,
and its Characterization Facility. A unique collaboration with Florida A&amp;M
University focusing on the preparation of minority undergraduate students for
graduate studies and their recruitment into the IGERT program will enable
building of a diverse student body.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide
program intended to meet the challenges of educating Ph.D. scientists and
engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical,
professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of the future.
The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by
establishing new, innovative models for graduate education and training in a
fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends traditional
disciplinary boundaries. In the fourth year of the program, awards are being
made to twenty-two institutions for programs that collectively span all areas of
science and engineering supported by NSF. The intellectual foci of this specific
award reside in the Directorates for Engineering; Mathematical and Physical
Sciences; and Education and Human Resources.&lt;br/&gt;