* 0114351
* IGERT:  Integrative Graduate Education in Urban Ecology
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2007
* Craig ZumBrunnen, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Melur Ramasubramanian
* 08/31/2007
* USD 3,357,178.00

Most of today's scientific and social problems lie at the interface of many
disciplines. Urban ecology is an emerging field that addresses one of the most
challenging problems humanity is facing world wide: how to manage metropolitan
growth by simultaneously maximizing human wellbeing and minimizing impacts on
ecosystems. These problems require interdisciplinary approaches that current
disciplinary doctoral education cannot teach. The vision of this IGERT program
is to change the culture of graduate education from a traditional enterprise
focused on an individual's discipline to one clearly emphasizing
interdisciplinary teams. This will increase student retention and prepare
students for leadership within and beyond academia. Team members' dissertations
will include a common, co-authored section based on a real-world research
problem addressed by the team, plus an individually-written disciplinary
section. Students will be immersed immediately into interdisciplinary research
questions, using real-world problems presented to them by outside clients.
Students from widely varied backgrounds will collectively analyze, evaluate, and
propose strategies to address those problems. Rather than provide a set course
of instruction before students begin research, the intent is to help teams
decide what information and background they need as their analyses progress,
then arrange for the extended faculty to provide that background (just-in-time
education). The core curriculum assures that all students, regardless of the
projects they work on, receive essential skills and informational training. This
requires team-taught courses where Urban Ecology faculty members are in the
classroom with the students at lectures and discussion sessions, and where
everyone participates. The program centers on five broad research themes: (i)
What socioeconomic factors drive urban development, (ii) How landscape ecology
can be used to quantify urban development patterns, (iii) How urban development
patterns affect biodiversity and ecosystem function, (iv) How changes in
ecosystems affect human preferences and decisions, and (v) How policies
influence human settlement and its effects. By integrating research and
education the IGERT program will build a theoretical framework and a series of
empirical studies that increase understanding of the complex mechanisms that
mediate the interactions between natural and human processes in urban
ecosystems. This will produce students experienced in solving real-world
problems, improve working relationships between academia and business,
regulatory, and urban communities, and strengthen the foundation of Urban
Ecology as a field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended
to meet the challenges of educating Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical, professional, and personal
skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing new, innovative
models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for
collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries. In
the fourth year of the program, awards are being made to twenty-two institutions
for programs that collectively span all areas of science and engineering
supported by NSF. The intellectual foci of this specific award reside in the
Directorates for Biological Sciences; Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences;
and Education and Human Resources.&lt;br/&gt;