* 0114473
* Multiphase Mechanics of Tumor Encapsulation &amp; Multilobulation
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Trachette Jackson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2004
* USD 101,000.00

Jackson&lt;br/&gt;0114473&lt;br/&gt; The investigator uses mechanical models to
investigate the&lt;br/&gt;mechanisms involved in tumor encapsulation, multiple
lobe&lt;br/&gt;formation, and transcapsular spread. Mass and momentum
balance&lt;br/&gt;equations are written for the normal cells, neoplastic cells,
the&lt;br/&gt;extracellular matrix (ECM) on which they are anchored, and
the&lt;br/&gt;interstitial fluid in which they are bathed. This system
is&lt;br/&gt;closed by suitable constitutive relations for the mass
supply,&lt;br/&gt;the partial stress tensor, and the momentum supply of
each&lt;br/&gt;constituent. The former is defined on the basis
of&lt;br/&gt;phenomenological observations of tumor cell growth and the
latter&lt;br/&gt;is based on the mechanical properties of each phase. The
model&lt;br/&gt;equations, consisting of a set nonlinear conservation
and&lt;br/&gt;evolution equations, are analyzed using asymptotic
analysis,&lt;br/&gt;bifurcation analysis, and perturbation theory in order
to&lt;br/&gt;quantify the relative importance of chemical processes (such
as&lt;br/&gt;ECM production and degradation) and mechanical properties of
the&lt;br/&gt;tissue (such as ECM density and stiffness) in influencing
capsule&lt;br/&gt;formation. A further objective is to characterize
the&lt;br/&gt;bifurcation that leads to multiple lobe formation.
Through&lt;br/&gt;analysis and simulation of the model, the investigator aims
to&lt;br/&gt;discover which factors (mechanical and chemical)
determine&lt;br/&gt;successful capsule formation and to quantify their
influence.&lt;br/&gt; The mechanisms by which a tumor becomes encapsulated as
a&lt;br/&gt;continuum of cells or as several lobes of different
sizes,&lt;br/&gt;separated by connective tissue, is an interesting, important,
and&lt;br/&gt;unsolved phenomenon in tumor biology. In fact, the presence
(or&lt;br/&gt;absence) of a dense capsule surrounding a neoplastic mass is
a&lt;br/&gt;major determinant of prognosis and the ultimate survival of
the&lt;br/&gt;host. Despite the importance of capsule formation, little
is&lt;br/&gt;known about the process by which capsules arise.
The&lt;br/&gt;incestigator develops a mathematical modeling framework
that&lt;br/&gt;describes tumor growth, encapsulation, multiple lobe
formation,&lt;br/&gt;and transcapsular spread based on the physical forces
and&lt;br/&gt;cellular interactions involved. The specific aims are to
use&lt;br/&gt;mechanical models to assist in understanding i) the role
tumor&lt;br/&gt;cell, normal cell, and extracellular matrix (ECM) interactions
in&lt;br/&gt;capsule formation, ii) the effects of tumor induced
ECM&lt;br/&gt;production and degradation on the formation of tumor
capsules,&lt;br/&gt;iii) the role of tissue properties such as ECM density
and&lt;br/&gt;stiffness in slowing or impeding the process of
tumor&lt;br/&gt;encapsulation, and iv) the bifurcation that allows a
simple&lt;br/&gt;encapsulated continuum of cells to make the transition to
a&lt;br/&gt;multi-nodular form. There are implications for clinical
diagnosis&lt;br/&gt;as well as for prognosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;