* 0114723
* Program for Gender Equity in Science, Mathematics, Engineering and Technology (PGE): DEM:Women on the Prairie:  Bringing Girls into Science through Environmental Stewardship
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Beth Montelone, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2006
* USD 875,343.00

This demonstration project, a collaborative network of faculty, public school
teachers&lt;br/&gt;and counselors, and professionals in both private sector/non-
profit organizations will&lt;br/&gt;deliver and evaluate activities designed to
bolster and reinforce the interest of &lt;br/&gt;middle-school girls in SMET
disciplines and careers. These activities are based on &lt;br/&gt;research
showing that access to role models, career information, and hands-
on&lt;br/&gt;activities have beneficial effects. A hands-on summer workshop,
industrial site &lt;br/&gt;tours, classroom activities, visits with women
scientists and engineers, activities&lt;br/&gt;developed in conjunction with
commercial and service organizations, and a web site&lt;br/&gt;characterize the
intervention for the 6th and 7th grade girls who participate.
&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, in response to research showing that professional
development for&lt;br/&gt;teachers, interactions between teachers and
scientists, and implementation of &lt;br/&gt;methods to address diversity and
gender equity issues are of paramount importance&lt;br/&gt;in creating more
gender equitable classrooms, middle-school and high-school teacher&lt;br/&gt;in
science and mathematics will be invited to partner with University faculty in
&lt;br/&gt;developing the summer workshop activities. In addition, they will be
invited to &lt;br/&gt;participate in a graduate-level course on gender equity in
science and mathematics &lt;br/&gt;education and conduct action research
projects that can be shared within the &lt;br/&gt;collaborative network.
Finally, packets with information on both various SMET &lt;br/&gt;careers and on
women who are currently employed in these fields, will be &lt;br/&gt;distributed
to school counselors, the parents of girls in Girl Scout troops, and
&lt;br/&gt;the parents of those girls who participate in the project activities.
Summative &lt;br/&gt;evaluation will focus on the comparison of SMET course-
taking patterns and course&lt;br/&gt;grades of participants in the project
activities compared to a matched sample of &lt;br/&gt;girls who did not
participate.