* 0114476
* Regulation of BMP-4/Smad1 Signals by MAP Kinase During Xenopus Neural Specification
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Amy Sater, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 07/31/2005
* USD 330,000.00

0114476&lt;br/&gt;Sater&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work addresses the
cellular mechanisms underlying neural specification in Xenopus. Neural fate is
inhibited by BMP-4, and induction of anterior neural ectoderm is initiated by
extracellular BMP-4 antagonists such as noggin and chordin. FGF has been
implicated in the initiation of neural development; current findings indicate
that the FGF effector MAP kinase is necessary for neural specification. The
inhibitory effects of BMP-4 are mediated by transcriptional repression:
expression of key neural-specific genes is initiated prior to gastrulation and
later inhibited in non-neural ectoderm by BMP-4. The recent finding that MAP
kinase can inhibit Smad1 in mammalian cells suggests that MAP kinase may
antagonize BMP-4/Smad1 signals during neural specification in vivo. The proposed
work tests this hypothesis, and examines the functional significance of these
interactions. The studies in Aim I will determine whether transcriptional
regulation via endogenous Smad1 is affected by alterations in MAPK activity. The
studies in Aim II will use overexpression of Smad1 proteins carrying mutations
at MAPK sites that prevent inhibitory phosphorylation. These studies will
determine whether inhibitory phosphorylation of MAPK sites in Smad1 participates
in neural specification and patterning. They will also address the hypothesis
that inhibition of Smad1 is necessary for posterior neural specification. The
studies in Aim III will determine whether antagonistic interactions between the
FGF/MAPK and BMP-4 pathways can affect boundaries of gene expression within
gastrula ectoderm. These studies will examine the spatial patterns of activation
of these pathways, and of Smad1-dependent gene expression, in ectoderm exposed
to localized sources of FGF and/or BMP-4. This investigation will compare the
pattern of Smad1-dependent transcription in ectoderm overexpressing WT-Smad1
with that of ectoderm expressing a mutant Smad1 impervious to MAPK. The
comparison will show whether antagonistic interactions contribute to the
establishment of spatial boundaries. &lt;br/&gt;Preliminary findings indicate
that MAPK and BMP-4 signals are mutually antagonistic in Xenopus ectoderm:
mutations in Smad1 that prevent inhibtion by MAP kinase act collectively as a
gain-of-function mutation, while BMP-4 inhibits MAP kinase activity via a
TAK1-dependent pathway. Since BMPs and FGFs have opposing effects in many
developmental processes, analysis of the interactions between these pathways may
elucidate a key cellular mechanism of developmental regulation.&lt;br/&gt;