* 0114443
* IGERT:  Materials Creation Training Program (MCTP)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2007
* Bruce Dunn, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Van Hartesveldt
* 08/31/2007
* USD 3,192,060.00

The Materials Creation Training Program (MCTP) at UCLA will train scientists to
be leaders in the design, synthesis, and production of new materials for
electronic, computer, communication, and nanoscale devices. The training and
mentoring faculty come from departments in Physical Sciences (Physics and
Astronomy, Chemistry and Biochemistry) and Engineering (Mechanical and
Aerospace, Chemical, and Electrical Engineering, and Materials Science). All are
associates of the UCLA Exotic Materials Institute (EMI), which will administer
the MCTP. Many are also members of the California NanoSystems Institute (CNSI) -
a state-supported venture that was created in 2001 to provide facilities and
resources for materials and medical nanoscience. This resource will be available
for training and research of MCTP Fellows. The MCTP unites a broad range of
molecular and materials architects, synthetic chemists, and device fabricators,
at UCLA and at partner industrial and national laboratories. MCTP Fellows are
supported for two years of their graduate careers, during which they will work
in teams with UCLA and off-campus scientist partners using state-of-the-art
instrumentation and computational resources. Novel training aspects will include
a new graduate course involving all aspects of materials and molecular design,
synthesis, testing, and modification of materials, device fabrication and
testing, and demonstration and marketing aspects of practical devices. This
course will deal with science issues beyond the laboratory and will develop
researchers versed in the importance of understanding materials properties
across length scales, from molecular to macroscopic. Each MCTP Fellow will spend
several months or more at an industrial or national laboratory partner site.
Research projects will include the design and synthesis of new molecules, the
transformation of these into molecular solids and polymers, the formation of new
inorganic and organic/information composites, and the development of devices
based on these new materials. Fellows will be selected for excellence and
diversity. The new graduate program will be evaluated on a yearly basis by a
board including university, industrial, and government representatives.
Community outreach activities will emphasize the importance and potential of
scientific research and attractiveness of graduate education in science. The
Materials (MCTP), Bioinformatics, and Neuroengineering IGERTs at UCLA constitute
a new graduate educational paradigm, emphasizing multidisciplinary research
encompassing life and physical sciences, as well as computer science and
engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet
the challenges of educating Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical, professional, and personal
skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing new, innovative
models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for
collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries. In
the fourth year of the program, awards are being made to twenty-two institutions
for programs that collectively span all areas of science and engineering
supported by NSF. The intellectual foci of this specific award reside in the
Directorates for Mathematical and Physical Sciences; Engineering; and Education
and Human Resources.