* 0114346
* IGERT:  Macromolecular Science and Infrastructure Engineering (MS&amp;IE)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2007
* John Lesko, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Van Hartesveldt
* 08/31/2007
* USD 3,098,580.00

This IGERT program in Macromolecular Science and Infrastructure Engineering
(MS&amp;IE) focusses on polymeric adhesives and composites in civil structures,
a national need identified by the National Research Council. The vision is to
train scientists, engineers, and business leaders with an interdisciplinary
perspective allowing them to bridge the gap between the materials and
infrastructure community, structural and civil engineers, and the economic and
business communities to create and maintain a durable, safe, and cost-effective
U.S. civil infrastructure. Seven departments (Chemistry, Engineering Science and
Mechanics, Civil and Environmental Engineering, Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Wood Science and Forest Products, Marketing and Accounting) from 4
colleges will collaborate. A University-based (not departmentally based)
graduate degree program in Macromolecular Science and Engineering (MACR) will be
launched concurrently with this cross-disciplinary IGERT program to afford
sufficient coursework flexibility for gaining depth and breadth in
infrastructure materials and design. Thus, the MS&amp;IE IGERT students will
comprise one part of a new graduate degree option (MACR). New courses to build
depth in this field will be co-developed and co-taught via distance learning
technologies with our partner institution, North Carolina State University.
IGERT students will begin their research in cross-disciplinary teams with two
required semesters of teamed research. Internship opportunities with national
labs, key industrial groups, international infrastructure centers, and in
congressional offices will enable students to gain experience in specialized
topics, develop leadership skills, and obtain a global perspective on
infrastructure methodologies and applications. A competitive summer
undergraduate program, mentored by the MS&amp;IE students, will facilitate
leadership skills for the MS&amp;IE students and recruiting into the program.
NSF IGERT funds will support approximately 40 students at VT and NC State during
their first year with the objective of at least 50% being either women or
students from under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-
wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating Ph.D. scientists and
engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical,
professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of the future.
The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by
establishing new, innovative models for graduate education and training in a
fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends traditional
disciplinary boundaries. In the fourth year of the program, awards are being
made to twenty-two institutions for programs that collectively span all areas of
science and engineering supported by NSF. The intellectual foci of this specific
award reside in the Directorates for Engineering; Mathematical and Physical
Sciences; Biological Sciences; and Education and Human Resources.&lt;br/&gt;