* 0114246
* Development of a 300 mK-10 Tesla Scanning Tunneling Microscope for Nanoscience Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2001,03/31/2005
* Wilson Ho, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 03/31/2005
* USD 280,000.00

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program supports
instrument development at the University of California Riverside. The ability to
probe matter at low temperatures (300 mK), high magnetic fields (10 Tesla),
under ultrahigh vacuum conditions (10-11 Torr), and with resolution below a
tenth of a nanometer pushes back the limits of our ability to understand matter
in details not hitherto possible. The development of a scanning tunneling
microscope with these capabilities allows controlled imaging, manipulation,
spectroscopic characterization, and chemical modification of individual atoms
and molecules. In addition to the charge, the spin of the electrons can be
probed at the nanoscale, enabling an understanding of nanomagnetism. The
development of this microscope encompasses a wide range of experimental
techniques, thus providing valuable opportunities for education and training of
undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral associates. These
techniques and the science made possible by the microscope will be integrated
into a new course on nanoscience. It is envisioned that the microscope will
serve as a centerpiece for collaborative research involving the investigation of
nanoscale phenomena and bring together researchers from different disciplines.
The instrument impact broad scientific research which include single molecule
spectroscopy, nanocatalysis, surface and interface magnetism, nanowires, and
cryogenic fluid behavior on alkali metal film.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
advancement of nanotechnology depends critically on instrumentation which can be
used to probe objects having nanometer dimensions. In this regard, the invention
of the scanning probe microscope in 1981 by Binnig and Rohrer has played a
central role in the rapid advances which have been made in the understanding of
materials at the atomic and molecular scales. The desire to probe in ever
greater details and to access hitherto unobservable properties of the system
requires the development of new instrumentation. This award from the
Instrumentation for Materials Research program supports the development of a new
more powerful microscope at the University of California. The new microscope
will make it possible to probe nanometer objects whose behavior can only be
revealed at minus 273 degrees Celsius and at magnetic fields two hundred
thousand times greater than the earth field. The development of such an
instrumentation provides unique opportunities for the education and training of
undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral associates in this critical
field of science and technology. In addition, activities surrounding this
development will be integrated into the teaching curriculum in the form of a new
course on nanoscience. The unique capabilities of the proposed instrumentation
will allow researchers from different disciplines to work together on nanoscale
problems. Nanotechnology naturally pulls together a wide range of scientists and
engineers since everything around us are made from and involve the
transformation of atoms and molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;