* 0114542
* School Science Epistemology and the American Public in the Twentieth Century
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* John Rudolph, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Ronald Rainger
* 08/31/2004
* USD 64,040.00

ABSTRACT SES 0114542 John L. Rudolph, University of Wisconsin-Madison School
Science Epistemology And The American Public In The Twentieth Century

The integration of science into American institutional, economic, and cultural
life has increasingly become a defining characteristic of modern society. The
growing importance of expert knowledge and technical skill in a country that has
continued to exhibit low levels of scientific literacy has prompted scholars and
policymakers to devote greater attention to the various avenues of communication
between science and the lay public. As useful as much of this work has been,
however, it has overlooked the schools -the one place society has set aside
specifically for communicating knowledge about science to the public -as an
important site of study. Though traditionally viewed as a place where only
scientific content knowledge is transmitted to students, science classrooms
serve a more important function mediating the relationship between science and
society through its portrayal of scientific epistemology -that is, the process
by which science generates reliable knowledge about the world. Perceptions of
how science works in the abstract provide the backdrop against which local,
context-specific scientific issues are viewed, and ultimately resolved, by the
public. To date, few researchers have looked carefully at or considered the
social implications of these school-science epistemologies.

This research project provides a historical analysis of the image of science in
schools over the course of the twentieth century. The specific aim is to
understand how the curricular portrayal of scientific epistemology has been used
to define the role of science in American society and culture. Dr. Rudolph uses
rich archival resources of both key individuals and institutions to examine how
the construction of science in education has varied from the Progressive era 's
view of the scientific method as the sole path to objective knowledge to the
more recent images of science as only one among many, equally legitimate ways of
knowing. He is interested in how portrayals of science in the classroom -through
textbook, homework, and lab -both have situated the individual with respect to
the scientific community and its practices and how science as an institution has
been placed within the larger social and political structures of the time. With
this work, Dr. Rudolph provides a detailed case-study history of United States
science education in its extended social context that promises to give insight
into how schools and the school curriculum have functioned in the past and how
they might be made to function better as a bridge between science and the lay
public in the future.