* 0114252
* Acquisition of a Deep Ultraviolet/Infrared Mask Aligner for Microscale/Nanoscale Device Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2002
* Susan Lunte, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2002
* USD 127,890.00

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program will allow
the University of Kansas (UK) to acquire a deep ultraviolet/infrared (UV/IR)
mask aligner. This instrument will support the research of five different groups
for fabrication of micron-scale and nano-scale devices. These devices include
superconducting thin films and tunnel junctions, semiconductor lasers and
detectors, III-N devices, and microchip-based electrophoresis devices. This
acquisition will enhance existing materials research infrastructure at KU and
will greatly improve KU's nanoscience and technology and materials research
competitiveness. In addition, the instrument will be an excellent education and
training platform providing a unique opportunity to learn thin film device and
integrated circuit fabrication technologies. Deep UV and IR lamps are critical
features of the proposed acquisition. The acquisition of a deep UV/IR mask
aligner is essential to research programs that span the Physics and Astronomy,
Chemical and Petroleum Engineering, and Pharmaceutical Chemistry departments.
These studies will have direct impact on the development of the next-generation
of information, computing, semiconductors and pharmaceutical
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Instrumentation for
Materials Research program will allow the University of Kansas (UK) to acquire a
deep ultraviolet/infrared (UV/IR) mask aligner. This instrument will support the
research of five different groups for fabrication of micron-scale and nano-scale
devices. These devices include superconducting thin films and tunnel junctions,
semiconductor lasers and detectors, III-N devices, and microchip-based
electrophoresis devices. This acquisition will enhance existing materials
research infrastructure at KU and will greatly improve KU's nanoscience and
technology and materials research competitiveness. In addition, the instrument
will be an excellent education and training platform providing a unique
opportunity to learn thin film device and integrated circuit fabrication
technologies. Deep UV and IR lamps are critical features of the proposed
acquisition. The acquisition of a deep UV/IR mask aligner is essential to
research programs that span the Physics and Astronomy, Chemical and Petroleum
Engineering, and Pharmaceutical Chemistry departments. These studies will have
direct impact on the development of the next-generation of information,
computing, semiconductors and pharmaceutical technology..&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;