* 0114768
* SGER:  The Development of Students' Informal and Formal Algebraic Thinking:  Case Studies of Intended K-8 Mathematics Curricula in China, Singapore and the United States
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2004
* Jinfa Cai, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* John S. Bradley
* 08/31/2004
* USD 99,861.00

This project will analyze how algebraic concepts and representations are
developed and introduced throughout the Chinese, Singaporean, and United States
curricula for Grades K-8. Recent international assessments indicate that the
level of achievement in algebra is quite different in the three countries, and
this project will analyze how the differences in achievement are related to
differences in curricula. Case studies of the Chinese and Singaporean curricula,
as well as selected US curricula (including NSF-funded programs and others),
will help explain these differences and provide guidance to curriculum
developers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be conducted in parallel with
the comparative study organized by the International Commission on Mathematical
Instruction (ICMI) entitled "Mathematics Education in Different Cultural
Traditions: A Comparative Study of East Asia and the West." The ICMI study
provides a broader mathematical context for the more specific work of this
project on the algebra curriculum. It also provides a pool of international
experts in the field who can advise this project and additional opportunities
for dissemination. The results of the project will be used to improve the
development of K-8 mathematics curricula in the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;