* 0114073
* RUI-Acquisition of Instrumentation for Measuring the Thermal Properties of Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2002
* Kandalam Ramanujachary, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2002
* USD 46,325.00

&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program
and the Major Research Instrumentation program will allow Rowan University to
enhance experimental capabilities in the solid state sciences at a primarily
undergraduate institution. The institution will purchase accessories allowing
thermal measurements in an existing platform system. The award will support
Rowan University to continue improving the quality and importance of research
performed by undergraduate faculty, adding to the local research environment,
and promoting the integration of research and education. The instrument will
support research involving important outstanding questions in materials research
in the areas of magnetic, superconducting and thermoelectric materials.
Specifically, the requested specific heat probe will be used to investigate
theoretical predictions for metamagnets and colossal magnetoresistive materials.
The thermal conductivity capability will be adapted for Nernst effect
measurements of superconducting multilayers with varying interlayer coupling.
The thermal conductivity and Seebeck voltage will be measured for materials,
which are candidates for thermoelectric devices. Student researchers will be
involved in each of these activities. The instrumentation will enhance existing
Advanced Laboratory and Chemistry/Physics Research courses. Many students will
benefit from first-hand and original observation of the interplay between the
various physical properties demonstrated by the systems under
investigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Instrumentation for
Materials Research program and the Major Research Instrumentation program will
allow Rowan University to enhance experimental capabilities in the solid state
sciences at a primarily undergraduate institution. The institution will purchase
accessories allowing thermal measurements in an existing platform system. The
award will support Rowan University to continue improving the quality and
importance of research performed by undergraduate faculty, adding to the local
research environment, and promoting the integration of research and education.
The instrument will support research involving important outstanding questions
in materials research in the areas of magnetic, superconducting and
thermoelectric materials. Specifically, the requested specific heat probe will
be used to investigate theoretical predictions for metamagnets and colossal
magnetoresistive materials. Student researchers will be involved in each of
these activities. The instrumentation will enhance existing Advanced Laboratory
and Chemistry/Physics Research courses. Many students will benefit from first-
hand and original observation of the interplay between the various physical
properties demonstrated by the systems under investigation.&lt;br/&gt;