* 0114442
* Acquisition of a Physical Properties Characterization Facility for Research and Student Training
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2003
* Raymond Orbach, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2003
* USD 200,000.00

Basic information on the physical properties of materials, such as charge
transport, specific heat, and magnetization, are increasingly important in a
number of different fields. This award from the Instrumentation for Materials
Research program will be used to purchase a Physical Property Measurement System
from Quantum Design that will form the core capability of a Physical Properties
Characterization Facility at UCR. With this instrument, the specific heat,
electrical transport, and AC/torque magnetometry can be measured as a function
of temperature from 0.5 K to 350 K and field up to 14 T. Broad interest has been
expressed in the capability of this facility by researchers in condensed matter
physics, chemistry, engineering, and the life sciences from UCR, several local
colleges, and a government laboratory. The instrument also supports UCR's
initiative in materials science. Some of the systems of interest include:
biomaterials and pi-conjugated macromolecular materials with well-defined
architectures, lanthanide and actinide intermetallic systems, exotic magnetic
and superconducting materials, Fullerene chemistry, and molecular metals such
Phenalenyl-based neutral radical conductors. Along with the research program,
the instrument will be used in a required advanced laboratory course for
undergraduates majoring in Physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, there
is much interest in exotic materials that exhibit new fundamental principles of
nature, which can sometimes be exploited to yield useful products. As new
systems are synthesized, characterizing their basic properties such as the way
electric charge moves, the thermal response, and the magnetic response is
important. Funds from this award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research
program will be used to purchase a Physical Property Measurement System from
Quantum Design. This instrument is fully automated and has sophisticated control
systems for performing these measurements on small samples over a large range of
temperatures and as a function of applied magnetic field. Scientists working in
condensed matter physics, chemistry, materials science, and the life sciences
often deal with new materials or systems where this type of information is
useful, and we expect researchers from several departments at UCR, some local
colleges, and a government laboratory to use this equipment. The instrument will
also be used in a required advanced laboratory course for undergraduates
majoring in Physics.