* 0114418
* IGERT:   Optical Commuications and Networking
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2009
* M. Moharam, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Melur Ramasubramanian
* 08/31/2009
* USD 2,581,371.00

The University of Central Florida will establish an IGERT program with a
multidisciplinary research theme in Optical Communications and Networking to
train 30 Ph.D. students over the next five years. This program is a joint effort
of twenty scientists, engineers and educators from the Departments/Schools of
Mathematics, Statistics, Optics, Physics, Material science, Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science, and Education at UCF. Optical communications
and networking is a particularly well-suited IGERT theme because the diverse
multidisciplinary technologies that need to be developed to enable next-
generation information infrastructure. Major research efforts are grouped in
four areas: advanced components, transport, switching, and networking and
network management. Each IGERT thesis project is designed to build upon
expertise from at least two different groups in realizing an enhanced
functionality that is greater than the sum of the parts, over and above what the
two groups would pursue independently. The advising team of each IGERT student,
consisting of two or more faculty members from different departments, an
industrial advisor and a non-technical advisor, is designed to ensure the
successful integration of education, research and training. Industry, the users
of technology considered in this effort, will be involved at the onset of the
thesis research for each student. The research framework is complemented by the
existing multidisciplinary courses, new courses in optical communications and
networking to be developed under this IGERT program and being developed under an
existing NSF CRCD grant, on-site training on state-of-the-art equipment at UCF,
off-site training in industry, and non-technical training including business,
communication/ interpersonal skills and ethics. The objective of this IGERT
program is not only to train the participating Ph.D. students to become leaders
in industry and/or academia but also for this program to serve as a national
model for training scientists and engineers in today's globally competitive and
technology-driven market economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide
program intended to meet the challenges of educating Ph.D. scientists and
engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical,
professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of the future.
The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by
establishing new, innovative models for graduate education and training in a
fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends traditional
disciplinary boundaries. In the fourth year of the program, awards are being
made to twenty-two institutions for programs that collectively span all areas of
science and engineering supported by NSF. The intellectual foci of this specific
award reside in the Directorates for Engineering; Computer and Information
Science and Engineering; Mathematical and Physical Sciences; and Education and
Human Resources.&lt;br/&gt;