* 0114831
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Confocal Microscope at an Undergraduate College
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Yolanda Cruz, Oberlin College
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Farmer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 188,089.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Lynne Bianchi and her colleagues at Oberlin
College to purchase a confocal microscope. The confocal microscope will be used
to enhance and expand the existing research programs of these faculty members.
Specifically, the instrument will be used to investigate: 1) the cellular
organization of developing inner ear cells; 2) the developmental fate of
mammalian epiblast cells; 3) the shape and orientation of neurons that release
or respond to gonadotropin releasing hormone; 4) the structural abnormalities of
muscle cells from mutant C. elegans; 5) the projections of lateral line and
inner ear neurites; and 6) organization of the teleost forebrain. These projects
will benefit from the increased cellular detail and resolution provided by
confocal microscopy. &lt;br/&gt; Each of the research projects described will
investigate fundamental questions such as how cells are organized during
development, how the nervous system is wired, and how cell structure relates to
cell function. The findings will have direct relevance to the particular field
of the investigator, as well as to understanding biological systems in general.
The proposed instrument will not only be necessary for maintaining high-quality
faculty research, but will also play an important role in recruiting and
training undergraduate students. Oberlin College has a history of providing
outstanding science education to a diverse body of undergraduate students and is
currently constructing a new, $65 million Science Center which will further
enhance undergraduate science training. These students are directly involved in
the faculty member's ongoing research and will now have the opportunity to work
with a state-of-the-art confocal microscope. Additionally, faculty will develop
lab exercises that utilize confocal microscopy for upper division laboratory
courses and a month long internship program for first year students. Oberlin
faculty have found that introducing students to such instrumentation in a class
often inspires them to pursue individual undergraduate research projects and
enter graduate programs in the sciences. In summary, the confocal microscope
will be crucial to expanding current and future faculty research programs, as
well as enhancing undergraduate research and classroom training. The presence of
a confocal microscope on the Oberlin College campus will be a tremendous value
for both the immediate and long-term research and training needs of the
college.&lt;br/&gt;