* 0114949
* Urban Systemic Program in Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education (USP): SciMaX
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2007
* Donald Martin, Winston-Salem/Forsyth County Schools
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joseph Reed
* 08/31/2007
* USD 5,213,896.00

The goal of the Winston-Salem/Forsyth County Schools (WS/FCS) proposal entitled
Science and Mathematics Excellence (SciMaX) is that all students will graduate
with the capacity to pursue post-secondary studies and careers in science and
mathematics. Its specific objectives are (1) To complete the implementation of
standards-based K-12 mathematics and science program within the District
establishing high standards for all students in all classrooms; (2) To increase
K-8 proficiency by 4% in End-of-Grade [test] in mathematics, by 5% in 8th grade
Algebra I, and by 5 percentile points in science each year; (3) To increase
enrollment in upper level mathematics and science courses by 10% each year and
achieve an overall completion of 80%; and (4) To partner with universities to
ensure that new teachers arrive in the school system with the training needed to
teach high-quality, standards-based science and mathematics
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;WS/FCS plans revision and compacting of the K-8
mathematics curriculum to ensure that all pre-algebra topics are addressed by
the end of the 7th grade, which will facilitate successful student performance
in algebra at the 8th grade. Similarly, the District has created a plan to
infuse science standards-based, hands-on instruction at all grade levels through
the implementation of reform instructional materials and to integrate this
subject to mathematics and the Language Arts. A student safety-net program will
be implemented consisting of bridge courses and pre-college programs. In order
to ensure the coherent accomplishment of its objectives, WS/FCS will organize
Vertical Leadership Teams (VLT) consisting of a cross section of represented
schools, including school principals, counselors, curriculum coordinators,
teachers, students, parents, business and post-secondary partners based on a
three-cohort model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A comprehensive evaluation plan will
enable the leadership to assess progress in every component of the Initiative;
and gather, interpret and use data to inform the planning and decision-making
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;