* 0114505
* Physiological Role and Phylogenetic Diversity of Termite Gut Symbionts
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2006
* John Breznak, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Dona Boggs
* 07/31/2006
* USD 801,430.00

IBN-0114505: Physiological Role and Phylogenetic Diversity of Termite Gut
Symbionts&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: John A. Breznak, Michigan State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Termites are important decomposers of earth's
major form of biomass -- lignocellulosic plant material and residues derived
from it, e.g. humus. In order to thrive on such relatively refractory, nitrogen-
poor food resources, termites are aided by a diverse community of gut microbial
symbionts. The nature of the gut microbes, and their role in termite nutrition
and vitality, has been an ongoing focus of research in the PI's laboratory for
many years. Research supported by the current award is largely an outgrowth of a
breakthrough, which led to two major discoveries during the previous funding
period. The breakthrough was the isolation in pure culture of a long-recognized,
major, and morphologically distinct, but hitherto elusive, component of the
termite gut microbial community, i.e. spirochetes. The discoveries were: (a) the
recognition of them as novel species of Treponema capable of acetate production
from a variety of substrates, including H2+CO2; and (b) the demonstration of
nitrogenase structural genes (nifH) and N2 fixation in these (and subsequently
in free-living) spirochetes. Inasmuch as microbially-produced acetate supports
up to 100% of the daily energy requirement of termites, and N2 fixation by gut
microbes can supply up to 60% of the nitrogen for termite growth, the importance
of spirochetes in termite nutrition was becoming clearer. Moreover, as neither
H2/CO2-acetogenesis nor N2 fixation had ever been recognized in spirochetes
before, these discoveries were also providing new insight into the metabolic
diversity of these fascinating bacteria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A combination of
physiological, biochemical, and molecular biological methods will now be used to
explore these metabolic activities in greater detail. We seek to identify
factors affecting their expression and activity, and to assess the importance of
spirochetes to H2/CO2-acetogenesis and N2 fixation in situ. Cooperative and
antagonistic interactions of spirochetes with other members of the gut
microbiota will also be examined, including: the provision of folate compounds
(required for growth of termite gut spirochetes) by other gut microbes that
utilize spirochete products, e.g. acetate oxidizers; and antagonisms between
H2/CO2-acetogenic spirochetes and H2-consuming methanogens - two groups of
microbes competing for the same energy source. Studies will also be done to test
the hypothesis that many of the (non-spirochetal) gut microbes colonizing the
microoxic region of hindguts near the epithelium are microaerophiles that have
previously escaped isolation in pure culture, because they will not grow in air
or under anoxia. It is hypothesized that such microaerophiles are acetate-
oxidizers that consume inwardly diffusing O2, thereby rendering the luminal
region of the gut anoxic for the fermentative production (by spirochetes and
protozoa) of more acetate. This latter effort is likely to reveal new principles
about life under hypoxia, a pervasive but poorly studied condition experienced
by many organisms in our biosphere. This research project will involve graduate
students and a postdoctoral and, hence, will expand the base of scientists
trained to explore two of the most salient features of the microbial world - its
enormous, but poorly understood and largely untapped diversity, and its
importance to macrobial life on our planet.&lt;br/&gt;