* 0114703
* Development and Construction of Single Molecule Force Spectrometers for Research and Student Training
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2003
* Stephen Craig, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2003
* USD 173,280.00

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program supports the
construction of a suite of four single-molecule force spectrometers for
development, training and research to be shared by the Departments of Mechanical
Engineering, Chemistry, and Biochemistry at Duke University. These instruments
permit the measurement of very weak forces (tens of picoNewtons) on the
spectrometer tip as a function of its distance from a surface (controlled to 0.3
nm), so that the properties of individual molecules can be studied. In-house
construction of the instruments will provide the expertise necessary to modify
and develop the facility to meet future educational and research needs. The
presence of multiple instruments provides the resources necessary to allow
concurrent development and training while still meeting the research needs of
the users. Students from each of the represented disciplines will receive
training in the development and/or use of single-molecule force spectrometry, an
area of growing importance in fundamental research, biotechnology and materials
science. No such general training opportunity presently exists on campus. The
facility will be centrally located to encourage interactions and collaborations
between users from all disciplines, and these interactions will be fostered
through a course in macromolecular interactions to be taught and supervised by
faculty from each department.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the
Instrumentation for Materials Research program supports the construction of a
suite of four single-molecule force spectrometers for development, training and
research to be shared by the Departments of Mechanical Engineering, Chemistry,
and Biochemistry at Duke University. These instruments permit the measurement of
very weak forces (tens of piconewtons) on the spectrometer tip as a function of
its distance from a surface (controlled to a fraction of a nanometer), so that
the properties of individual molecules can be studied. In-house construction of
the instruments will provide the expertise necessary to modify and develop the
facility to meet future educational and research needs. The presence of multiple
instruments provides the resources necessary to allow concurrent development and
training while still meeting the research needs of the users. Students from each
of the represented disciplines will receive training in the development and/or
use of single-molecule force spectrometry, an area of growing importance in
fundamental research, biotechnology and materials science. No such general
training opportunity presently exists on campus. The facility will be centrally
located to encourage interactions and collaborations between users from all
disciplines, and these interactions will be fostered through a course in
macromolecular interactions to be taught and supervised by faculty from each
department.&lt;br/&gt;