* 0114565
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Coordinate Induction of Sink Strength and Polyphenol Metabolism in Trees
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2005
* Heidi Appel, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Winner
* 11/30/2005
* USD 230,264.00

The ability of plants to respond to damage by pests and pathogens is widespread,
but not all plant tissues are capable of producing defensive responses.
Defensive responsiveness is greatest in young leaves and decreases dramatically
with age. The variation in defensive capabilities among different parts of
plants affects the foraging of herbivores on plants, the ability of herbivores
to develop resistance to plant defenses, and the success of predators in
locating herbivores. To understand the ecology and evolution of plants and their
interactions with herbivores, it is critical to understand how plant defensive
responses differ among different plant tissues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
movement of carbohydrates throughout the canopies of trees may influence the
ability of young foliage to develop defensive responses. For example, the
ability of wounded Poplar leaves to obtain the resources they need to produce
defensive chemicals (polyphenolics) appears to be affected by the rate at which
carbohydrates are imported from the plant vascular system. In other words, the
magnitude of the defensive response is directly related to the flow of resources
to wounded leaves. This flow of resources causes variation in defensive
responses among different plant tissues, because wounded tissues vary in their
ability to acquire resources from the plant vascular system. The PIs propose to
test this hypothesis rigorously with greenhouse and laboratory experiments on
hybrid poplar and oak saplings. Chemical analyses of plant foliage will be
conducted to assess defensive responses, and carbon 13 labeling experiments will
be used to measure rates of resource movement in whole plants. The proposed
research will result in (1) the development of a model designed to predict where
and when defensive responses are likely to occur, (2) the establishment of
monitoring technology that can be applied to a broad range of plant communities
in the field, and (3) the training of graduate and undergraduate students in the
plant sciences. &lt;br/&gt;