* 0114502
* Workshops for Best Practices for Managing International REU Site Programs, National Science Foundation, Arlington, Virginia, April and October 2001
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/2001,03/31/2003
* Michael Hudecki, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 03/31/2003
* USD 39,000.00

0114502&lt;br/&gt;Hudecki&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a series of
workshops, to take place in April and October 2001 at the National Science
Foundation in Arlington,Virginia, that will explore best practices for the
development and management of international research experiences for
undergraduate students. Organized by Michael S. Hudecki and Christopher A.
Loretz of the State University of New York at Buffalo, the workshops bring
together directors of several NSF-supported international REU (research
experiences for undergraduates) sites, administrators of study abroad programs,
student participants, and foreign mentor-supervisors. Their collective
experience will be described as a reference on "best practices" for managing
international REUs. Among the issues to be discussed are: program development,
selection of research projects and foreign mentors, sustainability, student
recruitment, management plans, pre-program activities, on-site activities, post
program activities and program evaluation. The April workshop will produce a
draft manual to be tested in summer 2001 by a set of new international site
directors. Results from the field will be reviewed and findings incorporated
into the final version at a second workshop in October. The manual will be
available on the Web for public access and downloadable in print
version.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;International undergraduate research programs and
sites can promote the development of a globally competent science and
engineering workforce. The undergraduate level, in fact, may prove to be an
ideal time in a research career for immersion in an intensive international
environment. The reference for "best practices" that will be made available to
REU directors and the broader research community will advance future efforts in
international undergraduate research and education and ensure that students and
faculty receive maximum benefit from the experience. &lt;br/&gt;