* 0114767
* US-Ghana Cooperative Research:  Assessment of Groundwater Vulnerability to Pesticides Contamination in Farmlands Within Nsawam District, Ghana: An Integrated Approach
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/2001,12/31/2005
* Fred Boadu, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 12/31/2005
* USD 39,150.00

0114767&lt;br/&gt;Boadu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a
three-year cooperative research project between Professor Fred K. Boadu, with
the Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering at Duke University, and
Mr. Emmanuel A. Owusu, with the Department of Geological Engineering at Kwame
Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, in Kumasi, Ghana. The
investigators will conduct a study to investigate and assess the potential
vulnerability of groundwater in a fractured terrain that is subject to
indiscriminate use of pesticides. The study area is located in a farming
community in the Nsawam district.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In many developing
countries the heavy and routine use of pesticides is a common practice, but for
many areas the impact on groundwater resources is unknown. Fractures in
crystalline rock serve as the main hydraulic conduits for flow of groundwater
and transport of contaminants in the earth's subsurface. In Ghana farmers
routinely use pesticides such as DDT, and these can easily end up in the
groundwater that is used for domestic purposes, thus posing potential health
risks to inhabitants in surrounding communities. The investigators will use an
innovative approach that combines artificial neural networks with standard field
mapping techniques and geophysical survey methods to map subsurface fractures in
order to predict and map the potential flow directions of contaminated
groundwater. The project will utilize Dr. Boadu's expertise in the development
and use of geophysical models to predict subsurface transport properties of
fractured terrain and Mr. Owusu's background in field structural mapping. Both
will collaborate on the analysis and interpretation of the structural
information obtained from the field. Results of this project are expected to
advance current theoretical knowledge in environmental and engineering
geophysics, as will as provide new information on variations in fracture
parameters and orientations during past tectonic deformation. Additionally, the
project will result in a valuable database of geological and geophysical
information for this part of Ghana and similar environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly supported by the Division of
International Programs and the Division of Earth Sciences. &lt;br/&gt;