* 0114568
* Time Scales in Motor Learning
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Karl Newell, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Guy Van Orden
* 07/31/2004
* USD 281,196.00

The learning of movement skills is characterized by persistent change in
behavior over time. There are many indices of change in motor behavior and many
time scales (rates of change and time periods) over which the change in behavior
occurs. A central proposition of this research is that time scales are
fundamental in the description and prediction of the change in behavior that we
infer as learning. The research stems from a theoretical framework based upon
the concepts and tools of nonlinear dynamical systems; this framework was
devised to account for both the persistent (relatively long-term, such as days,
weeks, months) and transitory (relatively short-term, such as trial to trial)
changes traditionally shown for the learning of motor skills. The last 100 years
of research on the learning of motor skills has shown that a number of different
functions of change are revealed in learning curves, such as an exponential,
power law, S-shaped, logistic, sudden "discontinuous". Typically, different
theories of learning make different assumptions about the time scales of change
that are inherent in the mathematical equations used to fit learning data.
Moreover, theories of learning tend to focus on one function of learning rather
accommodate the complete set of learning functions. This research will test the
proposition that a small set of principles from nonlinear dynamics can produce
all of the standard functions of change observed in motor learning. A series of
experiments conducted within a dynamical systems framework will examine, in a
range of motor tasks, the time scales of change in motor learning. This research
will provide a first test of the notion that a unified and parsimonious
dynamical account of time scales of change can derive the established set of
short- and long-term learning functions in motor learning. The promise of this
theoretical and experimental approach to the time scales of motor learning is
that it will lead us beyond traditional descriptions of learning toward a
predictive science of human motor learning, that links theoretically to neural
net approaches to human cognition and artificial system learning.