* 0114124
* Acquisition of a Superconducting Magnetooptical Cryostat for Research and Student Training in Magnetoelectronic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2002
* Anne Reilly, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2002
* USD 56,210.00

This is an award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program in DMR
to the College and William and Mary. The award is for acquisition of a 7 Tesla
superconducting magnetooptical cryostat for the study of nonlinear
magnetooptical effects and magnetotransport in ferromagnetic thin film
multilayers. Such multilayers are showing great promise in technological
applications, but are limited by incomplete knowledge of electron spin lifetimes
and the sources of spin scattering and spin-flipping. This equipment will be
incorporated into a system for ultrafast pump-probe laser spectroscopy,
including frequency-dependent and time-resolved magneto-optical Kerr effect and
magnetization-induced second harmonic generation, to answer questions regarding
spin polarization and spin and magnetization dynamics. The instrument will also
be used in training of students at the College to study materials important for
magnetoelectronics. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the
Instruments for Materials Research to the College of William and Mary is for the
acquisition of a low-temperature, high-field magnetooptical cryostat which will
enhance research and education in the areas of magnetooptics and
magnetotransport at the College. The cryostat will be incorporated into a system
which uses ultrafast pulsed laser techniques (with laser pulses less than one-
trillionth of a second in duration) to measure how the magnetic properties of
thin-film ferromagnetic multilayers evolve in time. In these techniques, a
"pump" beam is used to excite the material under study while a second pulsed
beam "probes", or takes a snapshot of the state of the system later in time.
Such techniques have been successfully used, for example, to study chemical
reactions as they occur, and have only recently been applied to magnetic
materials. The study of the ultimate speed of magnetic processes and what
determines the magnetic and electrical properties of magnetic thin films is
extremely important for the design of electronic and magnetic devices such as
hard drive read heads, nonvolatile computer memory and the next generation
computer devices based on electron spin (dubbed "Spintronics" or
Magnetoelectronics"). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;