* 0114558
* Effects of Noise on the Electrosensory System of Mormyrid Electric Fish
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2001,03/31/2005
* Todd Leen, Oregon Health & Science University
* Continuing Grant
* Cole Gilbert
* 03/31/2005
* USD 390,000.00

The brain handles a continuous temporal flow of sensory information, but there
also is noise in the physiological signal that affects the uncertainty in
information processing. At the microscopic level of the synapses, which are the
functional contacts between nerve cells (neurons), the relevant signals are the
small variable electrophysiological events called synaptic potentials. When
learning occurs, there is a change in the relative weighted value of these
synaptic potentials, for how strongly they influence the targeted neurons to
fire and ultimately to drive a particular behavior. At the more macroscopic
level of a functional region of the brain, there are systems properties of the
response to large numbers of cellular inputs. The system needs to optimize the
trade-off between accuracy, which may take some time to establish, and
adaptability, which often requires rapid adjustment to changes in the sensory
environment. This collaborative project combines a neural network approach with
computational biology and experimental neurophysiology, to test a statistical
model on rules of adaptive learning. Experiments involve a species of weakly
electric fish, which produces a pulsed electrical field around itself. Objects
in the water distort the field, and the lateral-line sensors on the body detect
these distortions. Neurons in the electrosensory lateral-line lobe (ELL) in
their brain receive signals from the lateral line sensors, and also receive
signals temporally locked to the motor command for the electric pulses.
Responses of cells in the ELL adapt to changing electrosensory conditions, and
this adaptability allows these neurons to 'store' an image of the fish's
expectation of the electrosensory field. It is not clear whether the adaptive
learning seen at the cellular level can explain collective neural activity in
the brain of the behaving fish. This project involves a novel aspect of modeling
emphasizing statistical properties of the synaptic system in the presence of
noise, and making testable predictions about how noise can affect the accuracy
of the fish's stored expectation of the signal.&lt;br/&gt; Results of this
project will clarify how synaptic learning rates and signal processing interact,
and how the effects of noise are handled by the system. The impact will extend
beyond electrosensory processing and computational neuroscience to studies of
learning and of how cerebellar-like brain structures function, and there is
highly cross-disciplinary training involved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;