* 0114709
* Snapping-Cable Energy Dissipator (SCED) for Reducing Seismic Damage to Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Raymond Plaut, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2006
* USD 268,580.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This study examines energy loss mechanisms during the
transition of a cable from a slack state to a taut state and undertakes
optimization of the associated energy loss for use in design of low-tech/low
cost/high performance dampers for mitigation of seismic damage in structures.
Cables comprised of helical wires wound around a central core to form a strand
or strands wrapped helically around another strand will be modeled to capture
axial, flexural and torsional displacements. Dynamic friction at the contact
points or lines between wires absorbs energy and affects the responses.
Understanding these effects will enable design of a snapping cable energy
dissipater that does not produce harmful shock to the structure, yet dissipates
sufficient energy and/or adds sufficient stiffness to be effective in reducing
damage induced by seismic events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that
this analytical, numerical, and experimental research program leads to a novel
and effective tool in the effort to protect lives and property during
earthquakes and other natural or man-made hazards. Additionally, during the
course of the research, techniques and results will be incorporated into courses
cross-listed in Civil Engineering and Mechanics at Virginia Tech and the
participation of undergraduate research students will be encouraged.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;