* 0114231
* The Role of Stretch-Activated Calcium Channels in the Regulation of Cell Movement
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2001,12/31/2007
* Juliet Lee, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Loverine P. Taylor
* 12/31/2007
* USD 443,530.00

Cell movement is fundamental to many other important biological processes such
as embryogenesis, tissue formation, wound healing and immune function. Aberrant
cell movement is involved in immune dysfunction and the development of
metastatic cancer. Current studies of cell movement continue to be fueled by the
potential benefits of understanding such a fundamental process. Cell movement
along a surface involves repeated cycles of protrusion at the cell front
followed by retraction at the rear. This coordinated series of shape changes
depends on the spatial and temporal regulation of different cytoskeletal
functions. Recent investigations have provided increasingly detailed information
about the molecular basis of cytoskeletal function. However, one important yet
relatively unexplored area concerns how the production of mechanical force
integrates various aspects of cytoskeletal function to produce
movement.&lt;br/&gt;A promising new approach to the problem of cell movement, to
be used in this project, is the combined use of microscopic imaging techniques
with force detection assays, to study the interrelationship between cytoskeletal
behavior, force production and cell shape change during movement. Fish epidermal
keratocytes are an excellent model system for this type of study because they
can display a rapid mode of movement, while maintaining a simple, semicircular
shape. In addition, these cells can exhibit a slower, less
efficient&lt;br/&gt;mode of movement that is common to many other cell types.
The fact that the same molecular machinery can give rise to different modes of
movement, in a single cell type, points to the importance of regulatory
mechanisms in governing how cells move. Recently, stretch-activated calcium
channels (SAC's) have been found to regulate keratocyte cell movement, by
coordinating protrusion with retraction. Thus, when retraction of the rear is
impeded, cytoskeletal tension increases leading to the activation of SAC's. This
triggers a transient increase in intracellular calcium concentration ([Ca2+]i)
which induces retraction of the cell rear. Thus, SAC's provide a mechano-
chemical feedback mechanism that coordinates protrusion with retraction and
which is essential for continued cell movement.&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this
project is to investigate different aspects of SAC meditated regulation of cell
movement. The first aim will examine which molecular mechanisms are involved in
triggering retraction of the cell rear, following activation of SAC's.
&lt;br/&gt;Selective inhibitors of each mechanism will be used to see which is
effective in blocking retraction, while simultaneously monitoring [Ca2+]i, force
production, adhesion morphology and cell shape. The second aim will investigate
the process of force transduction via SAC's, by using a force assay together
with calcium imaging, to quantify the relationship between force production and
activation of SAC's. The third aim will&lt;br/&gt;determine how adhesion
strength influences the SAC mediated regulation of cell movement, by observing
the effects of transfecting keratocytes with mutant adhesion
receptors.&lt;br/&gt;The ability to simultaneously monitor changes in cellular
force production, [Ca2+]i and cell shape change, in response to defined physical
and biochemical perturbations is particularly useful for studying how cell
movement arises from the physical integration of molecular mechanisms. The
proposed work is expected to form the basis of a new experimental and conceptual
approach to the study of cell movement that can be used to study additional
mechano-chemical signaling mechanisms both in keratocytes and other cell
types.&lt;br/&gt;