* 0114277
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Infant Event Representations and Verb Argument Structure
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2003
* Charles Perfetti, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Lynne Bernstein
* 08/31/2003
* USD 18,000.00

With National Science Foundation support, Ms. Scherff and her advisor Dr.
Perfetti will conduct a year long investigation of the possibility that
prelinguistic infants identify the same kinds of structures in observed events
that languages identify with verb argument structure. The verb argument
structure is a highly constrained format for describing events in language.
Infants' ability to map events in the world onto concepts such as "give" and
"hug" raises questions about both the structure of language and of event
perception. As adults, we implicitly identify discrete events from a scene of
complex and even ambiguous interactions among objects. Further, we verbally
characterize these events in remarkably consistent ways, relating our cognitive
representations of events to our linguistic representations of events. The
difficulty in this process is that while the world of conceivable events may be
fairly unconstrained, language itself is a highly constrained format for
representing events. How then, do infants acquiring language learn to map the
less constrained world onto highly constrained linguistic structures? Scherff
and Perfetti will investigate infant event perception and the acquisition of
verb argument structure in preverbal infants (10-12 months) and infants just
beginning to produce word combinations (18-20 months). Their project focuses on
whether infants' conceptually categorize events based on the number of
obligatory participants, an operation that might be critical for acquiring verbs
with different argument structure. Using methods sensitive to a child's
perception of novel events, Scherff and Perfetti will examine how infants'
knowledge of event structures correspond to linguistic argument structures. They
will also examine the underlying contributions of perceptual and cognitive
mechanisms to infants' event representations and how language acquisition
impacts infant event knowledge. By recording electrical potentials at the scalp,
the investigators gain a rough idea of where in the infant brain perceived
events structures are represented.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This combination of
methodologies and research questions can uniquely inform our understanding of
how infants form bridges between their cognitive representations of events and
the language acquisition process. This work will increase knowledge about how
the cognitive and language functions of humans develop in the very early stages
of life. &lt;br/&gt;