* 0114215
* Forecasting Change in Hurricane Risk over Time
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2004
* David Rosowsky, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 07/31/2004
* USD 274,979.00

ABSTRACT Proposal : CMS-0114215 PI: Rachel Davidson Institution: Cornell
University DateL July 11, 2001 Project Abstract: "Forecasting Change in
Hurricane Risk over Time" The objectives of this project are to: (1) develop a
methodology to quantitatively model how hurricane risk in the U.S. changes over
time and how risk management strategies can affect the amount and rate of
change, and (2) demonstrate the methodology through a case study on the coast of
North and South Carolina. Hurricane risk (e.g., in terms of expected annual
economic loss) changes over time due to population and economic growth, changing
construction practices, aging infrastructure, and other forces. Since hurricane
risk continuously changes, those who attempt to assess and manage it are chasing
a moving target. While available regional loss estimation mosels are based on
the best estimate of how the world looks today-where people live and in what
types of structures, this new methodology will incorporate the dynamic nature of
the urban environment. This tools will enable risk managers to anticipate how
the world will change, estimate what the risk will be at the time in the future
when the next hurricane occurs, and plan for that future scenario. By making
loss estimation modeling dynamic, the new methodology will benefit government
agencies, insurance companies, and others in risk management decision-making.
The methodology also can improve risk communication. By establishing more
directly and quantitatively the connection between improve risk communication.
By establishing more directly and quantitatively the connection between today's
actions and the effects of a hurricane 20 years from now (e.g., as a decision to
build on the coast today creates structues to be damanaged in the next
hurricane), hurricanes can be perceived more as a present concern, rather than
an issue to be addressed at some unspecified future time. This study focuses on
hurricanes and the Carolina coast, but could be extended to other hazards and
other regions. The simulation-based methodology will integrate urban dynamics
and regional loss estimation modeling techniques. Its development requires: (1)
designing the overall hurricane risk forecasting methodology, developing the (2)
loss estimation model and (3) urban dynamics model that are components of the
methodology, (4) conducting the case study, (5) validating the overall hurricane
risk forecasting model, and (6) using the methodology to analyze sample
hurricane risk management questions.