* 0114429
* IGERT:   On A Virtual Tribology System: Future Engineers and Future Powertrain Virtualization Technology
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2010
* Leon Keer, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Melur Ramasubramanian
* 08/31/2010
* USD 3,495,930.00

This IGERT award supports the establishment of a multidisciplinary graduate
training program of education and research in the development of a virtual
tribology system for future powertrains, which are the power-delivery systems of
automobiles and aircraft. The current development of a powertrain tribological
system is time-consuming, requiring integration of new materials, engine
technologies, trial-and-error, laboratory experimentation and extensive field-
testing. The vision is to shorten the development time by developing a virtual
powertrain through advanced computer modeling that simulates the interfacial
interactions among critical machine elements. The development of such technology
requires new engineers and scientists with cross-disciplinary training. The
traditional engineering Ph.D. training model based on one advisor and a single
topic does not work well in this new paradigm. Creating Ph.D.s who are educated
in a multidisciplinary environment represents the educational focus of this
IGERT program. Because of the need for multiscale modeling and multidisciplinary
research, an aggressive education plan requiring the creation of a
multidisciplinary learning/research environment, electronic education,
industrial collaboration, international outreach and faculty re-education will
be an integral part of the current program. This program is a joint effort among
faculty members in chemistry, chemical engineering, civil engineering, computer
engineering, materials science and mechanical engineering, as well as physics.
With the successful development of virtualization technology, it is hoped to
educate a new generation of engineers and scientists who have strong technical
skill and are proficient in multidisciplinary collaboration and in working with
computer simulations of complex systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-
wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating Ph.D. scientists and
engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical,
professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of the future.
The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by
establishing new, innovative models for graduate education and training in a
fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends traditional
disciplinary boundaries. In the fourth year of the program, awards are being
made to twenty-two institutions for programs that collectively span all areas of
science and engineering supported by NSF. The intellectual foci of this specific
award reside in the Directorates for Engineering; Computer and Information
Science and Engineering; Mathematical and Physical Sciences; and Education and
Human Resources.&lt;br/&gt;