* 0114562
* Arabidopsis 2010: Identification of the Function of a Family of Putative Glycosyltransferases
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Christopher Somerville, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 08/31/2005
* USD 815,405.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to determine the
biological function of genes which encode six families of structurally related
proteins, called the cellulose synthase like (CSL) proteins. Based on the
sequence similarity to cellulose synthase, it is hypothesized that the CSL genes
encode processive glycosyltransferases that may catalyze the synthesis of some
of the non-cellulosic polymers that comprise plant cell walls and other
exopolysaccharides such as stylar secretions and mucilage, or the glycosyl
residues on arabinogalactan proteins Because plant cell walls and
exopolysaccharides are the dominant component of biomass on earth, knowledge of
the enzymes and genes associated with the synthesis of these compounds may
facilitate methods for the production and utilization of plant
biomass.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical approach that will be used to
determine the function of the CSL genes exploits the recently completed full
genome sequence of Arabidopsis to facilitate directed genetic analysis of the
genes. Most of the CSL genes will be inactivated by insertional mutagenesis. In
addition, the expression of the CSL genes will be altered by producing
transgenic plants that have increased or decreased accumulation of mRNA for the
CSL genes. The effects of the mutations and transgenic events on the growth and
development of the plants, and on plant polysaccharide composition will be
analyzed in order to associate each CSL gene with a specific biological role and
enzyme of known catalytic activity. A list of the accession numbers of the genes
to be analyzed during this project can be found at
http://www.arabidopsis.org/info/2010_projects/index.html. Information about the
gene families can be found at http://cellwall.stanford.edu/cesa/index.shtml.&lt;
br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;