* 0114533
* Temporal Dynamics of Unconscious and Conscious Perception in Visual Processing
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Bruno Breitmeyer, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher T. Kello
* 08/31/2005
* USD 252,924.00

Visual masking occurs when the visibility of one stimulus, called the target, is
reduced by the presence of another stimulus, designated as the mask. Like the
techniques of binocular rivalry and of multi-stable percepts of the same
stimulus, visual masking provides a way to dissociate neural processes that are
merely stimulus-dependent but not correlated with conscious perception, from
neural processes that are percept-dependent and thus correlated with conscious
perception of the stimulus. The broad long-term objective of this research is to
use the visual masking paradigm to study the temporal dynamics in the micro-
genesis of pattern processing from the time of stimulus presentation to the time
of its full registration in consciousness. A modified dual-channel model of
visual masking that incorporates mutual inhibitory interactions between
sustained parvocellular (P) and transient magnocellular (M) pathways will be
used to study how the cortical response evoked by the mask interacts with the
early and late components of the cortical response evoked by the target. The
project will rely on the masking paradigms of para- and metacontrast,
theoretical tools based on neural-network modeling, and the additional
psychophysical techniques of target disinhibition, binocular rivalry, and
unconscious priming by a masked (perceptually suppressed) target. It will
investigate where and when in the stream of processing the mechanisms implicated
in suppression and disinhibition of target visibility are located. It will also
probe whether and when the mechanisms implicated in suppression and
disinhibition of target visibility relate to stimulus-dependent (unconscious) or
percept-dependent (conscious) levels of neural processing. The research is
expected to provide a better understanding of the perceptual processes leading
to conscious registration of stimuli. The potential applications include the
development of novel biomimetic engineering design principles for autonomous
perceptual devices and the development of clinical diagnostic or vulnerability
markers for disorders such as dyslexia and schizophrenia.