* 0114055
* Technician Support for University of Wisconsin Rare Gas Geochronology Laboratory
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Bradley Singer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2005
* USD 128,688.00

0114055&lt;br/&gt;Singer &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides three-years
of partial salary support for the Rare Gas Geochronology Laboratory at the
University of Wisconsin-Madison. This will comprise the initial (phase I)
technician support for this laboratory that is under the supervision of Dr. Brad
Singer. The new technician will be a full-time employee whose responsibilities
shall include: (1) day-to-day operation and maintenance of ultra-high vacuum,
mass spectrometry, laser, furnace, electronic, and computer systems, (2)
scheduling analytical work, training students and outside users, (3) supervision
of sample preparation, including training and oversight of graduate students,
(4) irradiation and safe handling of radioactive and hazardous materials, (5)
development of the UW-Madison nuclear reactor for 40Ar/39Ar geochronology, (6)
completing computer automation of the gas extraction and mass spectrometry
system that was built by Dr. Singer, and (7) archiving and management of
analytical data. In addition, the new technician will assist in implementing
capabilities for the measurement of radiogenic 4He and cosmogenic 3He. The
laboratory is currently engaged in, or beginning, several research projects that
span many Earth Science disciplines and involve faculty plus graduate or
undergraduate students from UW-Madison or collaboration with other institutions.
The technician will contribute to bringing the laboratory from its developmental
state to one of full productivity. Moreover, the technician will help to expand
the capabilities of current equipment so that the laboratory may fulfill its
potential in both geo- and thermo-chronology.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;