* 0114572
* US-Turkey Cooperative Research:  Investigation of Electro-Optic Properties of Molecular Aggregates by Stark Spectroscopy
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2001,12/31/2004
* John Lombardi, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 12/31/2004
* USD 18,740.00

0114572&lt;br/&gt;Lombardi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a collaborative project between Dr. John Lombardi, Department of
Chemistry, CUNY City College, New York, NY and Dr. Serdar Ozcelik, Department of
Chemistry, Bilkent University, Ankara, Turkey. They plan to investigate the
electro-optical properties of J-aggregates. They plan to measure the change in
dipole moments to study the nature and relative importance of the intermolecular
interactions that lead to aggregate formation. They will study the effects of
electric fields on molecular events (absorption and fluorescence) to gain basic
understanding of nanostructural materials that would be useful in
nanotechnology. They plan to utilize Stark spectroscopic methods for these
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The project supports collaboration between
two scientists with complementary expertise and resources to investigate an
important problem. The results will help with designing of materials useful for
nanotechnology applications. Professor Lombardi is an expert in Stark
spectroscopy. He will advise on building up a Stark spectrometer at Bilkent
University and will participate in the analysis and simulation of the
electroabsorption data. Dr. Ozcelik will supervise the preparation of the film
sample, UV-Vis absorption, fluorescence, electroabsorption and electric field
modulated fluorescence measurements. Students at CCNY/CUNY will benefit from
this collaboration, and one graduate student will visit Bilkent University to
work on the project. This project meets the INT objective of supporting
collaborative research in areas of mutual interest.&lt;br/&gt;