* 0114420
* IGERT:  Evolutionary, Computational, and Molecular Approaches to Genome Structure and Function
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2008
* Michael Hammer, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Holly K. Given
* 09/30/2008
* USD 3,470,625.00

This multidisciplinary IGERT program will train graduate students in areas at
the interface of evolutionary biology, functional genomics, and computational
biology in a way that will enable them to collaborate productively across
traditional disciplinary boundaries. The emerging fields of comparative and
functional genomics will reshape biological research in the next twenty years
and have a profound impact on medicine and human health, agriculture,
engineering, and our understanding of the origin of life and the relationships
among living organisms. Research in these emerging disciplines requires the
coordinated interaction of scientists with diverse backgrounds in evolution,
molecular biology, and computer science, yet current departmental boundaries at
most universities do not foster interactions among these areas. The
comprehensive IGERT training plan at the University of Arizona is intended to
meet these challenges. This program includes advising, research rotations and
colloquia, two novel multidisciplinary courses that engage students in hands-on
problem solving, additional lecture and laboratory courses, training in ethics,
a monthly discussion group, opportunities to interact with visiting scientists,
bi-annual mini-symposia, opportunities to mentor undergraduates in research, and
offsite internships at other academic institutions or at leading genomics
companies. Finally, the training plan includes a strategy to recruit both
minority undergraduate and graduate students into science, drawing on the
Hispanic and Native American populations in Arizona. Some of the proposed
training initiatives build on existing structures; others are entirely new. The
University of Arizona is particularly well suited for this training program
because of existing strengths in evolution, functional genomics, and
computation, a strong graduate program, and an institutional commitment to
interdisciplinary programs. Moreover, the individual participants in this
program have a long track record of success in training students and a
commitment to multidisciplinary collaborations. The impact of the proposed
training program uniting three research areas will be to equip the next
generation of biologists with the tools to tackle the challenges of genome-scale
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the
challenges of educating Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical, professional, and personal
skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing new, innovative
models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for
collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries. In
the fourth year of the program, awards are being made to twenty-two institutions
for programs that collectively span all areas of science and engineering
supported by NSF. The intellectual foci of this specific award reside in the
Directorates for Biological Sciences; Engineering; Computer and Information
Science and Engineering; and Education and Human Resources.&lt;br/&gt;