* 0114189
* Acquisition of Magnetometer for Magnetic Films Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Zbigniew Celinski, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 08/31/2002
* USD 151,300.00

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program and the Major
Research Instrumentation program supports the acquisition of a highly sensitive
magnetometer at Colorado State University at Colorado Springs. The magnetometer
will have a profound impact on research program and teaching and training
students. The instrument will be used to fully correlate the static and dynamic
properties of studied magnetic structures. The system will significantly enhance
materials characterization capability on magnetic structures in three research
projects currently underway at the institution: (1) studies of the exchange
biased ferromagnetic/antiferromagnetic structures, (2) studies of the exchange
coupled Fe/Pd/Fe and Fe/Ag/Fe structures, (3) studies of the high frequency
devices based on ferromagnetic metals. Furthermore, this new magnetometer will
give graduate students but also undergraduate and high school students
opportunity to work on research projects, further expanding their training. The
interaction between students and postdoctoral fellows or faculty creates an
atmosphere, which strongly stimulates education and
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Instrumentation for Materials
Research program and the Major Research Instrumentation program allows Colorado
State University at Colorado Springs to acquire the acquisition of a highly
sensitive magnetometer. The magnetometer will have a profound impact on research
program and teaching and training students. The instrument will be used to fully
correlate the static and dynamic properties of studied magnetic structures. The
system will significantly enhance materials characterization capability on
magnetic structures in three research projects currently underway at the
institution. Furthermore, this new magnetometer will give graduate students, but
also undergraduate and high school students, opportunity to work on research
projects, further expanding their training. The interaction between students and
postdoctoral fellows or faculty creates an atmosphere, which strongly stimulates
education and training.&lt;br/&gt;