* 0114014
* ITR/SI - A Networking Protocol for Underwater Acoustic Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Geoffrey Xie, Naval Postgraduate School
* Interagency Agreement
* Jie Wu
* 08/31/2005
* USD 311,562.00

We propose development of a network layer protocol necessary to increase the
utility of acoustic&lt;br/&gt;communications in the shallow water environment.
Increasing attention has been given to collecting data&lt;br/&gt;from difficult
to access coastal waters for diverse activities, to include scientific research,
industrial and&lt;br/&gt;commercial concerns, and military applications. The
preponderance of activity has focused on&lt;br/&gt;developing reliable methods
for transmitting the information collected through the difficult time-
varying&lt;br/&gt;shallow water medium. However, current network layer
protocols, which are responsible for determining&lt;br/&gt;traffic routing, do
not provide for guaranteed quality of services. Current protocols also may
cause&lt;br/&gt;unnecessary message delays.&lt;br/&gt;The delivery of traffic in
an acoustic network is complicated by the excessive propagation
delays&lt;br/&gt;resulting from the speed of sound in water. The effect of this
propagation speed is to cause an acoustic&lt;br/&gt;network connected by short
hops to perform similar to a wire-based network with links
between&lt;br/&gt;neighboring nodes of over 100,000 kilometers. However, the
potential benefits and increased potential&lt;br/&gt;for application
developments that stem from the implementation of wireless underwater networks
make it&lt;br/&gt;worthwhile to explore means of mitigating the effects of the
propagation delays.&lt;br/&gt;Central to the problem of route determination for
network traffic is the discovery of the networks&lt;br/&gt;topology from which
network nodes extract next-hop information upon which to base traffic
forwarding&lt;br/&gt;decisions. Two principal methods are used for discovering
the route information. Proactive routing&lt;br/&gt;methods pre-compute route
data before network traffic is generated, thus when traffic is submitted
by&lt;br/&gt;network applications the appropriate routes are already known.
Reactive routing determines the route&lt;br/&gt;information in response to
traffic submissions. This method, referred to as on-demand routing, seeks
to&lt;br/&gt;minimize route discovery traffic by only determining routes
necessary to support actual traffic patterns.&lt;br/&gt;This routing information
is cached to increase responsiveness to submitted traffic and adaptability
to&lt;br/&gt;topology changes. Both methods have their merits; however, neither
adequately supports resource&lt;br/&gt;allocations necessary to assure
guaranteed levels of service quality.&lt;br/&gt;We proposed a novel network
protocol that provides many of the benefits of proactive routing
yet&lt;br/&gt;retains the adaptability of reactive protocols. Our protocol is
based upon a central master node which&lt;br/&gt;periodically probes the network
for active participant nodes. In responding to the probes, the
nodes&lt;br/&gt;provide the master node with sufficient information for the
master node to determine all possible data&lt;br/&gt;paths through the network.
From this information the master node makes all routing decisions for
the&lt;br/&gt;network and provides irnext-hoply information to each non-master
node, thus reducing the workload on&lt;br/&gt;non-master nodes. This information
also enables the master node to optimize the allocation of traffic
to&lt;br/&gt;network paths providing for active management of delays insuring
delay variance and data capacity are&lt;br/&gt;within the established quality of
service commitments.&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental to this approach is the separation of
control traffic from data delivery. This separation&lt;br/&gt;allows data to be
transmitted without first having to wait for traditional handshake mechanisms to
provide&lt;br/&gt;access to the channel. This separation significantly reduces
the expected delay to which traffic is&lt;br/&gt;subjected resulting in
potentially higher data throughput.&lt;br/&gt;Progress in network layer
protocols will expand the usefulness of underwater acoustic
networks&lt;br/&gt;beyond applications that are limited to very low data rate
traffic and non-time sensitive data types.&lt;br/&gt;Specific beneficiaries of
this research activity include the Deployable Autonomous Distributed
System,&lt;br/&gt;the SeaWeb Technology Demonstrations, the Autonomous
Oceanographic Sampling Network, and the&lt;br/&gt;National Oceanographic
partnership Programs Front Resolving Observational Network with
Telemetry&lt;br/&gt;(FRONT) project.