* 0114760
* Dissertation Research:  Theory Development and Evaluation in Early Universe Cosmology
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2001,12/31/2002
* John Earman, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2002
* USD 8,580.00

Historians and philosophers of science have studied the development and
evaluation of theories in a wide variety of fields, and have developed a number
of different approaches to these topics. What little attention has been devoted
to modern cosmology has focused almost entirely on the controversy between the
big bang theory and the steady state theory, a controversy which ended in the
mid-60s. Since then a great deal of theoretical effort has been devoted to
understanding the very early universe. This dissertation research project
intends to develop a content-rich history of this research, with a focus on
issues of theory development and evaluation. The NSF dissertation research
support will allow the researcher to interview several prominent cosmologists
and visit archives with collections related to modern cosmology (England,
Chicago, Boston, and Princeton). These interviews and archival visits will allow
the researcher to develop a more nuanced and insightful historical account of
this period and to pose methodological questions to working scientists. In
addition, detailed interviews with cosmologists will be a valuable resource for
future historians. The research and interviews will focus on two methodological
questions. Much of early universe research has been motivated by the alluring
idea that fundamental physics dictates large scale properties of the universe.
In particular, inflationary cosmology has won widespread acceptance due to its
ability to solve a number of "fine-tuning" problems of standard cosmology.
However, cosmologists' assessments of the importance of this success differ
widely. Via focused interviews with proponents and critics of inflation (and
earlier theories with a similar motivation), the researcher will explore the
reasons for these differing assessments. The interviews will also focus on
attempts to make precision tests of inflation.