* 0114423
* IGERT:  Regional Resilience and Adaptation: Planning for Change
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2008
* Joshua Greenburg, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Holly K. Given
* 08/31/2008
* USD 3,231,538.00

This IGERT award is for an interdisciplinary graduate-training program in
regional resilience and adaptation (RR&amp;A). One of the major challenges
facing humanity is to sustain the desirable features of Earth's ecosystems and
society at a time of rapid changes in all of the major forces that shape the
structure and functioning of ecosystems and society. The RR&amp;A program seeks
to train Ph.D.-level scholars, policy-makers, and managers to address these
questions in an integrated fashion. The program integrates the tools and
approaches of ecology, economics, anthropology, climate dynamics, and philosophy
in a systems framework to understand the functioning of regional systems. It
emphasize high-latitude ecosystems, where current management issues require an
application of the integrated understanding of these disciplines. This graduate-
training program will train a new generation of scientists to integrate the
perspectives of natural and social sciences in addressing both the basic
understanding of regional systems and the application of this understanding to
management issues. The goal is to train scientists that are well-grounded in one
or more disciplines but have an understanding and research experience in a range
of natural and social sciences. The program will provide training to graduate
students from the University of Alaska and students enrolled in other
universities. It provides course work and a seminar program that integrates
ecology, economics, and anthropology in a systems-modeling framework and
provides faculty mentorship and internships in areas outside of each student's
parent discipline. The program emphasizes cross-cultural communication through
heavy involvement with the Alaskan Native American community and with managers,
businesses, and conservation groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide
program intended to meet the challenges of educating Ph.D. scientists and
engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical,
professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of the future.
The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by
establishing new, innovative models for graduate education and training in a
fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends traditional
disciplinary boundaries. In the fourth year of the program, awards are being
made to twenty-two institutions for programs that collectively span all areas of
science and engineering supported by NSF. The intellectual foci of this specific
award reside in the Office of Polar Programs and the Directorates for
Geosciences; Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences; and Education and Human
Resources.&lt;br/&gt;