* 0114869
* Geology and the Emergence of Science as a Profession in the United States
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2003
* Julie Newell, Southern Polytechnic State University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith R. Benson
* 07/31/2003
* USD 135,021.00

Project Abstract Julie R. Newell, Southern Polytechnic State University Geology
and the Emergence of Science as a Profession in the United States

In the secondary literature on the history of science in America, geology has
long been recognized as the first science to develop an extensive professional
community. Further, geologists developed the support structures and institutions
that made professional science in the United States possible. Among the critical
institutions founded by geologists were the first general scientific journal,
The American Journal of Science (1818), and the Association of American
Geologists (1840), which would become the American Association for the
Advancement of Science (1848). These achievements were critical to the emergence
of professional scientists in other disciplines in the United States. No
published history of science in America has, however, rooted these
generalizations about the importance of geology in primary documents and
archival evidence. Nor has it been explained why geology, rather than some other
science, should have played this pivotal role.

This project focuses on one central question with a multitude of ramifications:
Why geology? Why were geologists able to garner public, political, and most
importantly financial support for their scientific endeavors? What was it about
the science of geology in the period before 1865 that particularly suited the
cultural, political, and physical environment in the United States? Dr. Newell's
thesis is that geology was a relatively new science uniquely well suited to the
values and goals of the early United States and for which the United States
provided unique materials for study and for the generation of truly American
geological theories.

Working from her earlier manuscript, Dr. Newell is conducting extensive
additional archival research in order to unravel the personal and institutional
relationships that underlie the development of geology in the United States and
its impact on the broader history of science. The ultimate goal is an book-
length manuscript that provides an integrated account of the early history of
geology in the United States, including the content of the science, the goals
and methods of the scientists, and the contexts that shaped, and were shaped by,
American geologists and their geology. No such account exists in the published
literature of the history of American geology. In addition, because of the
centrality of geology to the emergence of science as a profession in the United
States, this study should interest scholars concerned with the general history
of science in the United States or in American intellectual history.