* 0114319
* IGERT:  Cross-disciplinary Optics Research and Education (CORE)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2001,11/30/2007
* Mansoor Sheik-Bahae, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Van Hartesveldt
* 11/30/2007
* USD 2,826,572.00

A Cross-disciplinary Optics Research and Education (CORE) program is established
at the Uni-versity of New Mexico to enhance the education and training of
graduate students. The program involves the departments of Biology, Chemistry,
Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, and Physics. The research and
educational theme of the CORE project is centered about optical imaging and
spectroscopic techniques with high spatial and temporal resolution and their
appli-cation to physical, chemical, and biological problems. (i) During the
project interdisciplinary teams of graduate students will work on various
aspects of the CORE research, comprising the design and development of methods
and tools and their application in the fields of biology, chemistry, physics,
and engineering. The research projects involve the study of fundamental pro-
cesses in various samples ranging from single molecules, to quantum dots, to
living cells, and their utilization for the development of biosensors. (ii) In
addition to the current curricula in their respective departments, IGERT
students will take a set of cross-disciplinary courses designed specifically for
the program. (iii) The IGERT fellows will be offered internships in the local
op-tics industry, in local national laboratories, and abroad to widen their
horizon and to introduce career opportunities. (iv) A weekly seminar will
provide the students with training in technical writing and in presentations of
their research in a multi-disciplinary environment. (v) Mentoring undergraduate
students will foster team spirit and leadership skills and will help to recruit,
retain, and involve undergraduates, in particular those from underrepresented
minorities, in research. The overall goal of our education and training
activities is to produce a new cadre of engineers and scientists who are
prepared to work in multidisciplinary environments. As experts in their
respective home disciplines, the IGERT graduates will share a basic
understanding of optics, im-aging and spectroscopy. As such, they will be
prepared to work at the forefront of optics-related research, development and
education in national labs, academia, and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT
is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating Ph.D.
scientists and engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
education by establishing new, innovative models for graduate education and
training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries. In the fourth year of the program, awards
are being made to twenty-two institutions for programs that collectively span
all areas of science and engineering supported by NSF. The intellectual foci of
this specific award reside in the Directorates for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences; Engineering; Biological Sciences; and Education and Human
Resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;