* 0114235
* Acquisition of a High Resolution Mass Spectrometer for Materials Characterization and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Brian Hoffman, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 08/31/2002
* USD 235,360.00

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research Program and the
Solid-State Chemistry Program will help Northwestern University with the
acquisition of a high-resolution magnetic-sector mass spectrometer with electron
impact (EI) and liquid secondary ion mass spectrometry (LSIMS) ionization
sources. This instrument will be used to characterize a wide range of materials
science compounds such as mesoporous supramolecular molecules, porphyrazines,
novel molecular species for electronic device structure, and other macrocyclic
materials. As this research has moved toward larger and more complex species,
the availability of in-house state-of- the-art mass spectrometry instrumentation
has become essential for characterization of these molecules. The requested
instrument will improve on the mass spectrometry capabilities for in-house
molecular characterization in several ways: (1) the increased sensitivity for
high-resolution mass spectrometry with either electron impact (EI) or LSIMS
ionization is essential for determination of elemental composition of these
species; (2) the increased mass range for mass spectrometry with LSIMS
ionization will allow both low- and high-resolution characterization of the
higher molecular weight species which will continue to increase in molecular
weight as the research programs at NU progress; (3) air-sensitive materials may
be characterized without fear of decomposition during transit to another
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Instrumentation for
Materials Research Program and the Solid-State Chemistry Program will help
Northwestern University (NU) with the acquisition of a high-resolution magnetic-
sector mass spectrometer with electron impact and liquid secondary ion mass
spectrometry ionization sources and with appropriate sample inlets for compounds
with a wide range of volatility and purity. This instrument will be a
significant benefit to molecular characterization in the materials research
efforts in the Chemistry Department. Currently such characterization is done by
sending samples to external laboratories. In-house characterization with the
requested instrument will benefit both the research and the educational efforts
at NU. The availability of the requested instrument for in-house analysis will
increase significantly the exposure of graduate students to modern analytical
techniques. In addition to gaining a more complete characterization of the
materials that they have synthesized, students also will gain a deeper
understanding of the techniques used for the analysis, the reason for choosing
different ionization techniques, and the accurate interpretation of the mass
spectra gathered from this analysis.&lt;br/&gt;