* 0114536
* US-India Cooperative Research:  A Comprehensive Digital Library of Stellar Spectra
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2004
* Francisco Valdes, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 06/30/2004
* USD 19,500.00

0114536&lt;br/&gt;Rose&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award supports a
US-India cooperative research project entitled "A Comprehensive Digital Library
of Stellar Spectra." The US PIs are Drs. James Rose, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, and David Bell and Francisco Valdes of the National
Optical Astronomy Observatories (NOAO). With Indian counterparts Drs. Ranjan
Gupta and Harinder Singh of the Inter-University Centre for Astronomy and
Astrophysics (IUCCA), they will work toward completing a comprehensive library
of stellar spectra, obtained with the coude feed telescope at the Kitt Peak
National Observatory. The library will consist of spectra for more than 1000
stars, covering a large range of atmospheric parameters such as effective
temperature, surface gravity, and metal-abundance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope:
The library will be made publicly available through the NOAO archives. It will
be a major resource for many investigators, given its unprecedented scope and
quality in spectral resolution, signal-to-noise ratio, and coverage of stellar
atmosphere parameters. The library will also be used by both the US and India
investigators in their efforts to apply Artificial Neural Network techniques to
the classification of stellar spectra and population synthesis of galaxy
spectra. This award is supported by the Division of International Programs and
the Division of Astronomical Sciences. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;0114536&lt;br/&gt;Rose &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award
supports US-India Cooperative Research: A Comprehensive Digital Library of
Stellar Spectra. US PIs are Drs. James Rose of the University of North Carolina
at Chapel Hill, and David Bell and Francisco Valdes of the National Optical
Astronomy Observatories (NOAO). With Indian counterparts Drs. Ranjan and Singh
of the Inter-University IUCCA, they will work toward completing a comprehensive
library of stellar spectra, obtained with the coude feed telescope at the Kitt
Peak National Observatory. The library will consist of spectra for more than
1000 stars, covering a large range of atmospheric parameters such as effective
temperature, surface gravity, and metal-abundance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope:
The library will be made publicly available through the NOAO archives. It will
be a major resource for many investigators, given its unprecedented scope and
quality in spectral resolution, signal-to-noise ratio, and coverage of stellar
atmosphere parameters. The library will also be used by both the US and India
investigators in their efforts to apply Artificial Neural Network techniques to
the classification of stellar spectra and to the population synthesis of galaxy
spectra. This award is supported by the Division of International Programs and
the Division of Astronomical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;