* 0114653
* Arabidopsis 2010: Bioluminescence Resonance Energy Transfer (BRET)- A Tool to Explore Protein-Protein Interactions in Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Albrecht von Arnim, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 07/31/2005
* USD 805,540.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
develop a novel optical technique, termed&lt;br/&gt; Bioluminescence Resonance
Energy Transfer (BRET), as a resource for the plant&lt;br/&gt; functional
genomics community, specifically in the model species Arabidopsis&lt;br/&gt;
thaliana. BRET has shown promise as a tool to chart the physical
contacts&lt;br/&gt; between specific cellular proteins, and their time-resolved
interactions, in&lt;br/&gt; living tissue and in real time. While the importance
of such interactions has&lt;br/&gt; long been recognized in the life sciences,
the corresponding experimental tools&lt;br/&gt; have largely been limited to in
vitro conditions or to heterologous, non-plant&lt;br/&gt; organisms. Therefore,
the BRET technique will provide a unique contribution&lt;br/&gt; toward
delineating the functions of the 25,000 genes thought to be contained&lt;br/&gt;
within the Arabidopsis genome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; BRET is a form of
radiation-free energy&lt;br/&gt; transfer that can occur when two compatible
optical probes are brought into&lt;br/&gt; molecular proximity. In detail, to
probe for a protein-protein interaction&lt;br/&gt; between two given partner
proteins, the two proteins are genetically fused to a&lt;br/&gt; blue light
emitting luciferase and to a blue light absorbing yellow fluorescent&lt;br/&gt;
protein. If the two hybrid proteins interact, the excitation energy of
the&lt;br/&gt; luciferase may be transferred to the fluorescent protein,
resulting in an&lt;br/&gt; easily detected yellow-shift in the luminescence
spectrum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The first goal&lt;br/&gt; of this project is to
construct molecular genetic tools, such as cloning&lt;br/&gt; vectors, for the
expression of BRET hybrid proteins. Second, instrumentation&lt;br/&gt; and
experimental protocols will be optimized for time-resolved BRET data&lt;br/&gt;
acquisition. Moreover, as a prototype example of the efficacy of BRET
for&lt;br/&gt; research in plants, BRET will be applied to illuminate the
genetic networks&lt;br/&gt; that mediate the control of nuclear gene expression
by light and the circadian&lt;br/&gt; clock. Resources developed in this project
shall be widely disseminated to&lt;br/&gt; encourage their application within
the entire plant science community&lt;br/&gt; (http://chicory.bio.vanderbilt.edu
/chj/arabidopsisbret&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;