* 0114147
* Determinants of Demographic Choice and Intergenerational Transfers
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Michele Boldrin, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/2005
* USD 244,321.00

&lt;br/&gt;This research project consists of two, related but independent parts:
(1) Modeling demographic evolution; (2) Evaluating the intergenerational aspects
of the Welfare State. The issues addressed are of great social relevance. We are
debating the implications of demographic changes and population aging for our
society; at the same time we are considering the opportunity of reforming our
social security, public health and public education systems. The two research
projects are meant to study and quantify fundamental economic factors behind the
working of such systems. The first project should improve our understanding of
the long-run interactions between public health, fertility decisions, population
growth and capital accumulation. It aims at building a quantitative model for
evaluating the impact of improvements in life expectancy at various ages on
fertility and saving choices. Key aspects of this research are the explicit
links established between: (i) improvements in health, (ii) availability of
public pensions and other forms of retirement savings, (iii) internal family
structure, on the one hand, and the dynamics of fertility and capital
accumulation, on the other. The second portion of this research project aims at
providing tools and criteria useful for evaluating the welfare value of pay-as-
you-go pension systems and their (often underestimated) connection with the
provision of public education and health. This project shows that a good pay-as-
you-go pension system should link pension payments to past investment in the
human capital of young generations and not, as it is currently done, to previous
social security contributions. Redesigning the intergenerational welfare state
along these lines, not only makes the pension system immune from demographic
shocks but also foster economic growth by increasing human capital accumulation
and reducing labor supply distortions. A key goal of this project is to deliver
a quantitative appraisal of such effects for the USA and other OECD countries.
From a more general policy perspective, this investigation should provide new
tools for designing the intergenerational features of the welfare state and for
furthering the use of Generational Accounting methods in evaluating it.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;