* 0114472
* Program for Gender Equity in Science, Mathematics, Engineering and Technology (PGE): DIS: On the Air with Gender Equity
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2001,09/30/2002
* Mary Darcy, WAMC Northeast Public Radio
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 09/30/2002
* USD 92,260.00

This project seeks to impact K-8 grade girls by disseminating information on
gender equity issues, barriers, possibilities and role models, via radio to a
national audience. Through radio WAMC will develop a weekly segment and 4
regional call-in shows for national distribution that will inform, enlighten,
engage, and inspire listeners on the issues and possibilities of gender equity
in the sciences for K-8 grade girls. This model will be shared nationally so
that it can be replicated. WAMC will create, produce, air and distribute the
weekly segments and call-in shows regionally through WAMC's 10 station-network,
nationally and globally via Public Radio and ABC satellites, the Internet,
mailings of CDs and the Armed Forces Radio. The Gender Equity segments will be
incorporated into WAMC's award-winning radio programs "51Percent," their show
concerning women's issues, and WAMC's current call-in program "Vox Pop."
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a collaboration with an Advisory Board of
professional women, nationally known for their involvement with gender equity,
and The Capital Area School Development Association, a study council affiliated
with the School of Education at The University at Albany, SUNY, which serves as
a cooperative planning and development unit through which affiliated schools and
educational agencies may more effectively define and fulfill their purposes and
functions in serving the educational needs of their communities. Both will
assist in evaluation of the program and the Advisory Board will give input for
program content. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has the potential of
reaching more than 300,000 listeners per month in WAMC's regional area alone.
Additionally, "51Percent" is heard on over 125 radio stations nationally via
satellite to affiliates of the ABC Radio Networks, via satellite to stations
able to access the Public Radio Satellite, and on Compact Disc to stations that
are not interconnected. Additionally, the program airs worldwide via the Armed
Forces Radio to 133 countries, and online via the Internet through www.wamc.org,
the WAMC web site and &lt;br/&gt;www.ThePublicRadioStation.com, WAMC's model
non-broadcast public radio style program &lt;br/&gt;stream.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;