* 0114986
* Dissertation Research: The Governance of 'Difference': Constructions of Race, Class, and Gender in Accounts of Cardiovascular Risk
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2002
* Howard Pinderhughes, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 06/30/2002
* USD 8,000.00

This dissertation improvement grant is a multi-sited ethnography of the
constructions of race, social class, and gender in epidemiologic and
experiential accounts of cardiovascular disease (CVD) risks and causes. Data
collection methods include participant observation at scientific meetings,
interviews with cardiovascular epidemiologists, and interviews with persons of
color living with CVD. This project explores how ideas about racial, class, and
gender differences are conceptualized and stabilized in epidemiologic knowledge
production. How epidemiologists manage and navigate disputes over the inclusion,
measurement, and interpretation of race, class, and gender, and sustain the
validity of their work in the face of such controversies are examined. This
research also analyzes how individuals living with CVD understand, take up,
and/or reconstruct epidemiologic knowledge about racial, class, and gender
differences in risk. The influence of people's social contexts and relationships
with biomedical institutions on responses to and renegotiation of scientific
claims are important here. Finally, this project examines how epidemiologic and
experiential definitions of race, class, and gender shape what we know about the
causes of CVD inequalities, and participate in processes of racial, class, and
gender formation.

