* 0114945
* Program for Gender Equity in Science, Mathematics, Engineering and Technology (PGE): Early influences on gender differences in mathematics achievement
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2005
* Martha Carr, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 06/30/2005
* USD 134,432.00

This project over a year period, will examine gender differences in the ways
strategy use, speed of retrieval, spatial skills, confidence in mathematics, and
conceptual understanding predict mathematics achievement. The longitudinal study
beginning in the second grade and ending in the fourth grade, will document
whether gender difference found in early strategy use, spatial skills and
confidence continue through three years of elementary school and whether they
promote each other's development and mathematics achievement. The elementary
school years have been selected for study because although gender differences in
strategy use, spatial skills, and confidence have been documented in elementary
school age children, it is not clear how these differences may impact
mathematics achievement. If mathematics achievement and conceptual understanding
are affected by these early emerging gender differences that would suggest a
need to intervene in girls' mathematics in the early elementary school years as
opposed to waiting until the middle school and high school years when gender
differences become more pronounced.This project over a year period, will examine
gender differences in the ways strategy use, speed of retrieval, spatial skills,
confidence in mathematics, and conceptual understanding predict mathematics
achievement. The longitudinal study beginning in the second grade and ending in
the fourth grade, will document whether gender difference found in early
strategy use, spatial skills and confidence continue through three years of
elementary school and whether they promote each other's development and
mathematics achievement. The elementary school years have been selected for
study because although gender differences in strategy use, spatial skills, and
confidence have been documented in elementary school age children, it is not
clear how these differences may impact mathematics achievement. If mathematics
achievement and conceptual understanding are affected by these early emerging
gender differences that would suggest a need to intervene in girls' mathematics
in the early elementary school years as opposed to waiting until the middle
school and high school years when gender differences become more pronounced.