* 0114731
* The Possession of Kuru: Exchange Relations In Modern Science
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2002,04/30/2004
* Warwick Anderson, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Keith R. Benson
* 04/30/2004
* USD 105,023.00

Proposal Abstract Warwick Anderson, University of California -San Francisco THE
POSSESSION OF KURU: EXCHANGE RELATIONS IN MODERN SCIENCE

This project explores the material cultures of modern by looking intensively at
the case of D. Carleton Gajdusek's investigations of the disease of kuru,
conducted among the Fore people of New Guinea in the 1950s and 1960s. This focus
is on the circulation of goods in global biomedical science. This is a multi-
sited historical study designed principally to describe and explain transactions
involving local inhabitants, anthropologists and biomedical scientists,
exchanges clustered around contested kuru material, principally brains, blood
and corpses. The goal is to outline some of the basic features of the material
cultures of late colonial, postwar scientific exchange, and to see how these
material cultures structured and transformed the identities of transactors. The
transaction of kuru material can help us to think more generally about the
creation of value and the circulation of goods in global science. In view of
Gajdusek's later (1990s) involvement in the patenting of cell lines, this study
will additionally present an unrivalled opportunity to consider how local
exchange regimes of science may have changed over the last fifty years, in
particular to investigate whether science has become more commodified and
marketable. The study of the character of kuru transactions etches in especially
clear relief the more recent global traffic of genetic material (including that
proposed in the Human Genome Diversity Project). Moreover, the analysis of the
changing transactional orders of global science can serve to illuminate
contemporary tensions between ownership and authorship in science, and prompts
us to reconsider scientific authorship as an exchange function, possibly now an
imperiled form of exchange, not just as a writing process. This is essentially a
historical study that addresses issues usually in the province of anthropology
or sociology: it describes how scientific identities are fashioned in collection
and exchange; it advances the analysis of the material cultures of late-
twentieth century science; it explores new ways of describing the increasing
global circulation of goods in science, and the creation of value in
international scientific transactions; and it brings the Asia-Pacific region
into focus in science and technology studies as an important, but previously
much neglected, location of scientific production and exchange. The outcomes
include a monograph, a series of articles, and enhanced graduate student
education.