* 0114312
* The Mathematical Works of Thomas Hobbes
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Douglas Jesseph, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Keith R. Benson
* 08/31/2002
* USD 45,014.00

Project Abstract Douglas Jesseph, North Carolina State University The
Mathematical Works of Thomas Hobbes

This project is a renewal of support for the preparation of three volumes of
mathematical works of Thomas Hobbes. The works will appear through Oxford
University Press as part of the Clarendon Edition of the Works of Thomas Hobbes.
Hobbes is a figure of central importance in the development of early modern
science, and his prominence as a political theorist has placed him at the center
of numerous studies of the social, cultural, and intellectual context of
seventeenth-century science. Hobbes's significance for the development of
mathematics is also profound, although scholars have tended to overlook his
mathematical work. This relative neglect stems, in part, from the mistaken
impression that his mathematical writings are nothing more than misguided
attempts to solve such unsolvable problems as the squaring of the circle.
Although Hobbes was convinced that his first principles would enable the
solution of such problems, the majority of his mathematical writings concern
methodological and philosophical issues that are independent of his failed
circle quadratures, and many other of his writings are part of his long and
bitter controversy with John Wallis and other members of the Royal Society. A
proper edition of his mathematical works is of interest to STS scholarship
generally, and particularly to studies of science and mathematics in the
seventeenth century.

A major obstacle impeding scholarly attention to Hobbes's mathematics is the
fact that the current standard edition of his collected works has a completely
inadequate presentation of the mathematical material. The edition is almost
useless for scholarly investigation of Hobbes's mathematics. By including
complete texts, adequate diagrams, introductions, translations, notes, and a
critical apparatus, the mathematical volumes of the Clarendon Works will make
accessible a wealth of material relevant to studies of the philosophical,
social, and cultural background of seventeenth-century mathematics. The PI has
assembled the printed sources in electronically editable form and has compared
them line by line with the originals. In addition, all known manuscript sources
(including those the PI has recently discovered) have been transcribed or
photocopied, and they are being rendered in electronically editable form.
Approximately one third of the material in Latin has been translated, with to be
completed in the summer of 2001. This support permits final redaction of all
three volumes, (including notation of variants, writing introductions, and
preparation of explanatory notes). They are to be ready for copy editing by the
Press in September of 2002.