* 0114390
* Dissertation Research:  Signal Content and Function in Wild Male Orangutan Long Calls
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2002
* Carel van Schaik, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 11/30/2002
* USD 9,390.00

Despite previous long-term behavioral studies, a full understanding of the
social organization and reproductive strategies of orangutans has been difficult
to achieve due to their extended life histories, large home ranges,
predominantly arboreal lifestyles and semi-solitary natures. Because adult
individuals are normally dispersed and visibility is limited within their
rainforest habitats, long distance vocalizations are likely to play an important
role in regulating individual relationships and social interactions, including
reproduction. There is already strong and consistent behavioral and experimental
evidence for an intra-sexual spacing function, but additional hypotheses such as
mate attraction or protection against sexual coercion have not been tested
rigorously. It is also not yet clear if reliable assessment cues are encoded in
acoustic features and calling patterns or if listeners can recognize individual
males and associate a signaler's identity with past performance. &lt;br/&gt;This
research aims to test predictions for the signal content of male long calls,
examine potential functions and assess possible determinants of variation in
calling behavior among Bornean and Sumatran populations. Using field recordings,
focal animal sampling and carefully controlled playback experiments, this study
intends to examine acoustic variation in male long calls, the patterns of
calling behavior by males and behavioral responses in relation to the listener's
social context, reproductive status and familiarity with the calling male. The
signal content of male orangutan long calls has important repercussions for
understanding female mate choice and the nature of inter-individual
relationships in this endangered species.&lt;br/&gt;