* 0114998
* RUI: The Carbon Dioxide Theory of Climate Change
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* James Fleming, Colby College
* Standard Grant
* Ronald Rainger
* 08/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;JamesFleming, Colby College&lt;br/&gt;The Carbon Dioxide
Theory of Climate Change: Emergence, Eclipse, and
Reemergence&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study documents the discovery and early
development of the carbon dioxide theory of climate change, its eclipse during
the first five decades of the twentieth century, and its reemergence after 1950.
It also examines subsequent developments in modeling, monitoring and climate
reconstructions, while examining more recent social and political implications
of the theory. Based on archives, interviews, expert consultations, and primary
printed sources, the study provides an historical context for understanding
current climate concerns. It also demonstrates the importance of intellectual
and social changes in the study of global environmental change. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;In the nineteenth century, the work of John Tyndall, Svante
Arrhenius, T.C. Chamberlin and others drew scientific attention to the role of
carbon dioxide as a possible mechanism of climate change. Throughout the first
half of the twentieth century, however, most scientists did not think that
increased carbon dioxide levels would result in global warming. It was believed
that current levels of carbon dioxide already absorbed all the available long-
wave radiation, so any increases would not significantly alter the radiative
heat balance of the planet. Most meteorologists gave other mechanisms of
climatic change more credence. Beginning in 1938 the work of Guy Steward
Callendar, Gilbert Plass, Hans Seuss, Roger Revelle, Charles Keeling and others
revived the carbon dioxide theory of climate change and placed it on a more
solid scientific basis. Callendar based his theory on new detailed measurements
of the infrared spectrum, further noting that the warming trend from about 1900
to 1938 might be related to rising fossil fuel emissions. Seuss and Revelle
later named the rising levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide caused by industrial
fuel combustion the "Callendar effect."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the second half
of the twentieth century, computers, satellites, and reconstructions of past
climate records provided new privileged perspectives on the climate, allowing
the emergence of a scientific consensus (but not unanimity) on the carbon
dioxide theory of climate change. The state of climate science (in theory and in
practice) during this convergence of opinion will be contrasted with that during
the earlier eclipse and re-emergence phases. By the 1950s, station temperatures
around the Northern Hemisphere reached early-twentieth-century peaks, giving
credence to Callendar's warnings and placing climate warming on the public
agenda. Concerns were expressed in both the scientific and popular press about
rising sea levels, loss of habitat, and shifting agricultural zones. This was
followed by a global cooling scare in the 1970s and the re-emergence of global
warming consensus through the work of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change and the Framework Convention on Climate Change. The project concludes
with a reconsideration of the human dimensions of climate change in light of
history, including popular perceptions, economic and public policy initiatives,
and politicization of the issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outcomes include paper at
professional historical and scientific meetings, refereed journal articles,
materials posted on a WWW Center for the History of Meteorology web site, and a
fully-documented book. &lt;br/&gt;