* 0114792
* Arabidopsis 2010:  Pre-mRNA Splicing Signals in Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2001,05/31/2006
* Steven Salzberg, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Vicki B. Vance
* 05/31/2006
* USD 1,020,298.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing genefinders use information about splice sites
and differences&lt;br/&gt;between exons and introns, but do not explicitly
incorporate information&lt;br/&gt;about sequences known as splicing enhancers,
which promote incorporation&lt;br/&gt;of exons into mRNA. This is a project to
characterize exonic splicing&lt;br/&gt;enhancers in Arabidopsis. Although
splicing enhancers likely function in&lt;br/&gt;splice site selection in many
plant genes, and contribute to the&lt;br/&gt;regulation of alternative splicing,
plant splicing enhancers have not&lt;br/&gt;yet been described in detail.
Computational analysis of a database of&lt;br/&gt;Arabidopsis exons and introns
will be used to identify candidate&lt;br/&gt;splicing enhancer sequences. The
role of these sequences, and sequences&lt;br/&gt;from genes that are known to be
alternatively spliced, will be tested in&lt;br/&gt;transgenic Arabidopsis using
a splicing reporter construct. The activity&lt;br/&gt;of these enhancers will be
examined in transgenes that depend on exon&lt;br/&gt;inclusion for expression.
This will include analysis of the&lt;br/&gt;tissue-specificity of splicing
enhancer activity and should provide an&lt;br/&gt;extensive database of
information about the role of particular sequences&lt;br/&gt;in promoting
splicing. This project will generate: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) 2,000 publicly
available transgenic lines, available through the&lt;br/&gt;ABRC, carrying
splicing reporter genes with defined candidate splicing&lt;br/&gt;enhancer
sequences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) A description of marker gene expression for
each splicing enhancer&lt;br/&gt;candidate. This will consist of a description
of all expression patterns&lt;br/&gt;and images of typical and selected
patterns, available through the&lt;br/&gt;internet
(http://www.tigr.org/2010-splicing/) and linked to the seed
stocks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) Improved genefinding and gene annotation
available as improvements to&lt;br/&gt;the existing GlimmerM server
(http://www.tigr.org/softlab/glimmerm/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Effective use of
the complete nucleotide sequence of Arabidopsis&lt;br/&gt;requires improved gene
annotation. Information about the messenger RNA&lt;br/&gt;products of genes is
incomplete. This project will provide to the&lt;br/&gt;scientific community both
experimental data on splicing enhancers that&lt;br/&gt;will improve gene
annotation, and genetic material for further study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;