* 0114795
* Arabidopsis 2010:  The Arabidopsis RPM1 Disease Resistance Signaling Network
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Jeffery Dangl, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2006
* USD 1,274,302.00

Determining the function of a network of genes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Definition
of "determining the function"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In our project, we will
define the function of approximately 10 new genes from Arabidopsis that are
functionally related because they are part of the RPM1 disease resistance
pathway. Our definition of function will entail:&lt;br/&gt;1. Detailed
information on the role of these genes in disease resistance.&lt;br/&gt;2.
Broader definition of extra functions that we may uncover for these genes. For
example, we already know that reduction of function of at least two of them
causes meristem defects. At present, this may be simple pleiotropy. It also may
be relevant, meaning that the genes in question have additional functions in
plant growth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;URLs where the public can get information on
their accession numbers in GenBank or other identifiers in a publicly accessible
database&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our data will be published and our results will
also be available on our lab web site at:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;http://www.bio.un
c.edu/faculty/dangl/lab/superpage.html&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As an example of how
we release web based data, see:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;http://www.bio.unc.edu/facu
lty/dangl/lab/sar/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What, how and where the results will be
shared&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will share our results well before publication at
the annual Arabidopsis meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significance of the
proposed work in relation to the 2010 Project
objectives&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our work will dovetail with more general
functional genomics proposals funded in 2010. It is necessary to incorporate
hypothesis driven functional genomics results, such as the data we intend to
generate, with the gene family and whole genome data generated by
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Disease
resistance is a significant problem in agriculture. We will add to the body of
knowledge that will eventually lead to more effective control of plant disease.
This is vital because we currently lose up to 30% of crop yield to pathogens and
pests.&lt;br/&gt;