* 0114621
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Nutritional mechanisms of population regulation in frugivorous primates: the effects of logging on redtail monkeys in Kibale National Park, Uganda
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2001,11/30/2002
* Colin Chapman, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 11/30/2002
* USD 12,000.00

With primate populations losing 125,140 km2 of habitat annually most populations
exist either in isolated, scattered protected areas, or in unprotected areas
facing pressures from an increasing human population. Cercopithecine monkeys, a
subfamily of small, frugivorous monkeys, are now found only in tiny forest
fragments and a few national parks and forest reserves throughout West and East
Africa. Scientists have recognized that little progress has been made towards
providing scientific information that managers can use in the conservation of
this subfamily. For example, while it has been suggested that weather, disease,
infanticide, and food resources may all act to regulate primates populations,
little is known about the specific conditions necessary for a species to survive
and prosper. Food resources have been argued to be the most common limiting
factor for most species, yet little is known about how food quantity and quality
interact to determine the size and distribution of primate populations. This is
particularly true for frugivorous primates since fruit, unlike leaves, is
typically low in protein, minerals, and lipids, making it difficult to maintain
a balanced diet. Therefore, this study will use redtail monkeys in Kibale
National Park, Uganda to investigate the relationship between nutrient intake
and availability, reproduction, and population densities. In addition, it will
determine if nutritional factors are responsible for reduced population
densities of redtail monkeys in heavily logged areas. Three focal groups have
been identified in the heavily logged and unlogged areas to: 1) quantify and
compare seasonal nutrient intake of groups between areas and to examine
relationships between nutrient availability and intake, 2) compare the
relationship between nutrient intake and reproduction between groups and
correlate nutrient intake and availability with reproductive rates, timing, and
infant survival, and 3) identify behavioral responses to changes in seasonal
nutrient availability and intake. In addition, nutrient intake and behaviors
will be correlated with group size across all six groups. Finally, existing data
on redtail population densities and diets across six habitats within Kibale will
be used to test for correlations between nutrient availability, key food
resources, and redtail population densities. This will be the first study to
explicitly examine the role of nutrition in population regulation of frugivorous
primates and one of only a few to quantify the mechanisms by which habitat
disturbance affects primates. The results of this study have implications to our
understanding of the diets and nutrition of extinct and extant primates and
hominids, the role of nutrition in population regulation, and the conservation
and management of frugivore populations. By identifying the tree species needed
to support high densities of redtail monkeys, current and future habitat
restoration and protection plans will have the information necessary to design
appropriate management strategies.