* 0114214
* Acquisition of an Optic Image Furnace for Ferroic Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2003
* Ruyan Guo, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2003
* USD 130,000.00

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research Program supports Penn
State University with the purchase a state-of-the-art optical image furnace for
the growth of up to 10 mm diameter single crystals for the study of oxide
ferroic and dielectric materials. The need for the capability to grow highly
uniform and sufficient size single crystals is stemmed from the necessity to
separate and understand the mechanisms in the mixed valence solid solution and
often refractory ferroic crystal systems. The equipment is a NEC double lamp
elliptical mirror cavity image furnace is particularly suited to the study of
bulk single crystal samples. The ongoing NSF supported research program carried
out by this PI, as well as several current NSF, DARPA, ONR sponsored programs
would benefit strongly from the proposed equipment. Future research areas
particularly the meta-materials, microwave field agile dielectric materials,
electrooptic and acoustooptic materials are closely aligned with the proposed
capabilities. The equipment will provide invaluable enhancement of available
processing and analysis resource at the Materials Research Laboratory, at Penn
State. Both graduate students and postdoctoral fellows will obtain training and
carry out funded research using the proposed facility. Laboratory intensive
senior/graduate level course on Science and Technology of Crystal Growth,
currently being developed, will get invaluable enhancement from this proposed
addition. Undergraduates and graduates and minority will be trained with the
handling of this state-of-the-art crystal growth facility. The award is
leveraged by Enthusiasm 30% cost sharing from Penn State.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research
Program supports Penn State University with the purchase a state-of-the-art
optical image furnace for the growth of up to 10 mm diameter single crystals for
the study of oxide ferroic and dielectric materials. The equipment is a NEC
double lamp elliptical mirror cavity image furnace is particularly suited to the
study of bulk single crystal samples. The ongoing NSF supported research program
carried out by this PI, as well as several current NSF, DARPA, ONR sponsored
programs would benefit strongly from the proposed equipment. Future research
areas particularly the meta-materials, microwave field agile dielectric
materials, electrooptic and acoustooptic materials are closely aligned with the
proposed capabilities. The equipment will provide invaluable enhancement of
available processing and analysis resource at the Materials Research Laboratory,
at Penn State. Both graduate students and postdoctoral fellows will obtain
training and carry out funded research using the proposed facility. Laboratory
intensive senior/graduate level course on Science and Technology of Crystal
Growth, currently being developed, will get invaluable enhancement from this
proposed addition. Undergraduates and graduates and minority will be trained
with the handling of this state-of-the-art crystal growth facility. The award is
leveraged by Enthusiasm 30% cost sharing from Penn State.&lt;br/&gt;