* 0115811
* Dissertation Research:  STS: Necessary Uncertainty:  The Scientific Controversy over Fallout Hazards in the United States, 1954-1963
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2001,06/30/2003
* Mary Jo Nye, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 06/30/2003
* USD 8,000.00

This dissertation research project examines how scientists involved in the
debate over fallout hazards managed the necessary uncertainties in the
scientific, ideological, and ethical issues of the controversy. Political and
public demands for a resolution to the debate over fallout hazards placed
scientists in an uncomfortable position. They were asked questions for which
they had no conclusive answers then or in the foreseeable future. Scientific
research on fallout hazards rested on incomplete and inconclusive data. The
multitude of disciplinary and institutional affiliations of the scientists
involved exacerbated uncertainties in the interpretation of the data by
introducing numerous different conceptual and experimental approaches. The
start-to-finish public nature of the debate added to the uncertainties that
confronted fallout scientists. The "politicalization" of many scientists after
World War 11, as well as the impact of atomic energy on American culture and
foreign policy, gave rise to debate over the proper role of the scientist in
society. Scientists differed not only in their scientific interpretation of the
data, but also in their opinions on how and to whom their interpretations should
be communicated. The fallout controversy was a prototype of future controversies
over environmental and health hazards such as nuclear power and global warming.
Support for this project will fund trips to examine key scientific papers and
archival documents related to them.