* 0115609
* Collaborative Research: Understanding and Cultivating the Transition from Arithmetic to Algebraic Reasoning
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2007
* Hilda Borko, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 09/30/2007
* USD 3,049,286.00

&lt;br/&gt;This is a collaborative research project between three universities.
The project is a comprehensive, systemic research and development program
addressing three inter-related tiers of study: student learning and development;
teacher beliefs, knowledge, and practice; and professional development. The
project is grounded in both sound theory of how students develop algebraic
reasoning and acquire domain knowledge and skills and in the beliefs and
existing practices of teachers. In the student tier a detailed developmental
model of students' evolving algebraic reasoning and skill acquisition will be
constructed concentrating on the transition from arithmetic to algebraic
reasoning. In the teaching tier a promising pedagogical approach, Bridging
Instruction, will be tested. In the professional development tier a teacher
professional development prototype will be implemented. The prototypeT extends
an existing technology based approach. It enables the evaluation of a scalable
model of teacher professional development. Technology is a central aspect of
this project. The findings of this research will be implemented into a coherent
educational program for students and teachers using Algebra Cognitive Tutors and
the STEP web teacher professional development
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;