* 0115023
* Dissertation Research:  A wonderful world of reason and imagination': The Production and Representation of Automata in Late Enlightenment and Early Romantic Germany 1750-1820
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2001,12/31/2002
* NONE NONE, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 12/31/2002
* USD 5,832.00

This dissertation research proposal requests support to improve a dissertation
on the construction and representation of automata in Late Enlightenment and
Early Romantic Germany (1750-1820). The dissertation will investigate the ways
in which "artificial humans", their philosophical accounts, their
epistemological use, and their literary representation intersected with each
other in this particular time period. The project will analyze this complex on
three different levels. On the level of epistemology and natural philosophy, it
will explore how automata were constructed both as models of the embodied
individual and as models of the human inquirer into nature. On the level of
literary and symbolic representation, it will look at the ways in which automata
were productive in provoking accounts or ideas of the extent to which humans are
machines, and the extent to which machines are human. Exemplary sources for this
level of analysis are literary accounts. German-speaking writers in this period
are well-known for their explorations of "Maschinenmenschen". On the level of
the actual material artifacts, finally, it will investigate closely the nature
and the functioning of various automata, taking them seriously as historical
"sources". The project presupposes that artifacts in general inevitably suggest,
and often require, specific kinds of reactions and interactions on the part of a
user or on the part of a spectator, and it thus aims to develop an acute sense
of their limits and capabilities both as highly sophisticated exemplars of
craftsmanship as well as devices that provoked thought and wonder. Very
important exemplars of automata are to be found in museums all over continental
Europe, in particular in Munich, Vienna, Paris and Neuchatel (Switzerland). .
Funds will support research expenses to museums and archives in Munich,
Neuchatel, Switzerland, Cambridge, UK, and Paris, as well as the Jena area.
Textual resources that relate directly to the automata are available in the
respective archives of the museums. Funds also support visual recording
equipment.

