* 0115837
* Acquisition of an Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer for Applications in Anthropology, Ecology and Conservation Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Diane Chase, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Farmer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 167,120.00

&lt;br/&gt; A grant has been awarded to Dr. Dupras and colleagues at the
University of Central Florida to acquire an isotope ratio mass spectrometer
(IRMS). This instrument is a specialized class of mass spectrometer designed to
measure, with high precision, small differences in natural abundances of the
light stable isotopes (non-radioactive types of carbon, nitrogen, sulfur, oxygen
and hydrogen). The primary application for this instrument is to measure
naturally occurring stable isotope ratios in tissues of plants, humans, and
other animals. In recent years, these stable isotopes have become essential
tools in investigations in physical anthropology, archaeology, ecology, and
conservation biology. Stable-isotope analysis is especially valuable in
reconstructing diets since the isotope ratios in animal tissues reflect the
isotope ratios of the foods consumed. Estimating the diets of humans and other
animals with this type of instrumentation allows investigators to reconstruct
environments, examine patterns of health, determine differential use of
alternative foods, and detect patterns of migration.&lt;br/&gt; The research
activities planned for this instrumentation include projects in several
disciplines. The specific activities in anthropology and archaeology include:
reconstructing the diet of past inhabitants of the Dakhleh Oasis, Egypt, in
order to understand human bio-cultural adaptation to the harsh Saharan ecozone;
determining differences and changes in diet among the inhabitants of ancient
Maya sites, such as Caracol, Belize; and, analyzing patterns of prehistoric
human migration. The research in ecology and conservation biology include:
investigating predator-prey interactions, feeding relationships, and energy flow
in the small mammal communities of coastal Florida; determining current and
historical diet of Canada lynx across their range for use in developing
conservation strategies for this endangered species; and, tracing the source of
the diet of Florida manatees to determine feeding habits, as well as the
historical foraging strategies, of this endangered marine mammal.&lt;br/&gt;
This grant is a cooperative effort by faculty in several different disciplines
to acquire basic equipment that has become integral to their fields. Recent
advances in technology (decreasing the time and cost of analysis) and an
increased recognition of the utility of stable-isotope ratios have promoted a
dramatic increase in the use of this technique to reconstruct diets and trace
the flow of energy and nutrients in ecological communities. The purchase of an
IRMS for researchers at the University of Central Florida will speed the process
of scientific inquiry on already existing scientific collections, and will
enhance interdisciplinary and multi-disciplinary scholarship. The IRMS will also
have implications for undergraduate and graduate education at UCF. Use of the
IMS in multi-disciplinary lab techniques courses will provide practical, hands-
on experience for graduate students and advanced undergraduates; students
trained in stable isotope analysis will have valuable expertise in this rapidly
expanding field. Thus, the acquisition of an IRMS also will strengthen the
connections between teaching, learning, and research at UCF.&lt;br/&gt;