* 0115486
* GOALI:  Flow Dynamics and Inclusion Transport in Continuous Casting of Steel
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Brian Thomas, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mary Lynn Realff
* 08/31/2005
* USD 366,759.00

This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project aims
to improve the understanding of transient flow, inclusion transport and defect
formation in the mold region during the continuous casting of steel slabs,
through the development, validation, and application of fundamental
computational models of transient fluid flow. Continued viability of the
domestic steel industry depends upon improved efficiency and steel quality,
relative to low cost imports. Lowering defects from internal inclusions is one
way to achieve this, while simultaneously improving steel minimum strength,
fatigue life, surface appearance, yield and energy efficiency (from reduced
rejects). Continuous casting produces 96% of the 100 million tons of steel
manufactured in the U.S. and is the last, and most important, processing step
where inclusions can either be generated or removed. Plant observations have
found that many serious quality problems, including inclusion entrapment, are
directly associated with the flow pattern in the mold. Many mold process
parameters, such as nozzle geometry and gas injection rate, are easy and
inexpensive to change and yet have a profound influence on flow and
corresponding quality. With many different operations and mold designs to
optimize, the traditional trial and error approach is too costly.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this grant, computational models of transient flow in
continuous casting will be applied to study the associated transport and
entrapment of inclusion particles. The models will be calibrated, validated, and
tested through water model experiments, steel plant trials, and metallographic
measurements at the industrial partner, LTV Steel, and several other steel
companies who are cosponsoring this research. The results will increase
fundamental understanding of inclusion transport, and lead to improved mold flow
patterns which minimize inclusion defects. Furthermore, the computational tools
developed in this work can be applied to optimize flow in other
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;