* 0115684
* The Floral Genome Project
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2007
* Claude dePamphilis, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 09/30/2007
* USD 7,471,263.00

Variations in floral architecture are of major evolutionary and economic
importance, impacting various plant processes such as pollination and gene flow,
as well as fruit production and seed dispersal. However, despite the central
role of flowers in plant reproduction and agriculture, questions about the
origin and diversification of the flower remain fundamental problems in plant
biology. Recent studies in plant developmental genetics and genomics have
identified dozens of genes with specific roles in flower development in
Arabidopsis and other model organisms. Still, many (if not most) genes with
critical roles remain undiscovered, largely because of functional redundancy.
Because most economically important species are not closely related to model
plant species, novel approaches are needed to build upon existing genome
projects and transfer knowledge to nonmodel organisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;THE
FLORAL GENOME PROJECT will investigate the origin, conservation, and
diversification of the genetic architecture of the flower, and develop
conceptual and real tools for evolutionary functional genomics in plants. A set
of plant 'exemplars' was selected, based on recent phylogenetic studies, to
include the basal angiosperm groups where most flower diversity is found, plus
key eudicot lineages where many crop species occur. THE FLORAL GENOME PROJECT
will generate large EST datasets , capturing thousands of sequences of genes
expressed during early flower development in each species. New sampling
approaches will be used to improve the chance of obtaining rare transcripts and
of obtaining comparable gene sets from each species. Finished sequencing for up
to 300 unique genes per species will allow study of the evolution of key genes
and gene families expressed in flowers, and test leading hypotheses about the
origin of the flower THE FLORAL GENOME PROJECT will examine the site and timing
of gene expression for the unique genes detected in each species using a
combination of microarray analysis and new methods of high throughput in situ
hybridization. Expression patterns will be evaluated for hundreds of genes in
each species, and summarized in 3-D virtual reconstructions of developing
flowers. This project would generate the first comparative data set of
expression patterns for a large number of genes across diverse angiosperms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These experiments will generate an enormous dataset of
gene sequences and their expression in different species, and will require new
informatic tools for the comparative analysis of gene history, gene function,
and molecular evolution. Informatics efforts will include the generation of
software for improved phylogenetic analysis of gene families and an automated
data pipeline to enable researchers to move efficiently from traces to trees in
an exploratory fashion. A phylogenetic database, integrated with web-based tools
for flexible inquiry, will be created as a public resource to relate sequence
information from expressed gene studies in a phylogenetic framework. This
database will provide annotated links to genomic and functional information in
Arabidopsis, rice, and maize, and to expressed gene studies in tomato, maize,
and many other important crop species. THE FLORAL GENOME PROJECT will provide a
key resource for generating hypotheses about common gene functions in plants and
the potential sources of variation among diverse species.&lt;br/&gt;