* 0115385
* Stochastic Optimization for Revenue Management
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Tito Homem-de-Mello, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen G. Nash
* 09/30/2005
* USD 341,706.00

This project will focus on methods to solve certain problems in the area of
revenue management. In particular, it will center on the development of
techniques to determine how to dynamically manage the availability of multiple
types of products comprised from a common pool of resources for sale to multiple
classes of customers. The proposed methods involve the integration of techniques
from two different fields: Markov decision processes and Monte Carlo-based
stochastic optimization. The key idea is to exploit the strengths of both tools
by using a Monte Carlo-based technique to obtain an initial static solution, and
then using the exact, but computationally-intensive, Markov-decision-process
approach to dynamically refine the solution. Recently, a great deal of attention
has been devoted to the control of inventories of perishable items. In a number
of settings, products must be sold before the resources, from which the products
are made, "perish." Typical examples are the airline, hotel, and rental car
industries; however, similar ideas have application to other contexts as well.
The area of study that addresses these issues is called revenue management. This
project aims to analyze an important aspect of revenue management - namely, the
development of mathematical approaches to determine the quantities of various
items to sell to different classes of customers at each given point in time.
This is significant to both industry and consumers, since such methods help
ensure an appropriate match of supply and demand. Even with powerful computers,
such problems can be intractable, because of the extremely large number of
variables involved. To overcome this obstacle, this project will develop methods
that blend together techniques from separate mathematical fields to efficiently
solve various revenue management problems. Since quantitative methods form the
cornerstone of revenue management efforts, this will support the continued
growth of the field from both practical and theoretical
standpoints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major benefits of this project are as
follows: (1) This research will contribute to the field of revenue management,
both for academics as well as for practitioners. (2) The successful
implementation of this technique will help establish such an approach as a
viable alternative tool for similar problems. (3) The students involved will be
introduced to new application areas and will learn new mathematical techniques
that will broaden their knowledge, and improve their perception of operations
research as a key ingredient to improve the performance of real
systems.&lt;br/&gt;