* 0115447
* Development and Validation of Design Ideation Models for Conceptual Engineering Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2001,06/30/2006
* Jami Shah, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Judy M. Vance
* 06/30/2006
* USD 450,611.00

The objective of this research project is to produce the knowledge needed to
evaluate the effectiveness of engineering design idea generation methods and to
distinguish between their necessary and superfluous components. This research
will combine the highly controlled lab experiments and atomic process models
from cognitive science with design experiments from design research. Instead of
conducting experiments by using an idea generation method in its entirety, each
method will be decomposed into its key "ideation" components and its overall
effectiveness predicted by testing the effectiveness of its components and their
mutual interactions. Lab experiments will be directed at studying key ideation
components individually, while the design experiments will examine interaction
between components and their relation to outcome by mutating their constituent
components. Explanations for why and how ideation components are effective will
be researched from accepted models of atomic processes and structures already
available in cognitive science. Effectiveness will be evaluated in terms of four
measures: fluency, quality, variety, and novelty of design concepts generated.
The results of the study will be consolidated into a model of design ideation by
combining and modifying several elements from existing models. The proposed
ideation model will be validated through final experiments in industry
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two important results should emerge from this
research: (1) data from the empirical studies that can be interpreted in terms
of both theory and applied practices, and (2) a system for pursuing additional
research questions about ideational aspects of conceptual design theory. An
understanding of the relationship of ideation processes to design outcome will
help companies determine which method to use under given conditions and how to
constitute design teams. This work will also help educators in finding better
ways of teaching design synthesis.