* 0115211
* DesignExplorer: Knowledge Management, Modeling, and Synthesis for Conceptual Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Janis Terpenny, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 08/31/2003
* USD 70,000.00

This award provides funding for the research and development of a function-based
representation to support concept modeling and solution synthesis in early
design. The approach will focus on contributing to the standards currently under
development at the National Institute of Standards and Technology for function
representation and knowledge interoperability. The representation of semantics,
meaning of design intent, in a modeling and synthesis environment is a
challenging problem. As envisioned, the representation will include knowledge
that is fuzzy (difficult to quantify but reflects engineering expertise and
preference) and computable knowledge (based on scientific and engineering
principles). Through close collaborations with industry partners, Pratt and
Whitney and Telaxis Communications, the research will address issues that are
not only fundamentally challenging, but also responsive to and informed by the
needs of industry. Example problems from jet engine and telecommunication design
will inform, validate, and demonstrate the research and development of the
function-based representation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
generalized representation will provide the foundation needed for the exchange
of design rationale, design preferences, and knowledge for modeling and design
optimization currently not available in today's design systems. This project is
the first step in the research needed for the development of an integrated
design environment and the nation's next generation of design systems, wherein
customers, designers, suppliers, manufacturers, and distributors work
collaboratively in a distributed and integrated environment. The results of this
work will provide the needed representation and foundation for such an
environment.&lt;br/&gt;