* 0115208
* Minority Engineering Education in the United States, 1945 to the Present
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Amy Slaton, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Ronald Rainger
* 09/30/2005
* USD 127,128.00

SES 0115208 Amy Slaton, Drexel University Minority Engineering Education in the
United States, 1945 to the Present

Despite ongoing governmental and institutional attempts at diversification,
African Americans and other minorities remain severely underrepresented among
university graduates in engineering fields. Many quantitative studies have
measured this inequity and the impacts of individual educational reforms, but
few scholars have explored historical or epistemological patterns behind the
successes and failures of diversification efforts. Using archives, artifacts,
and approximately 35 interviews with engineering instructors and graduates, this
project compares engineering education in American universities attended
primarily by black students and white students since 1945 to establish such an
overview.

Based on four pairs of schools, representing each of four states and four
historical eras, this study describes the broad political conditions in which
these universities functioned, and provides detailed accounts of practices
within their engineering classrooms and laboratories. The cases of Lincoln
University (Missouri) and the University of Missouri will illustrate conditions
during the science and engineering "manpower" crisis immediately following World
War II. Technical programs at Maryland State College and the University of
Maryland will illustrate the impacts of integration as separate-but-equal
doctrines fell away in the 1950s. The histories of two urban schools, the
Kennedy-King College and Illinois Institute of Technology in Chicago, will
reflect the coalescence of civil rights activism and legislation in the 1960s
and 1970s; and comparisons of Prairie View and Texas A&M Universities will
document the ascendance of political conservatism and a "post-industrial"
economy in the 1980s and 1990s. Engineering curricula and course materials
varied greatly among these settings, and this project treats post-secondary
technical education since 1945 as both a reflection of prevailing social
ideologies about race and a shaping force of those values. It explores, overall,
the uncertain connection between technical and social modernity in contemporary
America.

