* 0115757
* Evolution and Development of the Trophotaenial Placenta in Embryos of Viviparous Fishes
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2007
* John Wourms, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 07/31/2007
* USD 340,000.00

0115757 Wourms

Viviparity, i.e. giving birth to living young, has evolved from oviparity (egg
laying) many times in different animal groups. Among the vertebrates, it first
evolved in fishes which now display an extraordinary diversity of
specializations for viviparity. The evolution of viviparity established new
functional relationships, such as maternal-embryonic nutrient transfer.
Specialized tissues, such as the placenta, evolved for transfer. Live bearing
goodeid fishes, are being used as a model system to study nutrient transfer
across a placenta and to investigate the development and evolution of the
embryonic portion of the placenta. Goodeid embryos undergo considerable growth
(3500X) due to transfer of nutrients across a placenta composed of the lumenal
ovarian epithelium and trophotaeniae, external processes emanating from the
embryo's vent. Trophotaeniae are derivatives of the embryonic hindgut. Previous
research established the structure and function of trophotaeniae and lead to the
discovery of an evolutionary intermediate, A. toweri, a species of goodeid
fishes whose embryos have vestigial trophotaeniae and rely on gut-based
nutrition. Comparative studies produced a robust developmental model for the
evolution of trophotaeniae from the hindgut. Its key feature is the precocious
formation of a new posterior gut opening (vent) instead of the typical anus.
This event permits externalization of hindgut tissue. Once externalized, the
hindgut tissue could evolve into trophotaeniae by incremental modifications of a
gut-based developmental program. Research objectives are to: 1) extend the study
of the trophotaenial placenta as part of long term studies of the evolutionary
physiology of viviparity; and 2) test the model of trophotaenial evolution.
Standard methods of cell-developmental biology and physiology will be used to:
1) analyze vent formation, externalization of hindgut tissue, and the origin of
trophotaenial precursors; 2) analyze the development of rudimentary
trophotaeniae, an evolutionary intermediate, in the blue-tailed goodeid (A.
toweri) and compare the selective advantages of gut and trophotaeniae-based
nutrition; 3) analyze growth and morphogenesis of trophotaeniae; and 4) analyze
the temporal and structural course of events and the physiological basis for the
shedding of trophotaeniae at birth. These studies will: 1) advance the general
understanding of viviparity, a major form of reproduction; 2) provide a basic
understanding of the function and development of the trophotaenial placenta; 3)
test a developmental model of trophotaenial evolution; 4) establish the
selective advantages of gut and trophotaenial-based embryonic nutrition; and 5)
enhance knowledge of the reproductive biology of endangered species.