* 0115586
* Arabidopsis 2010:   Nitrogen Networks in Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Gloria Coruzzi, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald A. Berkowitz
* 08/31/2006
* USD 3,230,000.00

The Arabidopsis genome project uncovered a large set of genes involved in
nitrogen uptake, metabolism, and allocation (600+). Expression studies on a
small subset showed that nitrogen status regulates the transcription of many of
these genes. Proposed signals include nitrate, ammonium, glutamine, and C:N
balance. At present, there is little or no understanding of the regulatory
molecules or networks involved in signaling N-status and integrating N
metabolism in plant growth. We propose to use expression arrays to identify
circuits of genes regulated by N-status (inorganic-N and organic-N), to use
bioinformatic sequence analysis to identify N-responsive cis-elements, and to
determine the function of key genes we identify by defining the phenotype of
mutants lacking each gene and by determining the biochemical properties of the
expressed proteins including describing meaningful interactions with other
macromolecules and determining where and when each is expressed. Our analysis
will allow us to place the activity of these genes and N-regulatory networks in
the context of plant growth and development. A computer cluster will store the
large amounts of data generated in this project and we will provide a publicly
accessible Web page that will include expression databases, gene identification
information, and all software developed in the proposed project. This community
resource will be linked to the major plant databases for the widest possible
distribution of information. It is expected that our results will substantially
advance our understanding of nitrogen metabolism in the context of plant growth,
as well as provide new insights into our understanding of complex regulatory
networks. Given the central role of nitrogen availability and metabolism in crop
productivity, these results will also have broad agricultural impacts.

