* 0115548
* Global Modeling of HIgh Frequency Circuits and Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Samir El-Ghazaly, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 09/30/2005
* USD 360,000.00

0115548&lt;br/&gt;Goodnick&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conventional approach to
analyzing circuits and/or systems is to model the behavior in terms of lumped-
parameter descriptions of the current-voltage relationships. Hence, device,
circuit, and system modeling is often reduced to establishing the parameters
that describe I-V characteristics of lumped circuit elements. However, present
system operating frequencies characterized in terms of bandwidth and/or clock-
speed are increasing at a rate analogous (and even faster) than Moore's law for
integration density. As the operating frequency (or the clock speed) increases
in circuits, one must treat the signals as electromagnetic waves propagating on
transmission lines, rather than the simple voltages and currents. At even higher
frequencies in the tera-hertz and far-infrared regime, one has to account for
radiation absorption and emission including the interaction with the whole
environment. This higher frequency regime is not only being approached from
increasingly higher speed devices and circuits, but also from the
optoelectronics side as long-wavelength sources and detectors are sought for new
optical communication channels, as well as a variety special use applications
such as sensing. This requires the development of new CAD tools that combines
both electromagnetic theory and semiconductor device concepts. This approach is
known as Global Modeling referring to its ability to model complete circuits
using one unified scheme.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Herein is proposed funding for a
three-year program of research with the goal of developing device and circuit
simulation tools for accurate simulation of high frequency electronic circuits
as well as long-wavelength optoelectronic systems. These semiconductor device
tools will employ a full-band Cellular Automata/Monte Carlo particle-based
techniques developed under previous NSF funding for efficient accurate physical
solution of the semi-classical Boltzmann transport equation, coupled
hierarchically with lower level models such as hydrodynamic solvers, and
distributed transistor behavioral models. These techniques will be combined with
robust field solvers based on full-wave solutions of Maxwell's equations using
finite difference time domain (FDTD) techniques. The 3D solution of the coupled
FDTD/Device problem is challenging from a computational standpoint, hence a
large fraction of effort will address algorithmic improvements including
parallelization in a distributed workstation
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The device/FDTD simulation kernel will be
embedded in a larger simulation domain representing for example the passive
elements and stripline coupling of the matching circuit for an amplifier.
Comparison and calibration of the simulation tools will be performed in
collaboration with industrial partners. High frequency scattering parameter
measurements on devices obtained from industrial collaborators will be used to
calibrate global simulation results using the above techniques. The PIs will
focus on the modeling of high frequency amplifier technologies such as GaAs
MESFET and HFET technology, as well as more advanced material systems such as
SiGe HBTs and GaN field effect transistors. Consideration of thermal effects
will be included as well for power amplifier applications. They will also apply
the proposed simulation tool to the investigation of tera-hertz sources and
detectors used for example in electro-optic sampling, where comparison will be
made to ultrafast optical switching measurements&lt;br/&gt;