* 0115581
* Molecular Mechanism of Protein Transport into Chloroplasts
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2005
* Kenneth Keegstra, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 07/31/2005
* USD 30,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chloroplasts are the organelles within plant cells that
are responsible for photosynthesis in addition to many other important aspects
of metabolism. However, most of the proteins needed for the functions performed
by chloroplasts are encoded in nuclear genes and imported into the organelle
following their synthesis in the cytosol. While the basic outlines of the import
process have been described, many aspects remain unknown. This project will
investigate the details of precursor protein import into chloroplasts using a
site-specific cross-linking strategy. Unnatural amino acids containing a
photoreactive functional group will be incorporated into specific locations
within precursor proteins and then allowed to interact with the transport
apparatus of isolated intact chloroplasts. Following treatment with UV light to
activate the cross-linking reagent, the products will be analyzed in an effort
to map the set of interactions that occur as precursor proteins are transported
across the chloroplastic envelope membranes. The expertise required to perform
this specialized cross-linking strategy is not widely available, but is
available at the University of Nagoya in Japan. Thus the project will be done in
collaboration with the laboratory of Professor Endo to accomplish these
experiments. &lt;br/&gt;