* 0115822
* Acquisition of Transmission Electron Microscopy Equipment for Invertebrate and Vertebrate Pigment Cell Studies, Undergraduate Laboratory Demonstrations, and Undergraduate Research
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* David Oetinger, Kentucky Wesleyan College
* Standard Grant
* Steven E. Ellis
* 08/31/2004
* USD 99,989.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. David F. Oetinger and Steven D. Wilt at
Kentucky Wesleyan College. This grant will allow the investigators to purchase
instrumentation to equip a transmission electron microscopy facility.
Specifically, the equipment will include a transmission electron microscope for
study of cellular components--in the 1,000 to 300,000 magnification range; an
ultramicrotome with diamond knife for cutting tissue sections in the range of 60
to 80 nanometers in thickness; a second ultramicrotome for preparatory work and
training purposes; a glass knife-maker, also for preparatory work and training;
and appropriate darkroom equipment. Dr. Oetinger will study the structure and
development of ommochrome pigment granules in the cells of freshwater sowbugs
(isopods). Subsequently, he will seek a better understanding of how infection
with larval worm parasites (acanthocephalans) interferes- structurally and
biochemically with normal pigment granule formation. Dr. Wilt is interested in
the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) of vertebrate eyes-specifically the
junctions between cells that form a "fence," restricting diffusion of lipids and
proteins between adjacent cells. He will use cell cultures and chick embryos to
determine the role of tight junction molecules in the development and
maintenance of tight junctions. Pigmented epidermis from an age-series of
aquatic isopods will be fixed, stained, embedded and sectioned. Ultrastructural
examination will assess location, size, shape and number of pigment granules
within cells. In certain insects, ommochrome pigments are known to be stored
waste products from tryptophan metabolism: that hypothesis will be tested for
freshwater isopods (crustaceans) using concurrent biochemical extraction
techniques and ultrastructural examination of pigment granules. So too, study of
the relationship between developing acanthocephalan larvae and altered
pigmentation will be studied at the ultrastructural level. Dr. Wilt will use a
Rous sarcoma retroviral expression system to overexpress subdomains of the tight
junction molecule (ZO-2). Then, using traditional electron microscopy and
immunogold labelling methods, he will determine the role of ZO-2 in the
development and regulation of RPE tight junctions ultrastructurally. Cellular
pigments and pigmented cells play of variety of biological roles in
invertebrates and vertebrates: cryptic coloration, physiological color changes,
ultraviolet light screening, and as important components of visual receptors. In
the isopod-acanthocephalan system, Oetinger is seeking an understanding of how a
parasite can mediate changes in a host's morphology--of selective advantage to
the parasite. In Wilt's research, the integrity of the retinal pigment
epithelium is critical for optimal vision. A better understanding of the
ultrastructural-molecular relationships that maintain that integrity is
important to our understanding of the evolution of the vertebrate eye and
subsequent defects in structure and function.