* 0115260
* SDEST: The Military Roots of Basic Science: American Oceanography in the Cold War and Beyond
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Naomi Oreskes, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2005
* USD 140,429.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The Military Roots of Basic Science:&lt;br/&gt;American
Oceanography in the Cold War and Beyond&lt;br/&gt;Naomi
Oreskes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;American oceanography was built on the twin pillars
of military funding and logistical support. Before the 1930s there was no `blue
water' oceanography in the United States, and the leaders of the field were to
be found in England, Germany, and Scandinavia. By the late 1960s, American
scientists were at the forefront of the field, and their work was instrumental
in transforming human knowledge of the deep seas. This project is a historical
study of how this transformation occurred: how oceanographers, working with
military patrons motivated by national security concerns, produced the modern
scientific understanding of the oceans, the sea-floor, and the processes that
shape the surface of the earth. The outcome is a book of interest to historians,
philosophers, and sociologists of science, to U.S. historians, and to scientists
and science policy analysts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project challenges the
standard model of a causal arrow from basic to applied science. In Cold War
oceanography, `application' drove science, not the other way around. Yet science
was not impeded: these were years of multiple, profound discoveries. This
challenges the deeply held conviction of most scientists that science must be
unfettered to advance. It also challenges the Mertonian assumption that the free
and open exchange of information is critical to scientific advance. The evidence
from oceanography is against these convictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;However,
while military patronage was good for oceanographic science, it was not always
good for scientists. Costs were paid in human, intellectual, and political
terms. Individual scientists had their careers derailed by security
investigations, and women were excluded or marginalized in the Navy- science
fraternity. Intellectually, the military agenda produced knowledge in many areas
but left persistent ignorance in others. On the socio-political front, fifty
years of military-scientific collaboration, in which scientists did not have to
explain their work to a larger public, has left a legacy of distrust among the
public, and a perception that scientists are now more self-interested than
disinterested. A major contribution of the study will be an analysis of the
lasting legacies of military patronage, in oceanography, and in American
science. The insights offered by the project have significant implications, not
only for our understanding of the history of science, but for future science
policy and funding. &lt;br/&gt;