* 0115007
* GOALI:  Going Beyond Design of Experiments (DOE) -  Process Improvement by Joint Adjustment and Monitoring
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2001,10/31/2004
* Harriet Nembhard, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 10/31/2004
* USD 139,566.00

The challenge for process control in many settings is that if a process is left
alone it will tend to drift and wander away from target and as a result, quality
will suffer. This is especially true in an industrial setting where both process
inputs and outputs continuously change. Traditional process control has centered
on detecting special causes that are suggested by significant patterns in the
data which point to the existence of unexpected changes or signals. Many
situations occur, however, where certain process signals are anticipated because
they are characteristic of a system or operation. The approach to be used in
this prjoect is to navigate to a good operating region using design of
experiments (DOE) to evaluate a set of variables, then focus the control effort
on the critical variables. Process transfer functions will be used to optimize
the control adjustment of these variables and use Cuscore statistics to
efficiently monitor the process by capitalizing on the structure of the
anticipated signal. For process adjustment and monitoring, the following
questions will be investigated: (1) What are the appropriate controllers and
Cuscore statistics for common process characterizations? (2) How well will the
new monitoring algorithms work in detecting signals? (3) How robust are the
controllers and monitors to approximations of (or deviations from) their key
parameters? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The contributions of this research will
include both empirical and theoretical developments to deliver improved output
through better process understanding, monitoring, and control. In particular,
the research is expected to provide a methodology for connecting the knowledge
on experimental design and process improvement, provide a full set of adjustment
and Cuscore monitoring algorithms and statistical evaluation of their
properties, generate tools and charting algorithms to improve daily process
operation and control, and demonstrate the feasibility of joint adjustment and
monitoring for real industry applications. This work includes a partnership with
Springs Window Fashions Division, Inc. (Middleton, WI). Springs is a leading
manufacturer of home window treatments and their processing operations will
serve as a test bed for implementation of the results. It also includes an
opportunity for a graduate research assistant to work on the project and with
the company.&lt;br/&gt;