* 0115238
* Improving the Producibility and Predictability of Reactive Multilayer Joining
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Omar Knio, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Jian Cao
* 07/31/2004
* USD 340,000.00

This project is a combined experimental and computational effort that aims at
improving the producibility and predictability of this joining process. Reactive
multilayer foils are a new class of engineered materials that can be used as
local heat sources for joining. These multilayer foils are comprised of hundreds
of nanoscale layers that alternate between elements with large heats of mixing,
such as Al and Ni. Self-propagating reactions can be initiated in these foils at
room temperature, and the reaction properties can be controlled by varying the
foil composition and the thickness of individual layers. By placing a reactive
foil between two braze layers and two components and initiating the reaction,
heat from the foil melts the braze layers and joins the components. This new
method of joining requires no vacuum furnace and, with very localized heating,
limits the temperature that is seen by the bonded components. Both advantages
open new possibilities in the joining of temperature-sensitive components and of
dissimilar materials like metals and ceramics. Computationally, this research
aims to analyze the effect of heat losses, predict the melting of braze layers,
and the evolution of temperature in the bonded components. Predictions will be
validated against experimental measurements and then applied to optimize the
design of reactive joining applications. The physical properties and
microstructure of the resulting joints will also be characterized. Combined, the
mechanical characterizations and numerical predictions will provide the
fundamental tools that will be needed to insert this new joining technology into
various manufacturing applications.

It is expected that this research will lead to significant changes in industrial
joining operations and to educational experiences for high school students from
a woman's high school as well undergraduate and graduate students.

