* 0115902
* Acquisition of a Preparative Ultracentrifuge and Tabletop Superspeed Centrifuge for Faculty Mentored Undergraduate Research Training in Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Rosemarie Rosell, University of Saint Thomas
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Farmer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 92,400.00

Acquisition of a Preparative Ultracentrifuge and Tabletop Superspeed Centrifuge
for Faculty Mentored Undergraduate Research and Training in Biology University
of St. Thomas, Dept. of Biology, Houston, TX 77006

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Romagni at the University of St. Thomas to
acquire a preparative ultracentrifuge and supporting desktop superspeed
centrifuge. It includes the cost of several necessary rotors, service for three
years, and required training for personnel using the equipment. This
instrumentation is an important component of departmental research strategy and
fills an obvious void in the current undergraduate biology research program. The
equipment will by used by undergraduate students at the University of St.
Thomas, an ethnic minority serving undergraduate institution with a majority of
women students, in independent research projects and in the classroom. These
investigations are part of a faculty/student mentoring approach that has grown
out of work originating in biology classes, and/or to research that is tied to
the foci of various faculty. The equipment will also be integrated into such
introductory biology classes as General Biology and, more intensively, in upper
division undergraduate classes, such as Molecular Ecology, Cell Biology, Plant
Physiology, Plant Physiological Ecology, and Biochemistry. Current faculty
research that will utilize the acquired instruments include the molecular
ecology and population dynamics of marine invertebrates used as indicators of
estuarine water quality. They will also investigate the population genetics of
several insect vectors of plant disease, in particular, whiteflies. Another area
of research includes studies of whitefly-vectored viruses of plants. Finally,
the equipment will be used for the ecophysiological/biochemical studies of plant
secondary metabolites, the elucidation of their modes of action and their
potential as environmentally friendly pesticides. With these funds, many of the
current projects that require subcontracting of non-campus personnel to run
experiments or that require faculty to complete some work off-campus, will be
completed at the University of St. Thomas. This is a clearly advantageous for
students who require a comprehensive laboratory experience as part of their
science education. Not only will funding allow students to complete entire
experiments/protocols themselves, it would also enable them to gain valuable
technical skills for future work in the biological sciences and complete
projects for publication in peer reviewed journals. Finally it will permit
faculty to undertake research activities currently not possible because of the
lack of centrifuge capabilities at their institution.

