* 0115596
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant--The Political Economy of Inter-Regional Exchange in Uruk Mesopotamia: Geochemical Analyses of Utilitarian Trade Goods
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2002
* Gil Stein, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2002
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Gil Stein, Mr. Mark Schwartz will collect data for
his doctoral dissertation. Long-distance trade has always been important in the
development of civilizations throughout history. The effect that inter-regional
trade has on developing societies is a current focus of debate in anthropology.
An excellent area to explore this issue is the ancient Near East because the
rise of the first states in Mesopotamia in the 4th millennium BC is linked
closely to long-distance exchange with developing areas of Anatolia, Syria and
Iran. This research will test the hypothesis that trade with Mesopotamia
produced an overspecialization in Anatolian polities making them more vulnerable
to economic collapse. While many earlier analyses have relied on indirect
evidence of trade, this research will provide direct evidence through geo-
chemical analyses of the utilitarian good, bitumen. This research is centered
around Hacinebi Tepe, a local Anatolian settlement on the Euphrates River that
had an enclave of Mesopotamian merchants during a later phase of its history.
The stratigraphic sequence of levels before and during contact with
Mesopotamians allows one to look at the impact of Mesopotamians on this
Anatolian polity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An analysis of this ancient exchange
system must involve the sourcing of trade goods. Unfortunately, many of the
prestige goods involved are extremely rare in archaeological deposits and hard
to source chemically. This has made many key economic questions concerning
exchange patterns and the geographic origins of trade goods unanswerable. To
remedy this, Mr. Schwartz's dissertation focuses not on prestige goods, but on
the utilitarian good bitumen. This petroleum tar is found throughout the Near
East, is associated with Mesopotamian and Anatolian activity, is abundant in
archaeological deposits at Hacinebi and is chemically sourceable. Employing
detailed geo-chemical analyses, Mr. Schwartz's pilot study used bitumen to
investigate the ancient exchange of a petroleum product in the Near East. For
the first time, the presence of goods from Mesopotamia in Anatolia was
demonstrated with scientific evidence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary
identifications of bitumen sources hint at some of the dynamics trade at
Hacinebi. Stable carbon isotope analyses suggest that the ancient exchange
network was complex in terms of the sources utilized, the exchange routes and
the consumers involved. Only when complete, will this project have the potential
to alter our view of this early exchange system and Mr. Schwartz will perform
chemical analyses on all 414 bitumen samples from Hacinebi in order to develop a
full regional perspective on exchange patterns. These data will be combined with
functional analyses of bitumen artifacts from different stratigraphic levels and
cultural contexts to determine if an increase in bitumen use, an emphasis on
distant sources or a focus on trade related activities demonstrates a shifting
economic specialization on long-distance exchange by the Anatolians at Hacinebi.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;