* 0115732
* FRG: Novel Approaches to the Search for Advanced Thermoelectric Materials
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Francis DiSalvo, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* David Nelson
* 12/31/2005
* USD 277,800.00

The objective of this collaborative Focused Research Group (FRG) project is to
invent a new class of thermoelectric (TE) materials that will significantly
enhance the efficiency of cooling and power applications. Based on the theory of
electronic and heat transport in solids, a theoretical model of semiconducting
TE materials has been available for several decades. However, no known material
has all the needed electronic and thermal characteristics. The purpose of this
collaboration is to design, synthesize and characterize new classes of
semiconducting thermoelectric materials that exhibit high efficiency as device
materials. Electronic structure theory will provide general guidelines in the
search for such materials. The main impediment is the inability of scientists to
predict the composition or structure of new compounds, unless they are
chemically similar to known compounds. However, once a new material is found and
its crystal structure determined, its electronic band structure as well as
transport properties can be calculated. Thus this research has both strong
theoretical and experimental components. A close interaction between the
chemists, physicists and theorists and their students through quarterly
meetings, exchange visits, and internet communication, will provide rapid
feedback and planning of the next experiments and calculations. The education
and research components of this interdisciplinary project are well integrated,
and overall success in this complex project will be realized through exceptional
synergy. %%%

Thermoelectric (TE) materials allow the construction of small, purely electronic
devices that provide thermal cooling on passing a current, or that produce
electricity directly from heat. TE coolers eliminate the need for compressors
and gasses, such as freons. However, current TE coolers have low efficiency
(only 10 % of the maximum allowed, while home refrigerators operate at about 30
% of Carnot efficiency.). Yet these devices are used in applications where
efficiency is less important than small size or reliability. Their use would
greatly expand if the efficiency could be raised to 30 % or more, resulting in
environmental improvements and economic benefits. This is an ideal training
ground for students. This experimental and theoretical project is highly
interactive and interdisciplinary with strong synergy exhibited among the
participating chemists and physicists and their graduate and postdoctoral
students.

