* 0115975
* Characterization of Insulin-Dependent Glucose Transporters in a Teleost Fish Model, the Goby Gillichthys mirobilis
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2005
* Kevin Kelley, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Continuing grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 06/30/2005
* USD 375,200.00

One of the most fundamental biological roles of the pancreatic hormone insulin
is to promote cellular uptake of glucose and other fuels from the blood and
extracellular spaces. The development of an insulin-regulated glucose
transporter system is arguably a key physiological adaptation that supports the
heightened energetic demands of cells and tissues in endothermic ("warm-
blooded") animals, such as mammals. Conversely, in ectothermic vertebrates, this
and other aspects of insulin-regulated metabolism are hypothetically less
developed. Current understanding of insulin-regulated cellular glucose transport
has been dependent almost entirely on studies of the insulin-regulated GLUT-4
glucose transporter of mammals. By contrast, the status of this system "before"
the evolution of an endothermic physiology (e.g., in fishes) is not understood,
due in part to the lack of available models of insulin deficiency in ectothermic
vertebrates to facilitate experimental analysis of the system. The objectives of
the proposed studies are (1) to characterize a teleost fish insulin-regulated
glucose transporter system at the molecular and cellular levels, (2) to
elucidate its physiological role in the regulation of glucose homeostasis in
this vertebrate, and (3) to identify the likely evolutionary differences
relative to that which exist in mammals. The gobiid fish, Gillichthys mirabilis,
is a particularly useful model for such studies, since it can be experimentally
manipulated into a state of insulin-deficiency reminiscent of type-1 diabetes
mellitus. Previous work on this model indicates that insulin-deficient gobies
exhibit high blood glucose levels and a pronounced impairment of insulin-
regulated glucose transport activity in skeletal muscle, while insulin
replacement therapy corrects these metabolic deficiencies. In addition, insulin
treatment stimulates glucose clearance in vivo and muscle glucose transport in
vitro. It is therefore hypothesized that an insulin-regulated glucose
transporter, related to mammalian GLUT-4, exists in muscle of this teleost fish
and plays an important role in glucoregulation, albeit with differences likely
to reflect the different metabolic strategies represented by the ectothermic
fish versus endotherms. In support of this hypothesis, recent molecular cloning
data in the goby and some other teleost fish species have identified at least
two different cDNAs related to mammalian GLUTs 1 & 4. The following three
specific aims are proposed: 1) to isolate, clone, and characterize GLUT cDNAs
from goby muscle, principally putative GLUT4 and GLUT 1, and to develop specific
molecular probes (cDNA, antisera) for use in subsequent biochemical analyses; 2)
to define insulin's specific regulatory actions on the muscle glucose
transporter system in the goby, both at the level of gene expression and the
level of the cell-physiological response to insulin; and 3) to characterize the
interaction of insulin and the hormones that antagonize its actions (so-called
counterregulatory hormones) in regulating the muscle GLUT system and hepatic
metabolism, in order to advance a more integrative understanding of
glucoregulatory physiology in this fish. These studies should provide a novel
biological perspective and understanding of a fundamental action of the hormone
insulin.