* 0115127
* Processing of Nanotubes Using Liquid Composite Molding Techniques
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Suresh Advani, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2005
* USD 326,001.00

Carbon nanotubes have exhibited the potential to enhance the physical and
mechanical properties of polymer composites. In the past few years, various
methods have been invented to produce pure nanotubes with enhanced properties
and reduced cost. The two main barriers to the widespread use of nanotubes are
(1) cost and (2) lack of processing techniques to disperse the nanotubes through
the matrix without forming clusters and to influence their orientation behavior.
This project will address these issues by exploring methods to process nanotubes
in glass-fiber-reinforced composites to form hybrid nano-micro composites.
Injection of the polymer resin and the carbon nanotubes suspension into glass-
fiber performs will enable the manufacture of hybrid nano-micro polymeric
composites. These materials will be less expensive than pure nano-composites, as
the volume fraction of the nanotubes used will be small. Modifying existing
processes for fiber-reinforced composites can also reduce the manufacturing cost
of nano-micro composites. In this project, three innovative modifications of
widely used Liquid Composite Molding (LCM) processes to manufacture composites
and explore the flow-induced dispersion and orientation behavior of carbon
nanotubes within fiber preforms will be introduced. It has been shown that
dispersion and alignment of nanotubes can be induced by rheological actions or
by drawing the nanotubes suspension through a porous medium. The new processes
will use this concept of stretching the flow of the resin that carries the
nanotubes by either elongation or shear. This will allow the development of
qualitative understanding of the relationship between the dispersion and
orientation behavior of the nanotubes and the suspension flow properties. The
statement of work is divided into three main tasks; (1) preparation and
characterization of the rheological properties of suspensions containing
nanotubes (2) processing of hybrid micro nanocomposites specimens with three
different modified LCM processes, where nanotubes and resins are introduced in a
mold containing pre-placed fiber preforms (3) examination and correlation of the
microstructure to processing and measurement of enhancement in mechanical
properties. The Center for Composite Material has the necessary equipment to
conduct the study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-range goal is to control the
dispersion and the orientation behavior of the nanotubes by manipulating the
shearing and stretching of the resin. The overall intent is to make hybrid nano-
micro composites into designable materials that will benefit both the carbon-
nanotubes and the continuous micro-fiber system industries.