* 0115132
* Studies on the Mechanism and Inhibition of Pectin Degrading Enzymes by Mass Spectrometry
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Carl Bergmann, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 09/30/2005
* USD 413,922.00

The enzymes produced by fungi that degrade the pectic components of plant cell
walls are central to fungal pathogenicity. Two of these classes of enzymes,
endopolygalacturonases (EPGs) and pectin methylesterases (PMEs), are the focus
of this project. Fungi produce EPGs to hydrolyze the cell wall polysaccharide
homogalacturonan as one of the first steps in invasion. Pectin methylesterases
(PMEs) often act in concert with EPGs by converting methyl-esterified regions of
homogalacturonan to a substrate which is susceptible to the EPG. One of plant
defense mechanisms involves the interactions between fungal EPGs and plant-
derived polygalacturonase-inhibiting proteins (PGIPs), that reduce the
hydrolytic activity of the EPG. The ability of PMEs and EPGs to modify and
fragment homogalacturonan, respectively, has led to their exploitation in a
variety of commercial applications, including the clarification of juices, the
texture and firmness of processed foods and purees, and control of the rheology
of pectins as gelling agents. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Little is known about the
mechanism of action of EPGs and PMEs, despite their economic importance to both
industry and agriculture. To increase our knowledge of EPGs and PMEs, this
project will use amide exchange-mass spectrometry to identify the sites on both
EPG and PME that bind to their respective substrates. This technique will also
be used to investigate the sites of protein/protein interaction between EPG and
its inhibitor protein (PGIP). The information obtained from the initial
experiments will identify amino acids of EPG and PME that appear to be critical
to these interactions with the substrate (and in the case of EPG with PGIP).
Based on these data, site-specific replacements will be designed to potentially
disrupt interactions. Amide exchange-MS will then be used to determine if the
resulting change in amino acid(s) has disrupted the binding interaction under
investigation. Besides obtaining the information on the binding surfaces on the
mutant enzymes, the project will also investigate if changes to the binding site
of PME alter the products of this enzyme. This will be done by a comparison of
the products of native PME action on short, methyl esterified pectic fragments
to the products of a series of site-specific mutant forms of the PME on the same
substrates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The detailed characterization of the
protein/protein and protein/carbohydrate interactions in this project will
provide added insight into mechanisms of host-pathogen interactions, and new
avenues for increasing plant disease resistance. This knowledge will provide
information on fruit ripening and plant development, and will be of great
benefit in the design and selection of overexpressed enzymes to meet specific
industrial requirements.&lt;br/&gt;