* 0115297
* US-India Cooperative Research:  Investigation of Bubble Size Distribution Profiles in Gas-Liquid Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2006
* Doraiswami Ramkrishna, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 07/31/2006
* USD 13,208.00

0115297&lt;br/&gt;Ramkrishna &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award
supports a US-India cooperative research project entitled Investigation of
Bubble Size Distribution Profiles in Gas-Liquid Systems. The collaborators are
Professor D. Ramkrishna, Department of Chemical Engineering, Purdue University
and Professor J.B. Joshi, Department of Chemical Technology, Bombay University.
They will make a systematic investigation of the effect that bubble population
balance may have on prediction of computational fluid dynamics (CFD)
calculations in gas-liquid flow. Such calculations are usually done with an
assumed single bubble size and coalescence, and break-up phenomena and resulting
bubble size distributions are ignored. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: This
collaboration will combine the US investigator's expertise on bubble dynamics,
break-up and coalescence, and population balance with Professor Joshi's
experimental facilities needed to measure model predictions. Together they can
advance the current state of the art of gas-liquid flows significantly. The US
and Indian graduate students involved in this project will have the advantage of
exposure to the best available thinking in the field of gas-liquid bubbly flows.
This research could have a profound impact on design and scale-up of gas-liquid
contactors, which are common to numerous chemical processes and are of great
technological and economic importance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;