* 0115860
* Collaborative Research:   Assessment of Infants' Object Concepts
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Kathy Johnson, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher T. Kello
* 08/31/2004
* USD 121,952.00

The question of whether infants and older toddlers differentiate the world of
objects into fundamentally similar kinds of categories has persisted for
decades, largely due to the absence of methods for assessing categorization that
are effective across a wide variety of ages. The concepts of preverbal infants
must be examined through techniques that are independent of language, while
language production and comprehension typically are vital to the assessment of
toddlers' early concepts. Determining whether younger and older infants possess
similar types of concepts is relevant to broader questions concerning the degree
to which cognitive development is continuous or discontinuous. On the one hand,
differences between the category extensions of infants and older toddlers may be
due to different methods of assessment or to different levels of experience with
objects. Even within a single age group, infants may produce different patterns
of category extension across different categorization tasks because the tasks
vary in terms of attentional and other information-processing demands. On the
other hand, fundamental differences may exist between prelinguistic infants and
older infants who know names for things because they possess qualitatively
different representational systems. By this account, within-group variations in
categorization emerge because different procedures tap different categorization
processes. This research will introduce a new method, a comprehension measure of
associative generalization, that is intended to help determine the basis for
between-group and within-group variations in categorization during infancy. In
this method, preferred looking will serve as an index of infants' understanding
of conceptual boundaries and will correct for methodological problems associated
with production-based responses such as imitation and labeling.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Throughout three consecutive phases of the project, the
comprehension measure of associative generalization will be used to explore
infants' understanding of the toy replicas often used in studies of early
categorization as symbols for the corresponding real objects, and to
differentiate among three alternative developmental sequences in the emergence
of concepts: (1) Domain-first: Infants' early concepts are global in nature
(e.g., at the level of animal or vehicle) and broad concepts control infants'
associations of category properties; (2) Basic-first: Infants' initial concepts
are at the basic level (e.g., dog, cat, car, or truck), and domain-level
generalizations obtained through production-based imitation tasks are
attributable to overextensions of basic level categories; and (3) Variable
specificity: Infants possess rudimentary knowledge that different types of
properties are aligned with categories at different levels of specificity. The
last would imply that certain properties are generalized at the basic level, and
others are generalized at the domain level; such awareness would constitute
evidence for rudimentary understanding of the asymmetry of class inclusion
relations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of a comprehension-based analog
to productive imitation measures has tremendous potential to serve as a
methodological "bridge" between tasks appropriate for younger infants (e.g.,
habituation) and tasks suitable for older toddlers (e.g., naming, successive
touching). Such a tool will enable researchers to sensitively test the degree to
which categorization processes remain stable throughout the first two years of
life and will provide useful data for the development of intervention programs
aimed at facilitating early lexical development.&lt;br/&gt;