* 0115978
* Acquisition of a Flow Cytometer
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Charles Somerville, Marshall University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Farmer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 164,244.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Laura Jenski at Marshall University to acquire a
flow cytometer. Six faculty in three units will use this instrument for their
research projects, thesis projects of graduate and undergraduate students, and
training students in undergraduate courses in research applications of this
technology. Acquisition of a flow cytometer will bring a new and important
technology to the faculty and students at Marshall
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The immediate research applications of the flow
cytometer are diverse, and include exploration of fatty acid-induced changes in
membrane function, protein expression during epidermal development and apoptosis
in skin embryogenesis, cell cycle and quantitative gene expression during plant
growth, and analysis of environmental samples for specific microbial
populations. In addition, three courses are targeted for introducing flow
cytometric applications as part of the independent exploration component of the
courses. One is a core cell biology course and another is a combined
undergraduate and graduate plant physiology course in Biological Sciences; the
third is a course in the Integrated Science and Technology Program. Students
pursuing graduate thesis research or undergraduate projects will have access to
this instrument if properly trained and supervised by faculty, and
collaborations established through the engagement of students in flow cytometry
will, in addition to campus seminars and workshops, help to bring new users to
the instrument.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The flow cytometer will benefit students
and faculty at Marshall University, and have a positive impact on the university
and the state of West Virginia. Students at Marshall University will gain
exposure, and in many cases hands-on experience, with flow cytometry, thereby
contributing to a better trained and more scientifically sophisticated workforce
in a state aiming to achieve more high technology jobs. Faculty at Marshall
University will have a new technology available to them to apply to research
questions, and this will improve their competitiveness in gaining funding for
their projects. The availability of shared instrumentation and the intellectual
exchange among the group of users will stimulate collaborative projects, also
improving faculty research success. Finally, acquisition of research
instrumentation will help Marshall University to build its national research
presence and, in this fashion, offer modern creative experiences to its
undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;