* 0115905
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Combined GC and HPLC System for Undergraduate Research and Training
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* John Palasota, University of Saint Thomas
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2004
* USD 99,468.00

0115905 Malloy

This grant, funded through the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program
provides support for the acquisition of a combined gas chromatography (GC) and
high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system for undergraduate research
and training at the University of St. Thomas in Houston, TX. This system will be
used initially for environmental and other research projects conducted by
faculty and undergraduate students in Chemistry and Environmental Studies. The
system comprises an automated HPLC with an autosampler, diode array detector,
and a gas chromatography system with a GC autosampler system, computer and
associated software, which will operate as a common interface between the two
systems. In addition, maintenance supplies and a service contract are included
in the grant. The initial projects supported by this equipment grant include
trace detection and measurement of air pollutants, particularly those related to
ozone formation, an issue of prime importance in the Houston area. Related
research includes analysis for similar types of oxygenates in ozonated drinking
water. The second project has to do with analysis of components in wine samples
from the sophomore organic laboratory. Winemaking has been included as part of
the organic curriculum for over 20 years and this addition will allow
integration of analysis for various components, including multifunctional
components, to be integrated as special projects in the laboratory. The
automated nature of the instrumentation will allow efficient processing of the
50+ wine samples in a short time period. The third project involves the
investigation of HPLC methods for the detection and quantitation of carbamates
and related species in drinking water. Once the method development stage is
complete, samples of local drinking water will be analyzed for the presence of
these analytes and the contamination level determined. The fourth project is the
use of chemical analysis in conjunction with the development of a Foraminiferal
Laboratory. The environmental studies program at the University is actively
engaged in research concerning the use of both benthic foraminifera and
ostracodes in the determination of water quality in the environments of the bays
of the Texas coast. This equipment acquisition will complement and supplement
work on GC/MS equipment for both electron ionization and positive and negative
chemical ionization already present in the department. In addition to research
projects, the automated nature of the equipment will allow integration into
normal laboratory course work. Recent collaboration on projects with a member of
the Biology department has led to future possibilities for use of this
equipment. ***