* 0115146
* Collaborative Research:  Program for Modeling of Microstructure Evolution During Hot Bulk Forming of Al-Mg-Si Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Wojciech Misiolek, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Lynn Realff
* 08/31/2005
* USD 226,827.00

The objective of this research is to develop a simulation tool, validated by
experiments, capable of predicting the evolution of key microstructural
characteristics in Al-Mg-Si alloys during hot bulk forming. New models and
simulation tools will be developed and used to model the phenomena the govern
the evolution of the microstructure during hot forming. Carefully designed and
controlled experiments will be used for model calibration and validation. Al-Mg-
Si alloys are among the most common materials used in aerospace, construction
and automotive industries. The ability to predict final microstructure, and
therefore mechanical properties, in a final aluminum part that results from a
controlled deformation process is extremely important for the US aluminum
industry and its customers. This work will guide process designers to design
processes that are lower in cost and produce aluminum products with improved
material characteristics.

If successful, this project will benefit aluminum producers and their customers,
may have a positive environmental impact, and will contribute to the advanced
training of engineers. The research will lead to a better understanding of the
way Al-Mg-Si alloys behave during forming and could lead to the design of new
forming processes resulting in improved material properties at lower cost. This
would make it more economical to use aluminum components in automobiles, for
example, which would result in lighter weight vehicles, and thus improved fuel
efficiency. Graduate, undergraduate, and high school students will participate
in the research, and the results will be widely disseminated.

