* 0115900
* MRI:  Integrated Sampling and Analysis Platform for the Investigation of Lake Geochemistry Over a Range of Temporal and Spatial Scales
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Jennifer Shosa, Colby College
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2003
* USD 99,716.00

0115900&lt;br/&gt;King&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) award will allow the investigators to assemble a cost-
effective and technically sophisticated instrument platform for coordinated
biogeochemical investigations in lakes. The platform is based in a Godfrey
Marine pontoon boat equipped with: four on-line FIA-based instruments (Fe, H2O2,
and nutrient analysis), CTD (temperature, depth, conductivity, pH, eH, O2,
fluorescence), GPS navigation, and a vibracoring system. This instrument
provides the capability to measure multiple geochemical parameters in the water
column and sediments over a range of scales - both temporal (seconds to
centuries) and spatial (cm to km). Fieldwork will be concentrated in the
Belgrade Lakes, where both general types of Maine lakes coexist and can be
compared. The integrated sampling and analysis platform will be used to
investigate the spatial and temporal distribution of iron, H2O2,, NO3-, and
PO43- in these lakes. Critical to this investigation is an estimate of nutrient
inputs from ground waters and historical burial of nutrients as it pertains to
internal nutrient loading. Fluid flow through the system will be modeled using
Visual MODFLOW software calibrated against actual physical and chemical fluid
flow over seasonal, and watershed scales. Vibracores of watershed sediments will
be obtained using the platform. Using standard sedimentological techniques a
detailed historical record of the transition from marine to freshwater
conditions will be developed. Stratigraphic elemental analyses across the
basins, reflecting long-term temporal and spatial changes, will be mapped and
assessed. Using these data, coupled with similar chemical data obtained on a
daily, weekly, monthly, and yearly basis, lake geochemical dynamics will be
evaluated over several scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student participation is an
integral part of this study. Student research assistants will help with all
aspects of the project during the summer months. In addition, approximately 40
students a year will actively use the integrated sampling and analysis platform
as part of two Geology and two Chemistry courses. Analysis of data over a range
of space and time will be used to draw connections between the research
projects. Such research efforts will provide the linkages between what students
generally consider unrelated disciplines, helping them to recognize that Earth
processes are system processes.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;