* 0115115
* Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMO): LSAMP-California Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation Phase III
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2001,10/31/2008
* Debra Richardson, University of California-Irvine
* Cooperative Agreement
* A.  Hicks
* 10/31/2008
* USD 5,244,000.00

One of 28 national alliances, CAMP is entering the ninth year of a ten-year
cooperative&lt;br/&gt;agreement between the National Science Foundation and UC
Irvine, the lead campus and&lt;br/&gt;administrative center. The primary
numerical goal is to double the number of B.S. degrees&lt;br/&gt;granted to
underrepresented students in SMET (science, mathematics, engineering,
technology)&lt;br/&gt;majors at the University of California. Offered at the
eight general UC campuses, CAMP has&lt;br/&gt;created a systemwide network of
faculty, program staff and students working toward a common&lt;br/&gt;set of
measured outcomes. Goals include completion of the B.S. degree, preparation for
and&lt;br/&gt;transition to graduate school or the professional workplace. The
program serves undergraduates&lt;br/&gt;through enrichment opportunities and
faculty mentored research supported by stipends. This&lt;br/&gt;effort has
contributed to a 78% increase in B.S. degrees granted by UC from the baseline
year&lt;br/&gt;(1990-91). Activities center on faculty mentored research
experiences, collaborative learning,&lt;br/&gt;presenting at scientific
conferences, science writing and co-authorship, technology literacy,
and&lt;br/&gt;preparation for graduate school. Student achievement is
disseminated through the Quarterly and&lt;br/&gt;on-line, www.camp.uci.edu. A
permanent allocation through the UC Regents Diversity&lt;br/&gt;Initiative
supports program infrastructure, administration, and expansion. Using a
synergistic&lt;br/&gt;approach, the California Alliance collaborates with
affiliated initiatives such as UC LEADS and&lt;br/&gt;AGEP (Alliance for
Graduate Education and the Professoriate) that enhance baccalaureate
degree&lt;br/&gt;completion and continuation to advanced study. Responding to
the paucity of minorities in&lt;br/&gt;faculty positions in the university and
nationwide, special emphasis is being placed on&lt;br/&gt;encouraging students
to prepare for a career in academia, and entering the professoriate.
The&lt;br/&gt;CAMP mission: Scientists and engineers are best prepared by other
scientists and engineers who&lt;br/&gt;exhibit and expect scholarly excellence.