* 0115970
* Acquisition of an Organic Semiconductor Processing and Characterization Facility for Research and Student Training
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2005
* Songping Huang, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2005
* USD 200,000.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program to Kent State
University supports the acquisition of a glove box system for an organic
semiconductor processing and characterization facility. Organic semiconductors
will play a central role in a variety of scientifically and technically
important processes and devices including xerography, light emitting diodes,
photovoltaics, thin film transistors and photorefractive media. The physical
properties of these organic and organic-inorganic hybrid materials often differ
significantly from those of the well known inorganic semiconductors. In order to
understand the basic physical properties of these organic materials a facility
for purification, deposition and device fabrication with time of flight and
microwave conductivity/mobility analytical capabilities is being assembled. This
facility will permit the creation of device structures from novel materials in a
highly controlled environment so that the intrinsic properties can accurately
and reproducibly be examined. The facility will be ideal for student training as
it provides a highly interdisciplinary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the
Major Research Instrumentation Program to Kent State University supports the
acquisition of a glove box system for an organic semiconductor processing and
characterization facility. Organic semiconductors present major and largely
unexplored opportunities for the improvement of a variety of electronic devices.
To exploit these materials a sophisticated facility comprised of several
components for the characterization of novel materials and systems based on
organic molecules is being assembled. A glove box with an integrated and highly
versatile thin-film deposition system will provide a clean environment for
material purification and device (e.g., field effect transistor) fabrication.
These novel systems will then be evaluated using state-of-the art electronics
and optical characterization tools including tunable laser sources, microwave
conductivity instrumentation and a powerful temperature-dependent x-ray
diffractometer for structural determination. These facilities will provide a
rich interdisciplinary training environment for students and post-doctoral
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;