* 0115825
* MRI:  Procurement of a Shared Confocal Microscope Facility at the Institute of Neurobiology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,02/28/2006
* Mark Miller, University of Puerto Rico Medical Sciences Campus
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 02/28/2006
* USD 217,061.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Mark W. Miller at the University of Puerto Rico
Medical Sciences Campus to establish a Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope (LSCM)
facility at the Institute of Neurobiology. This facility will be shared by the
investigators and students of the ten laboratories that comprise the Institute.
These laboratories utilize a variety of model systems, ranging from synapse
development and specification in the cockroach to retinal aging in the human, to
address some of the most challenging issues facing modern Neuroscience. While
diverse in scope, these research programs are unified by certain methodological
considerations and limitations. In particular, they share a need to localize
specific proteins, messenger RNAs, or physiological events, within highly
complex tissues. The elaborate three-dimensional structures of neurons, their
remarkable phenotypic heterogeneity, and their intricate sorting and trafficking
capabilities present formidable obstacles to studies requiring the precise
localization of fluorescent signals or markers. In many cases, however, the
limitations previously imposed by these factors have been overcome by the
introduction of the confocal microscope, an instrument that enables
investigators to detect and localize fluorescent signals with a resolution that
greatly exceeds the capabilities of traditional microscopy. &lt;br/&gt;The
research conducted at the Institute of Neurobiology is dedicated increasing our
understanding of the structure and function of nervous systems. Specific
programs include: (1) Neuropeptide Y and GABA Expression in the Aging Ground
Squirrel Circadian System (Dr. N. Lugo), (2) Dendritic Remodeling of Ganglion
Cells after Optic Nerve Injury (Dr. R. Blanco), Survival and Regeneration of
Human Spinal Cord Neurons (Dr. D. Kuffler), (4) Ultra-fast Imaging of
Subcellular Calcium Signals in Vascular Smooth Muscle (Dr. L. Santana), (5) Role
of Engrailed Paralogues in Specification of Neuronal Anatomy and Synaptic
Connections (Dr. J.M. Blagburn), (6) Cotransmitters and the Regulation of
Complex Behavior (Dr. M. W. Miller), (7) Retinal Aging in Human Populations in
Puerto Rico (Dr. E. Kicliter), and (8) Functional Role of Metabotropic Glutamate
Receptors in a Rhythm-generating Neuronal Network (Dr. W. Krenz). &lt;br/&gt;In
addition to the direct enhancement of these research projects, the proposed
facility will have a broad impact on the educational goals and capabilities of
the Institute of Neurobiology. Numerous graduate students affiliated with the
University of Puerto Rico School of Medicine and the Department of Biology at
the UPR Rio Piedras campus conduct their research at the Institute. Moreover,
many advanced undergraduate students receive research training by participating
in an Independent Investigation course, for which they may receive both credit
and funding. Finally, the Institute hosts a summer program in Tropical
Neuroethology that brings undergraduate students from around the country to
Puerto Rico for an intensive 5-week research experience. The creation of a
shared Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope facility will clearly enrich these
educational programs and enhance the training objectives of the Institute of
Neurobiology. &lt;br/&gt;