* 0115327
* Nano-Contact Magnetic Random Access Memory Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Romel Gomez, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* James W. Mink
* 08/31/2005
* USD 264,713.00

A research and educational initiative to develop a new all-metal magnetic random
access memory device, based on nano-contact ballistic magnetoresistance and
current-induced magnetization switching is proposed. The following research
goals are planned:&lt;br/&gt;- To understand the mechanisms that govern the
electrical transport on magnetic nanoconstrictions&lt;br/&gt;- To understand the
mechanisms for domain wall propagation using&lt;br/&gt;high-speed current pulses
&lt;br/&gt;- To design and fabricate a prototype magnetic random accessmemory
based on these new concepts for detection and recording. In this project, we
offer a completely different operating principle for magnetic random access
memory devices (MRAMS). Instead of exploiting giant magnetoresistance in
multilayer devices for readback, we propose a scheme which is fundamentally
different from the conventional approach in usual MRAM'S, which rely on external
currents to produce magnetic fields higher than the coercivity of the
ferromagnetic layers. In this&lt;br/&gt;method, we will utilize the so called
"s-d exchange" interaction to move domain walls. The principle is to use pulsed
current to move domain walls in the direction of electron velocity. The
educational efforts include the training of graduate and undergraduate students
specializing&lt;br/&gt;in magnetism, and the development of a web-based teaching
tool that visually demonstrates some of the key aspects of magnetic behavior.
This project will produce animation videos of magnetic phenomena derived from
actual experimental results and will be disseminated electronically via the
internet to reach a broad audience. The goal is to enhance the understanding of
magnetism and promote enthusiasm towards science and technology. These efforts
will utilize the existing technical expertise and experimental capabilities in
surface science, nanolithography, scanned probe microscopy, magnetic imaging,
and device fabrication. This&lt;br/&gt;project is leveraged upon the results of
an NSF CAREER award, and represents a related but distinct research
direction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;