* 0115419
* Scalable and Sustainable Technologies for Reading Instruction and Assessment
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2007
* Ronald Cole, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 09/30/2007
* USD 6,136,395.00

&lt;br/&gt;In this project a program of individualized, computer-aided reading
instruction will be implemented and assessed. The computer-aided reading
instruction is based on two classes of tools - one based on speech and animation
technology and the other on language comprehension technology. An example of the
former tool is Vocabulary Tutor which focuses on decoding practices. It includes
a 3D animated talking head synchronized with recorder or synthesized speech,
paired with illustrations and printed words that can be entered by the teacher
or the child. Children look at the images, listen to the words, see their
spelling, pronounce them, and receive feedback. An example of the second kind is
Summary Street. Summary Street is based on a statistical theory of meaning,
latent semantic analysis. Children write summaries, Summary Street automatically
compares their summaries with the text they are summarizing and provides
feedback about the content and the adequacy of their summaries. These tools are
classroom tested. This project extends the foundation of technology and
application development to a comprehensive reading program called Colorado
Literacy Tutor that will be tested throughout the state of Colorado after
testing in the Boulder School district.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;