* 0115028
* Paths of a Generation: From Socialist Up-Bringing to Post-Socialist Adulthood
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2001,09/30/2007
* Nancy Tuma, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 09/30/2007
* USD 299,090.00

Over the last decade, the USSR has split into 15 new independent countries with
distinct borders, varying kinds and levels of resources, diverse political and
economic regimes, and different degrees of success and failure in meeting the
challenges of post-socialism. Within every new country, though to varying
degrees, the old command economy and party-state have undergone substantial
change and the environment shaping people's lives has become radically
different. This transition from a rather uniform social space to a new and
diverse social landscape offers a unique natural experiment, and an
unprecedented opportunity to understand why some people are successful in taking
advantage of new emerging economic opportunities, whereas others fail to cope
with the new environment, experience downward mobility, become impoverished, and
develop pessimistic and negative views about their life and the new social
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study takes advantage of the opportunity to
study these changes using a unique data set. The "Paths of a Generation" surveys
have followed samples of a cohort of adolescents since shortly before secondary
school graduation. The first wave of interviews in 1983-1984 was followed by a
second wave in 1988-89 during the declining days of the USSR, a third wave in
1993-1994 in the early years of the post-socialist period, and a fourth wave in
1997-1999 when the adolescents had reached young adulthood. The surveys contain
data on roughly 13,000 respondents in seven diverse post-Soviet countries. The
project analyzes these data by considering how social background and early life
experiences affect later employment, income, and material well being of this
generation during a period of rapid change from socialism to
capitalism.&lt;br/&gt;