* 0115575
* INT'L. CONF.  ON POWER SYSTEM OPERATION &amp; PLANNING (ICPSOP 2002) Experiences and Challenges of Technical and Policy Reforms in a Restructured Power Industry, Nigeria, Summer 20
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2002
* Victor Dzidzienyo, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 12/31/2002
* USD 44,092.00

0115575&lt;br/&gt;Dzidzienyo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will support a
second international workshop on the experiences and challenges of both US and
African power industry restructuring activities. It will strengthen and broaden
the scope of power restructuring technical, economic and legal activities. The
experiences and lessons from the implementation of restructuring and
privatization worldwide will be directed towards the enhancement of future
activities in the energy sector. The workshop will involve energy experts,
researchers, university scholars and students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
emergence of a competitive utility environment presents new planning, operation,
reliability, and costing issues that constitute new challenges to power system
managers, practicing engineers, researchers and developers. There are already
conferences, workshops, symposiums and studies to address several of these
important issues. However, there is a lack of dialogue and a lack of visionary
goals towards identification of the most effective methods to deal with
obstacles such as computational challenges, institutional barriers, policies,
etc. In order to overcome these obstacles, the proposed international workshop
in Abauja, Nigeria is aimed at synthesizing ideas, setting directions and
developing joint projects to assist the participating
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is to organize a
focused workshop between US and Sub-Saharan Africa countries to address the
following issues: promotion of effective planning, optimal strategies and
paradigms for competitive power systems: development of dialogues through open
exchange on different power system structures, experiences and challenges in
restructuring; evaluation of available computational techniques to address
technical challenges in a restructured environment, policy analysis and social
sector issues; and to promote cooperation between US and African
utilities/vendors, universities, and policy makers in the energy sector to
address the issues: economics of restructuring, incentives for capital
investment, congestion management, distributed generation (DG) in a restructured
utility environment, reliability assessment technology, costing and pricing of
the power market, collection and billing issues, human resources/training
issues, policies, legal concerns, and environmental concerns.&lt;br/&gt;