* 0115000
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Development of High Optical Quality Tellurite Glasses of Potential Non-Linear Applications and Their Structure
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Paras Prasad, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2004
* USD 30,000.00

0115000&lt;br/&gt;Prasad&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a collaborative project between Dr. Paras N. Prasad, Department of
Chemistry and Director of Photonics Research Laboratory, State University of New
York at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York and Dr. Raouf El-Mallawany, Department of
Physics, Menofia University, Shebin El-Kom, Egypt. The objectives of the
research are to develop and study new material based on tellurite glasses for
their potential for non-linear applications. The study will include: Preparation
of high optical quality of tellurite glasses (in the bulk &amp; fiber form) by
using new different rare earth and transition metal oxides in order to get a
glass with high refractive index and low dispersion, optical measurements which
include the measurements of the refractive index at different wavelengths and
the wavelength of IR transmission, thermal &amp; Elastic characterization
measurements which include: glass transformation, crystallization temperatures,
stability, longitudinal, shear, bulk, Young's moduli, Poisson's ratio and Debye
temperature of the produced glasses, and structural determinations like x-ray
Diffraction (XRD), transmission electron microscope.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope:
The project supports collaboration between two well-recognized scientists who
have the expertise and resources for this research. The topic is important to
the field of amorphous materials, and has applications in the expanding arena of
photonics. Understanding of tellurite glasses will have an impact in the
development of pressure sensors and optical materials. The international team is
quite suited for the project, as the Egyptian scientist has significant
expertise in the synthesis of tellurite glasses of different compositions, and
the US scientist has vast expertise in material characterization. This project
has the potential to greatly benefit both sides by developing new materials that
can have wide applications. The project will promote training of Egyptian and US
graduate students who will participate in this collaborative work. This project
meets the INT objective of supporting collaborative research in areas of mutual
interest.&lt;br/&gt;