* 0115091
* Desktop Rapid Prototyping Millirobots
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Ronald Fearing, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2005
* USD 252,021.00

This research project is to develop a millirobot system for rapid prototyping of
complicated micromechatronic devices combining folded-sheet structures,
commercial sensors, and actuators. Folded sheet structures will provide not only
a method for rapid-prototyping, but also a flexible mechanical fabrication
capability for 3-dimensional mechanisms in the 1 to 10 mm size range.
Microassembly will provide the ability to construct 3-dimensional heterogenous
microsystems by joining sensors, actuators, structures, and intelligence, which
are separately fabricated, and ideally available off-the-shelf. This research
will address: (1) Flexible fabrication methods using fixtures and millirobots to
fold pre-cut sheets of material into 3D microstructures and bond in final
configurations. (2) Microassembly techniques using millirobots capable of
precisely attaching 100 micron blocks as well as 12 micron or thinner sheets
(such as strain gauges) through control of interaction forces. (3) Algorithms
which can compile an assembly plan, consisting of gripper and tool operations
and fixture locations, which can then be used to rapidly prototype a complete
microsystem, such as a 25 mm wing span micromechanical fly, including thorax
structure, strain gauges, and piezoelectric actuators.

The goal is to allow a micro-system designer to go from design to first
prototype in several hours, with additional prototypes being produced in
minutes. In the first stage of the prototype fabrication, a millirobot
containing grippers and tools customizes the workspace by bonding fixtures at
appropriate locations. The passive fixtures are designed to dramatically reduce
the complexity of the millirobot actuation, sensing, and control. In effect,
fixtures maximize off-line planning, and minimize millirobot hardware. In the
second stage of fabrication, the millirobot system can construct the prototype,
and future copies of the prototype can be quickly made without additional
workpiece setup time. A broader impact of this research will be a low-cost rapid
prototyping millirobot system which can be readily copied to provide a micro-
tool construction capability for any lab or school interested in developing
micromechatronic systems. Undergraduate students in the SUPERB Program will be
included on the research team along with graduate students.



