* 0115741
* Acquisition of an Extrusion System for Innovative Polymer Processing and New Materials Research Programs
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* George Roberts, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2004
* USD 130,000.00

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program provides
funds to North Carolina State University for the acquisition of a unique, three-
component extrusion system that would provide critically needed capability in
new materials and polymer processing research at North Carolina State
University. The extrusion system would become the cornerstone of several
research projects including (1) Supercritical Fluid Assisted Step Growth
Polymerization, (2) CO2-Asisted Depolymerization, Purification and Recycling of
Step-Growth Polymers, (3) Reactive Blending, and (4) Nano-composite Foams.
Specifically, this extrusion system will allow the principal investigators to
develop novel polymer processing techniques, investigate CO2-assisted polymeric
processing, and improve existing industrial processes. The equipment acquisition
will strengthen the polymer research already established within the University.
It will lead to many new initiatives in polymerization and polymer processing
and support a number of projects in the NSF Science and Technology Center for
Environmentally Responsible Solvents & Processes. The extrusion system will also
serve to expand the institutional capability to educate both graduate and
undergraduate students. The equipment will be used to directly benefit
undergraduate students enrolled in the Polymer Science Option. An experiment
based on the extrusion system will be introduced into, a required undergraduate
laboratory course. The equipment also will be used for demonstration and project
purposes in at least two graduate courses, polymer rheology and polymer blends
and alloys. Finally, the equipment also will be available for graduate students
and post-doctoral personnel (more than 50 campus wide) that are involved in
polymer research.

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program provides
funds to North Carolina State University for the acquisition of a unique, three-
component extrusion system that would provide critically needed capability in
new materials and polymer processing research at North Carolina State
University. The extrusion system would become the cornerstone of several
research projects. Specifically, this extrusion system will allow the principal
investigators to develop novel polymer processing techniques, investigate new
polymeric processing, and improve existing industrial processes. The equipment
acquisition will strengthen the polymer research already established within the
University. It will lead to many new initiatives in polymerization and polymer
processing and support a number of projects in the NSF Science and Technology
Center for Environmentally Responsible Solvents & Processes. The extrusion
system will also serve to expand the institutional capability to educate both
graduate and undergraduate students. The equipment will be used to directly
benefit undergraduate students enrolled in the Polymer Science Option. An
experiment based on the extrusion system will be introduced into, a required
undergraduate laboratory course. The equipment also will be used for
demonstration and project purposes in at least two graduate courses, polymer
rheology and polymer blends and alloys. Finally, the equipment also will be
available for graduate students and post-doctoral personnel (more than 50 campus
wide) that are involved in polymer research.