* 0115961
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* Larry Knox, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2003
* USD 269,000.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation program, Tennessee
Technological University will acquire acquire a variable pressure scanning
electron microscope with an energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) attachment and
ancillary sample preparation equipment for multidisciplinary, integrated
research and education. The instrument will provide a core facility for all
departments in the College of Engineering, the College of Arts and Sciences and
Tennessee Technological University's three State funded Centers of Excellence.
Specific ongoing research or proposed research in the following areas will
benefit: (1) hydration kinetics of waste materials in portland cement, (2)
controlled deposition of boron on silicon from solid dopant sources, (3)
fracture toughness determination by fractographic observation, (4) fatigue crack
front evolution tracking, (5) in situ mechanical testing of
microelectromechanical (MEMS) devices, (6) point defect and fracture mechanics
of Laves phases, (7) environmental embrittlement of intermetalic alloys, (8)
novel coatings for interconnect materials in solid oxide fuel cells, (9) trophic
interactions between Legionella and protozoa, (10) interactions of protozoa and
mycobacteria species, (11) community structure of protozoa, and (12)
identification and characterization of microfossils. The new facility will also
be used to enhance existing laboratory opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students, further develop ongoing NSF funded Course Curriculum and
Laboratory Improvement projects and promote greater interaction with local area
elementary and high schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Major
Research Instrumentation program, Tennessee Technological University (TTU) will
acquire acquire a variable pressure scanning electron microscope (SEM) with an
energy dispersive spectroscopy attachment and ancillary sample preparation
equipment for multidisciplinary, integrated research and education. TTU serves
Tennessee and the surrounding states by providing a highly ranked regional
university environment. As such, the TTU faculty is primarily involved in
applied research serving the regional industrial community. The acquisition of
instruments, such as the proposed scanning electron microscope, enables TTU to
achieve its mission and obligation to this community by providing state-of-the-
art facilities to train students, to conduct applied research for industrial
constituents and to attract and conduct basic research. The new SEM is to be a
core facility in support of a wide range of ongoing and future interdisciplinary
research and educational activities at TTU. Current research programs include
utilization of waste in portland cement, development of materials for advanced
fuel cell applications, fundamental studies regarding the mechanical behavior of
metals and ceramics, microbiology of pathogen-cell interactions and single cell
animal behavior and investigation of microfossils. The new facility will also be
used to enhance existing laboratory opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students, further develop ongoing NSF funded Course Curriculum and Laboratory
Improvement projects and promote greater interaction with local area elementary
and high schools.&lt;br/&gt;