* 0115417
* US-Egypt Workshop:  Advanced Material Characterization and Metal Manufacturing Techniques, Cairo, Egypt, December 2001
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2002
* Hassan El-Shall, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/2002
* USD 25,000.00

0115417 &lt;br/&gt;Elshall&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project supports a US-
Egypt Workshop on Advanced Materials Characterization and Metal Manufacturing
Techniques to be held in Cairo, Egypt, December 2001. The organizers are Dr.
Hassan El-Shall, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, the University
of Florida, Gainesville, Florida and Dr. Adel A. Nofal, President, Central
Metallurgical Research and Development Institute (CMRDI), Helwan, Cairo, Egypt.
The purpose of the workshop is to exchange information between the US and
Egyptian sides on advances in materials characterization and manufacturing, and
to discuss R&amp;D needs that may be met through cooperative research projects.
Topics to be included are: fine particles preparation and surface coating,
powder metallurgy, vacuum melting and coating, high pressure die casting, shell
molding of chemically bonded sand, heat treatment of super-alloys, laser use in
surface treatment, cutting and welding, and material characterization. Possible
avenues for collaboration will be discussed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: This
project enables US and Egyptian scientists to participate in a workshop to
discuss an area of importance to both countries and to identify potential
collaborative research where the two sides can complement each others'
capabilities. Dr. El-Shall is Associate Director for Research in the NSF-funded
Engineering Research Center for Particle Science and Technology at the
University of Florida. He has participated in past seminars and in cooperative
research projects with scientists at the CMRDI. Dr. Nofal is the head of the
main research center in materials science and engineering in Egypt. His
institute is well equipped to organize the workshop and to secure participation
from various academic and industrial research organizations in that country.
Among the US participants are several junior scientists. The project meets INT
objectives in supporting mutually beneficial joint workshops. This project is
being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to
scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out joint scientific
activities.