* 0115624
* Acquisition of Instrumentation to Study the Effects of Odors on Sleep Quality and Post-Sleep Performance
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Bryan Raudenbush, Wheeling Jesuit University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2002
* USD 22,059.00

The Psychophysiology Laboratory within the Department of Psychology at Wheeling
Jesuit University will purchase equipment for the construction of a sleep
research laboratory. The primary equipment will consist of a BioPac MP100 Data
Acquisition System and Samadhi Light and Sound Attenuation Chamber. The BioPac
MP100 Data Acquisition System is a flexible, easy-to-use modular system designed
to perform data collection and analysis. The software allows for recording,
analysis, and data filtering in real time and off-line. The software also
provides analysis tools for EMG, EEG, ECG, EOG, plethysmography, evoked
responses, cardiovascular hemodynamics, pulmonary function, exercise physiology,
sleep studies, in-vitro pharmacology, and psychophysiology. Accessory components
include the hardware unit, computer cards, manuals, cables, transformers,
electrode leads, galvanic skin response transducer, pulse phethysmograph
transducer, respiratory effort transducer, air flow transducer, reaction timer,
headphones, pressure transducer, variable range force transducer, stimulator,
blood pressure cuff, stethoscope, hand dynamometer, and multi-lead cables. The
Samadhi Light and Sound Attenuation Chamber is a lightweight, portable chamber
designed to provide barriers to external lights, sounds, and other stimulation
that might otherwise disrupt normal sleep. Light and temperature control
accessories make the sleep environment as comfortable as possible for the
participants, while observation cameras, a two-way intercom system, and video
recording devices are installed to provide for constant participant monitoring
and recording. The PI will use this equipment to assess the impact of odorant
administration on (1) physiological changes during sleep, (2) measures of sleep
quality and duration, and (3) measures of post-sleep cognitive performance and
wakefulness. The equipment will also be used by other departmental faculty
members in facilitating studies on social isolation, echo-location, child
psychopathology, and cognitive mapping. This equipment will enhance current
departmental research capabilities and extend the department's ability to afford
undergraduates with meaningful and technologically advanced research
experiences.