* 0115305
* DNA Profiling and Fingerprinting: Relations between Closure and Controversy
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2001,11/30/2005
* Michael Lynch, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ronald Rainger
* 11/30/2005
* USD 143,881.00

Michael Lynch, Cornell University DNA Profiling and Fingerprinting: Relations
between Closure and Controversy

This one-year project examines the role of science and technology in criminal
justice, specifically the relation of DNA profiling to traditional forms of
legal evidence. In criminal investigations, DNA profiling is used to compare
bodily traces collected at crime scenes (blood, semen, hair and hair follicles,
skin, and cheek cells) with samples taken from suspects. State and national DNA
databases are under construction worldwide. When DNA profiling was introduced in
the mid-1980s it was called "DNA fingerprinting." The nominal association with
the established method of latent fingerprint analysis suggested that the new
method would enable investigators to identify unique individuals. However,
practical, population genetic, and probabilistic aspects of DNA profiling became
controversial in the late 1980s and early 90s. Court disputes and public debates
among scientists were popularly dubbed "the DNA wars." Due to a series of legal
decisions, technical fixes, and science advisory recommendations, the
controversy is now widely declared over, and a post-closure inversion of
credibility has occurred. Where DNA "fingerprinting" once borrowed its name and
credibility from the older method of fingerprinting, it is now so strongly
trusted that it is held as a standard for judging all other forms of criminal
evidence, including latent fingerprint evidence. DNA profiling methods are being
used to challenge convictions from years past, and this has led to renewed
debate about the death penalty and widespread concern about the adequacy of the
entire criminal justice process.

The PI, Michael Lynch and the co-investigator Simon Cole have conducted
extensive research on DNA profiling and latent fingerprint analysis. Both
investigators explore how the scientific credibility now ascribed to DNA
profiling implicates older forms of criminal evidence, including "common sense"
evidence and older forensic practices like fingerprinting. The PIs intend to
interview participants in The Innocence Project -- an ongoing effort using DNA
profiling to re-open criminal convictions obtained in the pre-DNA era. They draw
upon court transcripts, case summaries and participant interviews from recent
cases in which fingerprint evidence has been challenged, in order to assess the
extent to which the now-established credibility of DNA profiling has led to
questioning of traditional forms of evidence. These data are interpreted in
light of longer term, international trends in methods of criminal
identification. The study contributes to a growing area of S&TS research on the
intertwining of law, science, and public values. It also links up with related
projects on DNA profiling and criminal databases in the US, Australia, and
Europe.

The project and its dissemination products have scholarly and educational value
by enhancing professional and public insight into some important ethical, legal,
and political concerns about the uses of scientific expertise. Some of these
concerns are about the impact of DNA databases on civil liberties and privacy,
the ability of lay persons to understand and "weigh" scientific and
probabilistic evidence, and the possibility that "objective" evidence may
obscure the continued importance of critical evaluation of evidence in relation
to the overall circumstances of a case.