* 0115409
* Collaborative Research: How Single Genes Provide Proteins to Multiple Cellular Compartments
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2001,02/29/2004
* Anita Hopper, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 02/29/2004
* USD 126,700.00

This award supports a collaborative research program from Dr. Anita K. Hopper,
Penn. State Univ. Coll. Medicine and Dr. Nancy C. Martin, Univ. Louisville that
will examine how single genes provide proteins to more than one compartment
within cells. The discovery that this occurs emerged from observations that
mutations affecting cytosolic tRNA modification also affect mitochondrial tRNA.
The enzymes making these modifications were called sorting isozymes because they
came from a single gene and carried out the same function in multiple cellular
compartments. Previous results from these investigators showed that by
alternative use of in-frame translation initiation codons the yeast genes TRM1,
MOD5 and CCA1 each encode multiple isozymes. For each, the isozyme initiating at
the first initiator codon is mitochondrial. However, for Trm1p the amino-
terminal extension is not essential for mitochondrial import and for Mod5p the
long form is also found in the cytosol. The shorter forms of the proteins can be
located in nuclei and/or the cytosol. Earlier results from this collaborative
project showed: (1) organelles can share information with the rest of the cell;
(2) isozymes can be located in more than one compartment; (3) sorting
information resides in additional sequences missing from the eubacterial and
archaeal counterparts; (4) compartments may have activity provided by more than
one isozyme; (5) mitochondrial targeting information located at amino termini
prohibits nuclear import. Despite the advances, important questions remain
because the mechanisms that underlie #4 and #5 are still not understood. Aim I
is designed to understand how Trm1p can possess both mitochondrial and nuclear
targeting information and yet not locate to the nucleus. Possible mechanisms by
which commitment to mitochondrial import occurs will be tested using a novel
system developed by the investigators that assesses where in a cell a protein
destined to mitochondria folds. Experiments will also be performed to learn
whether mRNA sorting, cytosolic retention, and/or nuclear export function to
prohibit nuclear accumulation of Trm1p-I. Sorting isozymes are not only
distributed to different organelles; they have distinct suborganellar locations.
For example, the investigators showed that two sorting isozymes have distinct
subnuclear locations; Trm1p, is located at the inner nuclear membrane (INM) and
Mod5p is located in the nucleoplasm and the nucleolus. Goals of Aim II are to
confirm and characterize motif(s) specifying INM location and to identify gene
products that tether Trm1p to the INM. Yeast mutants that fail to appropriately
locate Trm1p to the INM will be characterized. The studies in Aim II will not
only address how sorting isozymes locate to the correct suborganellar locations,
but, in addition, will provide information concerning nuclear architecture and
nuclear biogenesis - an important area of cell biology not understood for any
eukaryote.