* 0115078
* Rop GTPase Signaling Networks:  Roles in Development and Stress Responses
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2004
* Zhenbiao Yang, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Susan J. Lolle
* 09/30/2004
* USD 300,001.00

0115078&lt;br/&gt;Yang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Guanine nucleotide-binding proteins
(G proteins) are universal molecular switches that control the flow of
extracellular signals to intracellular signal transduction pathways in
eukaryotic organisms. Arabidopsis possesses a unique subfamily of small G
proteins, termed Rop. Rop regulates many signal transduction pathways in
Arabidopsis. This proposed research is focused on a Rop-dependent pathway that
controls the morphogenesis of leaf epidermal pavement cells. Because plant cells
are encased in cell walls and are non-motile, cell morphogenesis is particularly
important for plant growth and development. Having a unique cell shape with
interlocking lobes and sinuses, epidermal pavement cells provide a useful model
system for studying the mechanism of cell morphogenesis in plants. Previous
studies using transgenic expression of Rop2 dominant mutant genes suggest that
one or more Rops controls the formation of lobes. However, these studies did not
reveal which of the 11 Arabidopsis Rop GTPases participate in the signaling
pathway that controls the morphogenesis of pavement cells. Furthermore, other
components in this pathway are unknown. As a first step in the long-term goal of
elucidating the molecular mechanism of cell morphogenesis in Arabidopsis, this
proposed work contains two major aims. First, knockout mutants for Arabidopsis
Rop genes will be used to determine which Rop gene(s) controls the morphogenesis
of leaf pavement cells. Second, components of the Rop-dependent morphogenesis
pathway will be identified using the yeast two-hybrid method complemented with a
high throughput proteomics approach. This research plan is expected to identify
new genes that control cell morphogenesis and plant development. These genes may
prove to be useful for genetically manipulating plant forms that are beneficial
to agricultural and horticultural practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;