* 0115166
* Development and Implementation of Algorithms for Stochastic Integer Programming
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Nikolaos Sahinidis, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Stephen G. Nash
* 08/31/2005
* USD 232,598.00

This research addresses stochastic optimization problems that are further
complicated by the presence of integer decision variables to model logical and
other discrete decisions in a multi-period or multistage setting. To cope with
the computational complexity of multistage stochastic integer optimization
problems, this research will develop new methodology, algorithms, and prototype
software. Fundamental properties of the value function of integer programs will
be exploited in conjunction with inherent decomposability of these optimization
problems in order to develop algorithms that scale well with problem size. A
large number of problems in production planning and scheduling, location,
transportation, finance, and engineering design require that decisions be made
in the presence of uncertainty. Uncertainty, for instance, governs the prices of
fuels, the availability of electricity, and the demand for chemicals. Stochastic
optimization is the branch of applied mathematics that provides systematic tools
to prudent decision-making under uncertainty. A key difficulty in stochastic
optimization is in dealing with an uncertainty space that is huge and which
leads to very large-scale optimization models.

The developed algorithms will be implemented in the investigator's widely
distributed global optimization package BARON and made available to the research
community. If successful, this project could have profound implications in
decision-making under uncertainty in many sectors of the economy.