* 0115801
* Acquisition of Instrumentation for Marine Genomics and Proteomics
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Brian Palenik, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Farmer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 253,959.00

#0115801, "Acquisition of instrumentation for marine genomics and proteomics."
(NSF Major Research Instrumentation Program). PI: R.S. Burton
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to
Dr. Burton at Scripps Institution of Oceanography (SIO) for the acquisition of
instrumentation for analyses of genes and their expression in marine organisms.
The instrumentation will enable researchers to study genome-wide responses to
environmental stress at both the nucleic acid and protein levels and will form a
core facility for use in the research projects of ten different laboratories at
SIO. Although the specific research goals vary with the laboratory, the primary
questions motivating the projects are similar: What are the molecular mechanisms
by which organisms adapt to specific marine environments? What impact do these
organismal adaptations have on ecosystem function?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific research projects will consist of analyses of
microbial communities in the ocean, including both quantitative identification
of community members and functional composition of the communities. Both free-
living microbes and those involved in symbiotic relationships with invertebrates
will be analyzed with a focus on adaptations to temperature, pressure and
nutrient regimes. Other studies will address interactions between components of
the nuclear and mitochondrial genomes of invertebrate species and signal
transduction pathways across marine invertebrate cell membranes.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;In addition to enabling multiple specific research projects, this
grant will facilitate SIO's mission of training the next generation of ocean
scientists. SIO students already take a variety of genomics classes and seminars
across the entire UCSD campus; yet without easy access and hands-on training
using modern instrumentation, students have been unable to take full advantage
of existing technologies in designing their own dissertation research programs.
This grant will enhance the research and training environment at SIO so that the
institution will continue to attract top faculty, postdoctoral researchers and
graduate students and provide a state-of-the-art research
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;