* 0115185
* Time-Symmetric Counterfactual Propositions in Quantum Theory
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Ruth Kastner, Kastner                 Ruth           E
* Standard Grant
* Keith R. Benson
* 08/31/2002
* USD 11,900.00

Ruth Kastner Time-Symmetric Counterfactual Propositions in Quantum Theory

Many interpretational problems in quantum theory involve counterfactual
statements (statements of the form, \If it were that P, then it would be that
Q"). In recent years, there has been controversy over the validity of
counterfactual claims in explicitly time symmetric formulations of quantum
theory such as that of Yakir Aharonov and Lev Vaidman, and that of Ulrich
Mohrhoff. The goal of the proposed project is twofold: (a) to investigate
precisely how such counterfactuals must differ from conventional counterfactuals
and (b) whether a consistent and/or physically meaningful account of time-
symmetric quantum counterfactual is possible.

The research plan is to conduct a thorough survey of the literature on
counterfactuals, in order to take account of existing theories and to ascertain
the domain of those theories (i.e., the kinds of counterfactual claims addressed
by those theories). Then an analysis follows of the salient features of
traditional counterfactual claims and of the novel counterfactual claims
addressed by the current proposal (hereinafter \novel counterfactuals"), in
order to uncover essential similarities and (primarily) differences. Next the
project turns to a critical analysis of the predominant traditional
counterfactual theories in light of differences uncovered between novel
counterfactual claims and the traditional counterfactual claims. Such an
analysis should provide at least a partial answer to the question of whether
traditional theories can be applied to novel counterfactuals, possibly with some
modifications. If it is determined that traditional counterfactual theories are
fundamentally incompatible with novel counterfactuals, then an attempt follows
to lay out the essential features of an alternative counterfactual theory
(addressing the first point), which will then be critically analyzed (addressing
the second point) . If the result of this second point is negative, alternatives
to the use of counterfactual measurements are explored, to establish meaningful
time-symmetric \objective" quantum mechanical probabilities such as that sought
by Mohrhoff.