* 0115870
* Arabidopsis 2010: Functional Analysis of the  Ubiquitin-Protein Liagase (E3)Families in Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2001,02/28/2007
* Richard Vierstra, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 02/28/2007
* USD 3,341,763.00

The ubiquitin (Ub)/26S proteasome proteolytic pathway plays an integral role in
the growth, development, homeostasis, and defense of plants by selectively
removing abnormal polypeptides and short-lived regulatory proteins. In this
pathway, proteins are first covalently tagged with Ubs; these substrates are
then degraded by the 26S proteasome with the concomitant release of the Ubs for
reuse. The Ub-protein ligases (or E3s) determine the specificity of Ub
conjugation and hence control the selectivity of the system. Their importance in
plants is best demonstrated by the fact that the Arabidopsis genome encodes over
900 different E3s. Preliminary genetic analyses of just a few have identified
important roles for E3s in hormone and stress responses, light signaling,
circadian rhythms, enzymatic regulation, and pattern
formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To help define the depth and breath of
ubiquitination in plants, this project will analyze the Arabidopsis E3 families
in detail. Bioinformatic approaches will be used to assemble the E3s into
subfamilies. For representative examples, protein interaction techniques will
assign each with appropriate accessory factors and biochemical assays will
confirm that each has Ub-ligase activity. Their expression patterns and
locations will be examined by DNA microarrays and by analysis of GFP-E3 fusions.
Yeast two-hybrid and mass spectrometric techniques will identify possible
substrates. Functions will be further explored by the phenotypic analysis of
appropriate Arabidopsis mutants. All information will be released to the
scientific community in a freely accessible public web site
(http://www.hort.wisc.edu/vierstra/vierstra1.htm). The results generated will
form an essential framework for understanding E3 diversity, help reveal specific
functions for each E3 type, and will develop a database of proteins whose
abundance is affected by Ub-mediated proteolysis. Collectively, the project will
provide comprehensive information on a large and important cluster of
Arabidopsis genes/proteins that ultimately can be used to devise new strategies
to alter proteolysis when it interferes with crop
productivity&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;