* 0115919
* Acquisition of Multi-Imaging System For Use in an Undergraduate Institution
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Anne Houde, Lake Forest College
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Farmer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 93,230.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. Kirk, Houde, Darnell, and DebBurman in the
Biology Department at Lake Forest College to acquire a state-of-the-art multi-
imaging system to further biological research and enhance the undergraduate
biology curriculum. Faculty in the biology department currently utilize
molecular techniques to research basic aspects of biology such as chromosome
replication, neural development and degeneration, and the evolution of sexual
behavior. The multi-imaging system will allow the department to transition from
conventional analyses of protein and DNA to a highly sensitive and quantitative
approach utilizing fluorescent and radioactive signal detection.

Faculty-student collaborative research and teaching at Lake Forest College
relies heavily on the use of modern molecular techniques in order to visualize a
particular class of DNA or protein, separated from all other molecules of its
kind. For example, Dr. Karen Kirk studies the interaction of specific proteins
that bind to telomeres, the ends of chromosomes, in the cell cycle of the
protozoan, Tetrahymena. Dr. Diana Darnell studies the expression of certain
genes affecting neural development in chick, and Dr. Shubhik DebBurman studies
the effects of protein-remodeling factors on human disease-associated proteins
in yeast. Dr. Anne Houde will initiate a new molecular fingerprinting project in
her ongoing studies of the evolution of sexual behavior and color polymorphism
in guppies. The multi-imaging system is so versatile that it can be used in all
these research contexts. Data will be collected much more efficiently and
quantitatively from a variety of techniques, including agarose and acrylamide
gel electrophoresis of nucleic acids and proteins, polymerase chain reaction
(PCR), colony library screening, and Southern, Northern, and Western blotting.
Acquisition of the multi-imaging system will allow more rapid processing of the
data and hence greater throughput in laboratory procedures and will extend
quantification capabilities to allow faculty and students to employ new
experimental approaches.

Lake Forest College and its Biology Department are committed to an educational
mission that stresses integration of research and teaching and provides an
environment in which students can engage in original, publishable research.
Students majoring in biology at Lake Forest College receive training in modern
research methods through these research programs and through their course work.
The undergraduate biology curriculum emphasizes student-designed investigation
using current technology. This kind of environment in small colleges has been
shown to contribute disproportionately to the pool of future research
scientists. Lake Forest College has a strong track record in collaborative
faculty-student research and will benefit substantially from the availability of
a state-of-the-art multi-imaging system. Ultimately, the enhancement of the
research and training capabilities of the biology department will help attract
larger numbers of talented students interested in research and research careers.
Currently, the majority of biology majors at Lake Forest College are women and a
significant number are minority students. The college is strongly committed to
recruitment of underrepresented groups and improved research facilities will
help to achieve this goal.

