* 0115600
* Acquisition of an HPLC System for Undergraduate Research in Insect Chemical Defense
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Ann Yezerski, King's College
* Standard Grant
* Angela V. Klaus
* 08/31/2003
* USD 25,161.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Yezerski at King's College to acquire an High
Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) system with which to study the chemical
defense system of the flour beetle, Tribolium confusum . Two immediate projects
have been designed to address the questions of function and effect of the
production of these defenses. One project will address the effect benzoquinone
compounds have on conspecifics since these compounds are known to cause death to
the beetles themselves. This experiment will correlate levels of chemical
production in a series of recombinant inbred lines of beetles with levels of
survival using representatives from the same lines. Using the HPLC equipment, a
mean level of individual benzoquinone production within a line can be measured
and these values compared to the results of standard LD50 tests for the lines
when representatives are placed in an environment where no absorbent material
protects them from their own excretions &lt;br/&gt; Current and future
experiments using the HPLC will address correlations of the chemical defense
trait with other behavioral and physical factors including body weight, cuticle
color, and fecundity. Other planned research will measure the levels of
benzoquinones in natural flour beetle populations in order to assess the
evolutionary pressures conferred by natural environments. Such resulting
information can not only help elucidate how a complex defense system arises
evolutionarily but also help enlighten us on how this stored grain product pest
can be better controlled. Additionally, the HPLC system has uses far beyond the
measurement of beetle exudates. With only one other antiquated HPLC available
for the entire college, the acquisition of this additional modern system will
allow for other undergraduate research projects in both biology and chemistry
that utilizes this highly utilized piece of equipment. By conducting meaningful
research using modern equipment in which there is a demand for competent
researchers, undergraduates at King's College can have the opportunity to be
well prepared for whatever career goals they strive to reach whether these be in
industry or further schooling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;