* 0115981
* MRI:  Acquisition of an Amplified Ultrashort-Pulse Laser System for Ultrafast and Spectroscopic Studies of Condensed Matter Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Peter Saeta, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2004
* USD 227,807.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program will allow Harvey
Mudd College to acquire laser system to support research on the ultrafast
dynamics of electrons in metals and on the nonlinear optical behavior of
ultrathin semiconductors and metals. The system will produce a femtosecond laser
beam at a repetition rate of one kilohertz. This will greatly facilitate pump-
probe measurements to monitor the non-equilibrium distribution of photoexcited
electrons in metals. These measurements will provide information on both the
energy- and momentum-scattering rates in metals and permit quantitative
comparison to theories of electron dynamics in metals. Through continuum
generation and frequency shifting, the laser system will allow spectral
characterization of the nonlinear optical response of thin semiconductor films,
providing valuable information on the strength of both bulk and surface sources
of second-harmonic generation in centrosymmetric semiconductors.
&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate students will be trained in the operation of this
state-of-the-art femtosecond laser facility. It will also be available as a
resource to the members of the Claremont Consortium&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program will allow Harvey Mudd
College to acquire laser system to support research on the ultrafast dynamics of
electrons in metals and on the nonlinear optical behavior of ultrathin
semiconductors and metals. The high density of mobile electrons inside a metal
causes electrons to interact on extremely fast time scales. A detailed
understanding of these interactions is important for understanding how metals
catalyze chemical reactions and how atoms adsorb on metal surfaces. The new
laser system will permit researchers at Harvey Mudd College to perform time-
resolved measurements of the changes to the electronic system in a metal caused
by an intense pulse of laser light lasting less than fifty femtoseconds (1 fs =
10-15 s). These measurements will provide information on both the energy- and
momentum-scattering rates in metals and permit quantitative comparison to
theories of electron dynamics in metals. The laser system can provide useful
information on both the structures of the semiconductor crystal and on the
quality of surfaces. Spectroscopic study of the harmonic response will provide
useful information on the relative importance of surface and bulk phenomena and
will permit detailed comparisons to calculations of the nonlinear response of
materials.&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate research students will be trained in the
operation of this state-of-the-art femtosecond laser facility. It will also be
available as a resource to the members of the Claremont Consortium.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;