* 0115717
* Evaluation of Low Dietary Iron as a Nutritional Adaptation  to Infectious Disease
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2002
* Bettina Shell-Duncan, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 06/30/2002
* USD 65,610.00

Anemia affects an estimated 700 million people worldwide. In most cases it is
regarded as a disorder arising from inadequate dietary iron that requires
treatment with supplementation. In recent years, however, research has
demonstrated that low circulating iron levels can arise from a well-regulated
non-specific immunological defense against infection, the iron withholding
response. This response protects a human host by sequestering iron needed by
microorganisms for growth. The research proposed here will investigate whether
low circulating iron from low dietary intake similarly protects the host from
infection in a high disease load environment. Specifically, this research will
weigh the potential protective benefits of moderate iron deficiency against the
possible adverse consequences, particularly in relation to the specific immune
response. This study will investigate the effect of iron deficiency on one
aspect of the specific immune response, cell-mediated immunity, using blood
spots collected on filter paper from 314 Kenyan children. The investigators will
refine an assay for serum transferring receptor, a marker that is currently
considered the gold standard for assessing iron status. Commercial assay kits
that are designed to be used with venous blood samples will be modified for use
on dried capillary blood spots, resulting in an easy, minimally invasive,
"field-friendly" method that will also be useful for future community-based
assessments. The results of this study will contribute to a broader
understanding of the functional tradeoffs of mild iron deficiency and the
nutritional ecology of disease resistance.