* 0115672
* Tunable Laser for Characterizing Ultra Dense Wavelength Selective Devices and Integrated Optic Systems for Fiber Telecom Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2002
* Raymond Kostuk, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Filbert J. Bartoli
* 05/31/2002
* USD 19,333.00

One of the goals of optical fiber communication system design and development is
the realization of the full 25 THz bandwidth capability of this transmission
medium. One approach currently being pursued is to transmit a large number of
spectral channels at high modulation rates within the gain profile of doped
optical fiber amplifiers. Therefore in order for new device technologies to be
acceptable they must be characterized with high spectral resolution probes
(0.10-0.20 nm; 10-25 GHz at 1550 nm) over relatively large spectral bandwidths
(C-Band: 1528-1561 nm; L-Band: 1561-1620 nm). One approach to accomplishing this
task is to use a tunable laser source to probe the device to measure its
spectral properties over a range of wavelengths. The polarization of the
incident beam can also be changed to examine the sensitivity to polarization
variations that may occur in a length of fiber. The source output can also serve
as a continuous wave optical source that can then be modulated with an external
modulator to examine the performance of a modulator at different wavelengths. In
this regard a tunable laser source is an extremely versatile tool for
investigating many different aspects of high performance fiber optic devices and
systems.&lt;br/&gt;In addition to using a tunable laser source for research
purposes it also is a very useful instrument for education purposes. It can be
used in laboratory experiments that evaluate devices found in modern fiber optic
communications systems such as fiber Bragg gratings, spectral gain variation of
optical amplifiers, and amplifier gain equalization techniques. In addition it
can be used to train both undergraduate and graduate students in DWDM device
characterization techniques.&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this proposal is a request
for a tunable laser diode with a spectral resolution of 0.02 rim and a tuning
range from 1510-1580 nm. This source will provide our lab with the capability to
investigate the performance of devices and materials for wavelength selective
operations in fiber optic communications systems. it will also allow us to
significantly improve the quality and relevance of laboratory experiments that
we can offer in our classes on fiber optics and undergraduate and graduate
research projects. A source of this type is currently not available for our
research and educational facilities and is a significant obstacle to our
efforts. The importance of acquiring an instrument of this type is underscored
by the commitment from the University of Arizona to cost share one-third of the
cost of the laser.&lt;br/&gt;