* 0115694
* Device Controller Synthesis for Systems of Interacting Discrete-State Components
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Lawrence Holloway, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2005
* USD 229,006.00

With complex systems, monolithic models become impractical and it
becomes&lt;br/&gt;necessary to model them through subsystems and components.
Development of control&lt;br/&gt;logic for such systems also becomes complex,
unless the structure of the subsystems&lt;br/&gt;and components can be exploited
in a systematic way. In this proposal, we consider the&lt;br/&gt;development of
methods that use the structure of discrete-state model components
for&lt;br/&gt;synthesizing control logic and diagnostic information. These
methods are automated,&lt;br/&gt;generating formal control logic models that can
be analyzed, generating control software&lt;br/&gt;that can be executed, and
generating diagnostic models that can provide fault
diagnosis&lt;br/&gt;hypotheses. Such automated methods would reduce controller
development time, would&lt;br/&gt;provide enhanced reliability compared to
manually developed controllers, and would be&lt;br/&gt;automatically
reconfigured as underlying system designs are modified. In this
research,&lt;br/&gt;we propose to develop such tools and techniques by building
upon our prior research. In&lt;br/&gt;our previous research, techniques were
developed for: modeling common components&lt;br/&gt;of manufacturing systems;
assembling such components together to represent custom&lt;br/&gt;system
designs; synthesizing control logic called "taskblocks" for control of
those&lt;br/&gt;components; and assembling those taskblocks together
sequentially and hierarchically&lt;br/&gt;in order to achieve given
specifications. Software tools were developed for graphical&lt;br/&gt;entry of
the component models and the specifications, and for automatically
converting&lt;br/&gt;the synthesized control logic into C++ code. An
automatically synthesized software&lt;br/&gt;"supervisor" then coordinates the
multiple concurrent control activities, steering the&lt;br/&gt;system around
undesired states. The models we consider are a form of discrete
event&lt;br/&gt;system, and the synthesis techniques build upon discrete event
control methods.&lt;br/&gt;There are several unresolved issues with this current
approach that will be addressed in&lt;br/&gt;the proposed research. One major
emphasis of this work is recognizing and exploiting&lt;br/&gt;the multiple
layers of interaction with components of the system. The modeling
frame-&lt;br/&gt;work and our current analysis methods are ideally suited for
such models of interacting&lt;br/&gt;components, but they must be extended in
order to compactly represent components&lt;br/&gt;with large state spaces. A
second issue involves the timed dynamics of the system.&lt;br/&gt;Some
activities may be time critical, such as turning off an actuator within a
certain&lt;br/&gt;period of time or immediately upon receipt of a sensing. The
synthesized control&lt;br/&gt;software should consider such time issues, and
should ensure appropriate priorities&lt;br/&gt;among various potentially
concurrent activities. Finally, we propose to extend our
current&lt;br/&gt;software tools to become a resource for other researchers and
educators. This would&lt;br/&gt;allow others to test, develop, and evaluate
other techniques using our graphical system&lt;br/&gt;editor, our code synthesis
tool, and our hardware interface techniques. The automated&lt;br/&gt;control
synthesis and diagnostic synthesis techniques will be demonstrated using
both&lt;br/&gt;manufacturing and embedded control applications.