* 0115298
* US-Turkey Cooperative Research: Field Mapping of Quaternary Glaciations in Turkey
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2001,01/31/2004
* Marek Zreda, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 01/31/2004
* USD 30,000.00

0115298&lt;br/&gt;Zreda&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is for
support of a cooperative project by Dr. Marek Zreda, Department of Hydrology and
Water Resources, University of Arizona, Tucson and &lt;br/&gt;Dr. Attila Ciner,
Geological Engineering Department, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey. The
investigators will conduct field research to map late quaternary glacial
deposits and paleolake shorelines across Turkey in order to quantify equilibrium
line altitude (ELA) depression during glacial advances and collect samples for
cosmogenic dating. A central motivation for this study is to explore the shorter
time scale (Henrich and Dansgaard-Oeschger events) synchrony of climate
variation between the North Atlantic and southwest Asian. Because Turkey lies at
an interesting climatic crossroads, it may provide valuable chronological data.
Little is known about the glacial history of Turkey and this research may lead
to new findings on the climatic history of the Eurasian subtropics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: This collaboration involves two scientists with
complementary expertise. Zreda is a leader in the field of cosmogenic dating of
glacial feature. The Turkish researchers will organize fieldwork, provide access
to scientific materials (including aerial photographs and maps that may not
otherwise be accessible.), and provide the knowledge of the geology of Turkey.
The US investigators will design and conduct sample collections program and will
provide the technical expertise in the future isotopic dating. Together the two
sides will conduct all field investigations and mapping. The proposed activity
has great potential to advance knowledge within the field and across disciplines
and contribute to educational curriculum. &lt;br/&gt;