* 0115984
* MRI:  Acquisition of Equipment to Study the Structural and Chemical Properties of Molecular Subtances Using Positron Annihilation
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* David Schoepf, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2004
* USD 76,700.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation program, Bucknell
University will acquire equipment that is central to for the study positron
annihilation in molecular solids. When positrons are injected in molecular
solids they can form a positroniums, which are bound states with electrons.
Along with the annihilation rate of free positrons, measurement of annihilation
lifetime of positronium in molecular solids provides both chemical and
structural information about the molecular solid. The instrument acquired
through this award will allow measurement of both positron annihilation lifetime
spectra and Doppler broadened annihilation spectra from in an effort to
investigate these properties of a variety of molecular solids. Crucial timing
resolution of two hundred picoseconds and energy resolution of the order of one
kiloelectronvolts will be achieved. The instrumentation will be used in
supervised research opportunities for undergraduates using positron annihilation
to study structural and chemical properties of materials such as zeolites and
will support an existing REU summer research program.

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation program, Bucknell
University will acquire equipment that is central to for the study positron
annihilation in molecular solids. When positrons are injected in molecular
solids they can form a positroniums, which are bound states with electrons.
Along with the annihilation rate of free positrons, measurement of annihilation
lifetime of positronium in molecular solids provides both chemical and
structural information about the molecular solid. The instrument acquired
through this award will allow measurement of both positron annihilation lifetime
spectra and Doppler broadened annihilation spectra from in an effort to
investigate these properties of a variety of molecular solids. Crucial timing
resolution of two hundred picoseconds and energy resolution of the order of one
kiloelectronvolts will be achieved. The instrumentation will be used in
supervised research opportunities for undergraduates using positron annihilation
to study structural and chemical properties of materials such as zeolites and
will support an existing REU summer research program.