* 0115944
* Acquisition of Research Insrumentation for Molecular and Cellular Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Kazuo Hiraizumi, Gettysburg College
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 08/31/2004
* USD 97,810.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Steven James and Dr. Kazuo Hiraizumi, co-
principal investigators at Gettysburg College, to procure two major items of
equipment through the Major Research Instrumentation Program of the NSF. A
computerized system that integrates photodocumentation with image analysis and a
preparative ultracentrifuge will allow the two faculty and their students to
conduct research that cannot be executed with the equipment currently available
at Gettysburg College. The goals of this grant are to expand the scope and
quality of training in molecular and cellular biology for undergraduates.
Gettysburg College provides a research-intensive learning environment for
undergraduates in the sciences. Experiential, hands-on learning is encouraged by
requiring student-faculty collaborative research for the B.S. degrees in Biology
and Biochemistry/Molecular Biology (BMB). Students in these degree programs
write a research prospectus, spend at least a full semester on their research,
write a scientific paper on their work that is evaluated by faculty, and present
their research to their peers during an end-of-semester colloquium. All BMB
majors are required to conduct individualized research and over 60% of Biology
majors choose the B.S. track; a substantial number of these students go on to
graduate school. The instrumentation procured with NSF support will allow
undergraduates working with Drs. James and Hiraizumi to perform cutting-edge
research, thereby giving them excellent preparation for graduate school and
careers in science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The focus of Dr. James' research is
the regulation of the cell cycle, a carefully orchestrated series of events that
coordinates chromosome replication with nuclear and cell division. Dr. James
studies the role of genes that regulate this process, using as a model system
the bread mold Aspergillus. The focus of Dr. Hiraizumi's research is population
and evolutionary genetics of gene regulation. He studies genes that code for a
group of digestive enzymes called peptidases, using the fruit fly Drosophila
melanogaster. Both faculty employ techniques of molecular genetics, cell
biology, and biochemistry in their research. In these fields, a most fundamental
question involves the relationship between the DNA sequence of a gene and the
function of the protein that it encodes. Mutations in the sequence of DNA often
cripple or destroy the resulting protein, which can produce devastating effects.
To understand the relationship between DNA sequence, protein function, and the
physiological effects of mutations requires sophisticated instrumentation for
isolating molecules and measuring their activity. First, the ultracentrifuge
provided by support from this NSF-MRI grant will enable isolation of large
amounts of maximally pure DNA and protein. This preparative ultracentrifuge
subjects particles or molecules to high centrifugal force and separates them
based on differences in their density, size or shape. Second, the
photodocumentation /image analysis system will be used to measure the activity
of both normal and mutant proteins. These proteins will be isolated and purified
using the ultracentrifuge, or by a different technique called gel
electrophoresis. Gel electrophoresis separates molecules through a gel matrix
subjected to electrical current. DNA can also be separated in this manner. To
detect and measure the molecules of interest, they are chemically stained or
radioactively labeled. The resulting signals are stored as electronic files,
which can be analyzed for quantitative differences with a high degree of
sensitivity and precision. This helps to determine which genes are turned on
under various conditions, how much of the protein is present, and whether there
are differences in the activity of a protein between genetically different
individuals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The research conducted by these faculty and
their students addresses questions that have potential medical applications. For
example, many genes that regulate cell division can undergo mutation that leads
to cancer. In all organisms, cell division is governed by a similar set of
genes. Thus, investigating the regulation of genes that control cell division in
a simple, easy-to-study model organism such as Aspergillus aids in understanding
the molecular and cellular processes leading to cancer in more complex, less
tractable organisms such as humans. Recently, scientists discovered surprising
similarity in the DNA sequence of human and fruit fly genes. A mutation in a
peptidase-coding gene could produce debilitating effects, such as a form of
neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis, a fatal hereditary neurodegenerative disease in
humans. The use of the fruit fly peptidases as a model provides information on
how mutations affect the physiological function of these enzymes in other
organisms, including humans. Thus, with support from the NSF-MRI grant,
Gettysburg College undergraduates will benefit from expanded opportunities to
perform modern research on relevant biological problems. These experiences will
in turn prepare them for graduate studies in molecular and cellular biology and
careers in biomedical research.&lt;br/&gt;