* 0115480
* SDEST: Teaching Research Ethics - An Institutional Change Model
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2001,02/28/2005
* Thomas Van Valey, Western Michigan University
* Continuing Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 02/28/2005
* USD 225,000.00

This project is designed to implement a process that will alter the
institutional climate at Western Michigan University with respect to research
ethics. Its objective is to communicate, rapidly and effectively, information
about research-related ethical issues and decision-making across the several
colleges that make up the university. The long term goal is to increase the
level of ethical research behavior and decision-making within the university.
The short term goals are: first, to create a group of change agents within the
institution (the Research Ethics Fellows) who, along with the project team, will
be able to help train others, serve as resource people for their peers, and
model ethical behavior in research; second, to put in place a comprehensive and
systematic approach to teaching research ethics that not only cuts across
disciplines (colleges/departments) but also across levels (faculty/graduate
student); and third, to implement a structural approach to research ethics
training that becomes part of the institutional fabric itself. The project team
is proposing a curriculum in the area of research ethics which includes a series
of instructional modules. Following a baseline survey of faculty and graduate
students, the modules will be presented in a workshop (with a keynote speaker),
to a set of ten faculty/graduate student teams (20 Research Ethics Fellows)
representing departments across the institution. The modules will subsequently
be offered to the faculty, graduate students, and staff of the university
community. During this same time, the Fellows will continue to meet with one
another in study groups, carry out projects, and also engage in dissemination
efforts within their departments and colleges. Finally, the project will sponsor
a university-wide conference, again with a keynote speaker, at which the
research team and the Fellows will present the results of their various
projects, and share their dissemination efforts. A follow-up survey of faculty
and graduate students will also be carried out. Along with the baseline and
follow-up surveys (covering knowledge, attitude, and behaviors of faculty and
graduate students at WMU), evaluation will include the learning improvement and
the satisfaction of all people who participate in the instructional modules. The
second year will follow the same structure, with another set of ten
faculty/graduate student teams from across the institution. In addition, the
previous Fellows will assist the project team in presenting the instructional
modules during the year and continue to participate in the study groups.
Evaluation efforts will also continue. Furthermore, representatives from other
post-secondary institutions in the region will be invited to attend the spring
conference as part of an effort to extend the impact of the project to other
institutions. The institution has committed resources to continue the program
after the initial award period.