* 0115585
* Development of Balloon System for Continuous Measurement of Hurricane Eye Properties
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2002,08/31/2003
* Kerry Emanuel, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lydia Gates
* 08/31/2003
* USD 160,000.00

In order to obtain the greatly needed in-situ, continuous information on
hurricane properties, a balloon measuring system will be developed that can be
deployed from aircraft into the eyes of hurricanes. The hybrid system includes a
natural shaped balloon to carry the measurement equipment and an attached drogue
near the surface to maintain the balloon altitude. The hypothesis is that the
inflow into the center of a hurricane will keep the balloon system in or very
near the eye for the life of the storm over water. The goal is to obtain
continuous measurements in the storm center where major fluctuations of storm
intensity occur. Furthermore, the measurements will serve as "ground truth" for
satellite-based techniques for estimating storm intensity. The project is the
Phase I of a broader-scale effort. In this phase, the balloon system will be
developed and tested in controlled environments, in numerical simulations and,
to a limited extent, in the field. If successful, a Phase II proposal will be
submitted for more extensive field-testing in real hurricanes, and possible
operational implementation. A subcontractor, Modelsym, Inc, will carry out the
fabrication of the balloon system. The planned work, if proven to be successful,
would be of tremendous value in providing an inexpensive approach to obtaining
valuable data for hurricanes.