* 0115021
* US-Turkey Cooperative Research:  Experimental and Theoretical Investigation of Nanoscale Materials and Devices Based on Carbon Nanotubes
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2004
* Oguz Gulseren, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/2004
* USD 31,040.00

0115021&lt;br/&gt;Gulseren&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project is to
support a cooperative research project by Dr. Oguz Gulseren, Materials Science
and Engineering Department, Dr. John Fischer, Physics Department, both at the
University of Pennsylvania, and Dr. Selim Ciraci, Department of Physics, Bilkent
University, Ankara, Turkey. They plan to use advanced techniques to study the
electronic and structural properties of carbon nanotubes and their
functionalized derivatives. In particular they will investigate the phase
behavior of the carbon nanotubes under external pressure and strain, and their
interactions with hydrogen and various transition metals. The work will involve
first principles calculations by groups from the Universities of Pennsylvania
and Bilkent, as well as neutron scattering measurements performed by scientists
at the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: Nanoscience is an emerging field with promising
important applications. The results to be obtained from this project should help
guide other activities focused on novel technological applications such as
nanodevices and hydrogen storage etc. The scientific methods to be used by the
University of Pennsylvania and by Bilkent University are complementary in terms
of material synthesis, measurement capabilities, and theoretical expertise. The
American PIs have excellent track records in NSF-supported research in carbon
nanotubes. Dr. Ciraci has participated in a previous NSF international program
that had good results in terms of scientific progress and publications. The
collaboration between American and Turkish groups will result in synergistic
enhancements of the research. This project meets INT criteria for supporting
meritorious collaborative research of mutual benefit to the US and the foreign
country.&lt;br/&gt;