* 0115378
* Organizational Innovation and Interactive Technology among NGOs in Postsocialist Eastern Europe
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* David Stark, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* John L. Naman
* 06/30/2005
* USD 316,592.00

This ambitious proposal by a researcher experienced at Eastern Bloc
investigation seeks to examine organizational innovation and interactive
technology use among Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) in Postsocialist
Eastern Europe, with the collaborative assistance of local on-site associates
and foreign counterpart investigators and hosts. Drawing upon recent
developments in organization theory, especially work at the Santa Fe institute
on self-organizing, non-hierarchical systems as organizational forms that have
the requisite flexibility for continuing adaptability in rapidly changing
environments, the researchers propose to study the coevolution of organizational
forms and interactive technologies by focusing on NGOs in four East Central
European Societies, gathering data from 100 NGOs in Poland, the Czech Republic,
Slovakia and Hungary. Data collection will include field surveys augmented by
in-depth, ethnographic studies of 20 of these organizations to provide more
nuanced accounts of the lines of causation among critical variables in the
study. NGOs are particularly appropriate for study because they are increasingly
being pushed to move beyond their existing roles to facilitate economic and
social dynamism, assisting their societies in developing sources of innovation
and the capacity to generate it. Such capacity depends on both a rich
associational life (badly atrophied under communism) and a requisite variety of
organizational forms (which did not exist under communism). Information
technology can play an important role in facilitating both aspects of generative
capability. By examining variation across types of organizations among countries
in the region, the researchers will chart how innovation in the adoption and use
of interactive technologies is shaped by organizational form and, in turn, how
new technologies facilitate organizational innovation. This study's robust and
contemporary theoretical grounding and its multidisciplinary, multicultural
setting promise especially interesting insights, especially as so much of prior
organizational theory has been colored by a North American bias and the
assumption of universality in findings.