* 0115836
* An Integrated Head for Optically Assisted (Hybrid) Magnetic Recording
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* James Bain, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 08/31/2004
* USD 282,000.00

ABSTRACT for Proposal No. ECS-0115836&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hybrid recording is a
new recording paradigm that seeks to overcome&lt;br/&gt;fundamental physical
limits of existing magnetic and optical recording&lt;br/&gt;technologies.
Hybridization combines thermally assisted magnetic writing&lt;br/&gt;with giant
magnetoresistive readback, to circumvent the physical limits&lt;br/&gt;of both
magnetic and optical recording. This approach breaks the&lt;br/&gt;coupling seen
in magnetic recording systems among the size of a bit, the&lt;br/&gt;field
required to write it and the length of time for which the&lt;br/&gt;information
is stable. Thus, magnetic grains in the medium smaller than&lt;br/&gt;10 nm can
be stabilized, which is a critical advance for reaching&lt;br/&gt;densities of 1
terabit/in2 and beyond. These advances will only be&lt;br/&gt;possible, however,
if a plausible head design is demonstrated that&lt;br/&gt;integrates magnetic
write poles with a localized source (probably&lt;br/&gt;optical) of thermal
energy. An essential insight being pursued for this&lt;br/&gt;technology is how
to apply magnetic write fields and heat, as well as&lt;br/&gt;perform MR
readback with a single packaged device from a single side of&lt;br/&gt;the disk.
It is the goal of this project to design, prototype, and test&lt;br/&gt;devices
suitable for this application. Specific novel devices that will&lt;br/&gt;be
investigated will include two-dimensional mode-index lenses, and&lt;br/&gt;near-
field optical antenna structures. The Data Storage Systems
Center&lt;br/&gt;(DSSC) at Carnegie Mellon University (CMU) and GOALI
collaborator,&lt;br/&gt;Seagate Technology, has extensive experience in the
design and&lt;br/&gt;implementation of new head designs. The collaboration on
head&lt;br/&gt;fabrication will include a program of co-design with
Seagate&lt;br/&gt;researchers, joint wafer fabrication, and post-fabrication
modification&lt;br/&gt;of existing heads. It is anticipated that the result of
this&lt;br/&gt;academic-industrial collaboration will be a demonstration of a
plausible&lt;br/&gt;integrated head design for hybrid recording, which will
remove an&lt;br/&gt;important barrier to the advancement and eventual
commercialization of&lt;br/&gt;this technology.&lt;br/&gt;