* 0115986
* Polyandry: Proximate Mechanisms and Ultimate Causes
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2006
* David Zeh, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Byers
* 07/31/2006
* USD 350,480.00

IBN-0115986, Lay Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The revolution that has taken
place in molecular biology over the past decade has revealed one of nature's
best kept secrets, namely, that females across a wide range of animal species
commonly mate with more than one male. Identifying the causes and consequences
of such polyandrous behavior is of general significance to a broad spectrum of
biological disciplines, ranging from developmental and conservation genetics to
the study of new species formation. Unfortunately, however, the technical
difficulties associated with evaluating the alternative material and genetic
benefit hypotheses that have been proposed to explain polyandry make
investigation of this behavior largely intractable in many species.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of powerful, polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) techniques for assigning paternity, in combination with a unique suite of
reproductive and behavioral characteristics, make the pseudoscorpion,
Cordylochernes scorpioides, a model invertebrate organism for experimental
investigation of the selective forces favoring polyandry. Accurate assessment of
female sexual receptivity in these pseudoscorpions is greatly facilitated by
their indirect method of sperm transfer via a spermatophore deposited on the
substrate. Female reproductive status and embryonic development can be readily
monitored without the need for invasive techniques, due to Cordylochernes
scorpioides' "external womb" form of viviparity (live birth), in which females
nourish embryos in an external, translucent brood sac overlying the genital
aperture. In addition, these pseudoscorpions produce large broods, have a rapid
generation time, and are highly amenable to large-scale, laboratory behavioral,
rearing and genetic studies of individuals derived directly from natural
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous research has established that
polyandry in Cordylochernes scorpioides significantly enhances female lifetime
reproductive success, and that it is an active strategy in which females
recognize and reject previous mates. Over their lifetime, females mated to two
different males gave birth to 32% more offspring than did females mated twice to
the same male. This was primarily as a consequence of a significantly reduced
rate of spontaneous abortion, strongly suggesting that polyandry reduces the
risk and/or cost of fertilization by genetically incompatible sperm. The goal of
the proposed research is to gain a better understanding of the behavioral and
physiological mechanisms underlying polyandry in Cordylochernes scorpioides. A
combination of behavioral experiments and molecular techniques will be used to
address the following questions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. What is the recognition
mechanism used by females to discriminate against previous mates and
preferentially accept sperm from novel males in order to access the reproductive
benefits of polyandry? &lt;br/&gt;2. To what extent is the enhanced lifetime
reproductive success of polyandrous Cordylochernes scorpioides females due to
'cryptic material benefits' deriving from a rescuing effect of multi-male
seminal fluid products, as opposed to post-mating mechanisms that bias paternity
in favor of more compatible or genetically superior males?&lt;br/&gt;3. To what
extent do processes acting prior to fertilization (sperm competition and/or
female choice of sperm) versus processes acting after fertilization has occurred
(reallocation of maternal resources from defective/inferior embryos to
viable/superior embryos during gestation) contribute to paternity biasing in
polyandrous females? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the first study to investigate the
relative importance of pre- versus post-fertilization paternity-biasing
mechanisms in a live-bearing species, the findings of this research should
contribute to a better understanding of the role that reproductive mode may play
in the evolution of female mating behavior. &lt;br/&gt;