* 0115829
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Daniel J. Plafcan: Between State and Transnational Community: Building a U.S.-Japan Technological Alliance, 1976-1999
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2003
* Judith Reppy, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 06/30/2003
* USD 10,580.00

For reasons of cost, scale, function, and foreign policy, the governments of
Japan and the United States are increasingly relying on each other as partners
in what were previously considered to be primarily national technological
projects such as defense and space. Through a comparative study of U.S.-Japan
collaboration in environmental remote-sensing satellites and fighter aircraft,
this dissertation research project analyzes how the practices and processes of
building technological systems constitute intergovernmental relations that are
often subsumed under the label of "alliance." No previous academic study in
English or Japanese has addressed this question in an empirical fashion. The
project uses an interdisciplinary theoretical approach drawing from the fields
of science and technology studies, technology management, and international
relations theory. The contention is that an understanding of technological
practices in collaborative projects is essential for interpretations,
explanations, and prescriptions about the political role of technology.
Scientists, engineers, and program managers create transnational technological
practices and technologies that bring together knowledge and politics to build a
heterogeneous and multifaceted alliance. Between state and transnational
community, a U.S.-Japan alliance is built with technology.

