* 0115884
* MRI:  Acquisition of Finnigan MAT DELTA Plus Stable Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer With Gasbench II for Environmental Hydrological Study of Acid Mine Drainage & Watershed Dyna
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,09/30/2002
* Erik Melchiorre, DePauw University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 09/30/2002
* USD 150,000.00

0115884 Melchiorre

This grant, made through the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program,
provides partial support to purchase a Finnigan MAT DELTAplus stable isotope
ratio mass spectrometer with GasBench II. This equipment will be a key part of
our Environmental, Hydrology, and Geochemistry program for both undergraduate
research and the research of the P.I. Instrumentation will be housed within the
newly renovated $32 million Julian Science and Mathematics Building at Depauw
University. The requested equipment will serve growing student interest in
environmental geochemistry as well as ongoing collaborative research on acid
mine drainage and basin hydrology with the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources (IDNR) and Indiana Geological Survey (IGS). The P.I., his students,
and colleagues will also utilize the spectrometer for research on deep basin
groundwater and formation fluid migration. Ongoing projects with significant
student involvement includes studies of contaminant transport from acid mine
drainage sites within Indiana (with IDNR and IGS), studies of surface
water/groundwater interactions in the Wolf-Red (Wisconsin) and Tippecanoe-Wabash
(Indiana) watersheds, isotopic studies of groundwater systems in fracture-flow
and karst environments in southern Indiana, and studies of tectonic-driven
formation fluid migration in California. Faculty at DePauw University with
separate funding will make significant use of the laboratory to examine fluvial
sediment transport and systematics and to participate in the Indiana Riverwatch
Program. As a member of both the American Indian Science and Engineering Society
(AISES) and the Society for Advancement of Chicanos and Native Americans in
Science (SACNAS), the P.I. is firmly committed to promoting student
participation for those groups traditionally underrepresented in the Earth
Sciences. This commitment is echoed and supported by DePauw University, and
efforts are underway to link the environmental stable isotope laboratory with
DePauw's Women in Science Program and to participate in projects with Native
American Tribal Colleges in evaluating the isotope hydrology of the Red-Wolf
river basin of Wisconsin. This environmental stable isotope facility will be
open to in house use as well as outside students and colleagues. ***