* 0115250
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Monitoring Large-Scale Water Storage Variability in Egypt
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Isabella Velicogna, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2005
* USD 24,082.00

0115250&lt;br/&gt;Wahr&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project is to
support a cooperative research project between Dr. John Wahr, Department of
Physics, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado and Dr. Mosalam Shaltout,
Solar and Space Research Department of the National Research Institute of
Astronomy and Geophysics, Helwan, Cairo, Egypt. The goal of the research is to
develop a method of monitoring the large-scale distribution of ground water and
soil moisture throughout Egypt, by using a combination of satellite gravity
measurements and atmospheric pressure data. The gravity measurements will come
from GRACE, a satellite mission expected for launch in late 2001. GRACE will map
the earth's gravity field with high accuracy every30 days, and so will provide
information on month-to month variations in the distribution of mass within the
Earth and on or above the surface. This will allow the monitoring of changes in
the distribution of water stored on land, at a scale of few hundred kilometers,
everywhere over the globe. The accuracy of these water storage estimates is
expected to depend primarily on the errors in the atmospheric pressure fields
used to remove atmospheric mass contributions from the gravity measurements. The
work proposed will strengthen the existing atmospheric pressure network in Egypt
so that the atmospheric mass contributions to gravity can be accurately modeled
and removed from the GRACE data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The research
planned is exploratory intended to calibrate and increase the accuracy of the
GRACE data for assessing the moisture in soils. This effort can be of great
importance to predicting availability of ground water and other forms of soil
moisture and thus help with planning purposes for hydrologists, agriculture
specialists and for social and political planners. The two scientists have
complementary experiences. They have access to resources needed for the project.
A female US post doctorate at the University of Colorado will participate in
this research. The project is funded by the Division of International Programs
and the Division of Earth Sciences.