* 0115070
* Adaptive Cancellation of Time-Varying Disturbances
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2005
* Marc Bodson, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2005
* USD 189,000.00

The object of this project is to develop control algorithms for the cancellation
of periodic disturbances whose frequency content varies significantly over time.
Typical applications include active noise and vibration control, although the
problems under consideration are generic and the algorithms are applicable in
many other contexts. Two classes of algorithms are considered. They have been
studied before for restricted cases and have shown promising results. The
algorithms are particularly valuable because of their simplicity and because of
the tools available to design them for specific performance goals. In the
project, the algorithms will be developed so that they will become applicable to
the most general problems with multivariable system and with disturbances having
multiple harmonic components. An important intermediate goal will be the
analysis of the robustness properties of adaptive algorithms using little known
but powerful results of linear time-invariant system equivalence. These results
will enable a precise quantification of the robustness margins of the
algorithms, and may lead to new strategies for robust design. Another goal is
the development of new algorithms for the estimation and tracking of the
parameters of periodic signals using multiple sensors. The algorithms will be
tested in active noise control or active vibration control experiments.