* 0115215
* US-India Cooperative Research: High Temperature Dielectric Studies on Advanced Materials in the High Frequency Region
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2006
* Dinesh Agrawal, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 07/31/2006
* USD 29,685.00

0115215&lt;br/&gt;Agrawal&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award supports
US-India cooperative research entitled High Temperature Dielectric Studies on
Advanced Materials in the High Frequency Region. The US investigators are Dinesh
Agrawal and Michael Lanagan, Pennsylania State University; Indian investigators
are Dinesh Dube and H.C. Gupta, Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi.
Microwave processing is emerging as a widely accepted new processing technology
for a variety of materials, especially advanced ceramics. In spite of
advancements, the physical understanding of how materials absorb microwaves is
not understood. The investigators will conduct structural characterization
studies on advanced ceramic materials to determine the electrical/dielectric
properties in different frequency regions with emphasis on high frequency
measurements. They intend to extend characterization to magnetic materials and
to metal powders. The results are expected to shed light on the physical
mechanisms responsible for microwave adsorption during microwave processing.
This is a fast emerging area in processing technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: Professor Agrawal is a world leader in this area
with several innovations in microwave characterization technique to his credit.
The Materials Research Laboratory at Penn State University is a premier
laboratory for advanced materials. The Indian researchers have long been engaged
in investigating electrical properties of materials in the high frequency
region. This project offers the opportunity for international collaboration and
the strengthening of institutional connections between Penn State and the Indian
Institute of Technology, Delhi. The project is jointly supported by the Division
of International Programs and the Government of India's Department of Science
&amp; Technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;