* 0115442
* Whispering-Gallery Microlaser with Nanocomposite-Film Gain Medium
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Donna Bandy, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2005
* USD 270,000.00

0115442&lt;br/&gt;Rosenberger&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is an
investigation of laser action in the whispering-gallery modes (WGMs) of
individual fused-silica spherical microresonators (100-1000 um in diameter). The
high quality factor (Q) of a microsphere WGM enables lasing with a very low
threshold. Using a layer-by-layer assembly process, a microsphere can be coated
with a thin polyelectrolyte film containing nanoparticle inclusions of HgTe. The
composite film then serves as the gain medium, interacting with the evanescent
component of a WGM into which pump laser light is coupled by optical tunneling
via a tapered fiber. Pumping with a wavelength around 800 nm can produce lasing
in the 1400-1700 nm range, with the laser emission coupled out of the
microresonator by the same tapered fiber. The objectives of this project include
the following: verify that lasing occurs; optimize the laser output; produce
stable, tunable single-mode operation; and concurrently&lt;br/&gt;develop the
theoretical counterpart, for purposes of guiding the experiment and interpreting
its results. To meet these objectives, the PIs previously developed experimental
techniques for tuning and frequency-locking the microsphere become invaluable.
In this project, light from a probe laser around 1550 nm is coupled into the
microsphere to measure optical gain. Then an output threshold is sought, and the
coincident linewidth narrowing of the output provides further evidence of
lasing. Analysis of the laser output spectrum is performed using a scanning
monochromator, a scanning confocal optical spectrum analyzer, and a second tuned
microsphere acting as a filter. By compression-tuning the lasing microsphere and
using a second microsphere as a filter, tunable single-mode emission can be
produced. The theoretical analysis includes an evaluation of the laser threshold
and relative gain that is produced in different WGMs under various pumping
conditions. Possible mode competition and instability are also explored for
normal laser operation and also for the microlaser with injected signal. Two
exciting new areas of research are combined here: resonant optical enhancement
in microsphere WGMs and easily-fabricated nanocomposite films. The potential
impact is great, because a single microlaser can act as a source for 100-channel
(or more) wave-division multiplexing. In addition, with the future use of
conducting and/or electroluminescent polymers in the film, electrical pumping
may replace optical pumping. Such a microlaser can be a tremendous asset to the
telecommunications industry. This work continues and expands preliminary
exploratory studies, the early results from which are promising. The requested
funding is to enable a longer-term (3-year) concerted effort in this area, while
providing partial support for the educational and professional development of
three Ph.D. candidates, and a hands-on introduction to multidisciplinary
experimental and theoretical science for two undergraduates each
year.&lt;br/&gt;