* 0115556
* Conflict on the Borders of Science in Medieval Europe
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2004
* Joan Cadden, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Ronald Rainger
* 09/30/2004
* USD 111,000.00

Joan Cadden, University of California-Davis Conflict on the Borders of Science
in Medieval Europe: Drawing Boundaries

This project explores the processes by which a scientific community and society
at large shape the understanding of what sorts of problems can properly be
addressed by science and what sorts of problems cannot. The project takes the
form of a historical case study, focusing on how scholars who undertook
explanations of natural phenomena in the thirteenth through fifteenth centuries
("natural philosophers") addressed or declined to address the question of why
some men experience homosexual desires. It considers not only the institutional
forces, such as the Catholic Church and the universities, but also the reactions
of individual natural philosophers to a subject that was widely regarded as
pertaining to religion and ethics, as well as (or rather than) to the domain of
scientific investigation. Although concerned with a specific society and a
distant time, the study sheds light on the complex interaction of powerful
institutions, prominent authorities, and ordinary scientists in adjudicating the
borders of science.

With NSF support, the Principal Investigator examines two aspects of this larger
project. First, she undertakes an analysis of a group of medieval texts in Latin
and French that treat a variety of sexual topics. She finds that medieval
Christian authors sought to tame their controversial subject matter by applying
well established scientific principles to it and, at the same time, made
explicit or implicit attempts to justify it in various ways. Since much research
and education in the Middle Ages centered on explicating and expanding upon
authoritative texts inherited from the Greek and Arabic traditions, and since
the subject of male homosexual desire appeared in a text attributed to
Aristotle, the proposed research studies the reactions of individual authors who
engaged in discussions of the subject -- or declined to do so. The sources are
in manuscript form. The fact that, before the advent of printing, every book was
made by hand provides the opportunity for the second aspect of the
investigation: detecting the responses of individuals who made copies of the
texts in question for themselves or others. By omitting or adding material
--whether whole sections of a work or just a few words --and sometimes by making
direct comments, copyists could express their views about what did and what did
not count as proper scientific subjects. In addition, medieval manuscripts often
contain marginalia and other interjections made by readers, and these too
constitute evidence about how readily contemporaries accepted treating this
volatile topic as a phenomenon of nature, subject to explanation in terms of
natural causes. Much of the work to be done involves gathering and evaluating
this fragmentary information, so that, taken together, it can provide insights
into the broad participation of natural philosophers in negotiating, and perhaps
expanding, the acceptable limits of the science of their day.