* 0115659
* Development and Evaluation of a Technology-Enhanced Success for All Reading Program
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2007
* Robert Slavin, Success for All Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 09/30/2007
* USD 5,994,273.00

The goal of this project is to substantially increase the emerging reading
skills of young children by employing technology to enhance the effectiveness of
the Success for All (SFA) reading program. The project will develop DVD, video,
and computer technology to improve the SFA reading, ESL, tutoring, and
professional development components, and systematically evaluate each component
separately and then together in an integrated program. By carefully integrating
technology in various of aspects of the SFA program, the PIs' believe it is
possible to double the effect size on reading measures from .5 to 1.0 and to
halve the failure rate. A new format for instruction called DaViD (DVD
incorporating assessment and instruction) will integrate DVD technology with
teacher instruction, incorporating material from Between the Lions, a PBS
program designed to enhance children's literacy. It will incorporate additional
video/DVD presentations to present vocabulary used in Reading Roots (beginning
reading) lessons and to preview the content of Reading Roots stories.
Additionally, a computer-assisted tutoring program, the Reading CAT, will be
created to support the performance of the student, the teacher, and the tutor,
by providing an electronic skills development and information hub. The Reading
CAT is being developed by Concordia University who is a subcontractor to Success
for All. The Reading CAT will be used for practice (by students), for assessment
(by tutors and teachers), for performance support (by tutors), and for
communication (by tutors, teachers, and the facilitator). A large scale
evaluation will compare schools using all technology elements to matched schools
using standard SFA and to control schools over a two-year period.

