* 0115079
* A Multi-Scale Approach for Predicting Wrinkling and its Experimental Validation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Wing Liu, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Lynn Realff
* 08/31/2005
* USD 369,220.00

This research project aims to provide experimental data on material resistance
to wrinkling under various loading conditions and to provide a reliable and
robust tool for simulating wrinkling in sheet metal forming processes, which
will dramatically increase the confidence level on simulation results and
therefore, be extremely beneficial to product and process development. The
increasing environmental concerns and global competition have pressured the auto
industry to aggressively search for thinner, lighter and stronger materials. As
the thickness of sheet metal decreases, the tendency towards wrinkling increases
significantly. It is therefore essential to have a good understanding of the
onset of wrinkling and its post-buckling behavior of sheet metal so that the
development time of bringing these new materials to final goods can be
minimized. The experiments will include a newly developed wedge test, a shrink
flanging test and forming of an irregular three-dimensional shape.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The test results will be used to verify the computability
of a new simulation tool, finite element methods with meshfree-enrichment
(FEMME), which is believed to be able to capture local deformation effectively
without the need of remeshing. The methodology and associated software routines
will be posted on our website for easy public access. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;