* 0115202
* Urban Systemic Program in Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education (USP): NSF USP Cleveland Municipal School District
* EHR,ESR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2002
* Myrna Eliott-Lewis, Cleveland Municipal School District
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 07/31/2002
* USD 500,000.00

The Cleveland Municipal School District's (CMSD) proposal was developed to use
the successes of the Urban Systemic Initiative (USI) and the lessons learned
from the implementation of the Language Arts and English standards to improve
education in science and mathematics. Hence, building on those efforts, the
intent is to bring systemic change to science and mathematics at the district
level at an accelerated pace by: (1) using high-quality inquiry-driven and
technology-rich curriculum, instruction, and assessment materials aligned with
local mathematics, science, and technology standards; (2) supporting the
recruitment and retention of K-12 teachers under a professional development
learning environment; (3) reallocating existing resources to support the
Cleveland USP; (4) mobilizing community stakeholders to support teachers in
their efforts to instill effective and technology-rich science and mathematics
learning for students; and (5) ensuring that all students will meet or exceed
the state's proficiency standards (and local) for academic achievement in
science and mathematics.

As a result of the three-stage process, the proposal did not received ratings
sufficient to recommend full funding. However, the National Science Foundation
agreed to support the District via a highly monitored, task-specific technical
assistance grant as suggested by the site visit team for stage three of the
review process. The aim of the grant is to assist the school system in advancing
its capacity to provide a solid science and mathematics education for all
students. The targets of this highly specific support is directed toward:

(1) Building leadership capacity in science and mathematics particularly at the
middle district level; and (2) Accelerating the modification and implementation
of the draft standards in science and mathematics.

The duration of the grant is 12 months at a level of $500,000.

