* 0115595
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Microsphere Based Tissue Engineering
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Cato Laurencin, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 50,000.00

0115595&lt;br/&gt;Laurencin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is for
support of a cooperative project by Dr. Cato Laurencin, Professor of Chemical
Engineering, and Dr. Mohamed Attawia, Research Assistant Professor, Department
of Chemical Engineering, Drexel University, and Dr. Wafaa Ismail, Department of
Ceramics at the National Research Center (NRC), in Cairo, Egypt. They plan to
develop and study novel three-dimensional matrices useful for tissue engineering
of bone. These matrices, developed at Drexel and based on polymeric
microspheres, demonstrate the ability to allow for attachment and growth of bone
in vitro and cellular ingrowth in mineralization in vivo. Work by researchers at
the NRC has demonstrated the ability of chitosan to support the growth and
phenotypic expression of osteoblasts and other mesenchymal cells. Recent
research for the modifications of chitosan chemistry and chitosan complexation
resulted in new materials with ranges of physicochemical properties. The
investigators plan to study microsphere based matrices for tissue engineered
matrices made from chitosan and microsphere based matrices for tissue
engineering using degradable polymeric materials combined with chitosan based
complexes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Scope: This award will permit collaboration
between US and Egyptian scientists who have complementary capabilities and
research experience in polymers and biomaterial. The two US scientists are
eminent in their field and are highly published in areas related to the problem.
The Egyptian collaborator is an active researcher with skills and expertise in
ceramics, polymers, and biomaterials. One US student and one Egyptian student
will participate in this research and will gain experience from the
international collaboration. The research topic is of broad interest both to the
materials science (especially biomaterials) community and to the medical science
community. This proposal meets the INT objective of increasing international
scientific collaboration in areas of mutual benefit. The project is supported by
the Division of Bioengineering and Environmental Systems and the Division of
International Programs.&lt;br/&gt;