* 0115606
* Urban Systemic Program in Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education (USP): Boston's Math and Science Plan
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2007
* Ann Hamadeh, Boston Public Schools
* Cooperative Agreement
* Celestine Pea
* 08/31/2007
* USD 5,597,750.00

&lt;br/&gt;Boston Public Schools&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Boston Public School District (BPS) proposes
to advance significantly the science, mathematics, and technology (SMT)
education of all K-12 students through the Boston Urban Systemic Program (BUSP).
The District plans to accomplish this task by building on the existing
infrastructure developed by reform efforts that began in 1995. These efforts
included a complete revision of the reading, Language Arts, and mathematics
programs. The lessons learned from these efforts will be used to facilitate
change in science and other core subjects. The foundational tenets of the extant
infrastructure include a strong K-12 leadership team, a standards-based
curriculum for science and mathematics based on the state's curriculum
framework, an aligned assessment system, and policies specific to science and
mathematics. The infrastructure also include the convergence of fiscal and
intellectual resources to improve science and mathematics education, significant
external support from multiple institutions of higher education, business
partners, and the at-large community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BUSP goals
parallel those of the USP that seeks to: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Increase
student achievement in science and mathematics as measured by higher scores on
standards-based assessments, increasing enrollments in higher level courses, and
greater articulation to institutions of higher education; &lt;br/&gt;2. Advance
the implementation of standards-based, inquiry-centered science and mathematics
program for all students, and employ research and assessments as effective tools
in improving the teaching and learning of science and mathematics; &lt;br/&gt;3.
Increase the competency and diversity of the science and mathematics
instructional workforce; and &lt;br/&gt;4. Promote collaborations with colleges
and universities and the engagement of the community to improve teaching and
learning for all students to meet high standards. &lt;br/&gt;