* 0115904
* The Acquisition of Virtual Reality Tools to Upgrade our Virtual Cognition Laboratory for Research in Cognitive Psychology, Sensation and Perception, and Consciousness
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Scott Krauchunas, Saint Anselm College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2002
* USD 99,928.00

The Virtual Cognition Laboratory at Saint Anselm College was established in 1998
to support faculty research and undergraduate research training in Cognitive
Psychology, Sensation and Perception, and Consciousness, as well as develop
innovative, hands-on laboratories for related courses. This grant supports
upgrades and expansion of the Virtual Cognition
Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today, the Virtual Cognition Laboratory
Research Center has two testing computers with related peripheral devices and an
EEG station to support three different programs of research: gender differences
in navigation, developmental models for place learning, and the impact of
daytime sleepiness on attention. In addition, the Virtual Cognition Laboratory
Education Center has another six computers to support hands-on laboratories for
students to complete as part of their requirements for a variety of courses.
Since the inception of the Virtual Cognition Laboratory, the development of
software, hardware, and peripheral devices to support highly immersive virtual
reality environments (IVEs) has grown at a rapid pace. In order to offer faculty
and students a state-of-the-art facility to conduct research and support
research training, the laboratory will be enhanced to include two new high speed
computers, software, and peripheral devices. The peripheral devices include two
different delivery methods, i.e., head mounted display versus
dome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of this equipment will support both
ongoing and new research activities in the following areas: developmental models
for place learning, individual differences in linear optical trajectory
strategies, and the impact of daytime sleepiness on a variety of cognitive
processes. The Virtual Cognition Laboratory will facilitate interdisciplinary
research activities on our campus and collaborations with investigators from
other institutions. The Virtual Cognition Laboratory will also support research
training for undergraduates and provide them with the opportunity to use state-
of-the-art equipment to develop their technical skills. Finally, the Virtual
Cognition Laboratory will continue to serve as a resource center for faculty to
develop new laboratory modules for their courses.