* 0115832
* MRI:  Acquisition of a CCD Single Crystal X-ray Diffraction System for a Partnership of Maine Institutions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2001,12/31/2004
* Henry Tracy, Colby College
* Standard Grant
* Joan M. Frye
* 12/31/2004
* USD 257,216.00

With support from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, the
Department of Chemistry at Colby College will acquire a X-ray diffractometer
with CCD detector for small molecule diffractometry. This equipment will be used
by five educational institutions in Maine: Colby College, Bates College, Bowdoin
College, the University of Southern Maine and the University of Maine. The X-ray
CCD diffractometer will enhance research in a number of areas including 1)
studies of copper-arene chemistry; 2) development of new synthetic methods of
selected natural products; 3) synthesis of polycyclic cage compounds with
unusual architecture; 4) structure-function relationships in metalloenzymes and
metalloenzymes mimics; and 5) production of C-2 symmetric lanthanocene catalyst
systems and their utility in the construction of chiral molecules.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The X-ray diffractometer allows accurate and precise
measurements of the full three dimensional structure of a molecule, including
bond distances and angles, and it provides accurate information about the
spatial arrangement of the molecule relative to the neighboring molecules. These
studies will have an impact in a number of areas, including organic and natural
products synthesis plus biological, organometallic and materials areas of
inorganic chemistry. The instrument will play a major supporting role in the
research efforts of all of the participating institutions, which range from
bachelor's level to Ph.D.-granting schools. In addition, the diffraction system
will be used for the formal education of students in advanced chemistry courses
utilizing the capability of the diffractometer to be run off site.