* 0115946
* Robust Control of Constrained Linear Parameter Varying Systems and Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Mario Sznaier, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

0115946&lt;br/&gt;Sznaier&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Robust control of linear time
invariant systems has undergone extensive developments in the past two decades,
leading to powerful formalisms such as H8, u-synthesis/analysis and, more
recently, l1optimal control, that have been successfully applied to challenging
practical problems. In contrast, tools for handling linear parameter varying
plants have just emerged and are still far from complete. An open issue, central
to many practical problems, is the non-conservative handling of constraints,
both on the outputs and in the control action. The proposed research is aimed at
addressing this issue by incorporating into the LPV frame-work the capability to
deal exactly with a broad class of performance specifications and model
uncertainty. Specifically, the objectives of the proposed research
are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;O Development of an analytical framework for
synthesizing robust LPV systems subject to hard constraints. This framework
should exhibit the following properties:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(a) Handle control
and output constraints in a non-conservative fashion;&lt;br/&gt;(b) Identify the
intrinsic limits of performance of the system as well as the limiting factors;
and&lt;br/&gt;(c) Result in computationally tractable procedures leading to
practically implementable controllers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;O Application of the
resulting theory to several problems spanning a broad spectrum of applications
such as active vision and oil prospection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will combine elements from functional analysis, viability theory and
dynamical systems theory, following an approach successfully used by the co-PIs
to handle constraints in the case of LTI systems. Preliminary results indicate
that this approach leads to a framework with the desired
features.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI expects that this research effort will
result in an expanded robust control framework for LPV systems, capable of
addressing realistic problems necessitating neither potentially conservative
approximations nor multiple trial and error type iterations. Moreover, in
addition to advancing the state of the art in control theory, he expects that by
removing some of the limitations of currently available LPV tools, it will
foster progress in related areas. An example is computer vision, an area where
recent technological advances have rendered a number of practical applications
feasible, provided that certain related control issues can be resolved. These
applications range from intelligent highway systems to remote surgery and have
the potential to broadly impact society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will also have a direct bearing upon the quality of graduate and
undergraduate education both at Penn State University (PSU) and the Universidad
Autonoma Metropolitana (UAM). In addition to direct student involvement and
incorporation of the results into the curriculum, it will allow students from
the UAM to use state-of-the-art computer vision equipment available at PSU,
while Penn State students will benefit from having access to proprietary data
and experiments from the Mexican Petroleum Institute.&lt;br/&gt;