* 0115716
* IERI/REC: Planning an Infrastructure to Support Ambitious Science for Urban School Children
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2001,02/29/2004
* Ronald Marx, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Janice M. Earle
* 02/29/2004
* USD 278,504.00

&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant proposal will examine the professional
development experiences that are most likely to help children in urban settings
to be more successful learners of "ambitious" science. To do so, the PIs will
create a data system that allows for detailed articulation of the ways that
teachers' opportunities for growth translate into learning outcomes for
children. The model for the work begins with actual classroom practices, then
examines student growth (defined by achievement test scores) and the kinds of
development experiences that result in successful student learning.
Specifically, the planning grant with refine and develop new measures of student
learning; develop a coding scheme for professional development experiences;
refine and codify the PIs existing scheme for analyzing classroom practice; and
use test cases to explore the feasibility of the
methodology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Panel Summary: The panel was enthusiastic
about the importance and scope of the study and viewed the ideas about enactment
and the conceptualization of change in the proposal particularly favorably. The
concerns raised by the panel included: the project is very ambitious given the
eighteen-month timeframe; and the proposal is short on detail in both
methodology and theory. However, panelists understood that some of the
conceptualizations would necessarily be somewhat vague in a planning
grant.&lt;br/&gt;An additional concern included the commitment of the PIs in
other research projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analysis: The panelists felt that
this was a planning grant with potential to yield important new measures and
understandings regarding links between teacher professional development and
student learning. The PIs are highly qualified. In spite of concerns about the
ambition of the project and the vagueness of some aspects of the underlying
theory and methodology, the Program Officer agrees with the panel that this
planning grant holds great promise for producing information that will be
helpful to schools and those interested in science reform. However, the PIs
should take care to address the concerns raised in the review in the submission
of a full proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Program Director Recommendation: Based
on the ratings received in the panel review, the comments contained in the
written reviews, the panel discussion, and the analysis described above, I
recommend that this proposal be funded for 18 months as a standard grant at the
level of $278,504.&lt;br/&gt;