* 0115756
* Large-Domain Hybrid Moment Method-Physical Optics Techniques for Efficient and Accurate Electromagnetic Modeling of Cars and Aircraft over a Wide Range of Frequencies
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Branislav Notaros, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2005
* USD 192,000.00

0115756&lt;br/&gt;Notaros&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central goal of the proposed
research is the development of the methodology and necessary knowledge for
electromagnetic modeling of cars and aircraft over a very wide range of radio
and microwave frequencies. Analysis of vehicles as electromagnetic structures
(antennas and scatterers) and parts of wireless communication and radar systems
is, by all means, one of the most challenging and practically important problems
of applied electro-magnetics and one of the mainstream tasks with highest
preference, today and in the future, of the computational electromagnetics (CEM)
community. A new unified general, highly efficient and accurate, hybrid large-
domain (higher-order expansion) current-based method will be developed for
analysis of electrically small, medium, and very large 3D electromagnetic
structures consisting of metallic and dielectric parts of arbitrary shapes.
Theoretical foundation of the method is a system of coupled surface integral
equations for equivalent surface electric and magnetic currents. The system will
be solved by the method of moments (MoM) which will be hybridized with high-
frequency asymptotic techniques based on the physical optics (PO). This
hybridization will provide a smooth transition between low and high frequency
applications. Within the new MoM-PO method, all the surfaces in the system
(metallic and dielectric surfaces, in both the MoM- and PO-regions) will be
approximated by electrically relatively large bilinear quadrilateral surface
elements (large domains) with higher-order polynomial vector expansions for
currents. Wires will also be incorporated, in the MoM-regions. Various
corrections in the PO-regions will be introduced, including an iterative
improvement of the interaction between the MoM- and PO-regions. Most
importantly, the memory requirements and computation time associated with the
unknowns in the PO-regions can be made extremely low, which results in an
enormous overall efficiency of the hybrid solution. As compared with the
existing CEM methods, the proposed method will have a unique feature of
efficient, accurate, and reliable electromagnetic modeling of cars and aircraft
in a wide range of frequencies on small computing platforms (such as desktop and
laptop PC's). An extensive new knowledge will be developed and systematized on
the methodology of electromagnetic modeling of cars and aircraft from
practically dc to high-frequency applications. Experimental validation of the
new MoM-PO technique will be performed by measurements in the new UMass
Dartmouth ATMC (Advanced Technology and Manufacturing Center) Antenna and
Wireless Laboratory. &lt;br/&gt;