* 0115317
* A Behavioral Approach to Dissipativity Analysis in Nonlinear Systems, with Applications to Human/Robot Interfaces
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Randy Freeman, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2005
* USD 280,000.00

This project will focus on the investigation of some of the basic unresolved
issues in the study of the performance properties of nonlinear systems. Once
these issues have been addressed, the resulting theory will be applied to the
stability analysis of various systems in which single or multiple human
operators are in feedback loops with active nonlinear robotic devices and are
thus subject to applied forces. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the
proposed work are threefold. First,the relationship between performance and
robust stability for nonlinear systems will be established. This relationship is
an essential part of many modern linear robust control techniques, but
extensions of the relevant results to nonlinear systems have not yet been fully
developed. Indeed, preliminary investigations have revealed that robust
stability does not imply performance for time-invariant nonlinear systems when
standard dissipativity-based criteria are used (such as L2-gain or passivity).
One goal of this project is to determine which weaker versions of dissipativity
lead to the desired equivalences between performance and robust stability. To
this end,a new version of dissipativity called conditional dissipativity is
proposed, and part of this project will be to identify its key
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To provide analysis tools sufficient for
meeting the first project objective, a behavioral approach to nonlinear system
models will be developed based on the work of Willems. In particular, concepts
especially important for the analysis of nonlinear system models (such as
LaSalle 's invariance principle) will be worked out in a behavioral context. An
expected outcome of this part of the project will be the demonstration that the
behavioral approach offers certain advantages to both analysis and design not
available with standard&lt;br/&gt;approaches to nonlinear system models.
Finally, the theory developed according to the first two project objectives will
be applied to the stability analysis of human/machine interfaces such as haptic
displays and&lt;br/&gt;bilateral teleoperation systems. In such systems, a human
operator is in direct contact with an active robotic device and is subject to
forces applied through a nonlinear feedback loop.The stability of such a
feedback system is important not only for the safety of the human operator but
also for the accurate tactile perception of the virtual or physical environment
via the force feedback.This project will significantly extend the
known&lt;br/&gt;results on the stability of these systems and provide guidelines
for system design. In fact, it will be the first to address stability issues for
multi-user systems, that is, systems in which multiple human operators interact
simultaneously with each other and with virtual or physical environments by
means of their own ocal robotic devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Any application of
nonlinear system design techniques which relies on the relationship between
performance and robust stability will directly benefit from the theory developed
during the course of this project. In particular, this project will provide
designers of robotic systems such as haptic displays and bilateral teleoperation
systems with useful guidelines for making their systems work in a stable manner.
This project thus has the potential for improving the quality of various
implementations of these systems in such areas as computer-aided design,
manufacturing and medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;