* 0115302
* Dissertation Research:  Design for a Pluralistic City: Multimodal Transportation in Oakland, California
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2001,10/31/2002
* Kim Fortun, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 10/31/2002
* USD 7,990.00

This dissertation research project proposes to study the design of urban
multimodal transportation in the United States. It will examine interdependent
technical, organizational, and cultural changes directed at diversifying
existing transportation infrastructures. It includes formal design processes and
people's everyday experiences to understand how "the street" and "safety" are
negotiated in designing for pedestrian, bicycle, automobile, bus, and rail
modes. The organizing concept of multimodal design focuses the research on the
negotiation of diversity in designing for multiple and potentially conflicting
needs. This project will examine how diverse perspectives on these five modes
grapple with the technical, organizational, and cultural inertia of existing
infrastructure to design a shared infrastructure that meets the needs of
pluralistic populations. In the United States, multimodal transportation is a
timely topic because of the possibilities for change afforded by the Intermodal
Surface Transportation Efficiency Act (ISTEA, 1991) and the Transportation
Equity Act for the 21st Century (TEA-21, 1998). Following on the completion of
the Eisenhower Interstate Highway System, this legislation marks a shift in
United States trans-portation policy away from road construction as the primary
solution to transportation problems. In response to political concerns over
previous highway policy, this legislation also increases the role of
metropolitan- and state-level decision making. This research will examine how
multimodal design addresses automobile dependence and its attendant problems of
air pollution, urban sprawl, and oil dependency by providing viable
transportation alternatives in people's everyday lives. It is socially
significant for assessing the role of nongovernmental organizations in
transportation change, opportunities for broader participation in design, and
best practices in design processes, programs, and policies that foster political
stability and environmental sustainability. The project uses the city of
Oakland, California as a research site including pedestrian, bicycle,
automobile, bus, and rail modes. Each mode will be examined through the
transportation planners, elected officials, advocates, and residents who shape
and are shaped by these modes. One year of field research will use the following
data collection methods: 1) thirty-five focused interviews with transportation
planners, elected officials, and advocates on the design of multimodal
transportation; 2) fifteen informant photography and photo-elicitation
interviews with residents on their everyday experiences of urban travel; and 3)
participant/observation in public hearings, advocacy meetings, and educational
outreach on transportation projects. These three data sets will be analyzed to
identify social worlds that negotiate the design of the street and safety for
the five transportation modes. The field research will be situated in the
context of regional, state, and federal policy and the cultural significance of
these transportation modes.