* 0115329
* GOALI:  Growth of GaSb-Related Materials and Devices by Metalorganic Chemical Vapor Deposition for Advanced Optical Fiber Communication Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Russell Dupuis, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Filbert J. Bartoli
* 08/31/2005
* USD 300,000.00

Long-wavelength lasers emitting at ?= 1.33 or 1.55 m are one of the most
important and widely used optoelectronic devices for optical fiber communication
systems in the present modern information technology era. For optical-fiber
communications, the lnGaAsP quaternary III-V semiconductor material system,
which is lattice-matched to InP, covers the wavelength range corresponding to
low dispersion or low attenuation in optical fibers. Therefore, lasers for
optical communication application with low dispersion or low attenuation have
been developed and commercialized using an InGaAsP active layer grown on InP
substrates. However, InP-based lasers have generally inferior characteristic
performance compared to GaAs-based lasers. Especially for vertical-cavity
surface-emitting lasers (VCSELs), lnP -based lasers have been problematic due to
the lack of good lattice-matched distributed Bragg reflector (DBR) material
combinations, which should have high refractive index contrast, low electrical
resistance, and low thermal resistance. Compared to lnP-based VCSELs, GaAs-based
VCSELs with AlAs/GaAs DBR mirrors have better characteristics. However, the
system performance characteristics, such as the transmission capacity, are
limited by the bandwidth of compatible multimode fibers, since they have a
short-wavelength spectral range (?~O.85 m).&lt;br/&gt;To obtain high-performance
long-wavelength lasers, the ideal practical combination should be that of an
~active layer" emitting in the long-wavelength range compatible with the well-
established GaAs-based laser technologies. The GaAs system offers several
important advantages over the alternate InP-based system, including larger area
wafer processing, better thermal properties higher doping concentrations, an
oxidation-compatible material system, and high-performance DBR materials.
Several possible approaches have been proposed and investigated. One of the most
promising is explored here.&lt;br/&gt;The study of InAlGaAsSb epitaxial growth
using MOCVD is a research topic that is of increasing interest throughout the
world. The realization of high-quality epitaxial layers and heterojunctions are
important elements in the development of advanced semiconductor devices, in
particular, VCSELS. The research proposed here will result in the practical
realization of X=1.33pm VCSELs as well as for the study of the fundamental
properties of Sb-based heterojunctions and in the study of Ill-Sb quantum dots.
The work of the primary topic of the study of Sb growth and fundamental
properties couples directly to that of a second research topic on devices,
specifically, VCSELs-an area that we are already exploring with collaborators at
Agilent Technologies. This research will provide new fundamental insight into
the physics of two-dimensionally confined systems in Ill-Sb materials. These
topics have a strong potential for broad impact in optoelectronics and also in
electronics, e.g.. high-speed electronics could be developed.&lt;br/&gt;