* 0115445
* Shear and Extensional Rheology of Nanoclays and Nanotubes in Polymer Melts and Solutions
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* M Forest, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Lyons
* 07/31/2005
* USD 360,000.00

This grant provides funding for the comprehensive characterization of the non-
linear rheology, particle orientation, and structure development of
nanoclay/polymer and carbon nanotube/polymer composites, in both shear and
elongation, and the development of simulation tools for control and optimization
of processes for nanocomposites. Polymer nanocomposites exhibit significantly
enhanced performance properties, including increased strength, stiffness,
barrier properties, and heat resistance, without a significant loss in impact
strength. Two types of nanoparticles, naturally occurring layered nanoclays and
synthesized carbon nanotubes, show promise in improving the mechanical and
electrical properties of thermoplastic and thermoset polymers. However, these
improvements come with a cost in processing: small additions of the high
surface-area-to-volume-ratio nanoclays and nanotubes have been observed to
significantly increase the viscosity and elasticity of polymer melts and
solutions, complicating the extrusion and injection molding of polymer
nanocomposite products. In addition, the effect of processing on nanoparticle
orientation and structure development, and hence performance properties of the
product materials, is not well understood. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the
proposed comprehensive rheological and structural characterization of polymer
nano-composites, questions such as the following will be addressed: What are the
shear and extensional viscosities of melts and solutions filled with extremely
large aspect ratio nanoparticles? What are their dependencies on nanoparticle
geometry, varying between tubes and discs of different aspect ratios? What is
the particle orientation and structure development in shear and extensional
flow? What models can be developed for process modeling of
stress/strain/structure? To what degree do nanoparticles become aligned in an
extensional flow? What are the correlations between elastic properties of
nanotubes and nanoclays and the viscoelasticity of the polymer melts and
solutions, between nanoparticle concentration and viscoelastic properties of
solutions, between orientation and structure development and viscoelastic
properties? What are the flow-aligning properties of the nanoparticles in
extension and shear, and do the tubes and platelets have very different flow-
aligning structures?