* 0115704
* MRI:  Acquisition of an Alpha Spectrometry System for Research and Undergraduate Training in Geology and Environmental Science
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2002
* Benjamin Greenstein, Cornell College
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2002
* USD 97,826.00

0115704 Denniston

This grant, made through the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program,
provides full support of the costs of acquiring a bank of alpha spectrometers
for uranium-series (238U-234U-230Th and 226Ra-210Pb) isotope dating of
speleothems and corals. The equipment will include a Canberra Genie-2000
benchtop alpha analyst with dual alpha spectrometers, 450 mm2 PIPS detectors,
hardware and software for operation and data reduction, as well as a radon
analysis system composed of Storm King R-LPSS double Rn extraction system with
an Applied Techniques model AC/DC-DRC-MK10-2 dual radon counting system.
Acquisition of this instrument will enable two lines of research in earth
systems processes at Cornell College, including the impacts of environmental
change on continental and shallow marine environments: (1) construction of
speleothem-based records of Holocene climate variability from the midwestern
U.S.A. and central Nepal and (2) analysis of the temporal resolving power of
reef coral death assemblages as a means of assessing the response of reef coral
communities to global climate change. Both research areas will be addressed as
faculty and faculty-guided undergraduate projects that will be combined with
stable and radiogenenic isotope mass spectrometric analyses at the University of
Iowa and the University of New Mexico. The research experiences students receive
using this alpha spectrometry system will enhance quantitative and analytical
skills, expand appreciation for independent research as a tool for scientific
training, introduce a variety of environmentally-oriented research topics, and
develop peripheral skills including X-ray diffraction and optical microscope
methods, stable isotopic analysis, and thermal ionization mass spectrometry. ***

