* 0115593
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Science:  Development of Force-Frequency Shifting for Low Frequency Structural Vibrations Testing
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Martin Trethewey, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 08/31/2005
* USD 26,894.00

0115593&lt;br/&gt;Trethewey&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a three
year collaborative research project between Professor Martin Trethewey of the
Pennsylvania State University and Professor Leonhard Koss of Monash University
in Victoria, Australia. This project will undertake a study of the development
of Force Frequency Shifting (FFS) for low frequency structural vibrations
testing. Experimental vibration testing of civil and architectural structures
has proven helpful in health assessment and in developing vibration absorbers
for troublesome facilities. These target systems are characterized by having 1)
low natural frequencies, 2) large mass, and 3) high damping. These conditions
create a demanding set of vibration excitation specifications for experimental
modal testing or active control applications. The vibration excitation problem
stems from the inherently difficulty in creating high amplitude forces at low
natural frequencies. The goal of the research is to develop and evaluate a novel
low frequency vibration excitation technique ultimately suitable for vibration
excitation of civil, architectural, and heavy machinery structures. Through a
mechanical modulation process, a component of an efficiently generated high
frequency excitation force is shifted to a low frequency. It is this shifted low
frequency excitation signal that is the focus of this research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project brings together the efforts of two
laboratories that have complementary expertise and research capabilities. The
value of vibration testing of large-scale systems has developed a proven track
record of delivering valuable information in relation to a number of varied
issues. Research in this are could assist in the assessment of bridge structural
health, building occupant acceptability, wind excited motion, earthquake
isolation performance and floor vibration for sensitive installations such as
medical MRI equipment. The project advances international human resources
through the participation of graduate and undergraduate students. Through the
exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our base of basic
knowledge and promote international understanding and cooperation. Results of
the research will be published in international scientific journals and will
also be presented at scientific meetings in the U.S. and
abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;