* 0115650
* Oxidation of Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCBs) in Supercritical Water
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2005
* Lawrence Tavlarides, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 05/31/2005
* USD 232,401.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Lawrence L. Tavlarides &lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Syracuse University&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0115650&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to advance the existing technology of the supercritical
water oxidation (SCWO) process by developing fundamental knowledge which can be
used to define an efficient and environmentally safe way to destroy toxic
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) extracted from contaminated soil/sediments or
from disposal sites. PCBs are highly toxic organic pollutants (POPs) included by
122 nations on a recently banned list of chemicals known as the "dirty dozen."
The 209 PCB congeners are approximately twice the number of the elements in the
Periodic Table and 17 times the number of chlorobenzenes, offering chess0like
possibilities of investigations. Systematically selected congeners and the most
used industrial PCB mixtures will be oxidized in SCW both neat and methanolic
solutions. Emphasis will be on the methanolic solutions due to observed rate-
enhancing quality of MeOH on PCB dechlorination. Several solutions obtained by
SC-CO2/MeOH extraction from PCB polluted real world sediments will also be
studied to couple the extraction and oxidation steps of a soil remediation
technology being developed by the PI. This approach will permit one to design
and optimally operate competitive SCWO large-scale units for PCBs and other
related pollutants under less severe conditions than those proposed without
kinetic studies and without reaction rate enhancers. Based on experimental
results, reaction kinetics and pathways and structure-reactivity relationships
will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PCB oxidation experiments in
supercritical water will be conducted in a high-pressure, isothermal plug-flow
tubular reactor capable of continuous operation at temperatures up to 873 K and
pressures up to 60 MPa. The approach is to select thermodynamic, kinetic and
process parameters in order to find the optimum conditions for achieving the
strategic goal of safe and efficient PCB destruction under the least aggressive
conditions. The main parameters considered are temperature (673 - 874 K),
pressure (25 - 35 MPa), residence time (1-240 s), and solute concentration (0.1
- 10 g/L in MeOH, and 10-3 - 10 mmol/L in SCW). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
knowledge will be disseminated to the research community through publications
and presentations and will provide a model training/education to students,
including Native Americans living on PCB contaminated lands.&lt;br/&gt;