* 0115932
* Acquisition of a Genetic Analyzer for Analysis of Phylogenetic Relationships and Populations Genetics.
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Gerard Allan, Arcadia University
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Farmer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 157,092.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. Allan, Bushar and Hearn at Arcadia University
(formerly Beaver College) to conduct DNA sequence analyses of select organisms
belonging to the Plant and Animal kingdoms. Dr. Allan will analyze evolutionary
relationships among plant species in the Pea Family to better understand their
origin and diversification in specific mediterranean environments. The study
will entail analysis of DNA sequences generated by an automated DNA sequencer,
and will result in the construction of a molecular phylogeny (DNA-based family
tree) for approximately 150 species, some of which are agriculturally important.
Dr. Bushar will conduct DNA sequence and microsatellite (tandemly repeated DNA
sequences) studies to understand factors that impact the structure, variation
and long-term viability of North American rattlesnakes. Dr. Hearn will use DNA
sequence information to augment her work on the conservation management and
evolutionary relationships of large forest mammals and nesting marine turtles on
Bioko Island, Equatorial Guinea, West Africa.

Methods used in this research include: the isolation of genomic DNA from
different study organisms (plants, snakes, mammals); identification of target
gene regions in nuclear, chloroplast and mitochondrial DNA; and the generation
of DNA sequence information using a Genetic Analyzer (DNA sequencer). In the
plant study, DNA sequence information will be used to generate molecular-based
phylogenies, in conjunction with computer-based algorithms. These data will
address questions relating to the origin and diversification of plants endemic
to different mediterranean regions including western North America, Chile, the
Mediterranean, western Australia and South Africa. In rattlesnakes, both DNA
sequence information and microsatellite loci will be applied to genetic
comparisons of spatially isolated North American species. These data will
provide valuable information on the genetic structure both within and between
snake populations. Relationships among large forest mammals will be analyzed
using DNA sequence data in conjunction with computer-based phylogenetic
analyses. These data will contribute to the conservation management of large
forest mammals and nesting marine turtles on Bioko Island.

The primary purpose of these DNA sequence studies is to enhance undergraduate
education in biology at Arcadia University. DNA sequence technology is rapidly
becoming the method of choice for a broad spectrum of biological-based
questions. The development of new pharmaceutical drugs, the identification of
virulent flu viruses, research on the AIDS virus, the human genome project and
conservation management of biodiversity are just a few examples of studies that
use DNA sequence technology. By incorporating DNA sequence methods into plant
biology, advanced genetics and molecular biology courses, students will gain an
understanding of the wide application DNA technology has to diverse biological
questions. Students will be trained both in theoretical and applied analyses of
DNA sequence data. An additional goal is to offer courses in advanced laboratory
techniques to faculty from other small liberal arts colleges and to high school
teachers. Ultimately, this research program constitutes a powerful heuristic
tool for educating and training the next generation of young scientists and
teachers. This program has a direct benefit to the public by training students
who will teach and conduct research on problems that directly impact human
society.

