* 0115438
* US-Southern Africa Cooperative Research:  International Distance Learning on the Environment of Southern Africa
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2003
* Paul Desanker, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 06/30/2003
* USD 25,000.00

0115438&lt;br/&gt;Macko &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a pilot
program for a one-year international distance learning project in the
environmental sciences to be conducted by the University of Virginia (UVA), the
University of Eduardo Mondlane (UEM) in Mozambique, and the University of the
Witwatersrand (WITS) in South Africa. Each participating university will
transmit some of the seminars via satellite broadcast (six from UVA and two each
from UEM and WITS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Southern Africa has undergone and
continues to experience large-scale land use/land cover changes largely brought
about by human intervention with the environment. These changes can have
environmental repercussions at the regional, continental, and global scales.
Environmental education is essential for understanding these impacts on the
global environment, and on the environment of the United States. This pilot
project will explore the feasibility of exposing US and Southern African
undergraduate and graduate students to leading edge technology and scientific
content through a satellite-based seminar series in the environmental sciences.
The seminar broadcasts will enable US students to have direct exposure to and
interaction with regional expert lecturers and African students. The US and
African students will also interact with each other through the internet, using
the classroom internet tools provided by UVA. This project is expected to foster
the transfer of knowledge and information on regional system level environmental
problems by harnessing the existing broad spectrum of academic excellence within
the partner universities. It is also expected to help create an internationally
oriented generation of young environmental scientists in both the United States
and Southern Africa. It is anticipated that up to 100 undergraduate and 20
graduate students from UVA will participate in these seminars, as well as
approximately 40 students from Southern Africa. The project also includes visits
by the US investigators to Southern Africa and visits by representatives from
UEM and WITS to UVA for collaborative input to and evaluation of the program.
&lt;br/&gt;