* 0115103
* Arabidopsis 2010:  A Sequence-Indexed Library of Insertion Mutations in the Arabidopsis Genome
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Joseph Ecker, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 08/31/2003
* USD 3,000,000.00

Arabidopsis 2010: A Sequence-Indexed Library of Insertion Mutations in the
Arabidopsis Genome. With the availability of the entire Arabidopsis genome
sequence, one of the next challenges is to uncover the functions of the more
than 25,000 genes in this reference plant. Given the scope of the NSF 2010
program, to identify the function of all Arabidopsis genes in the next decade,
an efficient and cost effective approach is necessary to identify mutations in
all genes. The goal of this program is to create a sequence-indexed library of
mutations in the Arabidopsis genome. The Salk Institute Genome Analysis
Laboratory (http://signal.salk.edu) will use high-throughput genome sequencing
methods to identify the sites of insertion of Agrobacterium T-DNA in the
Arabidopsis genome. T-DNA transformed plants from the Alonso/Crosby/Ecker
collection will be grown, genomic DNA will be prepared, T-DNA flanking plant DNA
will be recovered and sequenced. Insertion site sequences will be aligned with
the Arabidopsis genome sequence and gene annotation will be added. The data will
be made available via a web accessible graphical interface-T-
DNAExpress-(http://signal.salk.edu/cgi-bin/tdnaexpress) that will provide both
text and DNA searches of the insertion sequence database. All DNA sequences will
be deposited into GenBank (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) and also provided to The
Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR) (www.arabidopsis.org). Seeds from the
T-DNA insertion lines will be deposited with the Arabidopsis Biological Resource
Center (ABRC) at Ohio State University:http://www.biosci.ohiostate.edu/~plantbio
/Facilities/abrc/ABRCHOME.HTM. The ABRC will propagate and distribute seeds to
the community. The creation of a searchable database containing the insertion
site information and the availability of the corresponding mutant lines in
public stock centers will provide researchers with ready access to mutants in
their genes of interest, allowing the testing of hypotheses about gene function
at an unprecedented rate.