* 0115114
* Urban Systemic Program in Science (USP), Mathematics, and Technology Education: Portland Urban Systemic Program
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2007
* Susan Montag, School District No.1j Multnomah County, Or
* Cooperative Agreement
* Celestine Pea
* 08/31/2007
* USD 6,022,086.00

The Portland Public Schools (PPS) District is the largest district in the state
of Oregon. It has an enrollment of almost 55,000 students in 64 elementary
schools, 20 middle schools, 12 high schools and an increasing number of special
focus and alternative programs. Of these schools 55 qualify for Title I
assistance while approximately 49% of elementary students, 37% of middle school
students and 28% of high school students participate in free/reduced lunch
programs. Currently an estimated 38% of the students stem from minority
backgrounds. PPS employs over 3,100 certified teachers and the district serves
over 90% of Portland's eligible population. The district has used the PASS
college entrance requirements as the academic target of all students for a
number of years. The goals of the Portland USP are: 1. To enable the district's
entire diverse student enrollment to meet rigorous K-12 standards in science and
mathematics and prepare for post-secondary education and future careers. To
significantly reduce disparities in participation and academic performance
between various student populations. 2. To increase the district's capacity to
develop, support, and sustain teacher and principal leadership in implementing
standards-based curricular reform and continuous improvement of K-12 science,
mathematics and technology education for all students. 3. To engage families and
the community in supporting improved student performance in science and
mathematics and improved access to high-quality, inquiry-based educational
opportunities in science, mathematics and technology. 4. To establish ongoing,
collaborative partnerships with higher education, business/industry, policy
makers, and other key stakeholders in support of exemplary, research-based
teaching and learning in science, mathematics, and technology within the context
of a large and diverse urban school district.

To reach these goals, some of the implementation strategies that will be used by
the Portland USP during the first year are: a. After-school academic
assistance/tutoring in both mathematics and science. b. Parent education on
standards-based curricula and support for students at home. c. After-school
workshops for teachers and principals on content knowledge and pedagogy. d.
Science and math courses, workshops and lecture series. e. Annual summer
institutes (5 days in math and 5 days in science). f. Preparation of science and
mathematics leaders.