* 0115828
* Nonlinear Dynamics Study and Development of High Performance MEMS Gyroscopes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Zaichun Feng, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Alison Flatau
* 08/31/2004
* USD 253,304.00

Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose research in understanding the
nonlinear dynamics of MEMS gyroscopes to achieve better gyro performance. The
onset of instability in MEMS gyroscopes that is reported in the literature
prevents the microgyros from operating at optimum conditions. Specifically, the
mismatch between the resonance frequencies in the microgyro structure was not
minimized in existing designs. Since the microgyros have very low damping,
operating not at perfect resonance greatly limits the gyro performances. To
remove this barrier, nonlinearity in the system must be considered since the
system dynamics near resonances is well-known to be greatly affected by
nonlinear effects even though these nonlinear effects are otherwise small.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We also propose development effort to find better
fabrication techniques to make thick structures for the microgyros. This is
purely motivated by the simple fact that microgyros are inertia sensors and
thicker structures will accentuate the Coriolis force and make the signal
detection more immune to the noise associated with the signal amplification.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the tremendous amount of research and development
effort on MEMS inertia sensors, the crucial research results are not available
in the literature. Much of the know-how about microgyro designs remains
proprietary. Through the proposed research, we hope to provide the research
community our findings about the design considerations and innovative
fabrication techniques for the microgyros. Moreover, by involving both graduate
and undergraduate students in this research and incorporating MEMS in the
engineering curriculum, we hope to better prepare students for the work force.
Moreover, by taking advantage of the existing program called "Diversity in
Engineering" at University of Missouri, we hope to interest more under-
represented minority students in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;