* 0115406
* Magnetically Assisted CMP of Low-K Polymers
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2005
* Pradeep Fulay, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Olufemi Olowolafe
* 07/31/2005
* USD 252,000.00

In IC fabrication chemical mechanical planarization (CMP) is used to planarize
surfaces of&lt;br/&gt;conductors like aluminum, tungsten, tantalum and copper
and dielectrics like silicon dioxide,&lt;br/&gt;silicon nitride, and low-k
polymers. The CMP process is the only technique available now
to&lt;br/&gt;provide surfaces across the die and wafer with planarity sufficient
to meet the stringent depth of&lt;br/&gt;focus requirements of shorter
wavelength lithographic techniques. The CMP of low-k
polymeric&lt;br/&gt;materials and architectures overlaid on these polymers is
challenging. This is because the low-k&lt;br/&gt;polymeric materials are
mechanically softer and even porous, can flow under heat, and
have&lt;br/&gt;hydrophobic surfaces. There exists a critical need for developing
low pressure, selective, and&lt;br/&gt;effective CMP process of the new, low-k
polymers and architectures overlaid on these polymers.&lt;br/&gt;The primary
objective of this program is to develop a novel approach using
magnetically&lt;br/&gt;responsive slurries (MRS) to conduct CMP of low-k
polymers and associated structures. The&lt;br/&gt;project is a joint
collaborative, interdisciplinary, synergistic effort between investigators
from&lt;br/&gt;Clarkson University and University of Pittsburgh, with
collaboration with industry. A&lt;br/&gt;fundamental and systematic
investigation of the feasibility such a magnetically assisted
CMP&lt;br/&gt;process will be conducted. The outcome of this program has the
potential for a significantly high&lt;br/&gt;economic payoff. This project will
have significant combined impact on the: basic science that&lt;br/&gt;forms the
underpinning of the CMP technology, research infrastructure, and development
of&lt;br/&gt;human resources.