* 0115233
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Determining Early Elite Strategies through Household Excavations in the northern Lake Titicaca Basin of Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2002
* Mark Aldenderfer, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2002
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Mark S. Aldenderfer, Elizabeth Klarich will collect
data for her doctoral dissertation during the summer and fall of 2001. She will
direct excavations at Pucara (200 BC- AD 400), a site located in the
northwestern Lake Titicaca Basin of Peru at an elevation of 3950 masl. During
the Upper Formative Period, Pucara was one of two major population centers in
the Titicaca region. The site has been characterized as an early urban center, a
ceremonial center, the center of a complex chiefdom, and more generally as the
center of a ceramic style region. Previous archaeological research at Pucara has
clarified the layout of the monumental public architecture and surrounding mound
complexes, defined Classic Pukara decorated ceramics and monoliths, and located
two areas of distinct residential architecture within the 1 km2 site.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within early complex societies such as Pucara, elites gain
and maintain power using a number of economic, political, and social strategies.
There are three major models for Pukara polity organization, each emphasizing
different strategies used by elites during the Upper Formative Period. While the
models have the potential to provide significant insights, each is based on only
limited excavation data from the site. Consequently, it is impossible to
evaluate these models without collecting additional data. The proposed
excavations will be conducted in a central area of residential architecture in
order to understand the organization of elite domestic economy in this early
regional center. Broad, horizontal areas will be excavated in order to locate
contemporaneous activity areas and determine general household organization
within elite compounds. These compounds, originally located in 1939 by Alfred
Kidder II, are not visible on the modern ground surface. Excavation blocks have
been selected based on geophysical survey data (ground penetrating radar and
cesium magnetometer) collected during the fall of 2000. Excavation data from
households-- the predominant location of production, consumption, and
distribution activities within preindustrial societies-- will be used to
determine what type of economic, political, and ritual strategies were involved
in the development and maintenance of Pukara elites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
rise of complex societies occurred independently in many parts of the world
Although historical contingency played a role in shaping individual
trajectories, through cross region comparison archaeologists gain insight into
common underlying processes. MS Klarich's research will provide additional
information on one such case. It will yield data of interest to many
archaeologists and assist in training a promising young scientist.&lt;br/&gt;