* 0115315
* Collaborative Research: Planar Magnetic Photonic Crystals
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Miguel Levy, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* James W. Mink
* 08/31/2005
* USD 178,275.00

This collaborative project between Michigan Technological University (MTU) and
Southwest Texas State University (SWT) focuses on the fabrication and testing of
waveguide photonic crystals in magnetic oxides for novel integrated photonic
device prototyping. The project responds to the growing interest in photonic
crystals for device applications based on their unique optical band gap
properties. While various novel optical band gap structures have been fabricated
in non-magnetic dielectric media for highly efficient waveguiding, filtering and
resonator applications, very little work has been done on photonic crystals in
magnetic systems and no work exists on monolithic planar magnetophotonic
crystals. This project will focus on the electron-beam patterning of magnetic
photonic crystals on ferrite waveguides for a new generation of integrated
optical isolator devices. The non-reciprocal properties of magnetic oxides, such
as yttrium iron garnet (YIG), make these materials a unique choice for optical
isolator and circulator fabrication. Optical fiber telecommunications have
developed to the point where the monolithic integration of different optical
components is a serious issue to reduce costs in local area networks and long-
distance data transmittal. However, conventional systems utilizing non-planar
geometries are both bulky and expensive. Photonic crystal structures provide a
novel alternative to address this problem since they can significantly enhance
the Faraday response, making it possible to build smaller and cheaper isolators
and circulators, a generation beyond the types of integrated isolators being
explored at present. The proposed program will concentrate on the fabrication of
patterned ridge waveguides on rf-sputtered bismuth-substituted YIG films, with
special emphasis on achieving superior optical isolation by minimizing
birefringence. It will also explore the fabrication of flat top transmission
devices. By establishing the practical implementation of magnetic photonic
crystals on chip, the project will also contribute to the development of optical
filters, highly efficient Kerr reflectors for magneto-optic recording and mode
converters.

