* 0115892
* Acquisition of Molecular Biology Instrumentation for a Biotechnology Research Center Between Departments of Biology and Chemistry at Southern Oregon University
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Karen Stone, Southern Oregon University
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Farmer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 157,231.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Stone at Southern Oregon University to purchase
major instrumentation for the establishment of an interdepartmental
biotechnology center. Equipment includes a genetic analyzer (automated DNA
sequencer), superspeed centrifuge, autoclave, chromatography cabinet, water
filtration system, vacufuge concentrator, incubated shaker, microfuge,
circulating baths, incubator, fume hood, and safety hood. Faculty in the biology
and chemistry departments will develop a biotechnology center to create a
supportive work environment without need for duplication of equipment. This
center will house equipment and supplies needed for diverse research activities
using molecular methods, provide functional bench space, and serve as a forum
for interaction between faculty and students working on diverse projects that
share common methodology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research will be conducted on a
range of organisms including bacteria, higher plants, invertebrates, and
vertebrates. Research training will be extended to faculty and students who may
update or expand their skills in molecular techniques. The areas that will be
investigated span from biochemistry, developmental biology, and environmental
microbiology to molecular systematics, conservation genetics, population
biology, and molecular evolution. Specific research projects
include:&lt;br/&gt;a. identifying and monitoring bacterial levels in local
streams and determining possible pollution sources. &lt;br/&gt;b. studying the
evolution of American martens using DNA sequencing and the taxonomic status of a
rare subspecies of martens found in California.&lt;br/&gt;c. identifying
bacteria associated with an exposed vein of pyrite and other bacteria involved
in acid drainage from pyrite. &lt;br/&gt;d. developing an inexpensive, reliable
method of producing high volumes of conotoxins, which are possible models for
future pharmaceuticals due to their biochemical properties.&lt;br/&gt;e.
investigating the roles of specific genes in the development of garden
peas.&lt;br/&gt;f. investigating the evolutionary development of floral
components.&lt;br/&gt;g. studying the genetics of variants of noble firs and
firs found on Mt. Shasta which may represent hybrids between California red firs
and noble firs.&lt;br/&gt;examining diversity of plant and microbial species on
serpentine soils which have high concentrations of heavy metals such as nickel,
cadmium, and chromium.&lt;br/&gt;characterizing the structure and function of
common mycorrhizal networks on white oak.&lt;br/&gt;Southern Oregon University
is a small, non-Ph.D. granting university whose faculty is primarily engaged in
teaching. As a small college focused on quality undergraduate education with a
relatively high faculty to student ratio (1:18), their students have the
opportunity to be mentored individually by faculty in a way that is usually only
available to graduate students. This represents a great advantage to those
students who wish to explore laboratory research. All students have the
opportunity to do research, and much of this research is carried out as senior
capstone projects. In addition, increasing numbers of students are attracted to
the prospect of jobs in biotechnology fields and the new frontiers biotechnology
makes available to medicine. This biotechnology center will provide students
with saleable skills needed to attain tech-level positions in industry or to
further their education by attending graduate or medical school. &lt;br/&gt;