* 0115599
*  Columbus Urban Systemic Program (CUSP)
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2007
* Gene Harris, Columbus Public Schools
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joseph Reed
* 08/31/2007
* USD 5,287,053.00

COLUMBUS URBAN SYSTEMIC PROGRAM&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Columbus Public Schools
(CPS) serving 64,339 students, in 144 schools, of which 62% are minority, 57%
are poor, and 3% are Limited-English-Proficient, through the Columbus Urban
Systemic Program (CUSP), proposes to build upon the results realized under the
Columbus Urban Systemic Initiative (USI). During the USI, CPS developed a
building-based, professional-development delivery infrastructure promoting
standards-based curriculum, instruction, and assessment strategies in support of
all students attaining high levels of academic achievement in mathematics and
science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the CUSP, the District states commitments
to achieving the four driving goals of the USP Solicitation, NSF 01-15, related
to improved student achievement, enhanced implementation of standards-based-
inquiry-centered science and mathematics, increased competency and diversity of
the instructional workforce, and intensified substantive collaborations with
institutions of higher education towards improved teacher education. The USP
implementation process embraces three major components and attendant enabling
strategies. Therein, the CUSP will:&lt;br/&gt;- Focus Efforts and Resources
Identify and target schools that have not fully implemented the standards-based
curriculum for on-site professional development, monitoring of instruction, and
increased parent involvement at those sites;&lt;br/&gt;-Fund long-term
professional development with interim follow-up, reflecting the success of past
models and current technology standards;&lt;br/&gt;-Focus on reaching full
implementation of the standards-based curriculum in the District's lowest-
implementation schools each year;&lt;br/&gt; Sustain support for students
through summer bridge activities, internships and summer camps in mathematics,
science, engineering, and technology; and&lt;br/&gt;-Advocate and ensure that
resources and facilities are sufficient to support the standards-based learning
environment.&lt;br/&gt;-Nurture Building-Level Leadership Support existing K-12
instructional leadership teams and other in-service participants through on-
going professional development and follow-up consistent with the National Staff
Development Council standards;&lt;br/&gt;-Assure that Instructional Leadership
Teams (ILT) provide professional development to their staffs, serve as resources
for other teachers, and coordinate school-wide mathematics and science
events;&lt;br/&gt;-Provide training for district-level curriculum specialists
and Peer Assistance Review (PAR) consultants to ensure cohesive delivery of
instruction;&lt;br/&gt;-Coordinate in-depth training in the principal walk-
through process;&lt;br/&gt;-Expand incentives for the district's Performance
Advancement System by encouraging university collaboration, action research, and
dissemination of research related to improved student achievement in mathematics
and science.&lt;br/&gt;-Collaborate with Universities to Improve Teacher
Education Continue strengthening university alliances to impact the
effectiveness of pre-service education, the diversity of the CPS workforce, the
technological skill of CPS graduates, and classroom research on teaching and
learning;&lt;br/&gt;-Support CPS classified personnel in the pursuit of degrees
in mathematics and science education;&lt;br/&gt;-Provide a forum for cooperating
and pre-service teachers in area universities to apply their knowledge of K-12
mathematics and science standards and technology utility;
and&lt;br/&gt;-Contribute as a consequential partner in university initiatives,
i.e., The Ohio State University Teacher Quality Institute, Project Discovery,
the P-12 Initiative of the Ohio State University, and the Urban Academy,
designed to increase student achievement by improving the quality of mathematics
and science teacher education.&lt;br/&gt;