* 0115887
* Acquisition of a 200KV FEG Electron Microscope for Molecular Microscopy
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Ronald Milligan, The Scripps Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 08/31/2004
* USD 838,054.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Ron Milligan at The Scripps Research Institute
to purchase an electron microscope. This is an advanced research instrument that
can be used to record images of biological specimens at magnifications of up to
500,000X. The instrument will be used to visualize and image proteins and large
assemblies composed of many different molecules that occurs inside cells and
enable them to carry out various functions.

The research of the user group focuses on three-dimensional (3D) molecular
microscopy: determination of the near-atomic, secondary, tertiary and quaternary
structure of molecules and macromolecular assemblies by cryo-electron microscopy
and image analysis. The common goal of the user group is to calculate 3D
structures of biological molecules and macromolecular complexes to determine how
they work. Some of the work to be carried out on the instrument includes
investigations of: proteins that bind to microtubules and stabilize them, motor
proteins that move along microtubules, toxins from bacteria that punch holes in
cells, proteins that facilitate fusion of membrane-bound compartments in cells,
protein assemblies that read off (transcribe) the genome in the nucleus,
membrane proteins that act as pumps, channels or signaling complexes, and plant
and animal viruses. The superior performance of the new microscope is essential
for getting the best possible results in these studies.

The work to be undertaken is of fundamental biological importance. The results
will provide insight in to many of the basic processes that occur inside cells
and are essential for life. At The Scripps Research institute, the instrument
will be used by 6 research groups. 12 postdoctoral associates and 6 graduate
students will receive advanced training in structural biology using this
instrument. 10-20 research professionals will use the instrument in the course
of their work. Visiting researchers from elsewhere in the US and overseas are
anticipated. The proposed new instrument will be integrated into existing EM
management plan as well as training, education and outreach activities at The
Scripps Research Institute. This will create a unique research and training
facility, which will have a major impact on the regional, national and
international research infrastructure.