* 0115004
* Arabidopsis 2010:  Comprehensive Functional Analysis of the Arabidopsis RCD Gene Family
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2005
* Jan A. D. Zeevaart, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Gavin Thompson
* 12/31/2005
* USD 665,750.00

Apocarotenoids are a diverse set of plant secondary metabolites derived from
carotenoid breakdown. They have significant roles as developmental and
environmental response signals. They also have important roles as contributors
to flavor and nutritional quality. A critical advance in elucidating
apocarotenoid synthesis occurred when the first gene encoding a carotenoid
dioxygenase, maize Vp14, was cloned. Vp14 encodes the limiting enzyme in
abscisic acid synthesis, 9-cis-epoxycarotenoid dioxygenase (NCED). Arabidopsis
contains nine members of a gene family encoding enzymes related to NCED,
referred to hereafter as RCDs (Related to Carotenoid Dioxgenase). Only a subset
of the family is directly involved in abscisic acid synthesis and the other
members of the family likely encode enzymes that metabolize a range of
carotenoids to multiple volatile and non-volatile apocarotenoids. One of the
family members, RCD1, does indeed cleave multiple carotenoid substrates at a
different position than NCED, supporting this hypothesis. Thus, the RCD family
exhibits variation both in carotenoid substrates and position of cleavage. We
will establish the functions of the complete Arabidopsis RCD gene family. We
have identified knock-out mutants in every RCD gene and will construct double
and triple knockout combinations, as appropriate. Using bacterial expression and
in vitro assays, the substrate specificities and products of each member of the
RCD enzyme family will be determined. The apocarotenoid metabolic profiles of
each mutant, as well as appropriate double and triple mutants, will be
quantified. Mutants will also be examined for phenotypic alterations associated
with altered apocarotenoid profiles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Upon completion of
the project, we will have defined the functions of a complete set of
evolutionarily related enzymes that synthesize a broad range of apocarotenoids.
We will have further isolated mutant lines deficient in synthesis of specific
subsets of these biologically active moleculaes and determined the consequences
of loss of subsets of apocarotenoids on plant growth and development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current information on the RCD gene family and
characterization of the individual gene products may be obtained at
http://www.hos.ufl.edu/kleeweb/2010RCDprogram.htm&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All gene
knockouts will be deposited with the Ohio State University Arabidopsis stock
center (http://www.biosci.ohiostate.edu/~plantbio/Facilities/abrc/ABRCHOME.HTM)
by the end of 2002. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;