* 0115819
* Using Spatial and Temporal Variations of Ice Deformation to Study Basal Processes
* GEO,OPP
* 11/01/2001,10/31/2004
* Keith Echelmeyer, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 10/31/2004
* USD 274,167.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;Echelmeyer&lt;br/&gt;OPP-01-15819&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
Principal Investigators will study the distribution of basal shear stress and
basal motion through detailed monitoring of surface velocities and internal ice
deformation. The hypothesis is that the distribution of basal stress is related
to the internal deformation field, and that temporal changes in basal conditions
manifest themselves not only as changes in surface motion, but as changes in
internal deformation. Such changes in internal deformation can be relatively
large given the non-linear rheology of ice and the sensitivity of basal
processes to variations in effective pressure. The Principal Investigators will
investigate the mechanisms of basal motion using these ideas on Black Rapids
Glacier, Alaska. They have previously documented the presence of a subglacial
till layer and have some knowledge of its properties. Observational and modeling
studies have shown that water pressure fluctuations cause changes in the
strength of this till, and that these spatial and temporal changes in basal
conditions then lead to measurable changes in the ice deformation field. Six
boreholes will be drilled along a cross section where the till exists, and a
seventh will be drilled further downglacier. They will be instrumented with tilt
sensors for continuous monitoring of borehole deformation and with pressure
transducers for monitoring basal water pressure. They will also measure surface
velocities across the transects, and their temporal fluctuations. The
observational study will be initiated before the annual spring speed-up event
and carried through the summer, when various motion events occur. Logging will
then continue through the more steady conditions of the winter season. A finite
element model of ice deformation will then be used to interpret these data in
terms of the distribution of basal shear stress and the underlying mechanisms of
basal motion throughout the annual cycle. The proposed project will take full
advantage of synergetic collaboration with an existing, funded program to
install tilt sensors deep in the underlying basal till at the same location as
our central borehole. Taken together, the Principal Investigators will be able
to obtain a more complete picture of basal processes and of the interdependence
of basal motion and ice deformation. Such interdependence is usually neglected
in simple models of ice flow and the response of glaciers to climate
variations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;