* 0115709
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Scanning Laser Confocal Microscope for Research and Education in Biology and Biochemistry at Luther College
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Jodi Enos-Berlage, Luther College
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Farmer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 256,813.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Jodi Enos-Berlage at Luther College to purchase
a scanning laser confocal microscope. This instrument, which enables three-
dimensional imaging and superior resolution of biological specimens, has become
an essential tool for modern biological research. This microscope will be used
for eight projects that will enhance research and education at Luther College.
These projects span diverse areas of biological research, including studies of
plant physiology, developmental biology, eukaryotic cell biology, bacterial
"multicellularity", and techniques in light microscopy. The eight proposed
projects include four faculty/student research projects and four upper division
courses, representing the research and teaching activities of at least 5 science
faculty in two different departments (Biology and Chemistry). Acquisition of a
confocal microscope will increase student research opportunities at Luther
College and is expected to result in a concomitant increase in the number of
students that pursue graduate studies in science, along with preparing them
better for this endeavor. Together with the faculty, we expect that 60-70
students will be users of this instrument on an annual basis. The eight projects
that will utilize scanning laser confocal microscopy (SLCM) are as follows: In
project 1, SCLM will be used to study various forms of bacterial
"multicellularity". The model organism Vibrio parahaemolyticus will be used to
determine how bacterial cells are organized in colonies and biofilms, how these
communities develop, and what environmental and bacterial factors are required.
Project 2 will utilize SCLM to investigate lipid trafficking in eukaryotic
cells. Fluorescent lipid analogs will be used as probes to study the
concentration, movement, and metabolism of lipids and to determine the factors
that influence the sorting mechanisms of lipids. Project 3 involves
investigating the nature of plant border cells, which form at the root tips of
plants and easily detach to form a specialized root tissue. SCLM will be used to
examine border cell production and characterize their potential involvement in a
fungal pathogen-plant interaction. The developmental biology of the model
organism Drosophila is the focus of project 4. Confocal microscopy will be used
to assay developmental protein localization patterns in Drosophila embryos of
wild type and mutant strains. In project 5, bacterial biofilms will be
investigated in a general microbiology course. Students will grow biofilms,
observe their development using SCLM, and identify environmental factors that
affect biofilm formation. Project 6 will incorporate confocal microscopy into an
existing course in light microscopy. Various laboratories will be developed to
demonstrate how SCLM is being used for current research and to train students on
the operation of the instrument. In project 7, confocal microscopy will be used
to demonstrate concepts in a biochemistry laboratory course. Eukaryotic cellular
processes and organelle structure and function will be examined using a variety
of fluorescently-labeled probes. Finally, project 8 will utilize SCLM for an
integrative laboratory experience in cell biology. Specifically, students will
use fluorescently-labeled antibodies that crosslink cell surface proteins to
examine the structure and fluidity of the plasma membrane and functioning of the
cytoskeleton. The research projects described above will increase understanding
of a number of important biological processes. A better understanding of such
processes has broad implications. For example, knowledge of bacterial biofilm
formation will aid in control of these structures, which play a role bacterial
pathogenesis. Understanding lipid trafficking will aid in diagnosis and
treatment of persons with disorders caused by alterations in these processes. A
more thorough understanding of plant-pathogen interactions will facilitate
improvements in controlling plant infectious diseases. Knowledge of Drosophila
development can be applied to developmental processes in humans. Significantly,
several of the above projects involve an educational component. By using the
confocal microscope, students will have a better understanding of a variety of
biological processes and modern techniques. The general and scientific
communities will benefit by having persons that are better educated in these
areas.