* 0115797
* Development of an Ultrabroad Bandwidth Source for Ultrafast Observation and Control of Physical, Chemical, and Biological Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* David Tanner, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2004
* USD 300,000.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation will support instrument
development at the University of Florida. A group of physicists and chemists
with a common need for broadband spectroscopic probing of materials with
ultrafast time resolution have teamed together to develop a high brightness,
high repetition rate femtosecond laser chirped pulse amplifier system capable of
providing high intensity pulses over a range of wavelengths spanning 3 decades
from 200 nm to 20 microns. Pulses with temporal duration approaching 10
femtoseconds and intensities nearing 100 Petawatts per square centimeter will be
delivered at a repetition rate of 10 Kilohertz. In addition, the instrument will
have the capability to 'sculpt' temporal pulse shapes to produce 'pulse shapes
on demand'. Applications will include investigations of ultrafast chemical
reactions in dendrimers, studies of nonlinear optical properties of carbon
nanotubes, investigations of protein folding, and coherent control of solid
state phase transitions and molecular motion. The instrument will be operated by
a campus wide shared facility serving cross disciplinary training ground for
future scientists with programs in the application of ultrafast optical
techniques to problems in physics, chemistry, biology and materials. It will
allso be part of a teaching activity for undergraduate studenbts in science and
engineering through established NSF-funded summer REU
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Major Research
Instrumentation will support instrument development at the University of
Florida. A group of physicists and chemists with a common need for broadband
spectroscopic capability to probe materials with ultrafast time resolution will
develop a high brightness, high repetition rate femtosecond laser chirped pulse
amplifier system capable of providing high intensity pulses over a range of
wavelengths. The instrument will have the capability to 'sculpt' temporal pulse
shapes to produce 'pulse shapes on demand'. Applications will include
investigations of ultrafast chemical reactions in dendrimers, studies of
nonlinear optical properties of carbon nanotubes, investigations of protein
folding, and coherent control of solid state phase transitions and molecular
motion. The instrument will be operated by a campus wide shared facility serving
cross disciplinary training ground for future scientists with programs in the
application of ultrafast optical techniques to problems in physics, chemistry,
biology and materials. It will also be part of a teaching activity for
undergraduate students in science and engineering through established NSF-funded
summer REU programs. &lt;br/&gt;