* 0115222
* Integrated Electromagnetic/Thermal/Mechanical Analysis for MEMS Reliability
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* John Volakis, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2005
* USD 306,000.00

This proposal will identify and overcome the difficulty associated with the
reliable operation of MEMS devices, RF-MEMS in particular. This objective is
addressed through the integrated modeling of electromagnetic/thermal/mechanical
couplings in MEMS devices, experimental validation of the model, and
quantification of the coupling effects for device
reliability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To meet the need of simulating RF MEMS, the
proposal research aims at the development of an integrated multi-physics model
and its experimental verification. Research issues are 1) what is the coupling
among electromagnetic, thermal, and mechanical effects in MEMS, 2) what
numerical solution algorithms are suitable for an integrated multi-domain model,
3) what types of experiments can effectively verify the multi-domain coupling
models. Each research issue is approached as follows (in numerical
order):&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. The model will be developed for 1) Joule heating
caused by RF excitation, 2) thermal strain caused by temperature change, 3)
electrostatic pressure caused by the electric field, and 4) electric charge
redistribution caused by mechanical deformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2.
Considering the size and possible ill-condition of the FE matrix resulting from
the proposed multi-physics model, the incomplete LU (ILU) preconditioner
developed by a PI, will be used with robust solvers based on
GMRES.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. The direct observation of temperature
distribution of a RF-MEMS switch during its operation will be done using a high
resolution infrared imaging system and a high-speed digital signal analyzer, to
verify the developed coupling model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines
our modeling and experimental expertise in electromagnetic, thermal, and
mechanical science and engineering to address the highly multidisciplinary
reliability problems associated with RF MEMS applications. Our theoretical and
experimental tasks are very complementary to each other and will serve well to
achieve our research goals. The aimed simulation tool, combined with our
experimental capabilities, will help us develop RF MEMS with high performance
and reliability, and will significantly contribute to technologies related to
wireless telecommunications.&lt;br/&gt;