* 0115534
* Modeling Silicon Carbide Devices for Power Supply Performance Evaluation
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2001,02/28/2005
* Homer Mantooth, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 02/28/2005
* USD 300,219.00

This project will concentrate on compact circuit simulation models for Silicon
Carbide (SiC) devices. Namely, the power MPS diode, PiN diode, BJT, and npnp
thyristor and MTO devices will be investigated. Specifically, the project
objectives are to:&lt;br/&gt; Physically characterize MPS, PiN, BJT, and
thyristor SiC devices&lt;br/&gt; Design &amp; develop circuit simulation models
for these devices&lt;br/&gt; Validate the SiC power device models against actual
device measurements&lt;br/&gt; Demonstrate and validate SiC power device models
in key power electronic applications&lt;br/&gt;Compact circuit simulation models
enable designers to more effectively utilize a technology in circuits and
systems. Power electronic designers rely on computer simulation for insight into
the details of the operation of their circuits. In addition to nominal operating
conditions, the designer analyzes the robustness of the design through a number
of studies such as dynamic thermal analysis, worst case analysis, statistical
variations in circuit performance due manufacturing tolerances on parts, and
failure modes and effects to determine the safe operating area of the circuit.
In order to perform these simulations, models are required. Such analysis cannot
practically be performed using hardware prototypes. &lt;br/&gt;Silicon carbide
is capable of operating temperatures of 500C because of its unique electrical
and mechanical properties. Other advantages compared to silicon-based devices
exist regarding reliability, higher immunity to thermal runaway, reduced
switching losses, and higher current density. Due to SiC's high thermal
conductivity, significant savings in system cooling requirements, mass, and cost
are likely for many aircraft, shipboard, vehicle, and utility power conversion
applications.&lt;br/&gt;Now that SiC power devices are becoming more reliable
and reproducible, it is time for research and development of accurate, physical-
based models to commence. As the number of commercially available SiC devices
increase, designers will require an increasing number of component models
(characterized parts) for use in circuit simulators. Since it takes on the order
of two years to correctly construct and validate an accurate model, it is
imperative that SiC device models be developed somewhat in parallel with the
device technologies. &lt;br/&gt;Collaborators at two federal agencies, National
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) and NASA Glenn, will provide access
to SiC devices, facilities, and summer employment to the UA researchers
throughout the duration of the project. Further collaboration will occur with
Cree Research and Northrop-Grumman.&lt;br/&gt;