* 0115532
* A Novel Temperature Adaptive Nano-crystalline Dry Lubricant plus Hard Phase Composite Coating for Cutting Tools and Advanced Machining Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2007
* William Brown, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2007
* USD 287,999.00

This project is to design, develop and test a novel temperature adaptive and
nano-crystalline dry lubricant (MoS2+ZnO) plus hard phase (TiN) composite
coating for cutting tools and advanced machining applications. The nano-
crystalline dry lubricant (MoS2+ZnO) particulate coating will be deposited using
an innovative electrostatic spray coating (ESC) process. In this project, nano-
crystalline ZnO particles, coated with MoS2 via a ball milling process, will be
sprayed onto appropriate substrates using ESC. Sequentially, a hard TiN phase
will be infiltrated into the nano-crystalline particulate ZnO matrix using a
chemical vapor infiltration (CVI) process. The combination of ZnO + MoS2 was
selected for investigation because it forms oxythiomolybdates and molybdates,
which have exhibited an excellent potential for high temperature
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is a collaboration between the
Materials and Manufacturing Research Laboratories (MRL) at the University of
Arkansas and Materials Research and Development (MRD) at Valenite-Widia. As a
part of the project, students and university faculty will perform part of the
research at Valenite. The experience gained in this manner will be of great
benefit to the project and will generate an outstanding workforce knowledgeable
in the emerging area of nano-technology and advanced manufacturing. This program
will truly add scientific and engineering innovations to the state-of-the-art,
and thus, will allow the investigators to competitively address the emerging
needs of the multi-billion dollar cutting tool industry for low cost,
temperature adaptive lubrication, even on complex surfaces. The establishment of
this technology and resulting products can be a major step in the realization of
dry machining for environmentally conscious "green" manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;