* 0115886
* Acquisition of an Organic Thin Film Deposition System for Research and Training in Molecular Electronics and Nanophotonics
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2002
* David Mathine, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 07/31/2002
* USD 179,077.00

0115886&lt;br/&gt;Kippelen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is to acquire a
highly specialized organic thin film deposition system for the development and
characterization of new organic electronics and nanophotonic materials. The
instrumentation will impact not only research in Optical Sciences, but is also
considered to be critical in the training of students in Chemistry and Physics,
through established and pending collaborations between these three departments.
The Principal Investigator (Kippelen) was recently awarded an NSF CAREER Program
on Organic Photonic Materials and Plastic Optoelectronic Technologies, an ECS
grant # 9985222 and is engaged in several multidisciplinary research programs
with faculty from The University of Arizona (Optical Sciences, Chemistry, and
Physics) through programs funded by federal sources (AFOSR,DOE, NSF, ONR) and by
industrial contracts (3M, Durel Corporation, eMagin, Intel, and Nitto Denko
Corporation).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of the proposed low
temperature organic thin film deposition system will complement existing high
temperature deposition systems that are used for the deposition of inorganic
materials and will become a key building block in the research capabilities of
the Optical Sciences Center at The University of Arizona, a Center that has one
of the nation's finest teaching programs in optics at both the graduate and
undergraduate levels. With this new instrumentation, students and postdoctorals
will be able to create multifunctional organic materials for optical storage,
displays and imaging -- three technologies expected to significantly impact both
local and regional economies in coming decades. The development of processable,
low cost, high performance organic materials and well trained students will play
a key role in enabling such technologies. Instrumentation of this type does not
exist currently on this campus, but is compatible with technologies developed
recently in Chemistry (Armstrong). A true symbiosis between this proposed
facility, and the materials characterization capabilities in Chemistry, is
anticipated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the proposed organic thin film deposition
system, the P1 will capitalize on recent breakthroughs in photorefractive and
light-emitting polymers made possible by collaborations between faculty of the
College of Science and the Optical Sciences Center to carry out research in the
following areas: (i) highly efficient and reliable organic electroluminescent
displays and organic lasers; (ii) photorefractive polymers for applications in
communications and information processing, including dynamic holographic
storage, and imaging; (iii) organic based photovoltaic technologies; (iv)
nanometer thick patterned organic layers for organic field-effect transistors;
and (v) organized nanostructures for nanoelectronics. The goals of these
programs are to establish the foundations for an understanding of charge
injection, charge transport, charge trapping, and light-emission in organic
molecules and at interfaces with metallic electrodes. These advances will lead
to new materials and disposable devices on light weight and flexible substrates
that can be mass produced at low cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to
fabricate organic films with nanometer thickness control is essential for the
advancement of new and improved organic photonic technologies. Current
deposition systems at Optical Sciences for organic materials are limiting the
performance of devices under investigation and the pace at which new samples can
be produced. The SPECTROS system offered by the Kurt J. Lesker Company has been
specially designed for the low temperature deposition of organic materials. It
combines four sources for the evaporation and co-evaporation of organic
materials with two sources for the deposition of metallic contacts. This unique
system enables the fabrication of organic multilayer optoelectronic devices and
their electrodes without breaking the vacuum or having to transfer samples
between small bell-jars in a glove-box assembly. Since exposure to air and
moisture is a critical parameter in determining the intrinsic optical and
electronic properties of organics, this system will provide us with the
capabilities required to compete with other research groups at the National and
International levels in an area of intense global competition.&lt;br/&gt;