* 0115962
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Transmission Electron Microscope and Ultramicrotome for Research in the Natural Sciences at St. Joseph's University
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Karen Snetselaar, St Joseph's University
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Farmer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 277,928.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Christina King-Smith (Principal Investigator)
and Drs. Michael McCann and Karen Snetselaar (Co-Principal Investigators) at
Saint Joseph's University (SJU) to acquire a transmission electron microscope
(TEM) with digital imaging capabilities, an ultramicrotome, and ancillary
equipment. The requested ultramicrotome will be used by faculty and students in
the Biology Department for cutting ultrathin sections of biological materials
which will be examined and characterized at very high magnification using the
TEM. The electron microscope will also be used by members of the Chemistry and
Physics departments for qualitative analysis of metallo-organic compounds and
electron diffraction. The requested equipment will replace the currently
available, antiquated EM equipment and will be housed in an existing Light and
Electron Microscopy suite in the Biology Department. It will be available for
use by all faculty and students in the Departments of Biology, Chemistry,
Physics and Environmental Science as the cornerstone of an Advanced Image
Analysis and Processing Center, which is proposed as part of a planned Science
Center renovation program at SJU. The requested instrumentation will therefore
serve both to update existing research tools and as a centerpiece for a
programmatic initiative involving all of the Natural Science
departments.&lt;br/&gt; The research activities that will benefit from this
instrumentation span several disciplines in the Natural Sciences. In the Biology
Department, one project focuses on the protein skeleton of retinal pigment
epithelial (RPE) cells, a type of cell found in all vertebrate eyes. These cells
are used as a model system to investigate mechanisms for transport of components
through the interior of a cell, a basic cellular activity in nearly all animal
and plant cells. Another research project will characterize the structure and
organization of photoreceptors from the compound eyes of mantis shrimps,
invertebrate animals which have extremely unusual and complicated eyes. This
project will compare structure of eyes from different species of mantis shrimp
found at different depths in the ocean, with the goal of discovering the
structural adaptations these organisms make to maximize their visual
capabilities under low light conditions in aquatic environments. The
instrumentation will also be used to investigate cellular structures and life
cycle events of the corn smut fungus, a pathogenic fungus of corn. Studies will
include characterization of the structures the fungus uses to infect corn
plants, and other features of its life cycle. The interaction between this
fungus and corn represents a useful model system for understanding general
mechanisms of how pathogenic fungi interact with their host plants or animals.
Another project will focus on patterns of cartilage mineralization in sharks.
This research has developmental and evolutionary significance, since the
mineralization of cartilage in organisms such as sharks is important in
understanding the origin of vertebrate skeletal tissues. Microbiological
research will also make use of the instrumentation through the study of an
unusual bacterium that is a predator of other, larger bacteria. These studies
focus on the genes and proteins involved in the development and growth of this
organism. This basic research will contribute to the understanding of
fundamental patterns of genetic control of development. Researchers in the
Chemistry and Physics department will use the TEM for qualitative studies of
non-biological materials. One project in the Chemistry department is centered on
understanding the chemical transformations that occur to organic pollutants in
the environment. These studies will involve the examination of the size, shape,
and physical properties, discovered by electron diffraction, of metallic
particles that are formed as a result of the interaction between metallic
compounds and organic pollutants. This research will enhance our knowledge of
the behavior of pollutants in the environment. &lt;br/&gt; The overall
significance of the research activities that will benefit from the requested
instrumentation lie principally in the areas of basic biological and chemical
research. The cell biological studies, microbiological research, and fungal
pathogen studies will all contribute to our general knowledge of the way cells
function, extending from single-celled organisms such as fungal pathogens and
bacteria, to cells from multicellular organisms, such as RPE cells from
vertebrate eyes. The ultrastructural studies on shrimp visual systems and
mineralization of cartilage in sharks will expand our basic understanding of
structural adaptations and development of visual systems and bone. The use of
this instrumentation in materials research to investigate the reaction product
of metallic compounds and organic pollutants will provide insight on how these
pollutants react in the environment, with potential benefits to environmental
pollutant remediation. In addition to these advances in research, this award
will also have significant impact on the quality of research training for
undergraduate and masters level students. Students involved in research at SJU
work alongside faculty on the research projects described above. The electron
microscope and digital camera will interface with all of our existing image
analysis and processing equipment, and thus will greatly increase our
productivity and ability to train undergraduate and masters level students in
digital electron microscopy. &lt;br/&gt;