* 0115758
* Development of Tracer Methodology and Fluorescent Microscopy in Faculty/Student Research
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* James Haley, College of Mount Saint Vincent
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 08/31/2004
* USD 78,633.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. James E. Haley of the College of Mt. St.
Vincent. Recent research in the biological sciences has taken on more
sophisticated methods and instrumentation. One active current area involves the
use of cell/tissue culture analyses of cell function especially for neurally
derived cells from the rat brain including neurons and astrocytes as well as
other glial cells. We are fortunate to offer such rare training experience at a
small liberal arts college including a heavy emphasis on student involvement in
faculty research activities. Most of our majors and graduates, about a total of
40 per year, are women and there is a growing enrollment of minority students
who will have direct use and instruction with this sophisticated equipment. This
type of training is critical for the preparation of future health science
professionals. However, we are at present deficient in many state-of-the-art
equipment necessary to expand the efficiency, skills, capacity, level of
sensitivity, and potential for faculty/student research in the areas of
neuroscience, plant cell biology, and pharmacology. The equipment requested
include the following: 1) Liquid scintillation counter to be used in tracer
methodology to examine proteins, nucleic acids, lipids, and other bio-active
molecules made by cells. 2) A water purification system to produce ultrapure
water necessary for cell culture. 3) A fluorescent microscope with photographic
capabilities to examine cultured cells for specific proteins/molecules using
indirect immunofluorescence staining and an efficient way to collect data. 4) An
automated X-ray film processor to more proficiently develop film previously
exposed to radiolabeled biomolecules resolved by gel electrophoresis to examine
alterations after specific exposure to a variety of substances; for example
drugs. 5) The research students as well as all graduating seniors are required
to orally present their findings and conclusions or monographs at regional
meetings and/or to the entire faculty. The purchase of a Polaroid Propalette
would greatly facilitate the professional preparation of colored slides, an
essential training for the students. In summary, this equipment would greatly
facilitate the training and research experience of both our students and
faculty. It is hoped that this undergraduate experience will more adequately
train, prepare, and attract more students into the health professions as well as
biology science teachers. The research area in neuroscience, specifically, may
lead to a better understanding of the interaction between nerve cells and
astrocytes, the later, which represents by far the most prominent number of
cells in the central nervous system. It is thought that the formation of a glial
(astrocyte) scar after damage to the brain prevents reformation of neuronal
connections. This may lead to potential mechanisms for the treatment of brain
injury.

