* 0115619
* Nonparametric Inference in Mixture Models
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2005
* Hoben Thomas, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/2005
* USD 299,980.00

People differ enormously in many physical and behavioral characteristics. Height
and weight are physical differences; lifestyle variables, such as occupational,
hobby, or recreational activities are behavioral differences. These differences
are typically observed, but many differences are not directly observable, such
as beliefs, attitudes, or the ways by which people perceive the world. To
understand these unobservable differences it is necessary to infer qualities of
these differences through observations which we can make. An often useful
vehicle for doing so employs statistical theory called finite mixtures. This
approach is based on two central ideas. One is that differences in unobservables
can be viewed as relatively distinct classes in the same way one might view
physical differences: righthanded or left, male or female. The other central
notion is to make these differences in unobservable classes equivalent to
different probability distributions. As an example, suppose the heights of 100
randomly selected adults were measured. The goal is to estimate the heights of
men and women. Suppose however, there was a failure to code the measurements for
sex. It is still possible to estimate the mean heights of each sex, the
proportions of males and females in the population, and the probability that an
individual measurement is from a man or a women. The reason this can be done is
because the probability distributions for height are different: Men and women
differ in their average height, which means they have different probability
distributions for height.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will use
analytical, empirical, and computer methods to develop finite mixture models
that make weaker assumptions than standard mixture theory. Some of the
approaches are nearly nonparametric in the sense that the unobserved probability
distributions need not be fully specified. In particular, three of the five
projects will explore the binomial mixture approach. The other two projects will
examine other largely distribution free mixture strategies not tied to the
binomial. The models to be developed should make it easier to identify important
unobserved features of individuals such as those "at risk" for certain
personality disorders thereby anticipating, in the future, possible intervention
strategies to facilitate development.&lt;br/&gt;