* 0115546
* Acquisition of Environmental Chambers for the Enhancement of Research Activity in the Undergraduate Biology Curriculum
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Donna Smith, Northeastern State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Farmer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 73,337.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Vincent Cobb, Dr. Craig Clifford, Dr. Donna
Smith and Monica Macklin at Northeastern State University in Oklahoma to develop
problem-based laboratory experiences in their Biology curriculum. In addition,
this grant will promote student and faculty research. To support these
objectives, eleven environmental chambers will be purchased which will allow
students and faculty to investigate the effects of temperature and light on
plants and animals. Biology majors will get instruction in experimental design
and data analysis early in their university training. This will begin at the
introductory level in General Botany Laboratory. The experimental process will
be further integrated into the curriculum at the upper level. Students in upper
level courses such as Plant Physiology, Animal Physiology, and Entomology will
participate in more advanced investigation-centered laboratories that examine
the effects of temperature and light on plants and animals. Once students have
gained familiarity with these instruments in classes, they will be more likely
to participate in independent research with a faculty
mentor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Although environmental chambers are simple
instruments, they control two of the most important environmental variables for
many living organisms, temperature and light. At the introductory level, General
Botany students will work in small groups to develop experiments. Four of the
purchased chambers will be Arabidopsis Growth Chambers. Arabidopsis is
considered the gold standard for plant research. Many genetic variants are
available of this small mustard-like plant making it an excellent model for
student experimentation. In the upper level courses, laboratories will use
environmental chambers to control environmental conditions, thus allowing the
students to design and execute their own experiments. Possibilities include
sorting genetic mutations in plants using cell signaling pathways for growth
hormones or determining the effect of different nutritional diets on insect
growth and reproduction. Independent student and faculty research will involve
examining the effect of temperature on ectothermic animals, such as reptiles.
Among the factors to be examined will be embryonic developmental rate,
morphological abnormality frequency, locomotor ability, and physiological
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students in the sciences need numerous hands-
on experiences to grasp the true nature of science and experimentation. With
this grant, NSU will strengthen its students' curriculum by making class
laboratories more experimental and will also promote student and faculty
research. Experience in designing and carrying out experiments involving the
manipulation of temperature and light as variables will give students a better
understanding of the scientific process and help them to develop the confidence
to pursue careers in science.&lt;br/&gt;