* 0115642
* Whole Genome Analysis of Pathogen-Host Recognition and Subsequent Responses in the Rice Blast Patho-System
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2006
* Rod Wing, North Carolina State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 09/30/2006
* USD 6,374,314.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rice blast disease, caused by the
fungus Magnaporthe grisea, is a leading constraint to rice production and is a
serious threat to food security worldwide. The goal of this project is to
elucidate the basis of plant resistance through a comprehensive analysis of the
molecular events that occur during pathogen-host recognition and the subsequent
defense responses. Our ultimate goal is to design durable disease resistance.
Rice blast is a compelling experimental system for conducting such analyses. A
complete understanding of the interaction requires knowledge of the genes in
both pathogen and host. In this project, a set of crucial ESTs involved in rice
defense will be identified. This information, along with other data, will be
used for functional genomics studies, specifically microarray analysis and gene
knockout, to uncover many of the early events in host-pathogen recognition from
the perspectives of both the pathogen and host. As a result, major new resources
for distribution and long term use by the plant, cell and pathogen biology
research communities will be created. To facilitate access to resources and
research data, a new database (MGOS) will be developed that will serve as a
bridge between plant and pathogen research communities. An interactive
educational component "Genomics and Food Security" will be designed and
developed for high school students founded on the research. The project includes
a major component to promote research experiences for undergraduates from
underrepresented groups including the formation of a Genomics Club that will
integrate other Plant Genome projects at North Carolina State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deliverables:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. 50,000
mutants with corresponding phenotype information, digital photographs, and
genomic DNA &lt;br/&gt;2. Identification and cloning of mutated genes shown to
affect fungal penetration and pathogenesis&lt;br/&gt;3. Putatively secreted
proteins, plant responses, and their deduced functions&lt;br/&gt;4. Micro-arrays
and the results of transcriptional profiling experiments looking at gene
regulation in the rice host and the fungal pathogen&lt;br/&gt;5. SAGE libraries
from infected rice tissue&lt;br/&gt;6. 35,000 ESTs from different rice tissues
infected and non-infected&lt;br/&gt;7. Public database (MGOS) housing all data
generated during the course of this project.&lt;br/&gt;8. Teaching module
"Genomics and food security" for high school teachers and students&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Contact Information for Deliverables:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;1.
Project Leader, Thomas Mitchell, North Carolina State University,
thomas_mitchell@ncsu.edu, &lt;br/&gt;2. Project Director, Ralph Dean, North
Carolina State University, ralph_dean@ncsu.edu, &lt;br/&gt;3. Bioinformatics,
Cari Soderlund, University of Arizona, cari@genome.arizona.edu&lt;br/&gt;4.
Education and Outreach, Brenda Wojnowski, North Carolina State University,
brenda_wojnowski@ncsu.edu&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Internet Addresses (Web or
Email) for Project Information:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;1.
http://www.fungalgenomics.ncsu.edu&lt;br/&gt;2.
http://www.riceblast.org&lt;br/&gt;3. thomas_mitchell@ncsu.edu&lt;br/&gt;4.
ralph_dean@ncsu.edu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;