* 0115230
* Acquisition of a 600MHz NMR spectrometer
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Bruce Novak, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Farmer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 543,000.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Cavanagh at North Carolina State University to
assist in the purchase of a 600 MHz high-resolution nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) spectrometer. This instrument will be a driving and enabling technology in
a myriad of disparate research areas. Twelve different research programs will be
immediately enhanced along with many teaching programs. The problems to be
addressed that will utilize and develop this state-of-the-art technology are
noted below: (i) determination of the structures of proteins involved in cell
response to stress, exchange of genetic material between bacteria and calcium
transport in cells; (ii) modifications in RNA structures that impact binding to
proteins and peptides; (iii) studies of polymers with predetermined functions,
sizes, electronic/optical properties and conformations; (iv) examination of how
viruses enter cells; (v) electronic properties of DNA; (vi) design of quantum
computer methods; (vii) study of the mechanisms by which proteins transport RNA
in plants; (viii) investigation of how the proteins involved in inflammatory
response fold into their active shapes; (ix) diagnostics of biological fluids;
(x) study of how peptides and proteins form solid structures; (xi) examination
of the catalytic properties of enzymes at high temperatures and (xii) molecular
pores capable of spanning biological membranes and mediating solute transport.

The acquisition of a 600 MHz NMR spectrometer will allow researchers at North
Carolina State University to generate high-resolution three-dimensional
structures of the proteins, nucleic acids and peptides. Determination of such
accurate structures gives insight, at the molecular level, as to how the
chemical/biological/electronic/optical function of the various systems actually
occurs. This information is critical if these mechanisms of action are to be
enhanced or inhibited.

The processes to be investigated are all fundamental phenomena that need to be
studied as part of expanding our general knowledge base. However, these
investigations are by no means esoteric, and all have the potential to have
enormous practical impact. For example, the development of a successful quantum
computer would increase computing speeds and power by orders of magnitude;
studies of polymers with defined electronic and optical properties is needed in
the computing and electronics fields; the proteins involved in genetic exchange,
calcium transport and solid deposition will assist in the understanding of
antibiotic resistance and neurodegenerative disorders; diagnostics of bodily
fluids will allow cholesterol levels to be efficiently measured; pores spanning
membranes offer the opportunity to deliver appropriate chemicals to cells.

From a teaching point of view the new instrumentation will expand the teaching
capability for undergraduates and graduates in Chemistry, Biochemistry,
Structural Biology, Chemical Engineering, Genetics, Plant Pathology and
Molecular Biophysics.

In summary, a 600 MHz NMR spectrometer will be of enormous benefit to the North
Carolina State University research community. It will be a focal point for
countless interdisciplinary research programs, fostering interactions between
scientists of different disciplines. Such interactions will, undoubtedly,
suggest new and important research directions to pursue

