* 0115175
* Active Control of Tool Deflection and Chatter During Precision Milling Operations Using Magnetic Bearing Spindles
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2001,12/31/2004
* Thomas Dow, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 12/31/2004
* USD 372,000.00

This grant will be used to determine the feasibility of quasi-static and dynamic
error compensation for precision machining applications using small diameter end
mills. The prime mover for these active control schemes will be a commercially-
available, magnetically-suspended, 70,000 rpm spindle. Such a spindle is capable
of creating the high surface speeds needed for miniature milling tools, can
adjust the center of rotation to compensate for tool deflection, and has the
high bandwidth necessary to provide active chatter compensation. The control
strategies will have two modes: low-frequency path correction for tool
deflection and high-frequency compensation for chatter. The controller used to
position the magnetic bearing spindle will require major modifications to
implement the algorithms described above. The controller supplied with this
spindle senses the rotor displacements and manipulates electromagnet currents to
keep the spindle rotating around the inertial center. A high-speed processing
board will be added to implement the proposed control strategy of estimating the
magnitude and direction of dynamic tool deflections and modifying the spindle
rotor setpoint to compensate for these static and dynamic deflections.

If successful, the techniques demonstrated in this project will improve the
capability to machine precision surfaces such as injection molds dies for
plastic optical and mechanical parts. But the results will have much broader
applications including a scientific basis for generalized tool deflection
compensation, actively reducing the effects of chatter on surface finish, and
high-bandwidth control of magnetic bearings. In addition, real-time frequency
analysis techniques will be developed to analyze the displacement signals and
extract high-frequency components for chatter detection and correction. It is
anticipated that these results will have immediate application to both high-
precision and full-scale, high-speed milling applications.