* 0115357
* US-Morocco Cooperative Research:  Cenomanian-Turonian Paleoenvironment of Morocco
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2007
* Gerta Keller, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2007
* USD 34,730.00

0115357&lt;br/&gt;Keller&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project is to
support a cooperative research project by Dr. Gerta Keller, Department of
Geosciences, Princeton, Princeton, New Jersey and Dr. El Hassane Chellai,
Department of Geology, University of Cadi Ayyad, Marrakech, Morocco. They plan
to conduct a high-resolution study of the organic carbon rich pelagic carbonates
of the Cenomanaian-Turonian transition exposed along NW Atlantic margin of
Morocco. The primary target will be the Cenomanaian-Turonian transition interval
represented by planktic foraminiferal zones R. cushmani, W. archaeocretacea and
H. helvetica, an interval that is represented by up to 160m of sediments along
the Atlantic margin. This study will provide the most detailed record of these
global anoxic event and greenhouse conditions and serve as analogue for a
potential future greenhouse event. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The PI plans to
carry out a multi-institutional and multi-disciplinary study that documents the
Cenomanian-Turonian anoxic event and greenhouse conditions in terms of climate,
sea level and productivity fluctuations and their effect on marine plankton
(e.g. planktic foraminifera and calcareous nannoplankton). This study will bring
together experts in sedimentology and stratigraphy, mineralogy stable isotopes,
geochemistry, calcareous nannofossils and planktic foraminifera. The project
will involve graduate and undergraduate students in the field work and
laboratory analyses thus exposing them to working in a foreign country. An
Egyptian scientist, Dr. A. A. Tantawy from South Valley University, Aswan, Egypt
will also participate in the research based on his expertise in high-resolution
age and biostratigraphy. This project meets INT criteria for supporting
meritorious collaborative research of mutual benefit to the US and the foreign
country. This project is funded by the Division of International Programs and
the Division of Earth Sciences.