* 0115527
* Manufacturing and Reliability of Three-Dimensional Micro-Mechanical Actuators
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2004
* Michael Bryant, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 07/31/2004
* USD 185,000.00

This grant provides funding for the development of micro-actuators, e.g., micro-
motor, dynamic micro-gas bearing micro-continuously-variable speed-reducers.
Inasmuch as magnetic fields, difficult to contain, have limited micro-scale use,
two electrostatic motor drive concepts will be developed: (1) Variable
Capacitance Motor - Variable capacitance motor minimizes energy of electric
field in an air gap field that can change geometry. Rotor electrodes seek
positions relative to stator electrodes of least potential energy stored in the
electric field of an air gap between the rotor and stator. (2) Induced Charge
Motor - Induced charge motor is based on a concept of induced polarization of
charges of material in the motor creating a secondary electric field which
aligns in a primary field. This variant of drive is the electric field analogy
to an induction motor. To avoid stiction, contact between surfaces in relative
motion must be avoided as in bearings. Among other concepts, micro-gas-bearings
will be developed. Micro-grooves built into the shaft part of the motor will
pump air or gas and build-up films that keep the shaft from touching the bearing
and housing. In order to avoid stiction for start-stop, the bearing housing will
be suitable coated with a thin film lubricant. For the above, and other
actuators, advanced science-based modeling methods will be developed for
underpinning design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this
research will lead to new methods in the relatively new arena of manufacturing
in the micro-scale of three-dimensional mechanical components needed for various
actuators. In developing the methods, emphasis will be given to reliability in
the use of components in actuators. Envisioned are applications of actuators in
bio-medical, aerospace, as well as other consumer products for which micro-size
is paramount. Of course the use of micro-size actuators has the additional
advantage of being environmentally friendly.