* 0115772
* STS: The Nature Study Movement in Education, 1890-1932
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2001,01/31/2003
* Sally Kohlstedt, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Keith R. Benson
* 01/31/2003
* USD 27,864.00

Project Abstract &lt;br/&gt;Sally Kohlstedt, University of
Minnesota&lt;br/&gt;The Nature Study Movement in Education,
1890-1932&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the late nineteenth century for the first time
educators began to make instruction in the natural sciences an integral part of
the public school curriculum down to the most elementary grades. Advocacy for
and experiments with science teaching had been tried in private schools and even
a few public ones, but only at the turn of the century was there a national
movement to introduce the natural sciences into urban and rural publicly funded
school classrooms. The most visible and widely advocated pedagogical technique
was "nature study" and its proponents offered multiple justifications for
introducing children to plants, insects, birds, meteorological observation, and
other phenomena. This historical project provides the first extensive discussion
of the nature study movement from its origins in the early 1890s through the
1920s when educational leaders called for a radically distinct pedagogical
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The often profoundly different geographic,
social, and economic circumstances of children in urban centers, in suburban
locations, in small towns, and in the rural countryside serviced by one and two
room schools also meant programs differed in rationale, in quality of teacher
preparation, in availability of resources for teaching, and in the interests of
the children. Nonetheless, there were elements that made nature study a
movement, including several prominent textbooks used for teacher training and
for classrooms, a specialized educational journal, Nature-Study Review, and a
membership organization of administrators and teachers in the movement.
Increasing standardization in normal school training and in bureaucratic urban
and even state-wide school systems made implementation possible, but it was
broader commitment by local communities as well as school administrators and
teachers that established nature study across the American landscape, although
apparently not much in the poorer schools of the South. Nature study education
framed a set of principles for learning first hand about the natural world that
was extended into informal settings like the Boy and Girl Scouts, the new
environmental nature centers ringing urban areas, and junior clubs within the
Audubon and Wild Flower societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project allows the
investigator to spend a month doing the final research that extends the
discussion of the movement to geographical locations that have not been fully
investigated. It also supports the efforts of a graduate student to survey the
nature study literature generated during this forty-year period, including
materials from Germany. Historians of science have long noted the nature study
movement, often mentioning it in passing and presuming that it was ephemeral or
not highly relevant. The publications from this research establish its
pervasiveness over several decades and its relationship to the dynamic changes
in the natural sciences during this period. &lt;br/&gt;