* 0115062
* Arabidopsis 2010: The Genealogy of Arabidopsis Thaliana
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Magnus Nordborg, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2005
* USD 2,697,884.00

0115062&lt;br/&gt;Nordberg&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The entire 130 million base pair
genome of the plant Arabidopsis thaliana was finished last year. The objective
of this project is to leverage the genome sequence to catalog the naturally
occurring genetic variation in the species. The project is based on the
theoretical insight that, in highly self-fertilizing organisms, like A.
thaliana, it should be possible to create such a catalog very efficiently by
looking at the pattern of variation in a number of small segments distributed
over the genome. Rather than sequencing the entire genome of one additional
individual, one should sequence 1% of the genome in 100
individuals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project will sequence
1500-2000 chromosomal segments of length 500-700 base pairs, distributed over
the genome, in a sample of 96 carefully selected individuals. The data will be
publicly available through GenBank, as well as through a highly flexible
relational database developed specifically for this purpose. The database will
be equipped with web-based bioinformatics tools to query it, and will be
continuously updated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project represents the first
serious attempt to describe the genomic variation in a species. It is highly
relevant to the objectives of the 2010 project in a general sense, because it
will not be possible to "determine the function of all genes [...] within their
cellular, organismal, and evolutionary contexts" without understanding how
genetic variation is structured in the species. More immediately, the database
will be an invaluable resource for plant geneticists interested in finding the
genes responsible for variation in agriculturally important traits such as
drought tolerance. In this respect, the project should be compared to the large
databases of human variation that are currently being created to aid genetic
epidemiology. The tools and methods created for this project will also be
directly applicable to several organisms of direct economic importance, such as
rice and barley. Finally, the database will serve as a very important training
tool for students in computational and evolutionary biology, and in statistical
genetics.&lt;br/&gt;