* 0115918
* MRI:  Acquisition Of A Gas Chromatograph/Mass Spectrometer And Graphite Furnace Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer To Facilitate The Kanawha River Project.
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2001,02/28/2005
* Matthew Poslusny, University of Charleston
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 02/28/2005
* USD 147,960.00

0115918 Poslusny

This grant, made through the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program,
provides support for the acquisition of state-of-the-art instrumentation which
will be used to integrate research on the Kanawha River Project into the
educational experience of undergraduate environmental science majors at the
University of Charleston (West Virginia) and K-12 students and teachers within
the Appalachian region. Specifically, a graphite furnace atomic absorption
spectrophotometer (AAS) and a gas chromatograph/mass spectrometer (GC/MS) will
be purchased. The AAS will be used to carry out metal studies on the Kanawha
River. Students will measure trace levels of lead, mercury, cadmium and also
monitor other metals, including calcium, iron, magnesium, and tin. The GC/MS
will be used to determine levels of organic pollutants in the river, including
polychlorinated biphenyls, chlorinated dioxins and furans, pesticides, and
polyaromatic hydrocarbons. This instrument will also be used to help identify
other contaminants in the river. A series of river-based research projects will
enrich the educational experiences of undergraduate environmental science majors
at the University of Charleston. The instrumentation will also be used in
ongoing outreach projects that will bring area teachers and students on campus
to participate in a variety of environmental science experiments and research
activities. ***