* 0115626
* The Role of the Cia5 Gene in the Carbon Concentrating Mechanism in Chlamydomonas Reinhardtii
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2001,11/30/2005
* Donald Weeks, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Gavin Thompson
* 11/30/2005
* USD 387,000.00

The carbon concentrating mechanism (CCM) plays a major role in the
earth's&lt;br/&gt;photosynthetic productivity and its capacity to cycle carbon.
The CCM is&lt;br/&gt;essential for photosynthesis at atmospheric levels of CO2
in Chlamydomonas&lt;br/&gt;and most other eukaryotic and prokaryotic algae.
Knowledge gained&lt;br/&gt;regarding the CCM in C. reinhardtii through this
three-year project,&lt;br/&gt;coupled with information from other laboratories,
should allow a more&lt;br/&gt;complete understanding of how algal cells are able
to survive and flourish&lt;br/&gt;in their CO2-limited, aqueous environment. The
primary goal of this&lt;br/&gt;research project is to elucidate components and
mechanisms of regulation of&lt;br/&gt;the CCM in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. The
focus of the project is the&lt;br/&gt;complete characterization of the Cia5 gene
and its role as a master&lt;br/&gt;regulator of the cell's response to changes
in environmental CO2 and HCO3&lt;br/&gt;concentrations. Based on the weight of
present evidence, it appears the&lt;br/&gt;Cia5 gene encodes a transcription
factor that is part of one or more signal&lt;br/&gt;transduction cascades that
allow, or reverse, formation of a functional&lt;br/&gt;CCM. Experiments to fully
characterize the Cia5 gene are outlined along&lt;br/&gt;with studies of the CIA5
protein, its subcellular location,&lt;br/&gt;post-translational modification(s),
DNA binding specificities and other&lt;br/&gt;features required for its function
in controlling assembly of the CCM. A&lt;br/&gt;model is proposed in which the
CIA5 protein could act either as an inducer&lt;br/&gt;or repressor of
transcription of genes whose expression is dramatically&lt;br/&gt;increased
during a shift of cells from high to low CO2 levels. Experiments&lt;br/&gt;are
outlined that will resolve the uncertainty of whether CIA5 acts as
an&lt;br/&gt;inducer or repressor of gene expression. In the long term, an
increased&lt;br/&gt;understanding of the CCM has the potential for practical
application in&lt;br/&gt;agriculture. For example, certain crop plants have been
demonstrated to&lt;br/&gt;produce higher yields under elevated levels of CO2. If
appropriate&lt;br/&gt;portions of the CCM can be transferred to those crops,
their resultant&lt;br/&gt;ability to increase internal CO2 concentrations could
lead to substantially&lt;br/&gt;improved crop yields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;