* 0115258
* SDEST: Scientists and Policy-Making:  Objectivity, Moral Responsibility and Risk
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2002,08/31/2002
* Heather Douglas, University of  Puget Sound
* Standard Grant
* SIEBER,JOAN E.
* 08/31/2002
* USD 44,752.00

As the role of scientists in policy-making has grown over the past half-century,
there has been increasing difficulty characterizing how science should be used
to formulate public policy, from debates about the role of science in the
courtroom to disputes over which science should inform environmental policy.
This grant will support philosophical analysis of the role of scientists in
public decision-making. For the period of the grant, the investigator will
consider central issues that underlie the relationship between science and
society, namely the understanding of scientific objectivity, the moral
responsibility of scientists, and the proper role of science in risk analysis.
Scientific objectivity is often the justification given for why scientists
should be heavily involved with public decision-making, but objectivity is a
complex concept, and not all aspects are either possible or desirable in the
public decision-making setting. A more careful examination of this concept will
help clarify what the public role of scientists should be. This public role is
intimately tied to the issue of whether and to what extent scientists have
particular moral responsibilities to the rest of society. A divergent set of
views on this issue have been expressed over the past fifty years, and a more
careful examination of these views and the arguments behind them will help
determine to what extent and in what situations scientists must consider certain
ethical issues. Finally, both of these areas, objectivity and moral
responsibility, play a crucial role in how the U.S. conceptualizes the use of
scientists in risk analysis for public policy. There has been considerable
debate about the appropriate risk decision-making process, and the relationship
between scientists and citizens lies at the heart of these debates. Using a wide
variety of sources, from scientists, philosophers, historians, and policymakers,
to gather the basic arguments and positions, the primary investigator will
develop three related pieces of written work on the above topics. These pieces
will be submitted to peer reviewed journals for refinement and publication. In
addition, these three pieces will become part of a larger written work, for
which the primary investigator has additional support from her home institution.
This final work should help clarify the historical development of scientists in
policy-making, the philosophical understanding of science that shaped that
development, and how altering that philosophical understanding should change how
scientists function in the public eye.