* 0115205
* Integrated Design and Fabrication of Multimaterial Compliant Systems using Solid Freeform Fabrication
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Suman Das, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 08/31/2005
* USD 326,278.00

The research objective of this grant is to develop scientific techniques for
digital transformation of computer generated mechanical designs with spatially
optimized topology, geometry, material composition and properties directly into
physical realizations of functional mechanisms. This objective will be
accomplished by developing two key components: (1) a design methodology for
automated, computer aided design synthesis of compliant systems that are
spatially optimized with respect to function, form and material composition; and
(2) a methodology for automated, solid freeform fabrication of such systems with
true, three-dimensional material heterogeneity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, this project will pioneer the integrated design and fabrication of
heterogeneous, multi-functional, compliant systems. The design algorithms to be
developed as part of this project will introduce a new way of designing complex
mechanisms. They will allow the designer to develop designs optimized not only
with respect to geometric, topological and kinematic considerations, but also
with spatially optimized material composition and properties. The fabrication
methods developed in this project will enable the construction of multi-
material, multi-functional compliant systems that cannot be fabricated by any
other manufacturing methods. This is a unique marriage of digital design and
digital fabrication. Therefore, this project provides a seamless integration of
design synthesis, selective material deposition and freeform
fabrication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;