* 0115901
* A Comprehensive Methodology to Estimate the Current Safety and to Predict the Remaining Useful Life of Suspension Bridge Cables
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Raimondo Betti, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Perumalsamy N. Balaguru
* 08/31/2005
* USD 274,293.00

In the US, various transportation systems, including long-span cable suspension
bridges,&lt;br/&gt;have been allowed to deteriorate because of inadequate
investment in maintenance and life extension technology, and particularly
because of clearly insufficient support for research in the area of structural
assessment and protection. In-depth inspections of the main cables in the
suspension bridges in the New York metropolitan area have found a quite large
number of broken wires inside the cables and at the anchorage, showing extensive
deterioration and brittle fractures. These findings pose the difficult task of
determining the actual strength of main suspension cables in existing bridges.
The safety evaluation of suspension bridge cables has always been done
considering as a safety factor the ratio between the estimated cable strength
over the computed ultimate load. However, in view of the many uncertainties
involved with the cable deterioration pattern and with wire corrosion
mechanisms, and considering the relatively small proportion of wires that are
inspected and/or tested, such a safety factor is useful only as a first
approximation, but not in assessing the overall safety of the bridge. A better
and more&lt;br/&gt;appropriate measure of the overall safety of main suspension
cables is the use of probabilistic indicators such as the reliability or the
safety index. Without a well-defined methodology for estimating the residual
strength of an existing cable, suspension bridge owner agencies do not have a
clear idea of what to search for in a cable inspection and so they base their
maintenance program mainly on previous experiences and on trial and error
attempts. This grant proposes to go beyond the objectives of the NCHRP Project
10-57 by developing a comprehensive methodology for a rigorous safety appraisal
of the cable system in existing suspension bridges. The ultimate objectives of
this study will focus on 1) the estimation of the actual residual strength and
of the actual safety of main cables in suspension bridges based on results of
inspections and laboratory testing of cable wires, and on 2) the prediction of
the remaining useful life of suspension bridge cables using the same results. In
this way, the estimated overall safety of the cables of different bridges can be
directly compared. A new cable model that accounts for limited and different
ductility of the corroded bridge wires will also be developed, using a
probabilistic framework to account for the random nature of the deterioration
pattern. The determination of the statistical parameters to be used in the new
prediction model will be done using a unique set of inspection and test data,
collected over 30 years of bridge testing by the Carleton Laboratory at Columbia
University, and on the results of current research projects on wire
deterioration. This project will make a significant contribution to the bridge
engineering community with the introduction of a more rigorous description of
the overall safety and remaining useful life of main cables in existing
suspension bridges.&lt;br/&gt;