* 0115469
* GOALI:  An Integrative Approach to Concurrent Process Planning and Production Planning in Electronics Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Kimberly Ellis, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 08/31/2005
* USD 98,631.00

This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project will
develop an integrative approach for concurrent process planning and production
planning, with an emphasis on electronic assembly systems. Today, the
development of process plans and production plans occurs more often due to the
reduced life cycle of electronic products, more frequent introduction of new
products, and continual changes in customer demand profiles. Furthermore, the
transition from low volume demand to high volume demand for a product can occur
rapidly. Thus, an effective means of generating complementary process plans and
production plans is important to improve productivity and responsiveness in
electronics manufacturing systems. The objectives of this research effort are as
follows: (1) to develop an integrated framework and identify critical decision
problems, (2) to develop analytical models and solution approaches for the
resulting decision problems, and (3) to evaluate the impact of an integrated
approach on the efficiency and productivity of the manufacturing system. With
this integrative approach, the following questions can be investigated: (1)
Under which demand profiles should various setup strategies be employed to
maximize productivity? (2) How should products and resources be allocated for a
given demand profile? (3) What levels of resource capacity are needed in order
to achieve the manufacturing objectives?&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;New decision
models will be developed to efficiently integrate the process planning and
production planning functions. Expected results include techniques to increase
productivity through improved planning decisions, algorithms to support
management decisions, and new case study results. The proposed research has the
potential to increase responsiveness and productivity through the improved
integration of manufacturing functions, to reduce capital expenditures through
more effective use of expensive assembly equipment, and to reduce engineering
time required to evaluate and implement changes. These research objectives are
pursued in collaboration with Ericsson, Inc.&lt;br/&gt;