* 0115927
* Optical Imaging and Fluorescence Microscopy Enhancement
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Joseph Provost, Minnesota State University Moorhead
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Farmer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 116,163.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Ellen Brisch at Minnesota State University
Moorhead (MSUM) to build on our microscopy capabilities by upgrading our current
Olympus IX-70 brightfield/phase contrast microscope. The funding provided by
this grant will allow us to incorporate cell injection, image capture, image
analysis and high quality figure preparation capabilities into our teaching and
research. This equipment will be shared between the PI; Dr. Ellen Brisch, and
three Co-PIs; Dr. Chris Chastain, Dr. Joseph Provost and Dr. Mark Wallert. The
equipment and instrumentation this grant will fund includes: a cell injection
system, additional immunofluorescent filter cubes and high quality 100x
objectives, a software package which will enable us to detect and quantify
subtle changes in pH, an isolation table and motorized stage, state of the art
Macintosh computers for image analysis and figure preparation, and microscopy
training workshops. All four investigators are engaged in undergraduate teaching
and training. Our current goals are to provide a state of the art education to
our undergraduates by training them on state of the art equipment and also to
bring our research programs to a higher level. &lt;br/&gt;The research programs
led by the investigators vary. Dr. Brisch's research program focuses on how the
replication and segregation of a critical cellular organelle, the mitochondrion,
is coordinated during cell division. Dr. Brisch plans to examine a collection of
yeast cell cycle mutants--yeast cells that fail to complete the cell division
cycle correctly--by staining mitochondria and observing them with fluorescence
microscopy. Dr. Chastain's research program focuses on understanding enzyme
activity in the C4 photosynthetic pathway. Dr. Chastain plans to examine the
distribution of a C4 photosynthetic enzyme in a C3 plant by employing
immunolocalization studies. Drs. Wallert and Provost collaborate significantly
in their research efforts. Their research program focuses on how mitogenic
signaling pathways alter intracellular pH. They plan to perform cell injection
experiments by microinjecting a variety of interfering agents designed to alter
specific cell signaling pathways. They plan to quantitate the presence or
absence of subtle pH changes after interfering microinjections by observing
levels of immunofluorescence. Sophisticated software designed for calcium
ratioing will be used for their data acquisition and analysis.&lt;br/&gt;MSUM is
a regional comprehensive university that is committed to providing high quality
research opportunities for undergraduates. The equipment and training package
proposed in this application will be used to enhance the research programs of
Drs. Brisch, Chastain, Provost and Wallert. It will provide their students with
an advanced level of training. These projects will involve 25-30 students per
year. These students will present their work at local, regional and national
meetings and publish their results in review journals. Nearly 70% of the
students involved in these projects will be women, and our history suggests that
approximately 80% of them will continue their education in graduate or
professional schools. In addition, an even greater number of students would have
exposure to this state of the art equipment, as it would also be used in a
number of our upper division courses. Involving students in research and
incorporating research-based exercises in our teaching laboratories enhances not
only the student's education, but also the effectiveness and success of our
university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;