* 0115663
* FOCUSED RESEARCH GROUP (FRG's) Neutron Scattering Studies of Surface and Bulk Disordered Quantum Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2001,03/31/2005
* Henry Glyde, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 03/31/2005
* USD 564,923.00

This Focused Research Group (FRG) will investigate the fundamental role of
disorder as major factor underlying the structure and dynamics of molecules,
films and bulk quantum systems. The investigative technique is precision neutron
scattering at the Institut Laue Langevin, Grenoble and at ISIS, Rutherford
Appleton Laboratory, UK, currently the leading neutron facilities in the world.
The goal in education is training in neutron scattering for graduate students
and post doctoral associates in preparation for the Spallation Neutron Source
being built at Oak Ridge National Laboratory and to develop lasting
collaborations in Europe for young scientists. The scientific topics include the
location, orientation, tunneling and diffusion of simple and polar molecules on
smooth and chemically active surfaces (e.g. MgO), and on rough novel materials
(e.g. nanotubes), investigating helium and hydrogen film growth, layer
transitions, layer modes on surfaces and the characteristic three dimensional
excitations of bulk quantum fluids in fully filled porous media. An aim is to
relate excitations to structure (e.g. gaps in modes to localization) in one
dimensional (1D), 2D and 3D disordered quantum systems and the existence of
well-defined modes to Bose Einstein condensation and superfluidity. The
underlying physics has analogies in high Tc superconductivity and application in
catalysis and porous media development. The graduate students and post-docs
participating in this project will benefit from the international collaborations
and the use of cutting edge research tools. They will be exceptionally well
trained for careers in academe, industry and government. This project is co-
funded by the International Division of the Social, Behavioral and Economics
Directorate and by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the
Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This
research is dedicated to revealing the impact of disorder on the structure and
dynamics of molecules, films and bulk quantum systems. The investigative
technique is precision neutron scattering at the Institut Laue Langevin,
Grenoble, France and at ISIS, Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, UK which are
currently the best neutron facilities in the world. The goal in education is to
provide broad training in neutron scattering for graduate students and post
doctoral associates so that they can capitalize on the outstanding new
scientific opportunities that will be created by the Spallation Neutron Source
now being built at Oak Ridge National Laboratory. It is also to develop lasting
scientific collaborations in Europe for young scientists. The scientific topics
begin with the location, orientation, tunneling and diffusion of molecules on
surfaces; surfaces of materials that are important as catalysts in chemical
reactions (e.g. MgO) and structurally important materials (e.g. nanotubes). They
continue to the investigation of film growth, layer transitions, layer modes and
the dynamics of three dimensional quantum fluids in porous media and their to
relation Bose Einstein condensation. The underlying science has analogies in
high temperature superconductors and the motivations run from basic concepts in
disordered systems to tailoring catalysts and developing new porous materials.
The graduate students and post-docs participating in this project will benefit
from the international collaborations and the use of cutting edge research
tools. They will be exceptionally well trained for careers in academe, industry
and government. This project is co-funded by the International Division of the
Social, Behavioral and Economics Directorate and by the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;