* 0115852
* Development of High Energy Resolution Inelastic X-ray Scattering Instrument for Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2002,12/31/2006
* Miles Klein, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 12/31/2006
* USD 900,000.00

With this award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program State
University of New York at Stony Brook in partnership with several other
universities and Argonne National Laboratories will build an optimized, high-
resolution inelastic x-ray scattering beamline at the Advanced Photon Source.
The instrument will be completely dedicated to this technique, and as such will
be the only general-purpose meV resolution x-ray scattering spectrometer in the
United States. It will serve a large community of users working on many
different problems: dynamics of matter at very high pressure, picosecond
dynamics of soft condensed matter and biological systems, high temperature
superconductivity, etc. It will be of high system resolution of 0.8 meV (FWHM),
and be able to probe a large range of wave vectors, up to several inverse
Angstrom.&lt;br/&gt;The design is dictated by the desire to reach sub meV energy
resolution. This requires the use of diced (segmented) crystals in
backscattering geometry for analyzers, a novel nested monochromator to produce a
very clean resolution function, and a cryogenically cooled monochromator for
maximum x-ray flux. The analyzers must be located eight to ten meters away from
the sample, which dictates a large hutch and novel spectrometer
designs.&lt;br/&gt;The instrument will be available to members of the
collaborative access team (CAT) as well as to a broad group of independent
investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the hundred years since their
discovery, x-rays have enhanced our understanding of the invisible world. The
most familiar example is direct imaging of specimens ranging from the cardiac
arteries of a beating human heart to pipeline welds and airplane baggage. The
technique has enabled us to understand and control how the fundamental
principles of how atoms fit together to make molecules, the materials of our
daily lives (minerals, steel, semiconductors), and the fundamental elements of
life (DNA and proteins). All of these techniques depend on using x-rays in one
way or another to take snapshots of a sample. This award from the
Instrumentation for Materials Program to SUNY Stony Brook supports the
development of an emerging technique involving the use of x-rays to measure
dynamics (motion) of atoms on time scales that are inaccessible to other
techniques. Among the problems to be studied are sound waves in solids at
conditions in the core of the earth, the way that liquids freeze, and the way
that proteins fold once they are formed. Many of the most interesting
applications require measuring the energy of the x-ray to a precision of one
part in thirty million. This requires very special instrumentation, and the very
intense source of x-rays available at the Advanced Photon Source. There is
currently no such dedicated beamline in the US. The instrument will serve a
broad community access team users, with a planned strong outreach program to
involve people who are not technical experts in x-ray optics. Furthermore, it is
planned to be the most intense and highest resolution inelastic x-ray scattering
station in the world.&lt;br/&gt;