* 0115779
* US-Turkey Cooperative Research:   System-Theoretic Approach to Teletraffic Analysis and Engineering
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2006
* Khosrow Sohraby, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/2006
* USD 20,070.00

0115779 &lt;br/&gt;Sohraby&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project
supports collaborative research by Dr. Khosrow Sohraby, Professor of Computer
Science and Telecommunications (CST), University of Missouri-Kansas City (UMKC),
and Dr. Nail Akar, Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Bilkent
University, Ankara, Turkey. The investigators will study traffic modeling and
analysis and traffic engineering as applied to telecommunication networks.
Queuing systems are the fundamental systems in telecommunication networks, of
which traffic is the major constituent. Solution of queuing systems in most
cases reduce to the solution of a certain set of structured Markov chains if the
traffic and server process are modeled as Markovian processes. The two
scientists have introduced a new paradigm "Generalized Invariant Subspace
Approach," which was used to numerically solve a set of structured Markov
chains, the so-called M/G/1-type Markov chains. They plan to extend the
applicability of the approach to a wider set of Markov chains, used in numerical
solution of queues ranging from fluid queues to random servers, and from finite
capacity queues to continuous-time queues. They also plan to introduce an
interdisciplinary technique using "optimal control" to set the foundation for a
theory to synthesize path-splitting mechanisms that are used in engineering of
current Internet infrastructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: This project
enables two qualified scientists with complementary expertise to address a
problem that is important in the management of Internet and wireless data
transmission. The two scientists collaborated in the 1994-1996 period and
produced significant results. This project will allow them to combine expertise
in this multidisciplinary research field to produce a very generic engine that
solves most Markovian systems that arise in the field of performance evaluation
of communication networks. One or more graduate students from Bilkent University
are expected to join the research at UMKC. &lt;br/&gt;