* 0115434
* Collaborative Research:  Designing Responsive Product and Service Fulfillment Networks Using Dynamic Adaptive Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Prakash Mirchandani, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 08/31/2005
* USD 172,459.00

This collaborative research project addresses a new large-scale optimization
model, called Network Design with Service Guarantees (NDSG), that simultaneously
incorporates revenue, cost, and service (end-to-end delay) considerations.
Though of immense practical significance, the NDSG model is very difficult to
solve both from theoretical and computational perspectives. The goal is to
develop and test effective solution procedures using state-of-the-art
optimization techniques that can exploit the NDSG problem's special mathematical
structure. Accordingly, the project entails both theoretical and empirical
investigations, including developing and characterizing alternative problem
formulations, analyzing their structural properties, designing specialized
solution algorithms, and testing these methods using realistic data. To solve
the problem, a new family of optimization algorithms that dynamically
reformulates the problem, and correspondingly adapts the solution approach by
combining decomposition and model strengthening techniques will be investigated.
It is expected that the core research contributions-a new modeling paradigm, a
novel solution approach, and algorithmic implementation-will also extend to
other large-scale optimization models. Communication and physical distribution
capabilities have become critical in the new networked economy. Organizations
have come to rely on these capabilities to establish tightly integrated
partnerships that can effectively serve diverse market needs for products and
services. Delays or failures in the movement of information or goods can have
debilitating consequences not only for supply chains but also for services such
as emergency operations, air traffic control, and financial systems. Decisions
regarding the configuration of communication and distribution networks needed to
support coordination and collaboration have strategic importance both because
they entail massive investments of billions of dollars and because a network's
topological design largely determines the level of service it can provide.
Consequently, optimization tools are widely used in practice to design product
and service fulfillment networks, and network design continues to be a very
active research area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Designing optimal network
configurations entails complex tradeoffs between conflicting objectives such as
maximizing profitability, ensuring adequate resource utilization, improving
service levels, and so on. Classical optimization models, which focus primarily
on cost minimization, tend to design sparse networks that exploit economies of
scale but are not robust in terms of service and reliability. The project will
provide opportunities for graduate students to conduct thesis research, and
enrich graduate courses in optimization and operations
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;