* 0115213
* Objective Updating of Design Predictions for Supported Excavations Using Construction Monitoring Data
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Richard Finno, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2004
* USD 224,585.00

A major concern when performing deep excavations in urban environments is the
impact of construction-related ground movements on adjacent buildings and
utilities. Given the uncertainties associated with making movement predictions,
it is usual to include a monitoring program to record the ground movements that
develop during construction. Ideally, these recorded movements can be used to
control the construction process and update predictions of movements given the
measured deformations at early stages of constructions. However, it is quite
difficult, if not impossible, to use the observed movements for these purposes
in a timely enough fashion to be of use in a typical project where time is of
the essence to a contractor. To improve the state-of-the-art of predicting and
controlling ground movements associated with supported excavations, this project
develops methods to (1) objectively update design predictions of deformations
for supported excavations in clay using monitoring data obtained during
construction, and (2) to evaluate critical inputs to performance predictions in
design. Automated procedures, such as inverse modeling techniques, are adopted
wherein a given model is calibrated by iteratively changing model input values
until the simulated output values match the measured data. These procedures will
be coupled with a finite element program to automatically update predictions of
ground movements. Objective measures of the critical inputs to a finite element
analysis of a supported excavation are developed to provide quantitative
information concerning the relative importance of various input parameters. The
Infrastructure Technology Institute has provided funding to help support this
effort. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The methodology is developed and tested using
detailed ground and building movement data from a 13 m deep excavation through
soft clays for a subway renovation project in Chicago. With funding from Wiss,
Janney, Elstner Associates through the Chicago Department of Transportation,
Northwestern University collected and analyzed ground deformations and adjacent
building movements at the subway excavation. An advisory committee comprised of
an owner's representative and geotechnical and structural designers provides
input to the project via periodic reviews of the progress of the work. Members
of the advisory committee also contribute detailed case studies from their
project files that are used to check the methodology initially developed based
on the data from the Chicago project. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;