* 0115068
* Arabidopsis 2010: Functional Genomics of Arabidopsis P450s
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Lei Liu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 08/31/2006
* USD 3,461,517.00





Award Abstract: This project is aimed at functionally defining the expression
patterns and substrate reactivities of the Arabidopsis thaliana cytochrome P450
monooxygenase (P450) gene family that represents approximately 0.6% of this
plant's genome. The proteins encoded by these genes mediate oxidative
transformations in a wide array of biosynthetic and detoxicative pathways
essential for plant growth. Because of their roles in this wide diversity of
metabolic processes and their relative lack of post-translational modification,
they serve as downstream reporters for the direct activation of many different
biochemical pathways responding to chemical, developmental and environmental
cues. Extensive divergence of catalytic site as well as noncatalytic site
residues has resulted in a high degree of primary structure variation in this
very diverse P450 gene superfamily that presents unsurpassed complexity in
assigning function to individual genomic DNA sequences. We will further the
functional definition of Arabidopsis P450s by creating microarrays for analysis
of the mRNA expression patterns in tissues at different developmental stages.
Imaging of the responses of individual P450 genes with respect to a variety of
internal and external chemical cues as well as changing environmental conditions
(UV damage, pathogen attack, insect attack, cold stress, etc.) and collations of
these response patterns with respect to plant biochemical pathways will provide
the basis for assigning prospective functions to these enzymes. Overexpression
of a subset of these P450s in yeast and baculovirus protein production systems
and incorporation into membrane-scaffolding protein complexes suitable for high-
throughput screening of substrate reactivities will provide the basis for
assigning definitive function(s) to these enzymes. These results serve to
elucidate this model plant's biochemical responses to a variety of stress
conditions and provide genomic technology tools needed for assessment of the
diverse P450 gene family as well as other membrane protein families. Data on the
organization of the 273 P450 genes, alignments of available ESTs, patterns of
mRNA expression defined by microarray analysis and P450 substrate preferences
defined by functional protein expression will be made available at
http://arabidopsis-P450.biotec.uiuc.edu as collected.

