* 0115336
* US-India Cooperative Research:  "Complete" Spectroscopy at High Angular Momentum in Nuclei in the Vicinity of the Neutron Magic Number N=50
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2006
* Umesh Garg, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 07/31/2006
* USD 30,090.00

0115336 Garg

Description: This award supports a US-India cooperative research project
entitled "Complete" Spectroscopy at High Angular Momentum in Nuclei in the
Vicinity of the Neutron Magic Number N=50. The collaborators are Professor Umesh
Garg, University of Notre Dame and Professor Sandeep Ghugre, Inter-University
Consortium for DAE Facilities, Calcutta Centre. The PIs will investigate nuclei
in the vicinity of the N=50 closed shell. In addition to obtaining data on high-
angular momentum states in the N~50 nuclei, they propose to do a "complete"
spectroscopy of a number of nuclei with a view to understanding the evolution of
nuclear structure effects. Novel effects include "anti-magnetic rotation" and
"wobbling motion" in nuclei.

Scope: Experiments will be performed at the Gammasphere facility in the US and
at the MEHIA facility at the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai,
India. This project will actively involve graduate students and Postdocs at both
institutions. In addition to providing the opportunity to work at state-of-the-
art facilities, the proposed experiments will form Ph.D. dissertation projects
for students in both countries. This project is jointly supported by the
Division of International Programs and the Government of India's Department of
Science and Technology.

