* 0115396
* US-Zimbabwe Dissertation Enhancement:  Understanding the Role that Carbon Plays in Leaf Flush and the Implications for African Savannas
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Fakhri Bazzaz, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 08/31/2003
* USD 20,000.00

0115396&lt;br/&gt;Bazzaz &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation enhancement
grant supports a US graduate student, Ms. Renee Richer, working under the
guidance of Professor Fakhri Bazzaz, with the Department of Organismic &amp;
Evolutionary Biology at Harvard University, to conduct a study in Zimbabwe on
the mechanisms that control the timing of leaf
emergence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The timing of leaf flush and fall (leaf
phenology) can have significant impacts on rural economies, groundwater
supplies, the global carbon budget, and plant and animal diversity. But in
tropical savannas the cues that regulate leaf phenology are not that well
understood. Dry tropical woodlands are a source of food for humans and domestic
livestock and are also home to some of the world's most endangered wildlife,
which may be significantly impacted by changes in seasonal forage. Ms. Richer is
testing a novel hypothesis that fluctuating levels of stored carbohydrates
regulate patterns of leaf flush in the dry woodlands of Zimbabwe. She will also
test whether changes in the carbohydrates, as a result of elevated atmospheric
carbon, induce phenological change. Dr. Robson Mhuriro, in the Indigenous
Resources Department with the Forestry Commission of Zimbabwe, will provide
guidance on this project to Ms. Richer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this
study will increase the current knowledge about the basic dynamics of dry
woodlands and the potential effects of global change. This project will also
support an international research experience very early in the career of an
outstanding graduate student. &lt;br/&gt;