* 0116011
* Multiscale Research on the Effects of Anthropogenic Disturbance on Carbon and Nitrogen Dynamics: Major Research Instrumentation for Enhancing Research and Research Training
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Janet Gehring, Bradley University
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 08/31/2005
* USD 297,237.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. Morris, McConnaughay, Gehring and Frase at
Bradley University to acquire instrumentation needed to support integrated
studies of C and N dynamics including controlled environment growth chambers,
photosynthesis and soil respiration equipment and a nutrient auto-analyzer. The
equipment requested will be used within the department for individual projects,
interdepartmental collaborative projects and integrated research-training of
undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrumentation
will support on-going collaborative research efforts to examine the effects of
altered C and N dynamics on native and invasive plants in restored prairie
ecosystems. Specific projects will examine plant growth characteristics in the
field and in the laboratory under controlled environmental conditions in
chambers subjected to elevated CO2 and N deposition. Soil nutrient dynamics,
including C and N turnover, will be evaluated using laboratory mineralization
rates in tandem with measurements of plant growth characteristics. In addition
to answering fundamental questions about restoration ecology and ecosystem
change following disturbance, the instrumentation will be used as a tool by
individual researchers to introduce undergraduates in their respective
laboratories to integrated large-scale projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;