* 0116467
* Acquisition of a High-field Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) System for Neuroscience Research
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Paul Gamlin, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 08/31/2004
* USD 451,000.00

ABSTRACT

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Gamlin at the University of Alabama at
Birmingham (UAB) to acquire a state-of-the-art vertical, 4.7 Tesla, magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) device designed especially for use with alert, trained
non-human primates. MRI, especially functional MRI, is an exciting new tool that
is revolutionizing our ability to study the brain. However, this technology has
limitations when applied solely to humans. A major limitation is that once a
brain region is identified by fMRI as being functionally activated during a
specific task, additional invasive, experimental options are limited. However,
by using non-human primates, further studies are not limited to imaging alone.
One can conduct electrophysiological studies using single- and multi-unit
recording, and neuroanatomical and pharmacological inactivation techniques to
significantly enhance the level of understanding of brain function. Therefore,
this 4.7T MRI system will be used in a primate Neuroimaging Facility which, when
combined with existing neurophysiological techniques, will be able to examine
brain function at both microscopic and macroscopic scales and with temporal
resolutions of milliseconds - experiments that are not currently feasible in
humans. In addition, using this combination of techniques, new pulse sequences
will be developed and validated to ensure that fMRI images more accurately
reflect the spatial and temporal characteristics of the underlying neural
activity. UAB has assembled a group of internationally-recognized
neuroscientists with expertise in studying the underlying mechanisms of visual,
sensorimotor, and oculomotor processing in alert, behaving primates. The primate
visual system is the most extensively studied primate sensory system and the
oculomotor system is the best understood primate motor system. Thus, these UAB
investigators are in a unique position to fully exploit fMRI techniques to
better understand the behavior of these model neural systems and, in so doing,
contribute to a deeper understanding of brain function in general. The planned
research projects will include the investigation of neural mechanisms related to
vision, eye movements, plasticity, and sensorimotor integration in occipital,
parietal, temporal, and frontal cortex. Other projects will involve the
development of better functional and spectroscopic MRI techniques. The planned
Neuroimaging Facility, which will be one of only a few facilities in the world
in which research spanning single neurons to whole brain behavior can be
conducted in the same research animal, will be developed into a
regional/national resource for research in Neuroscience. This planned facility
thus has the potential to make major contributions to the field of functional
brain research. The planned Neuroimaging Facility will have a major impact on
recruitment and training of students in this emerging research area.
Specifically, to ensure that the next generation of scientists will exploit this
resource fully and develop MRI techniques further, participating faculty will
ensure that students are trained in-depth in both neuroscience and MRI imaging.
Further, UAB's Comprehensive Minority Faculty and Student Development Program,
the NSF-funded Alliance for Minority Participation, and the Alliance for
Graduate Education and the Professoriate Program, will ensure that a significant
proportion of these students are from underrepresented groups.

