* 0116617
* RUI: Acquisition of DNA Sequencer, Synthesizer and Spectrophotometer
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,02/28/2005
* Michael Savka, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 02/28/2005
* USD 115,948.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A grant has been awarded to Dr. Lawlor at
Rochester Institute of Technology to purchase three pieces of research
equipment: a Genetic Analyzer, a DNA synthesizer and a diode array
spectrophotometer. These complementary pieces would form an equipment suite that
would facilitate the research programs of four investigators in the departments
of biological sciences and chemistry. The research areas are diverse; they range
from molecular characterization of immune response molecules in the great apes
to creation of bacterial-resistant transgenic plants. They also include the
functional characterization of bacterial enzyme systems, as well as the
definition of closely related Central-American iguana species. The immune
response molecules regulate the activity of natural killer cells, a lymphoid
cell population instrumental in detecting virus-infected cells. The transgenic
plant project explores the possibility of creating plants with increased
production of a naturally occurring molecule that protects against bacterial
parasites. The function of threonine dehydrogenase, an essential enzyme in a key
metabolic pathway for many bacterial species, will be better understood after
molecular characterization of its variant forms. The iguana project is intent on
enumerating the species central Mexico and determining how similar they are to
one another. The projects, although disparate, share the feature that they are
basic biological research projects that would benefit by being able to
characterize and sequence the relevant genes.&lt;br/&gt; The suite of equipment
will permit the requisite DNA sequencing experiments so that the apes can be
tested for the presence of the natural killer genes. If present, precise
comparisons can be made against those found in human. The plant transgene,
created using recombinant DNA techniques, needs to be sequenced to insure proper
construction of the gene. Without this quality control assessment, subsequent
experiments cannot be undertaken. Preliminary sequence information obtained for
gram-negative bacteria, other than E. coli, reveals major differences in the
nucleotide sequence for threonine dehydrogenase. These differences will be
completely defined by sequencing the gene from the various bacterial species.
Earlier field trips to Mexico provided the samples required for DNA sequence
analysis of genes, mitochondrial and nuclear, that will form the database for
estimating relatedness amongst the species. Although the DNA sequencer is the
central equipment item, the DNA synthesizer will allow oligonucleotide
production for the sequencing experiments and the spectrophotometer is necessary
for accurate estimations of reagent amounts.&lt;br/&gt; The scientific
contributions from the four projects will be enhanced due to the expanded
capability provided by the equipment. Experiments that couldn't be undertaken
previously can now be performed in the respective laboratories. It is expected
that a better definition of the evolution of the natural killer genes in humans
and apes will be one result. Also, testing the hypothesis that transgenic plants
are superior to non-transgenic plants in regards to bacterial invasion will be
possible. The characterization of the threonine dehydrogenase gene will provide
insights as to the regions of the molecule critical for its function. Finally,
an understanding of the biogeography of mesoamerica will be increased from the
description of the iguana species that are indigenous to that area. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;