* 0116158
* MRI:  Acquisition of a High-Power CO2 Laser for Research and Education in Manufacturing and Materials Processing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2001,06/30/2003
* Ming Leu, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Julie Chen
* 06/30/2003
* USD 212,000.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI)Program grant provides funds to procure
a high-power CO2 laser system for research and education in manufacturing and
materials processing. The laser system consists of five major functional
components, including a laser generation unit, optics and beam delivery system,
a chiller and cooling system, gas control and supply system, and motion and
control system. The equipment will allow both fundamental and applied research
in: (1) Welding of High-Strength Aluminum Alloys; (2) Welding of Zinc-Coated
Steels; (3) Dual Beam Welding and Cutting; (4) The Formation of Striations in
Cutting; (5) Cladding of Functionally Graded Thermal Barrier Coating; (6) Laser-
Aided Sheet Metal Forming/Bending; (7) Surface Treating of Metals; (8) Laser-
Material Interactions and Keyhole Formation; (9) Sintering of Ceramic Coating
and Metal Films; and (10) Process Modeling and Real Time Control.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Availability of the equipment will enable the institution
to create new research capabilities and opportunities, to enrich the teaching of
several senior and graduate courses, to stimulate cross-disciplinary teamwork,
and to enhance university-industry-government collaborations. Faculty members
and graduate and undergraduate students from several academic departments will
form interdisciplinary teams to conduct the aforementioned research projects
using the acquired laser system.&lt;br/&gt;