* 0116547
* Acquisition and Development of a Non-linear Optical Microscope Workbench Facility for Research and Education at the Harvard Center for Imaging and Mesoscale Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2003
* Mara Prentiss, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2003
* USD 303,101.00

This award from the Major Instrumentation Program is for the acquisition of a
confocal microscope at Harvard University. This confocal microscope will be the
heart of a state-of-the-art optical microscopy facility which will be a core
component of the Center for Imaging and Mesoscopic Structures (CIMS), recently
established at Harvard University as part of a general initiative of renewed
support for the sciences. The facility will provide the Harvard research
community with a complete range of modern optical microscopy that will enable
optical imaging with unprecedented resolution and sensitivity. This will
facilitate a broad range of new research, and will help establish new
interdisciplinary research programs at Harvard University, bridging the
disciplines of chemistry, physics, engineering, materials science, biology and
medicine. This will help meet the important educational aim of CIMS, and this
facility, which is to ensure that students become skilled in state-of-the-art
microscopy, and are well versed in interdisciplinary collaboration. The research
to be conducted ranges from materials science to biology, from synthesis of
novel structured materials to probing single macromolecules inside living
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Major Instrumentation Program
will help Harvard University with the acquisition of a confocal microscope. This
equipment will be the heart of a state-of-the-art optical microscopy facility
which will be a core component of the Center for Imaging and Mesoscopic
Structures (CIMS), recently established at Harvard University as part of a
general initiative of renewed support for the sciences. The facility will
provide the Harvard research community with a complete range of modern optical
microscopy that will enable optical imaging with unprecedented resolution and
sensitivity. This will facilitate a broad range of new research, and will help
establish new interdisciplinary research programs at Harvard University,
bridging the disciplines of chemistry, physics, engineering, materials science,
biology and medicine. This will help meet the important educational aim of CIMS,
and this facility, which is to ensure that students become skilled in state-of-
the-art microscopy, and are well versed in interdisciplinary
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;