* 0116682
* Acquisition of Inductively Coupled Plasma Etch Tool for New Microsystems Technologies
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2001,12/31/2002
* Gregory Raupp, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 12/31/2002
* USD 400,000.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program to Arizona State
University will be used to acquire an inductively coupled plasma (ICP) etcher to
support a broad spectrum of well-funded interdisciplinary research programs with
a common focus on new integrated microsystems technologies for novel, high
payoff applications. The unique performance of this equipment provides a
critical tool that will substantially enhance wide bandgap semiconductor and
silicon fabrication capabilities, and thereby open up new frontiers in
microsystems concepts and applications for active exploration and discovery. The
equipment is configured with two independent etch chambers and ICP sources to
run a chlorine-based etch process for group III - nitrides, and a "Bosch"
fluorine-based process for deep etching of silicon. The dual chamber system will
avoid process cross-contamination and enhance overall reliability and robustness
of the etching to be performed. Research supported by this equipment falls into
one of two technology areas: (i) Wide Bandgap Materials, Devices and
Microsystems, and (ii) Si-based Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS).
Researchers in interdisciplinary teams from Materials Engineering, Chemical
Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Bioengineering, Mechanical Engineering,
Physics, Plant Biology, Chemistry and Biochemistry will be the principal
equipment users. It is anticipate that substantial breakthroughs in each of the
target applications will be enabled through the new patterning capability of the
ICP etch tool. The equipment will be run as a multi-user facility housed in the
class M3.5 cleanroom of the interdisciplinary Center for Solid State Electronics
Research (CSSER). Day-to-day operation of the equipment will be overseen by
CSSER's Associate Director. The majority of the actual users of the equipment
will be post-doctoral, graduate student and undergraduate student researchers.
Students will benefit from hands-on training with state-of-the-art fabrication
equipment and the exciting, creative environment of interdisciplinary
microsystems research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Major Research
Instrumentation program will allow Arizona State University to create a state-
of-the-art high density plasma processing facility that will provide unique
micropatterning capabilities that cannot otherwise be realized. The new multi-
user facility will bring catalyze research collaboration between materials
scientists, chemical engineers, electrical engineers, physicists, chemists, and
biologists, reflecting the highly interdisciplinary nature of the activities to
be undertaken. Through this new capability and new synergies, ASU will
contribute to the high technology industrial base by expanding research and
education capabilities in the design, synthesis, fabrication, and application of
novel microsystems. Research supported by this unique high tech processing
equipment will enable advances in interdisciplinary advanced materials research
in two high-payoff areas: (1) silicon-based nanostructure science and
technology, and (2) wide bandgap semiconductor microsystems. Students and
postdocs will benefit from hands-on training with state-of-the-art fabrication
equipment and the exciting, creative environment of interdisciplinary
microsystems research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;