* 0116235
* MRI:  Acquisition Of A Modern Electron Microprobe At The University of Maine
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Martin Yates, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2003
* USD 475,000.00

0116235 Guidotti

This award, made through the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program,
provides support for the acquisition of a state-of-the-art electron microprobe
(EMP) for the microchemical characterization of geological materials. A new EMP
will replace an aging (vintage 1981) ARL SEMQ in the Department of Geological
Sciences at the University of Maine. The instrument will facilitate research on
a range of topics in metamorphic petrology including, the speciation of Fe and
distribution of OH- in metapelites, and light element (i.e. Li, B, Be)
partitioning in granulite facies rocks. Research in paleoclimatology will also
be enhanced by this instrument. The probe will be used to analyze volcanic glass
shards in ice core samples for trace and major element compositions. Coupled
with analyses of suspected source tephras, such chemical analyses offer the
strong possibility of verifying the provenance of ice core tephra and therefore
relating these discrete events to climate proxies also recorded simultaneously
in ice cores. This facility will be the only modern EMP in the state of Maine
and will serve not only the needs of faculty and students from several
departments at the University of Maine , but also the needs of faculty and
students from nearby regional institutions (i.e. Bowdoin, Univ. of Southern
Maine, Bates). ***