* 0116900
* SGER: A Method to Genomic Sequence Uncultured Marine Phage
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2001,03/31/2002
* Forest Rohwer, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 03/31/2002
* USD 69,999.00

Our understanding of the marine environment was fundamentally changed when it
was shown that marine phage (viruses that infect bacteria) are present in
extraordinary numbers (ca.1010 per liter). Since this observation, marine
microbial ecologists have attempted to incorporate phage into the microbial food
web concepts. This work has shown that under various conditions phage account
for 12-600% of all bacterial production via lysis. The high number of observable
phage and their high production rates have called into question concepts of
energy and nutrient cycles in the world's oceans. The observation of large
numbers of phage in the ocean also raised two other extremely exciting
questions: 1) What type of phage inhabit the marine environment?, and 2) How
might phage affect genetic transfer (e.g., transduction or lysogenic conversion)
in the marine environment?. Available evidence suggests that marine phage
diversity is ten times as great as prokaryotic diversity and like their
prokaryotic counterparts, it is believed that each phage will have a unique
strategy for surviving and multiplying in the marine environment and these
strategies will be reflected in the genes that each phage encodes. The life
strategies adopted by phage will in turn help shape the MMFW and the
biogeochemical processes of the ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current methods of
phage characterization rely on phage morphology, genome size, and host range.
However, these approaches are extremely limited in their applicability to
environmental samples, primarily because the majority of host are not
culturable. Drs. Azam and Rohwer ill attempt to circumvent this problem by
sequencing the genomes of uncultured phage. This will be accomplished in three
steps. First, phage genomes will be separated from each other using pulse field
gels. Second, randomly amplified shotgun libraries (RASLs) will be constructed
from the bands isolated from the PF-gels. Finally, the shotgun libraries will be
sequenced.&lt;br/&gt;