* 0116375
* MRI:  Acquisition Of An ESEM With EDX And EBSD Capability For Microanalysis At The State University Of West Georgia
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2001,10/31/2005
* Julie Bartley, University of West Georgia
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 10/31/2005
* USD 300,871.00

0116375 Luneburg

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) grant provides funds for the
acquisition of electron microscopy equipment consisting of an environmental
scanning electron microscope (ESEM) with attached Energy Dispersive X-ray (EDX)
and Electron Backscatter Diffraction (EBSD) systems and partial support for a
technician to oversee operations of the instrument. A carbon coater will also be
purchased. This equipment is essential for innovative research and state-of-the-
art education of science students and will therefore strongly benefit the State
University of West Georgia in research and education. The Department of
Geosciences plans to establish a center for microanalysis comprising the
requested equipment as well as already available instruments such as optical
microscopes and an x-ray texture goniometer. Such a facility will be unique in
the southeastern United States. The wide range of users and applications from
within and outside the State University of West Georgia requires an instrument
like the ESEM whose particular technology allows analysis of a wide range of
specimens under low or high vacuum conditions with minimum contamination. The
EDX system is essential for quantitative chemical analyses of the samples. The
EBSD system will allow crystallographic orientation analyses of individual
minerals which, in combination with the texture goniometry measurements of bulk
samples, will promote new approaches to fabric analysis in rocks. Planned
research topics include fabric development in heterogeneous deformation fields
such as folds and shear zones, the kinematic significance of stretching
lineations, fabric development during a complex deformation history and the
relationship between fabrics and physical rock anisotropy. Studies will be
performed in the Southern Appalachians as well as in the Alps. The equipment
would also permit novel research in the field of microbial taphonomy
(decomposition and fossilization) and would permit detailed investigation into
the respiratory and feeding structures of well-preserved blastoids, thus
complementing existing research programs. Significant research and teaching
projects would also be undertaken in biology, chemistry and physics. ***