* 0116466
* MRI:  The Molecular Physiology of Stress in the Bioindicator Species Daphnia magna: Acquisition of Instrumentation for Research and Education
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Susan Whittemore, Keene State College
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 08/31/2004
* USD 148,486.00

Abstract: A grant has been awarded to Dr. Whittemore at Keene State College to
improve the ability to detect the presence, as well as to predict the effects,
of pollutants on aquatic environments for the effective management of our
valuable water resources. Daphnia magna, a freshwater crustacean species, has
long been used an indicator of freshwater quality. It has been well-demonstrated
that these invertebrates are highly sensitive to a wide variety of aquatic
contaminants. The bulk of the toxicological studies using bioassays based on
Daphnia rely on measurements of the effects of contaminant exposure on survival,
growth, and reproduction. The results of such studies are often difficult to
detect and quantify and are not reliably reproduceable. There is a need for
bioindicators of water quality that can be easily and rapidly measured and that
demonstrate sensitivity to sublethal toxicant exposures. The long-term objective
of our research is to further the effectiveness of this valuable bioindicator
species through the identification and quantification of genes that are
expressed upon exposure to specific contaminants. &lt;br/&gt; The grant will be
used to acquire a real-time PCR system and a differential display system to
further our investigations concerning the molecular physiology of stress in
Daphnia magna. The differential display system will greatly enhance the
efficiency with which we are able to identify genes that are expressed in
Daphnia following sublethal exposure to specific aquatic contaminants. The
expression of these genes will then be quantified using real-time PCR
methodology with the objective of developing these genes as sensitive molecular
markers of contaminant exposure. &lt;br/&gt;The PI, Susan Whittemore, a
physiologist, and the co-PI, Scott Strong, a molecular biologist, are faculty
members at a small public liberal arts college, Keene State College. The
requested equipment will greatly enhance the collaborative integrated
research/education efforts of these two faculty members. The project provides
KSC undergraduates state-of-the-art training opportunities in the field of
molecular biology. Engaging in faculty-mentored research enhances the desire and
ability of our undergraduates, many of whom are from underprivileged backgrounds
and/or are women, to pursue post-graduate training in biology.&lt;br/&gt;