* 0116925
* A Reassessment of Air-Sea Exchange of Mercury and of the Global Mercury Cycle
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Robert Mason, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2004
* USD 307,474.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0116925&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, studies
on air-sea exchange have suggested that estimated evasion rates for Hg from the
ocean are significantly higher that current deposition rates. One potential
reason for this lack of balance is that elemental Hg is oxidized by hydroxyl or
halogen radicals in the surface ocean, or via reactive halogen species in the
marine boundary layer (MBL). The PI proposes to determine the importance of Hg
oxidation at the air-sea exchange in controlling Hg cycling at the Earth's
surface. To achieve this goal, the scientist from the University of Maryland
will measure the spatial and temporal variation in the concentration of Hg
species in both the surface ocean and in the MBL. In the atmosphere, reactive
gaseous Hg (RGHg), particulate Hg and total gaseous Hg over the ocean will be
measured on short timescales during both research cruises and from the
atmospheric sampling tower at Bermuda and at a coastal site in Maryland. These
measurements will be carried out across seasons to assess the temporal and
spatial variability in Hg evasion and deposition. In conjunction with the air
measurements, the speciation of Hg in the surface ocean (total Hg, Hg0 and
methylated Hg) will be determined to allow the gas evasion from the ocean to be
calculated. The parameters that affect RGHg concentrations and the controls of
Hg oxidation and reduction in the MBL and in the surface ocean will be
ascertained using a combination of field incubation experiments and laboratory
tests. Results from this study will lead to an updated global Hg model and a
revision of our understanding of how Hg cycles at the Earth's surface.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;