* 0116078
* MRI:  Acquisition of an Ion Chromatograph and X-ray Diffractometer to Support Watershed Modeling, Seneca Lake, New York
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2003
* John Halfman, Hobart and William Smith Colleges
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 09/30/2003
* USD 99,771.00

0116078&lt;br/&gt;Halfman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant, made through the
Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, provides full support to acquire
an automated, dual column ion chromatograph (IC), and an X-ray diffractometer
(XRD) to investigate the geochemistry of the waters and sediments of Seneca
Lake, the largest of upstate New York's Finger Lakes. These new instruments will
complement existing instrumentation and Hobart and William Smith's 65-foot
research vessel, the HWS EXPLORER, to establish at the Colleges the scientific
resources needed for studying the interactions between the lake and its
watershed. Specifically, the ion chromatograph will increase the accuracy,
precision, and number of chemical analyses of both lake and tributary stream
waters. The X-ray diffractometer will identify and characterize the mineralogy
of fine-grained sediments, both in the lake and in tributary streams. Both
instruments will support a continuing project to develop quantitative models of
the movement of water, dissolved materials and sediment into and out of Seneca
Lake. Such models have immediate applications to several current environmental
concerns including the impact of exotic zebra mussels on the lake, rising
concentrations of the herbicide atrazine and nitrates in the lake and its
tributaries, and high concentrations of chloride in the lake. These models may
also help to understand changes in climate that followed glaciation and that are
recorded within the lake's sediments. Seneca Lake watershed models and the data
upon which they rest will also serve as an important base line for detecting and
evaluating future water quality changes in the lake. The impact of these
instruments will extend beyond the data they produce and the geochemical models
they will support. Much of the investigation of Seneca Lake's waters and
sediments will be done by undergraduate students working collaboratively with
geoscience faculty. The opportunity for these students to engage in hands-on
scientific research with modern instrumentation is critical to their development
as the next generation of geoscience researchers, environmental managers and
environmental policy makers.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;