* 0116500
* Acquisition of  an X-Ray Fluorescence (XRF) Spectrometer for Multi-disciplinary Research Projects
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2004
* David Cocke, Lamar University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas D. Frey
* 07/31/2004
* USD 99,875.00

Project Title: Acquisition of an X-Ray Fluorescence (XRF) Spectrometer
for&lt;br/&gt; Multi-disciplinary Research Projects&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF
Proposal No.: 0116500&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this NSF MRI (Major Research Instrumentation) award is to provide
an X-Ray Fluorescence (XRF) Spectrometer at Lamar University for research and
education. X-ray fluorescence is an instrumental technique for identification
and concentration determination of elements in solids or liquids. An XRF
spectrometer uses X-rays to excite an unknown sample. The excited elements in
the sample decay and re-emit their own "characteristic" fluorescent X-rays. The
spectrometer detects the fluorescent X-rays and quantitatively determines which
elements are present in the sample. The XRF being acquired is an Oxford
Instruments Model ED2000 equipped with a Vacuum System (XA620) and a Sample
Spinner Assembly (XA618). It can analyze elements in the mass range from Na(11)
to U(92), from low ppm to high percentage levels. Measurements can be made in
the standard air path, an optional helium path for liquids, or in vacuum for low
atomic number elements. Non-homogeneous samples such as particulates on filter
papers can be optimally measured with the use of the ED2000 sample
spinner.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The availability of an XRF unit at Lamar
University will greatly enhance our capabilities in particle-related research
and education, promote inter-disciplinary collaboration among departments,
reduce long-term operation costs for elemental analyses, and strengthen our
efforts in obtaining external research funds at Lamar University. Both currently
funded and future proposed projects will be directly benefited by this
acquisition, including measurement and analysis of outdoor/indoor particulate
matter, development of sorbent technology for metal and mercury emission
control, chemical characterization of industrial sludge, and development of a
super-porous titania-based photoreactor for environmental applications. In
addition, both undergraduate and graduate students at Lamar University will have
an opportunity, either through research or classroom instruction, to obtain
first-hand experience in understanding and operating this modern, advanced
chemical-analysis technique. The impact of this acquisition on research and
instructional infrastructure at Lamar University will be considerable. It will
also enhance service to the area K-12 students and efforts in recruiting
potential students to science and engineering programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;