* 0116263
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Magnetic Resonance Imaging Accessory for a Bruker 400 MHz NMR Spectrometer
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Nancy Kolodny, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Farmer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 184,623.00

Acquisition of a Magnetic Resonance Imaging Accessory&lt;br/&gt; for a 400 MHz
NMR Spectrometer: &lt;br/&gt;Interdisciplinary Research in MRI in an
Undergraduate College
Setting&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been
awarded to Dr. Nancy H. Kolodny and her colleagues at Wellesley College, an
undergraduate liberal arts college for women, to establish a Magnetic Resonance
Micro-Imaging Facility in Wellesley's Science Center. This facility will offer
unique interdisciplinary research, teaching, and learning opportunities to
Wellesley's faculty and students, with initial research projects in the emerging
field of neuroscience. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;With the establishment of the
micro-imaging facility, two different types of Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)
techniques, functional MRI (fMRI) and contrast enhanced MRI will be developed.
These techniques will be used to answer important neurobiological questions.
Functional MRI will be utilized to examine the brains of crustaceans such as
lobsters, and mice. Details of activity patterns in the olfactory pathway of the
crustacean brain will be elucidated. In mice, the question of whether gender and
age affect brain function will be investigated, focusing on the response of the
brain to stimulation of the whisker barrels. Contrast enhancement techniques
will be used to address questions related to the role of serotonin, an important
brain biochemical, in olfactory neurons in newborn crustaceans. An MRI
experiment will be introduced into Wellesley's undergraduate introductory
developmental biology course. Students will use MRI to explore the pupal
development of tobacco hawkmoth. Not only will this give students experience
with MRI, it will also provide an opportunity for dynamic observation of living
organisms during development.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The scientific problems to
be examined in the new Magnetic Resonance Micro-Imaging Facility at Wellesley
College are of importance in the developing basic understanding of brain and
neuron function. Furthermore, training undergraduate students in the use of MRI
will both inspire them to further study of science and enable them to pursue
sophisticated research during their college years and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;