* 0116014
* Building an Agenda for Public Understanding of Science:  Support of Planning Activities with Science Centers in China and Japan -- A Planning Grant
* EHR,DRL
* 05/01/2001,05/31/2004
* Freda Nicholson, Discovery Place, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 05/31/2004
* USD 48,677.00

Discovery Place in Charlotte, NC is planning and coordinating a visit by Chinese
delegates to designated United States Science Museums toward identifying
cooperative endeavors related to public understanding of science. Planning also
will be done for a separate delegation of informal educators from Japan.
Discovery Place will work with the Association of Science-Technology Centers
(ASTC) to assist in planning and arranging portions of each delegation's visit
in order to help science center professionals from all three countries meet and
learn more about each other's institutions, programs and priorities. Through
this networking, U.S. institutions will be encouraged to participate in
exchanges and cooperative projects. The meetings also will help all sides
identify potential partners and develop the relationships necessary to pursue
joint activities such as staff exchanges, cooperative development of exhibits
and programs and design of workshops.

Specific planning activities to be undertaken by Discovery Place include:

Identifying appropriate museum and media production sites for the Chinese
delegation to visit; Coordinating the purposes of the visit with these sites;
Working with The Institute of Pacific Asia (IPA is the NSF grantee that is
handling the administrative aspects of the Chinese and Japanese visits) to
develop a specific agenda for each site visit; Coordinating with ASTC to arrange
such activities as: Presentations by members of the Chinese and Japanese
delegation in ASTC conference sessions, Participation by members of the Chinese
and Japanese delegations in ASTC conference events and sessions, and Assisting
IPA in developing an agenda for a one-day US/China delegation meeting
immediately following the conference.

This project provides rare opportunities for informal science educators and
policy makers to explore a wide range of program options for the United States,
China and Japan to inform the public and build support for science.

