* 0116320
* Acquistion of a Laser Confocal Microscope for an Integrated Microscopy Facility at Union College
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Barbara Boyer, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Farmer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 226,832.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. Quynh Chu-LaGraff, Barbara Boyer, Barbara
Danowski, Stephen Horton, and Robert Lauzon at Union College to acquire a
confocal microscope to be the centerpiece for a renovated Integrated Microscope
facility. This instrument would substantially enhance and expand the research
capabilities of five faculty with interests ranging from cellular motility,
invertebrate development and evolution, genetic development, programmed cell
death, to molecular neuroscience. Moreover, confocal technology as an innovative
tool will be integrated into classroom laboratory training and individual
student-faculty projects to enrich the research experience of undergraduates.
Within the Biology Department, there are currently numerous projects that
represent the integration of cellular, genetics, molecular, and developmental
approach to biological science. Specifically, research include using fly and
mouse model systems to better understand human neurological diseases, evolution
of segmentation in primitive organisms, the role of centrosome reorientation in
migrating cultured cells, genetic and molecular mechanisms governing mushroom
development, and basic understanding of programmed cell death in colonial sea
squirt Botryllus schlosseri. The instrument represents a critical investment to
maintain and enhance academic research excellence both for faculty research and
for the training of undergraduate researchers. It will also facilitate more
active and productive faculty and student research interactions at Union College
by bypassing the need to gain access to a confocal microscope elsewhere.