* 0116634
* Acquisition of an Analytical Field Emission Environmental Scanning Electron Microscope for Interdisciplinary Multi-User Access at the University of Arkansas
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Richard Ulrich, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2005
* USD 572,034.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program to the University of
Arkansas is for the acquisition of a field emission environmental scanning
electron microscope. The system is expected to provide a spatial resolution of
two nanometer at thirty kilovolt accelerating voltage and at elevated chamber
pressure up to ten Torr. This allows imaging of biological or other wet samples
without the requirement of conducting coating. The system will be equipped with
hot/cold stages and micromanipulators. It includes additional features such as
computerized image processing with capability to capture videos of sample
evolution. Faculty and students from universities in Arkansas with
underrepresented minorities will have remote access to the instrument. The
instrument will be used by twenty faculty members along with students and
postdocs. The instrument will also support the research and training activities
of the Arkansas-Oklahoma Center of Instrumentation and Science for Planetary
Surfaces, the Center for Advanced Technology and the MRSEC.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program
to the University of Arkansas is for the acquisition of a field emission
environmental scanning electron microscope. The system is expected to provide a
spatial resolution of two nanometer at thirty kilovolt accelerating voltage and
at elevated chamber pressure up to ten Torr. This allows imaging of biological
or other wet samples without the requirement of conducting coating. The system
will be equipped with hot/cold stages and micromanipulators. It includes
additional features such as computerized image processing with capability to
capture videos of sample evolution. Faculty and students from universities in
Arkansas with underrepresented minorities will have remote access to the
instrument. The instrument will be used by twenty faculty members along with
students and postdocs. The instrument will also support the research and
training activities of the Arkansas-Oklahoma Center of Instrumentation and
Science for Planetary Surfaces, the Center for Advanced Technology and the
MRSEC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;