* 0116267
* Acquisition of a Transmission Electron Microscope to Support UCR's Accelerated Growth in the Cell/Molecular/Development Biology Program
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Prudence Talbot, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Farmer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 435,915.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. James G. Baldwin at The University of
California, Riverside (UCR) for a new transmission electron microscope (TEM).
The research and teaching needs of this growing campus and scheduling problems
on the existing microscope will be met by adding this new TEM. The new
microscope is highly complementary with the existing TEM and both instruments
will be housed and administered together in the campuswide Central Facility for
Advanced Microscopy and Microanalysis (CFAMM) administered within the College of
Natural and Agricultural Sciences (CNAGS).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This instrument
provides functionality needed by experts, yet simplicity appreciated by students
and less experienced microscopists. The new microscope will be scheduled for
projects that leverage its ease-of-use for diverse TEM work done by many biology
researchers and students that do not require high accelerating voltage nor
analytical capabilities. Flexibility and scheduling conflicts will be further
addressed by equipping the microscope with an electronically controlled rotating
stage (required by many Cell, Molecular and Developmental Biology [CMDB])
investigators, e.g. those using stereo pairs) and digital image capture required
for most CMDB scientists and crucial for cost effective printing, storage, 3D
reconstruction, and easy interfacing with the adjacent Center for Visual
Computing (CVC) with which it will be linked by an existing fiber optics system.
A new vacuum evaporator is also awarded and is vital for sample preparation for
the electron microscope.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;UCR is the most rapidly growing
UC campus, with the highest representation of minority students in the UC system
and among the highest nationally. New faculty hires and new laboratory
construction are underway to accommodate a 100% increase by 2010, with
particular growth in life sciences. The new TEM is essential for research and
teaching programs to keep pace with the rapidly expanding interdepartmental
program in CMDB and to address a worsening scheduling crisis on the only
existing modern TEM on campus and shared by both life and materials scientists.
For a significant group of Federally-funded UCR researchers in the life
sciences, TEM is an indispensable tool, complementary to a range of additional
techniques for acquiring structural information at the cellular and sub-cellular
level. These include special applications in cell biology that are relevant to
basic science as well as agriculture, biomedicine, pathogenesis, mode of action
of antibiotics, and exploring character changes in evolution. UCR's existing
CFAMM, interfaced with the CVC, provides a unique context for the new TEM
dedicated for life science/CMDB research and training. The new TEM will be the
primary graduate and undergraduate TEM teaching tool for seven existing courses,
and the PIs of this proposal will collaborate to develop a new training course
specific to TEM techniques centered around the new instrument at the
CFAMM.&lt;br/&gt;