* 0116105
* Instrumentation To Study The Control Of Blood Pressure Regulation
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2004
* Scott Carlson, Luther College
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 08/31/2004
* USD 113,200.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Scott Carlson at Luther College to acquire
instrumentation necessary to pursue basic research related to control of blood
pressure regulation. Specifically, the grant provides funding for purchase of a
telemetric monitoring system, isolated tissue bath setup, doppler flow probe
system, a microtome with a freeze stage, and a gamma counter. This equipment
provides state-of-the-art technologies necessary for basic research related to
rat cardiovascular physiology, and will be utilized by faculty and undergraduate
students to pursue research projects related to cardiovascular control under
normal and pathological conditions. &lt;br/&gt; Three faculty/student research
projects will be supported by this grant. The first project focuses on how the
rat brain receives information regarding dietary intake and normally responds to
prevent alterations in blood pressure. The second study will examine the effects
of diabetes on blood pressure and vascular function. The third study will
investigate whether estrogen protects cognitive function, in part by maintaining
proper blood flow to regions of the brains associated with learning and memory.
&lt;br/&gt; The projects described above will allow the awardee and his students
to pursue &lt;br/&gt;basic research which addresses significant physiological
questions. The projects &lt;br/&gt;will directly involve undergraduate students,
giving them experience in &lt;br/&gt;cardiovascular research methods and in the
scientific process. Furthermore, students will present research at national
meetings and in publication format. It is expected that the equipment will
increase collaborative opportunities within the college and with other
institutions through the use of the instrumentation as core equipment for the
Biology Department. This instrumentation will also be integrated into the
classroom curriculum, through a planned "Introduction to Cardiovascular
Research" course as well as in the current physiology laboratory courses. Thus,
in addition to the 6 undergraduate students which are currently working in the
awardee's laboratory, it is expected that approximately 110 students will
annually utilize this equipment during their course work. Finally, the
instrumentation will be used in the Summer Science Program, which exposes
minority students to scientific research. Thus, acquisition of this equipment
will greatly benefit the educational and research goals to which Luther College
and the National &lt;br/&gt;Science Foundation are committed.&lt;br/&gt;