* 0116904
* MRI:  Development of an Electron Microprobe Teaching &amp; Research Facility
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Ken Hon, University of Hawaii at Hilo
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2005
* USD 143,901.00

0116904&lt;br/&gt;Hon&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant, made through the Major
Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, provides partial support to upgrade an
existing ARL-SEMQ electron microprobe (EMP) in the Geology Department at the
University of Hawaii-Hilo. This EMP was recently donated to the Department by
the USGS and has since been upgraded with modern PC-based control and data
acquisition systems. This support will replace the electron gun power supply
(now 20 years old), the back-scatter imaging system, and the optical mirrors
within the microprobe. In addition, as teaching and education are an important
mission of this laboratory, funds will be used to develop a remote operating
capability. This will allow demonstrations of EMP techniques for use in current
courses, workshops and to produce outreach programs for local high schools.
Additional funds will be used for the purchase of a carbon coater and an optical
microscope and image analysis system. Having an operational and modern electron
microscopy facility at UH-Hilo will greatly enhance their ability to attract and
retain students in the sciences. In particular, Hawaiian and Pacific Islander
students make up a large proportion of the student body. Researchers at the
nearby USGS Hawaiian Volcanological Observatory (HVO) will also have access to
the probe for initial quantitative chemical and textural analysis of basaltic
lavas. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;