* 0116713
* MRI:  Acquisition of Laser Light Scattering Instrumentation
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Joseph Williamson, Willamette University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Kuczkowski
* 08/31/2005
* USD 90,000.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program will enable the
Chemistry Department at Willamette University to acquire laser light scattering
instrumentation. With these new capabilities, the PI will investigate the nature
of intermolecular interactions in binary liquid mixtures by analyzing both
Rayleigh and Raman scattering intensities as a function of composition and
temperature. In addition, in collaboration with Dr. Jeffrey Willemsen, he will
study the antispermatogenic nature of gossypol derivatives. Student researchers
at this undergraduate institution will also participate in these projects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Liquid solutions and the solvation process are vital to
both the scientific community and the chemical industry, but the liquid phase is
a challenge to understand and model. The close proximity of molecules in a
liquid makes the influence of the intermolecular potential impossible to ignore,
and the lack of long range order in a liquid further complicates matters.
Fortunately, motion and dynamics in a solution may be studied by directing a
laser onto the liquid sample and measuring the intensity and frequency of the
scattered light. Static and dynamic light scattering techniques represent an
indispensable tool for the in-situ characterization of complex liquid systems.