* 0116334
* MRI:  Acquisition Of A New Stable Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2004
* John Humphrey, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 09/30/2004
* USD 165,000.00

0116334&lt;br/&gt;Humphrey&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support from the Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) will be used to acquire a stable isotope ratio mass
spectrometer coupled with a gas chromatograph, water equilibration device,
automated carbonate extraction system, and an auto-sampler. This modern modular
system will replace a twenty-year-old mass spectrometer and ancillary vacuum
lines as the primary research instrument for obtaining stable isotope data at
the Colorado School of Mines (CSM). The outdated equipment will be retained as
teaching tools for graduate education. A primary advantage of a new system will
be its ability to routinely handle very small sample sizes, in some cases
several orders of magnitude smaller than that possible with the existing
facilities. For example, carbonate samples in the 5-10 microgram range and water
samples in the 200-300 microliter range can be analyzed with the new system,
whereas the previous facilities could only accurately measure in the milligram
and milliliter ranges, respectively. Further, sample preparation and
introduction into the mass spectrometer will be fully automated, allowing for
greater sample through-put and efficient use of researchers' time and resources.
The new equipment will be used to study a variety of earth systems for which the
isotopic analysis of hydrogen, carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, and sulfur is
particularly critical. Twelve faculty members at CSM currently have ongoing
research programs utilizing stable isotope geochemistry. The new instrumentation
will service faculty from the Department of Geology and Geological Engineering,
the Department of Chemistry and Geochemistry, and the Division of Environmental
Science and Engineering. Specific areas of faculty research that require stable
isotope data encompass both applied and fundamental topics, including water/rock
interaction and diagenesis of carbonate rocks, geomicrobiology, bioremediation,
petroleum reservoir characterization, hydrothermal alteration, petroleum and
natural gas characterization, geochemistry of metalliferous ore deposits,
continental paleoclimatology, and environmental
geochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;