* 0116674
* Development of a High-Resolution Continuous-Flow Analysis System for Measurements of Soluble Chemical Species in Ice Cores
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2001,06/30/2004
* Deirdre Belle-Oudry, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 06/30/2004
* USD 113,685.00

0116674&lt;br/&gt;Bales&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a Major
Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program project for one year of funding to
develop a state-of-the-art continuous flow analysis (CFA) system that will be
used for measuring concentrations of eight soluble chemical species (calcium,
hydrogen peroxide, ammonium, formaldehyde, nitrate, sodium, chloride and
sulfate) plus electrical conductivity in polar ice cores. The system will be
designed for use in either the laboratory or the field and will consist of a
melter (to hold, feed, melt and monitor the core melting progress) and a liquid-
flow system to distribute melted samples and mix with reagents. In addition, the
system will have a detector to measure the various analytical streams and a data
acquisition and processing system for manipulating the large amounts of data
that will be produced. While the chemical principles used in the detectors are
well established, the design of the overall system and the detailed
instrumentation will be entirely new. This new instrument will enable U.S. ice
core scientists to remain at the forefront of technology and will increase the
quality and rate at which new ice core records can be produced. The access to
new ice core records which will be produced by this instrument should result in
a better understanding of climate and atmospheric chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;