* 0116387
* The Identification of Nonpoint Sources of Escherichia Coli in Freshwater Ecosystems by DNA Fingerprinting
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,12/31/2004
* Ronald Stephens, Ferrum College
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Farmer
* 12/31/2004
* USD 75,584.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to Ronald Stephens at
Ferrum College, to purchase equipment for molecular biological techniques in
order to support research which determines the sources of fecal bacteria in
freshwater ecosystems by DNA fingerprinting of Escherichia coli bacteria. In
1972 the federal government passed the Clean Water Act whose mission is to
"restore and maintain the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of the
nations waters." In Virginia, many streams are classified as being impaired
because of high levels of fecal bacteria. The EPA has mandated that these
problems be mediated by the implementation of the TMDL (Total Maximum Daily
Load) Program. Successful water remediation cannot occur until reliable methods
of identifying the source(s) of the fecal contamination can be developed. Fecal
bacteria are found in the intestines of all warm-blooded animals. Therefore,
potential sources of E. coli contamination could be from humans, domestic
animals, wild life, or livestock. The presence of fecal bacteria indicate the
possibilities of the presence of pathogenic bacteria or
viruses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this project will be to determine
nonpoint (unknown) sources of fecal bacteria in the Blackwater and Pigg River
watersheds in Franklin County, Virginia. The specific objectives of the project
will be to:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Collect fecal bacterial strains from known
sources (fecal samples) and unknown sources (water
samples).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Determine the DNA fingerprint profile of the
bacterial samples using the equipment provided.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Compare
DNA fingerprint profiles from known and unknown sources with existing
profiles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Determine the sources of the bacteria in the
unknown samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Increase the DNA fingerprint library
database.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the establishment of methodologies to
determine the sources of fecal bacteria in the nations waterways, this problem
can be more directly addressed and remediation more accurately designed.
Otherwise, without specific knowledge of the sources of fecal pollution,
expensive remediation programs such as TMDL's will be based on guesswork. The
establishment of a DNA fingerprint library database will greatly increase the
scientist's ability to determine the sources of fecal pollution. This database
could not be established without the purchase of the molecular biology
equipment.