* 0116391
* Acquisition of Cell Imaging and Cell Laser Ablation Systems for Developmental Biology Research
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Mary Montgomery, Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Steven E. Ellis
* 08/31/2004
* USD 115,000.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Mary K. Montgomery at Macalester College to
support on-going developmental biology research and undergraduate research
training. Funds will be used to acquire a new epifluorescence microscope,
deconvolution software, and a laser ablation system. The instrumentation is
expected to primarily support the research program of the principal
investigator, which is in the fields of developmental biology and evolution, and
focuses on a comparative study of embryogenesis between the model organism C.
elegans and closely related species. The research programs of other faculty in
the Biology Department, particularly in the areas of neurobiology and
immunology, are also expected to benefit by supporting new lines of research
that require sophisticated cell imaging capabilities. Common components of all
of these research programs is the involvement of undergraduate student
collaborators and the utilization of immunofluorescence as a key technical
approach. &lt;br/&gt;The use of antibodies conjugated to fluorophores allows
researchers to visualize the spatial and temporal localization of specific gene
products, which helps to illuminate gene function particularly when complemented
with molecular genetic approaches. The requested cell imaging equipment will be
used to capture fluorescence images of enhanced quality through digital confocal
imaging, which can be achieved using a motorized Z-focus drive and deconvolution
software. This instrumentation will support optical sectioning of live or fixed
thick specimens, such as whole embryos, stained with fluorescently labeled
antibodies or other cell markers; this feature will allow observations of
changes in the distribution of the fluorescent label in different focal planes
of the specimen. Software will be used for three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction
from the series of optical sections. Multiple fluorophores will be detected
using different filter sets and the software used to determine regions of
colocalization. Laser ablation equipment attached to a pre-existing light
microscope will be used to ablate or isolate specific cells in early embryos to
determine the contribution of individual founder cells to the fully
differentiated state. Three-dimensional reconstructions of wildtype, mutant, and
laser-ablated embryos stained with cell-specific markers will aid these cell
lineage analyses, as will 4D time lapse imaging. &lt;br/&gt;Although the field
of developmental biology has made enormous progress in uncovering a common set
of mechanisms used to pattern animal embryos, much less is known about how
developmental mechanism are altered during the generation of species diversity.
The research supported by this grant is expected to contribute to an
understanding of how the mechanisms governing cell fate in the early embryo have
evolved in a group of closely related species. Furthermore, the requested
equipment will greatly enhance the quality of faculty-student collaborative
research being conducted in the Biology department at Macalester College. All
research programs impacted by this proposal have a common objective of providing
education and research training opportunities for advanced undergraduate
students. Student research training will also be enhanced through use of the
instrumentation in advanced courses, such as Developmental Biology, independent
projects, and senior honors theses. &lt;br/&gt;