* 0116266
* Arabidopsis 2010:  RUI: Genetic and Physiological Characterization of Arabidopsis Plasma Membrane H+-ATPase Mutants
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2005
* Jeff Young, Western Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 06/30/2005
* USD 500,000.00

The initial annotation of the complete sequence of Arabidopsis thaliana
indicates that of the 11,601 distinct gene types found, only 35% are represented
in the genome by one gene, while 37% are represented by gene families with five
or more different members. For a majority of the larger gene families, the
molecular function of the encoded proteins is known. However, the role of
individual gene family members in specific physiological or development pathways
is often uncertain. The focus of this project is to develop protocols to assist
in describing the in planta function of individual gene family members in the
AHA, Arabidopsis plasma membrane H+-ATPase, gene family. The AHA genes code for
proteins that couple ATP hydrolysis to proton transport across the plasma
membrane of plant cells. The proton-motive force produced by the ATPases then
drives the transport of solutes via carriers and channels. In Arabidopsis, the
proton pumps comprise a gene family with at least twelve gene isoforms.
Expressed in different tissues, the pumps provide the underlying energy for a
variety of fundamental plant processes such as cellular homeostasis, mineral and
metabolite transport, cell growth and plant morphogenesis, and a variety of
responses to the environment including stomatal control, tropic responses, and
defense related mechanisms. As a first step towards determining the function of
the AHA genes, we have screened over 80,000 Arabidopsis T-DNA insertion lines
and have identified twenty-nine mutants. This collection of mutants includes ten
of twelve AHA gene family members, with multiple alleles for many isoforms.
Exhaustive screening of the current 80,000 lines and screening of recently
available lines should make it possible to reach the goal of finding multiple
alleles for each gene family member. To understand the role these genes
individually and in the gene family, we will take the following approaches: - We
will isolate, outcross and prepare aha mutant lines for analysis and
distribution to the Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center, Columbus, OH 43210.

- We will perform genetic crosses and create multiple insert lines (i.e.,
double, triple mutants, etc.) in order to uncover genetic redundancy in the gene
family.

- We will test for conditional phenotypes in the mutant AHA lines by comparing
mutants to wild-type plants under conditions designed to reveal differences in
development, responses to environmental stimuli, nutrient uptake, etc.

- We will establish an on-line database of experimental conditions designed for
a broad range of phenotypic analysis. Preliminary protocols will be available
Year 1, first quarter. Detailed protocols and associated data will be added as
it is generated.

The availability of twenty-nine AHA gene-family mutant alleles provides the raw
materials for substantial progress into the function of the AHA genes and gene
family. The availability of this resource at a predominantly undergraduate
institution provides a means of integrating genomic scale research with
undergraduate training.

The AHA genes can be referenced at
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov:80/Database/index.html, via the accession numbers:
At2g18960, AT4g30190, MJB24.16, T17F15.180, At2g24520, At2g07560, F27H5.120,
T12K4.90, F23A5.1, F20D23.4, MRG21.9, AT4g11730.