* 0116203
* Acquisition of a Stable Isotope Mass Spectrometer Facility for Life Science Studies
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Gerald Edwards, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard M. McCourt
* 08/31/2006
* USD 288,889.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Lee at Washington State University to set up a
stable isotope ratio mass spectrometry (IRMS) facility for life science
research. Stable isotopes occur naturally in all organisms. Virtually all
biological activities involve compounds containing these isotopes. Measurements
of stable isotopes of carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur provide a powerful means of
establishing the sources of these elements and the processes involved in their
deposition. Therefore stable isotope data provide a fingerprint revealing the
history of an organism and the metabolic processes occurring within. Researchers
at WSU will apply stable isotope data to investigate questions in diverse
disciplines including: wildlife and population ecology, physiology, plant
molecular biology, agricultural science, and human nutrition.

This is an exciting technology for biologists because information can be gained
from wild populations without having to subject them to experimental
manipulation. Minute samples can be analyzed, and can consist of leaves,
feathers, blood, or a single hair. In addition, experimental investigations can
be conducted using compounds labeled with stable isotopes, providing a non-
radioactive method that can safely be used in humans and other organisms. C.
Robbins and L. Shipley will use stable isotopes to investigate diets of wildlife
that are difficult to observe in nature or have been extinct for thousands of
years (e.g., grizzly bears and cave bears). Physiological investigations will be
conducted by R. Lee, G. Edwards, K. Johnson, and M. Kahn to determine metabolic
adaptations in unusual deep-sea vent organisms, mechanisms of photosynthesis in
plants, the contribution of microorganisms to digestion in cows and sheep, and
factors that promote nitrogen fixation by crop plants. M. Webster will use this
technology as a novel means of tracking bird migrations. M. McGuire will use
stable isotopes to determine the benefits of breastfeeding vs. formula-feeding
in human infants by studying the metabolism of fatty acids found in breastmilk.

While stable isotopes are finding increased use in life sciences, very few
facilities are run by biologists. Consequently sample analyses are expensive and
receive low priority. New studies are difficult to initiate. This newly funded
facility will enhance existing research projects by enabling analyses to be
performed quickly and at low cost. Acquisition of instrumentation at WSU will
also allow principal investigator, postdoctoral, graduate, and undergraduate
training in stable isotope methods. Expansion of use is likely, due to the large
number of life science disciplines present at WSU. These disciplines are
represented by academic divisions in biological sciences and molecular
biosciences, as well as agriculture, veterinary medicine, natural resource
science, and pharmaceutical science. The presence of a facility geared towards
biological studies will likely stimulate new and innovative applications of
stable isotope techniques.