* 0116139
* C-RUI:Behavior and the Major Histocompatibility Complex in Savannah Sparrows
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Nathaniel Wheelwright, Skidmore College
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2005
* USD 646,469.00

0116139-Freeman-Gallant&lt;br/&gt;1. A lay abstract, with the title of the
proposal and your full name at the top.&lt;br/&gt;Corey R. Freeman-Gallant and
Nathaniel T. Wheelwright. "Inbreeding, Female Mating Fidelity, and
the&lt;br/&gt;Major Histocompatibility Complex in Savannah
Sparrows"&lt;br/&gt;Female birds often copulate outside of the pair-bond to
produce broods of mixed paternity, and in some&lt;br/&gt;species, as many as 60%
of young derive from extra-pair fertilizations. The ubiquity of this infidelity
has&lt;br/&gt;important implications for our understanding of avian biology.
Recent work has linked female mating&lt;br/&gt;fidelity to the ecology and
evolution of male parental care, social mating systems, breeding dispersion
and&lt;br/&gt;synchrony, and the form and function of elaborate sexual displays.
Despite its importance, the adaptive&lt;br/&gt;significance of multiple mating
remains controversial. While several recent studies support the idea
that&lt;br/&gt;extra-pair copulations (EPCs) allow females to obtain good genes
for their offspring (by trading-up) on&lt;br/&gt;the genetic quality of sires),
many others have found no relationship between female mating fidelity
and&lt;br/&gt;traits likely to reflect male quality. Indeed, much variation in
female mating fidelity remains unexplained,&lt;br/&gt;and few feasible
alternatives to the good genes hypothesis have been pursued in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;A corollary to the good genes hypothesis proposes that females
do use EPCs to increase the quality of&lt;br/&gt;young, but it is the
interaction between maternal and paternal genomes"and not male quality per
se"that&lt;br/&gt;is the target of female choice. This individual optimization
or genetic compatibility hypothesis has&lt;br/&gt;now been explored in snakes,
lizards, and pseudoscorpions, but few studies in birds have considered
the&lt;br/&gt;importance of genotype-dependent mating preferences and optima.
Preliminary work with Savannah&lt;br/&gt;sparrows (Passerculus sandwichensis),
however, strongly suggests that females pair nonrandomly
(and&lt;br/&gt;disassortatively) with respect to the major histocompatibility
complex (Mhc), a group of genes responsible&lt;br/&gt;for eliciting the adaptive
immune response of vertebrates. Moreover, a female's genetic similarity to
her&lt;br/&gt;social mate predicts her fidelity: females paired to similar males
are more likely to produce extra-pair&lt;br/&gt;young than females paired to
dissimilar males. These results parallel similar studies in mice and
humans,&lt;br/&gt;and suggest either that the benefits of genetic diversity (at
the Mhc) drive female mating patterns or that the&lt;br/&gt;avoidance of
inbreeding is an ultimate cause of social and genetic mate choice in Savannah
sparrows.&lt;br/&gt;With NSF funding, new molecular and analytical techniques
will applied to samples obtained during&lt;br/&gt;previous field work.
Preliminary results with Savannah sparrows are based on 38 pairs nesting on
Kent&lt;br/&gt;Island, New Brunswick, Canada in 1995. To determine whether
females choose within- and extra-pair&lt;br/&gt;sires according to their Mhc
genotype, and to incorporate other potential determinants of female
mating&lt;br/&gt;fidelity (such as adult age, timing of breeding and phenotypic
quality), the analysis will be extended to&lt;br/&gt;pairs nesting in 1994. In
addition, the importance of overall levels of genetic relatedness to female
mating&lt;br/&gt;fidelity, the occurrence of egg (embryo) mortality, and the
survivorship of nestlings and fledglings will be&lt;br/&gt;assessed by surveying
sparrows during the 2002 and 2003 breeding seasons. Both the costs of
inbreeding&lt;br/&gt;and the benefits of Mhc heterozygosity predict that females
should avoid fertilizations from genetically&lt;br/&gt;similar
males.&lt;br/&gt;This research benefits from the prior development of a species-
specific Mhc probe and nearly 15 years&lt;br/&gt;of field and molecular work on
the Kent Island population of Savannah sparrows. This study will
provide&lt;br/&gt;one of the first tests of the importance of the Mhc to social
and genetic mating patterns in a free-living&lt;br/&gt;population of songbirds.