* 0116090
* Physics of Dislocation Patterning and Size Effects in Plasticity
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2001,12/31/2006
* Robin Selinger, Catholic University of America
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2006
* USD 192,372.00

This grant supports theoretical research on the elastic-plastic response of
crystalline solids. The objectives of the project include: (1) characterizing
and understanding the thermodynamics driving coalescence of dislocations into
ordered structures in two dimensions, and (2) investigating the origins of size
effects in plasticity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dislocation patterning has been
extensively modeled as a non-equilibrium process governed by competing kinetics,
but the thermodynamics driving the coalescence of dislocations into ordered
structures is not well understood. This project considers the simple case of
screw dislocations under shear in two dimensions, and models their coalescence
into slip bands using both simulation and theory. Simulation studies are carried
out using an idealized model of a crystal under anti-plane shear with constant
strain rate, a system that is a close analog of the two-dimensional XY rotor
model under driving boundary conditions. It is conjectured that slip-band
formation in 2D represents a non-equilibrium quench into two-phase coexistence
between defect-rich and defect-poor phases. Characterization of the underlying
equilibrium phase diagram, scaling behavior, and flow properties of the defect-
rich phase will be used to derive constitutive laws for plasticity in two
dimensions. Dislocation patterning in three-dimensional crystalline solids is
far more complex, involving dislocation entanglement and a host of inherently 3D
mechanisms. While no 2D model can accurately describe a real 3D material, this
work will provide at least qualitative insight into the competition between
energy and entropy in evolution of dislocation
microstructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The project's second goal is to gain
insight into the origin of size effects in plasticity. Recent experiments show
that some mechanical properties of crystalline solids vary with sample size in
the range below ~ 100 microns. Size effects are observed in torsion and bending
but not in simple tension, suggesting that strain gradients play an important
role. Efforts to build strain gradient effects in continuum plasticity theory
point to the importance of a characteristic length scale whose origin is not
fully understood. To find out what mechanisms are involved, simulation studies
of dislocation patterning will be carried out using both the idelaized two-
dimensional model and more realistic molecular dynamics in two and three
dimensions. Geometries will include (1) a ductile slit crack loaded in shear,
(2) torsion/bending of a beam, and (3) pullout of a thin fiber from a soft metal
matrix. In each case multiple simulations will be preformed for samples of
different sizes and the results will be compared to the predictions of continuum
strain gradient theories.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports
theoretical research on the elastic-plastic response of crystalline solids. The
objectives of the project include: (1) characterizing and understanding the
thermodynamics driving coalescence of dislocations into ordered structures in
two dimensions, and (2) investigating the origins of size effects in plasticity.
Successful completion of this project will increase our knowledge of the
mechanical propoerties of materials, including their
failure.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;