* 0116451
* MRI: Development of Controlled Vacuum Growth of  Hybrid Organic/Inorganic Structures and Devices
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Vladimir Bulovic, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Douglas D. Frey
* 08/31/2003
* USD 286,653.00

CTS-0116451 MRI: Controlled Vacuum Growth of Hybrid Organic/Inorganic Structures
and Devices Vladimir Bulovic Massachusetts Institute of Technology $239,301

ABSTRACT

This award supports development of a versatile materials-growth system for
controlled deposition of organic, inorganic, and hybrid multilayer structures.
It appears that this will be the first system ever built capable of solvent-
free, vacuum deposition of thin films of inorganic nanocrystals (such as CdSe
and CdTe nanodots) that will also accommodate solvent-free deposition and co-
deposition of polymers, colloids, and molecular organic materials. The completed
growth system will integrate a novel method for physical and vapor phase
deposition of hybrid organic/inorganic thin-films with a low-pressure RF/DC
sputtering chamber and an evaporative growth chamber. The completed vacuum
system will be capable of depositing molecular organics, polymers, metals, metal
oxides, inorganic nanodots, and colloids in a controlled layer-by-layer fashion.
An in-situ shadow masking system will enable fabrication of complex patterned
structures inside a vacuum environment, while the integrated N2-filled, dry
glove box will facilitate handling, measuring, and packaging of organic thin
film samples that are susceptible to reactions with atmospheric oxygen and water
vapor. Completed samples will be tested in-situ in the analysis chamber by
contacting them with an electrical probe attached to an X-Y-Z manipulator.
Optical ports on the chamber allow for a telescopic view of the devices and
facilitate optical excitation of probed samples. The integrated AFM/STM chamber
will facilitate in-situ atomic scale microscopy necessary for evaluating
properties of hybrid materials.

The research goal in this program is to integrate physical and functional
properties of inorganic nanodots into active optoelectronic devices. The
resulting nano-scale hybrid organic/inorganic-materials structures are expected
to have unique properties and to exceed functional capability of purely organic
solids, enabling the development of devices such as photodetectors, LEDs,
lasers, modulators, and waveguides with superior properties compared to the
present state of the art. Development of active hybrid organic/inorganic
optoelectronics will lead to investigations of physical processes in hybrid
materials such as exciton energy transfer, photogeneration, and charged-carrier
transport. These fundamental studies will have a direct impact on practical
applications of hybrid solids in optoelectronic devices, influencing development
of hybrid thin films, heterojunctions, multilayers, quantum wells, and nano-
patterned organic/inorganic materials for a new generation of high-technology
devices.

