* 0116385
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Low-Vacuum SEM Microscope for Multi-Disciplinary Research and Education
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Reed Scherer, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2003
* USD 139,925.00

0116385&lt;br/&gt;Scherer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award, made
through the Major Research Instrumentation Program, provides partial support for
the acquisition of a low vacuum scanning electron microscope (LV SEM). The
principal investigators include four faculty members from three different
departments in the College of Liberal Arts and Sciences at Northern Illinois
University. Principal applications of the LV SEM by the PIs include: studies of
glacial-sedimentary processes and polar plankton biostratigraphy and evolution
entailing examination of microstructures in subglacial sediments; studies in the
environmental biogeosciences, including analysis of the spatial distribution of
microorganisms involved in biodegradation of organic solvents; studies of modern
soils and Quaternary paleosols to examine their current and historic ability to
sequester carbon; studies in plant morphology and systematics, ethnobotany,
conservation biology, and botanical biocomplexity; and applications in
educational programs, including research training, undergraduate coursework, and
community outreach education programs. The instrument to be purchased is the
JEOL 5600LV, which can operate at either high vacuum or low vacuum, with the
Noran Vantage DSI spectral imaging system X-ray analyzer (EDS). Samples for
observation require virtually no pretreatment, and large samples (up to 15 cm)
can be imaged without gold-coating. This is a non-destructive method, perfect
for examination of unique specimens, such as holotypes or artifacts, and wet or
outgassing samples can be directly analyzed.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;