* 0116776
* Acquisition Proposal:   Laboratory for Large Scale Integration of Nanostructures
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2001,12/31/2004
* Michael Roukes, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 12/31/2004
* USD 1,979,000.00

0116776&lt;br/&gt;Roukes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Major advances have recently been
made at California Institute of Technology (Caltech) in developing and employing
what are, largely, individual nanometer-scale structures for applications
ranging from fundamental science to technological applications. Within the
research groups of the co--P1's, Professor Scherer and Professor Roukes, who
have worked together on nanofabrication for the past fifteen years, electron
beam lithography techniques have been developed and used for the construction of
a wide range of functional nanometer-scale devices. Lateral dimensions below 10
nm are routinely obtained, and students in these groups have developed both
expertise in the requisite electron-beam-control code and an in-depth
understanding of the specialized resist processing and pattern transfer
techniques enabling ultrahigh resolution. The time is now ripe to exploit these
advances by creating nanosystems - i.e. advanced structures that comprise
coherently coupled arrays of the individual nanoscale elements the authors are
perfecting. This equipment acquisition proposal, if funded, would enable such
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanodevice arrays are emerging as a priority in
nanoscale science and technology. As detailed in this proposal (and its
accompanying letters of support), nanoscale arrays will find immediate
applications within the proposers' research programs. These currently involve 13
Caltech professors, in disciplines spanning fundamental physics, chemistry,
biology, and engineering and materials science. Among the specific topics
currently being pursued are: quantum optics, quantum computation, nanophotonics,
spin electronics, nanomechanics, neurophysiology, biotechnology,
electrochemistry and molecular electronics. These applications require
fabrication of structures spanning a hierarchy of size scales -from the smallest
dimensions accessible via state-of-the-art nanofabrication techniques, to the
millimeter to centimeter domain of integrated, chip-based systems. Fabrication
of these complex nanoscale arrays requires multiple, successively-aligned steps
of large-field electron beam lithography over the wafer
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A second important research thrust would be enabled
by the proposed instrumentation. This focuses upon future technological
applications requiring nanometer-scale features produced lithographically en
masse. This scale is far below the dimensions currently accessible via deep
ultraviolet lithography, the current industry standard for state-of-the-art
commercial production lines. To address this technological need, much recent
effort world-wide has focused upon development of new, high-resolution, high-
throughput lithographic methods. Projection x-ray lithography, shaped electron
beam lithography, and mechanical transfer methods (embossing, molding, or
stamping) all have evolved as principle contenders for the definition of sub-I
100nm structures over large areas. All of these techniques, however, have in
common the need for wafer-scale high-resolution masks. These are normally
generated by vector-scanned electron beam lithography. There are currently no
alternative lithographic tools which offer comparable flexibility, resolution
and placement accuracy for this purpose as state-of-the-au commercial electron
beam writers. Student access to such an instrument would greatly enhance
research and training in the proposers' university
setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An entirely new level of instrumentation is
required to successfully initiate these proposed endeavors. Specifically, the
capability of writing large (wafer scale) fields of features at the sub-5Onm
scale is absolutely crucial. This can only be done with a state-of-the-art
electron beam writer; however the acquisition of such an instrument is
significantly beyond the scope of most funding programs. Here the PIs propose to
purchase an electron-beam lithography system for this laboratory. The cost for
this instrument will be shared by Caltech ($l.5M), the NSF ($1.OM), and
DARPA/DURINT ($l.OM). The laboratory established with these funds will
constitute an interactive, "expert" facility within the larger efforts of the
PI's. This select, focused group of researchers will include undergraduate and
graduate students, staff and faculty members. This group will be collectively
dedicated to establishing routes to next-generation structures involving large
arrays of nanoscale elements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;