* 0116179
* MRI:  Infrastructure for Semiconductor Detector Design and Readout
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2006
* Patrick Skubic, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 07/31/2006
* USD 359,237.00

This proposal requests support for infrastructure for the design, readout, and
testing of semiconductor sensors for use in high energy particle physics
experiments. The equipment requested includes a probe station, wire bonders,
geometry gauge, logic analyzer, plasma cleaner, voltage sources, and positioning
stages. The equipment will allow the collaborating groups to broaden the range
of their contributions to experiments in which they already have leadership
roles (ATLAS, CLEO, CDF, and D0). The main focus of this proposal is to use this
equipment to develop and construct the ATLAS pixel detector. ATLAS is a large
international collaboration to which the US contributes over 20% of the effort,
and which detector is currently under construction for the Large Hadron Collider
(LHC) at the CERN Laboratory in Geneva Switzerland. Many NSF-supported groups
participate in ATLAS. In addition, there is concurrent activity in the
development of a silicon upgrade for the CDF detector for Run IIb at the
Fermilab Tevatron Collider. Many NSF-supported groups are collaborating on the
CDF experiment. The University of New Mexico proposes to lead the design and
testing of the pixel sensors, which would be based on the ATLAS designs. The
opportunities presented for education by this project at the collaborating
universities are also described. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;