* 0116202
* MRI:  Acquisition of Linux Cluster and Workstation Network for Biophysics, Mathematics, and Computer Science Research
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Ralph Meeker, Benedictine University
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Farmer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 71,293.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Ralph Meeker at Benedictine University to
acquire a multi-processor Linux computer system and a network of computer
workstations with stereo viewing capability for research in biophysics,
mathematics, and computer science. Faculty and undergraduate students conducting
biophysics research will perform molecular modeling simulations of protein
binding and use the stereo workstations to analyze and visualize the results.
Faculty and undergraduate students conducting mathematics research will use
computer algebra software to study group cohomology and to make extensions to
modular representation theory. The research in biophyiscs and algebra will
provide data for Dr. Meeker and his students to measure the performance of the
multi-processor computer system for both molecular modeling and computer-based
algebra software as a function of the configuration of the computer system.
Large-scale scientific computations, traditionally performed at reasonable
speeds on specialized, expensive supercomputers or very slowly on engineering
workstations, are being performed more and more on inexpensive Linux-based
clusters of computers using a Linux variant to provide the cluster support.
Rapid improvement in the performance of Pentium central processors, coupled with
the stability and performance of the Linux operating system, has made it
possible to assemble a networked cluster of personal computers at a fraction of
the cost of a supercomputer. The equipment to be acquired with this grant
includes a Linux multiprocessor computer system configured as an interconnected
cluster with 16 separate computers. When assembling a Linux-based computer
cluster for use in high-performance computing, one must take into account not
only the raw computing power of the individual central processing units, but
also system requirements in terms of memory and the network interconnection
between the computers. This research project will measure the performance of the
Linux-based cluster for both molecular modeling and computer-based algebra
software as a function of the individual computers' memory configuration, the
total number of clustered computers available for processing, the number of
processors per computer in single-processor and dual-processor configurations,
the number of simultaneous users, and what price/performance improvements are
obtained from using dual-processor motherboards instead of single-processor
motherboards. A network of computer workstations will provide researchers access
to the cluster computer system. Three of the workstations will incorporate
stereo viewing screens for visualization of three-dimensional molecular models
of biological interest. Here is a brief description of the typical steps
involved in this kind of modeling project. Identify a pair of molecules that are
known to interact as a key step in a physiological process. If the molecules are
large, and typically they are, the three-dimensional structure must be known or
have a reasonable homology model from which to generate spatial coordinates and
sequence regions of the molecules that interact. Results of x-ray studies
conducted by other researchers can be used to determine this information. The
molecules are then modeled by bringing them together, calculating the minimum of
their molecular energy, and running through molecular dynamic calculations to
identify possible binding orientations and their associated energies. For the
mathematics research, the first stage of this research program will be analysis
of data collected on the cohomology rings of the groups of order 64. The data
analysis will yield insight on which groups of order 128 should provide
"interesting" cohomology rings to compute. Results of this research will
contribute to three areas of science: biophysics, mathematics, and computer
science. The biophysics research is particularly useful in determining the
binding of a fibrinogen chain to the integrin receptor of platelet cells, an
essential step in blood clotting. The mathematics computational work should help
distinguish irreducible abstract algebraic modules from other more complex
modules by compiling a library of these basic algebraic building blocks. The
computer science research will characterize the performance of a low-cost, high-
performance computer system in computationally intensive applications to
biophysics and mathematics. The involvement of the undergraduate students in
these projects over the years have resulted in a number of undergraduate
research papers and several who are now pursuing advanced degrees in science.