* 0116786
* Lipid Biomarker Isotopic Composition Changes during Early Diagenesis in Variable Biogeochemical Sediment Regimes - Implications for Carbon Cycling and Paleoceanography
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Ming-Yi Sun, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 09/30/2005
* USD 337,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-
0116786&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Detailed chemical composition studies of
the distribution of preserved lipid molecular markers (also termed molecular
'fossils' or 'fingerprints') in the sinking particulate matter of water columns
and especially subsequently in sediments provides insight to our understanding
of the inputs and processing of organic matter carbon in the ocean.
Interpretation of the stable carbon isotopic composition (d 13C) of specific
lipid molecular markers in aged sedimentary deposits has increasingly been
suggested as a means of constraining past ocean and climate conditions and even
reconstructing paleo atmospheric carbon dioxide mixing ratios (pCO2). The PI
will measure isotopic d 13C fractionation effects on selected lipids using
controlled laboratory experiments to simulate processes reflecting those
undergone during natural diagenesis. This investigation will address the
otherwise default assumption that diagenetic effects are negligible. Incubation
experiments using target lipid biomarkers obtained from enriched 13C labeled
algal cultures will be conducted in different biogeochemical regimes including:
natural oxic and anoxic seawaters; simulated oxic vs. anoxic and cycled
oxic/anoxic sediment-water interfaces; and in homogenized sediment cores with
and without macrofauna. Compound specific isotopic analysis of biomarker
'molecular fossils' in sediments enhances understanding of the past conditions
experienced by the marine organisms producing such molecules. Use of lipid
biomarker information contained in natural archives such as deep sea sediments
is key in reconstructing past climate change and helps answer fundamental
questions such as how fast and how much can the planet's climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;