* 0116293
* MRI:  Acquisition of Instrumentation to Measure the Time-Course and Distribution of Cortical Activity in Perceptual Cognitive, and Social Psychological Processing
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Steven Small, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2004
* USD 395,820.00

This grant supports the acquisition of instrumentation to measure Event-Related
Potentials (ERPs) in cognitive and social neuroscience research. ERPs reflect
the synaptic activity of the brain that occur during mental activity. The
requested instrumentation will be used with fMRI brain scanning at the Brain
Research Imaging Center (BRIC) at the University of Chicago. BRIC has purchased
a 3T scanner to study psychological processes such as spoken language
understanding, shifts of attention, perceptuo-motor planning and motor imagery,
and social categorization. Although behavioral studies have told us much about
these mental processes, these studies cannot indicate the specific way in which
the brain implements this processing. fMRI can identify which parts of the brain
are involved in processing. Although fMRI can localize cortical areas, blood-
flow responses are too slow to measure the timing of activity in these areas.
ERPs provide this timing information, but cannot localize brain activity as
finely as fMRI. fMRI together with ERP combines high spatial resolution and
temporal resolution to investigate the functional processing in the brain.
Measuring ERP activity during fMRI will aid in relating temporal and spatial
information about cortical processing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three broad
projects will initially use the instrumentation. One project will investigate
interactions between language-specific mechanisms and more general cognitive
processes during language comprehension. This research examines how
understanding uses attention and memory as well as paralinguistic information.
ERP measures will investigate relative timing of cortical activity in working
memory and attention compared with specifically linguistic processing. The
second project will examine neural mechanisms involved in perception and
production of action. Comparison of perceptual processing of symbolic cues for
actions with direct human movement cues (to trigger "mirror" cells) will
investigate neural mechanisms underlying conceptual operations in motor
movements and motor "imagery" circuits. The third project investigates affective
evaluation and social categorization addressing the theory that positive and
negative attitudes are mediated by different mechanisms. fMRI and ERP will
identify relevant brain areas and examine the time-course of processing in
affective, perceptual, and autonomic parts of these networks to investigate how
affective evaluation systems mediate stereotypic responses in social
categorization.