* 0116566
* Massively Parallel Platform for the Center of Computational Materials Theory
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Nicholas Kioussis, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 08/31/2002
* USD 250,000.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program will allow California
State University Northridge to expand and strengthen the computational
facilities at the Computational Materials Theory Center at California State
University Northridge. The general goals of the Center are: (1) To conduct
fundamental and applied research that enhances our knowledge in materials
properties and processing through theory, modeling, simulation, visualization
and computation; (2) To educate and train students through a program of studies
and research activities on current and future materials-related technological
challenges; and (3) To stimulate and develop strong industrial-university-
national laboratory partnerships in materials research. The research programs
include the electronic and mechanical properties of metals and intermetallics,
the properties of strongly correlated electrons, the Quantum Hall effect and
high temperature superconductivity, the optical and magneto-optical properties
of materials, catalysis, and the Quantum Hall effect, the optical and magneto-
optical properties of materials, catalysis, and magnetic and electronic
properties of nanostructure materials in general. The award will provide a
parallel computing paradigm capability allowing the center (1) to treat large
numbers of atoms ab initio electronic structure codes, (2) to sample a larger
number of configurations in Monte Carlo simulations and (3) to decrease the time
steps in molecular dynamics simulations. The Center comprises of faculty,
postdoctoral fellows, visiting scientists and
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Major Research
Instrumentation Program will allow California State Northridge to enhance the
parallel computing capability at the Computational Materials Theory Center at
California State University Northridge. This award will be leveraged
substantially using funds from other federal agencies. The resulting massively
parallel platform state-of-the-art facility will allow enhanced capability to
investigate problems that are beyond current capabilities at the institution,
such as bridging different length scales, increasing the configuration space in
Monte Carlo simulations, and decreasing the time scale in molecular dynamics
simulations. The facility will train students, including underrepresented
minority students, and educate them in materials related technological
challenges of the next century. The University was ranked first among master's
degree-granting institutions in the number of baccalaureate graduates who went
on to complete the Ph.D. in science and engineering
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;