* 0116854
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Isolation and Overexpression of Thermostable Cellulase Genes from Egyptian Microorganisms
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* David Wilson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 25,000.00

0116854&lt;br/&gt;Wilson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a collaborative project between Dr. David Wilson, Department of
Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York and Dr.
Ahmed El-Diwany, Department of Molecular Biology, and Director, Mubarak City for
Scientific Research &amp; Technology Applications, Alexandria. The research is
aimed at identifying and characterizing new cellulases with properties that are
desirable for certain applications. They plan to construct cellulase mixtures
that have high thermostability, broad pH optima, and high activity on
crystalline cellulose. They will enrich and isolate thermophilic cellulolytic
microbes from various Egyptian soils. The cellulase systems produced will be
analyzed and those isolates producing enzyme systems with the desired properties
will be further characterized and genes encoding enzymes with interesting
properties will be cloned and expressed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The project
supports collaboration between two well-known scientists who have the expertise
and resources for important research. The research will add to our knowledge in
environmental biology and will generate useful information for producing
interesting new enzymes from a relatively untapped source in the Egyptian flora.
Interesting enzymes resulting from this work could be extremely valuable in
biotechnological processes. Dr. Wilson is an expert in cellulase cloning,
expression and characterization. Dr. El-Diwany is well published on the
biotechnological aspects of this project, and has the facilities to carry out
the work proposed. This project has the potential to greatly benefit both sides
by developing novel cellulase systems for efficient use of biomass, e.g., in
ethanol fuel production. It will promote teaching, training, and learning of
Egyptian and US graduate students. The project combines the complementary
strengths of the two PIs in molecular biology and biochemistry. This project
meets the INT objective of supporting collaborative research in areas of mutual
interest.&lt;br/&gt;