* 0116902
* Acquisition of a 600 MHz High-Resolution NMR CryoProbe
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,02/28/2006
* James White, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 02/28/2006
* USD 148,750.00

A grant has been award to Dr. Victor Hsu at Oregon State University to acquire
a cryoprobe for their 600 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer. NMR
spectroscopy is unique in that it is the only technique that yields molecular
information at the atomic scale in solution. Since the installation of the 600
MHz NMR instrument in 1995, researchers from various Departments and Colleges on
the Oregon State University campus have used NMR spectroscopy to study samples
ranging from 13C,15N-labeled protein-DNA complexes to anticancer/antitumor
agents isolated from marine algae and beer hops to measuring oil content in
grass seeds to studying metabolite levels in rat urine. However, one of the
limitations to the wider use of this instrument has been its inherent
sensitivity. Since many of the projects involve biomolecules that are either
isolated from natural sources or are synthetically obtained, collecting useful
NMR spectra under sample-limited conditions is often difficult, if not
impossible. Recently, however, cryogenic probes have been developed that improve
the sensitivity of the instrumentation by a factor of four. The improved signal
to noise (S/N) ratio of these probes is obtained by reducing the operating
temperature of the detection coil and the pre-amplifier to cryogenic
temperatures. Thus the efficiency of the coil is increased and the thermal noise
present in the coil and the pre-amplifier is reduced. What this means in
practical terms is that by using cryoprobes, the same experiments that are
currently used can be performed with either four times less sample, or a 16-fold
reduction in the amount of time required. Among the many research projects that
would greatly benefit from the increased sensitivity of the NMR cryoprobe are
the following: Dr. Hsu's (Biochemistry/Biophysics) projects involving
understanding the effects of environmental and endogenous damage on molecular
function and interactions, and his studies of DNA-binding by antitumor drugs;
Dr. William Gerwick's (Pharmacy) structural studies of biologically-active
natural products from marine cyanobacteria and algae; Dr. James White's and Dr.
David Horne's (Chemistry) studies of synthetic methods and the total synthesis
of biologically-active natural products and other complex molecules; Dr.
Kaichang Li's (Forest Products) investigations into the mechanisms of fungal
degradation of lignin; and Dr. Max Deinzer's (Chemistry) studies into how
protein alkylation and/or oxidation affects protein folding pathways. With the
arrival and installation of the cryoprobe, many sample- and sensitivity-limited
projects will be initiated, both by the same researchers and others. Most of
these new projects would be impossible without the cryoprobe. Research projects
utilizing a major involvement of the existing 600 MHz NMR spectrometer have led
to more than forty peer - reviewed journal articles, review articles, and book
chapters, and an even greater number of presentations at local, national, and
international scientific meetings. Of equal importance, Dr. Hsu is especially
pleased with the impact the NMR instrumentation has had on the University's
infrastructure. This spectrometer has been used by members of over a dozen
research groups on the OSU campus and additional users from other institutions.
These users have included undergraduate and graduate students, postdoctoral
associates and principal investigators. This instrument has also been very
successfully utilized for teaching in classroom settings and in programs
directly targeted to attracting women and minority students into the science
curriculum. In fact, women and minority scientists represent more than half of
the researchers trained to use the instrument. Other programs identify students
at the middle and high school level, and several of these students have gained
summer research employment involving the use of the NMR instrumentation. It is
fully anticipated that the cryoprobe will enhance and increase these training,
research, and outreach activities, and that the NMR instrument will continue to
be a highly valued and utilized research resource on the OSU campus and in the
Northwest region.