* 0116465
* Collaborative Research On Population Differences In Vervet Monkey Life History
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2003
* Patricia Whitten, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2003
* USD 50,392.00

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Patricia Whitten and Trudy Turner
will investigate the role of life history in divergence of populations of vervet
monkeys in Kenya. This collaborative research combines data and expertise from
genetics, endocrinology, morphology, demography and behavior. Life history
analyses link the events and processes of an individual's life to demographic
and evolutionary events at the population and species level. The timing of
growth, maturation and aging have important consequences for behavior,
demography and the genetic structure of populations. This research will
investigate these effects using a unique data set combining genetic,
morphometric and socioecological information in four ecologically distinct
populations of vervet monkeys. Genetic relatedness will be assessed with 8-10
polymorphic microsatellite loci. Allele frequencies will be used to determine
migration rates and differentiation among groups and populations. Paternity and
maternity will be ascertained by examining allele sharing between individuals.
Serum concentrations of adrenal and gonadal steroids will be assessed by
radioimmunoassay. Endocrine data will be combined with morphological data to
assess population differences in maturation and aging. These analyses will be
used to address several questions: 1. Do males migrate to troops where they have
brothers? 2. Are stress hormones higher when living in groups with more
competitors and lower genetic relatedness? 3. Do stress levels in males and
females and paternity in males affect behavior toward offspring? 4. Do increases
in adult body size in a population result from delayed maturation and prolonged
growth in males and females living in that population? 5. Do individuals in
populations with richer resources mature and age more rapidly?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is important for several reasons. The data
set provides an opportunity to gain an in-depth portrait of a group of organisms
that is rarely obtained in animal studies, because of both the number of animals
sampled and the range of biological systems examined. These data provide a link
between population level phenomena and individual physiology that will provide
new insights into social behavior and life history. Within species variation in
life history is poorly documented. A better understanding of the balance between
facultative and evolutionary adaptations to local conditions within species can
enhance our understanding of the evolution of life history differences across
species.&lt;br/&gt;