* 0116176
* Acquisition of an Automated Genetic Analyzer For Research and Training in Systematics and Ecology.
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Roger McPherson, Clarion University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Farmer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 76,901.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Roger McPherson at Clarion University of
Pennsylvania to purchase genetic technology crucial to several important
research projects and the training of undergraduate and Master's degree students
in ecology and systematics. The equipment purchased is a Genetic Analyzer with
gene sequencing, Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) product sizing software, and
quantitation software. This system allows faculty and student researchers at
Clarion University to carry out gene sequencing activities and to use genetic
markers that can determine the genetic profile, or "genetic fingerprint," of
individuals and populations on a small geographic scale with a high degree of
resolution.&lt;br/&gt; The instrumentation will support the efforts of four-
research groups led by ecology faculty at Clarion University. One project, led
by the Project Director, R. McPherson, will use genetic markers to indirectly
measure the dispersal of coldwater fishes in watersheds having various degrees
of fragmentation. These indirect measures of movement and more traditional
direct measures will be used to test hypotheses of among stream movement of
coldwater fishes. A second research group led by Dr. Andrew Turner (Co-PD) will
use genetic analyses to examine the relationship of gene flow and behavioral
variation among freshwater snail populations. Snail populations vary in the
extent to which they shift habitat use in the presence of predators. Studies of
gene flow will lead to a better understanding of local adaptation in freshwater
snails. A third group directed by Dr. Charles Williams (Co-PD) would use the
instrumentation to investigate population structure, gene flow, and dynamics of
woody plants in a chronically browsed landscape. Many plant species have
diminished greatly in abundance due to heavy browsing. However, little is known
about how the loss of key understory plants has influenced forest function and
structure. This research-group will be using genetic analyses to gain an
understanding of this relationship. A fourth research-group under the guidance
of Dr. Steven Harris (Co-PD) will use DNA sequence variation to resolve genetic
relationships in Neotropical caddisflies, a highly diverse invertebrate group.
Their larval stages are aquatic and along with the mayflies and stoneflies are
often utilized by ecologists as indicators of streams possessing good water
quality. In North America, the biodiversity of this group is fairly well known,
but in the neotropics, such is not the case. Dr. Harris and his students have
reached somewhat of an impasse using morphological characters, but have not yet
looked at genetic analyses as a means of resolving taxonomic relationships. They
will compare genetic sequences to study the biological diversity of these
important stream organisms. Each of these projects will use state-of- the-art
genetic technology to address fundamental questions in ecology and systematics.
&lt;br/&gt; The broad implications of the award include the strengthening of the
research infrastructure at Clarion University. Additionally, the presence of
this instrumentation will expand the scope of the research training for
undergraduate and Master of Science students in systematics and ecology. It will
allow the students, collaborating with faculty, hands-on experience with the
latest genetic techniques as these techniques apply to important issues in
environmental biology and systematics. With the expansion of the capabilities in
the use of these techniques a greater number of students (including female and
minority undergraduates) will be afforded the opportunity to gain valuable
research training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;