* 0116857
* Social Behavior, Immunity and Disease Resistance in Termites
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2006
* James F. A. Traniello, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Byers
* 07/31/2006
* USD 302,730.00



ABSTRACT Social Behavior, Immunity and Disease Resistance in Termites James
Traniello and Rebeca Rosengaus

Termites live in soil and decayed wood and are continuously exposed to fungal,
bacterial and other diseases. Their nesting and feeding habits have thus
influenced their social behavior because individuals may contact infectious
agents and transmit them to nestmates. We conduct research on termite disease
resistance that bridges sociobiology, immunology and chemical ecology; the
dampwood termite Zootermopsis angusticollis has been our model termite species.
We have found that termites can resist infection through mutual grooming, immune
response and chemical secretions and have begun to understand: 1) the benefits
and costs of social living in termites, in terms of disease; 2) how colony
composition can reduce infection; 3) the immune response of termites; 4) how
social behavior and immunity interact to increase resistance; 5) the
communication of information about pathogens within colonies; and 6) the
antimicrobial properties of termite secretions. Our research proposal Social
Behavior, Immunity and Disease Resistance in Termites will allow us to: 1)
determine if social exchanges between immune and naive termites enhance the
immune response of colony members, and the mechanisms involved; 2) understand
how termites recognize infection in nestmates; 3) determine if the social
control of infection is based on caste- and/or individual behavioral
specialization; and 4) examine the disease-resistance mechanisms of the
woodroach Cryptocercus punctulatus, which is a termite ancestor that lived in
families, and the drywood termite Incisitermes minor, a species which differs
from Z. angusticollis in the extent to which it must cope with microbes in the
nest. These studies will advance our understanding of how evolutionary history
and nesting ecology, which is a central feature of termite social life, have
influenced the evolution of disease resistance. This project will further our
knowledge of the ways in which individuals and colonies of termites resist
disease and will thus contribute to the overall understanding of how disease may
influence social behavior. The proposed research, which spans several
disciplines of biology, will train and educate undergraduate and graduate
students. Our research also concerns a group of wood-destroying insects which
have great economic importance. Through basic research on the ways termites
resist disease, new and effective technologies for termite control that do not
involve the use of toxic chemicals which adversely impact the environment may be
identified.