* 0116793
* Acquisition of X-Ray Computed Tomography System for the Modeling and Characterization of Materials with Microstructure
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2001,12/31/2005
* Stephen Antolovich, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 12/31/2005
* USD 426,397.00

OIA-0116793 PI Eyad Masad Institution Washington State University Title
"Acquisition of x-Ray Computed Tomgraphy System for the Modeling and
Characterization of Materials with Nanostructure Abstract This MRI award is for
the acquisition of an X-ray computed tomography (CT) system for non-invasive
evaluation of the microstructure of engineering materials. The system is unique
for the visualization of three-dimensional of microstructural features in the
interior of opaque solid objects. The X-ray CT system will be used to perform
detailed observations of the microstructural features associated with granular
deformation. It will also be used in the development of new generation ceramics
and metal matrix composites. The focus of the first research is on the
development of a microstructure based continuum model to study the deformation
and locialization in granular materials. The model is based on crystal
plasticity but inclused two microstructure length scales; one associated with
the plastic curvature (orientation re-distribution) and the other one is related
to the porosity re-distribution. This study is unique in that the microstructure
model parameters are determined directly from microscopic measurements. The
study will lead to analytical methods for modeling strain localization not only
in laboratory specimens, but also inpractical boundary value problems in
geotechnical engineering. The outcome of this work will also have implications
to the modeling of other types of materials that exhibit deformation
instabilities and shear banding such as metals and composites. The engineering
behavior of ceramics and metal matrix composite materials is controlled by the
microstructure of several levels. Therefore, the second study combines
microscopic and macroscopic principles and develops multiscale mosels for their
description. The multiscale model parameters are determined directly from X-ray
CT measurements. Use of such models will enable the design and development of
new materials with tailored microstructures. In addition to the above major
studies, a host of other research activities from different disciplines at
Washington State University will benefit from the proposed system. The unique
capabilities of the system will contribute substantially to the extramural
funding, and encourage more collaboration with other institutions and research
centers.