* 0116726
* MRI: Acquisition of Multiple Instruments for the College of Natural  Resources, Humboldt State University, California for the Investigation of Fluvial Sediment Transport ....
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Andre Lehre, Humboldt State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2003
* USD 55,000.00

0116726&lt;br/&gt;Cashman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant, funded by the Major
Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, provides support for multiple research
instruments for laboratory and field investigations of fluvial sediment
transport. The instrumentation requested is an interrelated group of equipment
necessary for the investigation of sediment transport processes within a
watershed. The proposed research instrumentation includes instrumentation for
fine-scaled field data collection of suspended sediment concentration, turbidity
and topography within a watershed and data collection instrumentation that
allows for the quantification of flow velocity and discharge, bed load material
transport, suspended load material transport and turbidity levels in the fluid
flow. Examples of the instrumentation purchased with the support of this grant
include a real-time kinematic (RTK) GPS mapping system, a field two-dimensional
acoustic doppler velocimeter (ADV), an automated field turbidity sampling
station and photographic equipment and software to analyze changes in topography
due to sediment movement. The principal users of the sediment transport research
instrumentation are faculty in the College of Natural Resources and Science
departments at Humboldt State University (HSU). The primary research areas
include: (1) identifying the effects of watershed characteristics such as
channel slope, stream velocity and particle size distribution on sediment
transport, (2) quantification and verification of the relationship between
turbidity and suspended sediment concentration, (3) quantification of sediment
transport under varying flow regimes and sediment supply conditions, and (4)
laboratory calibration of mathematical modeling of transport. The acquisition of
this equipment enhances the opportunity for research training of HSU students in
the College of Natural Resources. This group of instrumentation facilitates
research that encompasses multi-disciplines and explores the connection between
field data collection, laboratory physical modeling and computer mathematical
modeling. This research instrumentation has the potential to result in
significant improvements to the field estimation of suspended sediment
concentrations and bed load transport in rivers.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;