* 0116877
* Improving Design Fitness by Applying Tolerance Analysis, Methods Knowledge and Set-Based Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2006
* Iris Tommelein, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Edward John Jaselskis
* 08/31/2006
* USD 287,117.00

ABSTRACT

Proposal: CMS-0116877 PI: Iris Tommelein Institution: University of California
at Berkeley Date: July 22, 2001

Abstract: Improving Design Fitness by Applying Tolerance Analysis, Methods
Knowledge, and Set-Based Design AEC practitioners as well as academics lack a
vocabulary and conceptualization to describe tolerances. Tolerances--used
broadly to denote any variation from the point solution that was designed and
planned--significantly affect industry performance. This lack is reflected in
AEC practices, teachings, and software tools, including those for 4D CAD
modeling, which are inadequate in terms of reflecting alternative futures. To
alleviate this problem, this research is investigating how performance risk due
to tolerances can be reduced through the application of new principles combined
with software solutions. Some of these principles have already been applied in
manufacturing. They involve the application of distributed set-based design for
improving design fitness throughout the project life cycle and analysis of the
allocation of tolerances based on production method capabilities. In contrast to
contractual approaches that are commonly used in the AEC industry to allocate
risk, this research is investigating means for making designs and schedules more
robust, so they will withstand impact better. Design in this context broadly
refers to the development of the product itself (i.e., design in the narrow
sense) but also to the development of processes for production (manufacturing,
fabrication, and construction), operations, maintenance, and decommissioning.
Fitness denotes the ability of a design and a schedule (product and process) to
withstand the impact of tolerances and the corresponding changes while adhering
to project goals. The research tasks are to identify and classify various kinds
of tolerances affecting AEC product/process development. Case studies will
illustrate and help assess how they impede system performance. For each
tolerance, the key research question is "Which project stakeholder(s) is (are)
in the best position to manage that tolerance?" The objective of the research is
to develop a system for tolerance allocation. A method is needed to decide where
and when in the product/process development effort the tolerance has an impact,
and correspondingly, to decide how this situation is best managed. Research
outputs also include: a review of existing software tools and their
expressiveness with respect to modeling tolerances; if appropriate, development
of guidelines for new software capabilities; a methodology for capturing product
and process decisions that allow for alternative futures; and a decision support
system to trade off multiple objectives between project stakeholders in order to
gauge design fitness.