* 0116796
* Proposal for Supporting Travel Expenses to Attend the 7th IEEE Real-Time Technology and Application Symposium (RTAS) in Taipei, Taiwan
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2002
* Wei Zhao, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Yuan-Chieh Chow
* 05/31/2002
* USD 12,000.00

This proposal seeks to sponsor travel expenses for graduate students and junior
faculty members&lt;br/&gt;to attend the 7th IEEE Real-Time Technology and
Application Symposium (RTAS) to be held&lt;br/&gt;in Taipei, Taiwan and
sponsored by the IEEE Computer Society Technical Committee on
Real-&lt;br/&gt;Time Systems. RTAS provides a forum for presenting the latest
advances in real-time systems&lt;br/&gt;research and for discussing the
practical challenges encountered and the solutions adopted. A&lt;br/&gt;special
mission of RTAS 2001 is to foster discussion and technology exchange in the
real-time&lt;br/&gt;computing and communication communities between Asia and
North America. As such, we have&lt;br/&gt;invited Dr. C. L. Liu (who developed
the rate-monotonic scheduling theory in the 70's and is&lt;br/&gt;currently the
president of National Ching-Hua University in Hsin-Chu, Taiwan) to serve as
the&lt;br/&gt;Honorary Chair, and top-notch researchers in both Asia, Americas,
and Europe to serve on the&lt;br/&gt;Technical Program Committee. In addition to
single-track technical sessions, we will also organize&lt;br/&gt;tutorials and
workshops that address practical, temporal QoS issues in application domains or
over&lt;br/&gt;the Internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The symposium, as many other
academic activities, relies on the experience of senior members&lt;br/&gt;of the
community but requires fresh ideas and new people to join the community. As
such, and&lt;br/&gt;to encourage graduate students and young faculty members to
participate in the exciting technical&lt;br/&gt;program, we are requesting
support to defray the travel expenses for graduate students and
junior&lt;br/&gt;faculty attendees. The total amount requested is $12,000 on the
basis of an average travel grant&lt;br/&gt;of $1,200 for each selected junior
faculty participant and $800 for each selected graduate student.&lt;br/&gt;We
believe attendance at this Symposium will be very beneficial to young scientists
who otherwise&lt;br/&gt;would be unable to participlate in the gathering.
Contacts for future (international) collaborations&lt;br/&gt;will be made and
idea exchange will certainly occur. Travel support for student and junior
faculty&lt;br/&gt;attendance will be advertised nationwide and women, minorities
and disabled students will be&lt;br/&gt;especially encouraged to apply for
sponsorship.