* 0116997
* Bioenergetics of Mitochondria Isolated from Fast and Slow Skeletal Muscle
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2006
* Wayne Willis, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Dona Boggs
* 07/31/2006
* USD 277,000.00

Fast twitch white (type IIb) muscle fibers and slow twitch red (type I) fibers
represent the structural and functional extremes of locomotory skeletal muscle
cells in vertebrates. A distinguishing characteristic of type IIb fibers is the
capacity to generate high power, burst contractile activity. In contrast, type I
fibers provide postural support and are capable of sustaining long duration, but
low intensity, locomotor activity. Type IIb fibers nevertheless contribute to
endurance activity if exercise duration is sufficient to deplete carbohydrate
fuel. Type I cells possess threefold greater content of mitochondria, the
cellular organelles responsible for aerobic energy production, and this
difference is generally considered to account for much of the superior endurance
of type I fibers. Surprisingly, at rest type IIb cells respire at O2 consumption
rates similar to type I fibers, while maintaining a substantially higher
cellular energy status. This apparent ability of type IIb mitochondria to
energetically outperform their type I counterparts at rest gives rise to
interesting and illuminating examples of biological cost-benefit tradeoffs.
Mitochondrial structure and function are therefore very different in the two
fiber types, and these studies will contribute not only to our understanding of
metabolic regulation in fast and slow vertebrate skeletal muscle, but also more
generally to our appreciation of mitochondrial structure-function
relationships.&lt;br/&gt; The central hypothesis of the proposed research is
that the structure and function of type I and type IIb mitochondria reflect the
physiological missions of the cells in which they reside. Type IIb mitochondria
are thus able to generate higher energetic forces and flows than type I, but at
the expense of efficiency. These energetic differences are predicted to be
especially evident under low pH conditions, which exist in the type IIb cell
during burst activity and in the recovery period that follows. It is also
hypothesized that mitochondria use the cytosol-mitochondrial electron shuttles
to suppress fat oxidation and, again, this regulation is predicted to be
especially pronounced in type IIb mitochondria, in order to promote the
oxidative disposal of glycolytic products. The proposed studies will generally
evaluate thermodynamic flow:force relationships with various oxidative fuels
across the physiological range of concentrations. The concepts of metabolic
control analysis will be utilized in the interpretation of these
studies.&lt;br/&gt; Mitochondria will be isolated from mammalian skeletal
muscles known to be homogeneous in type I or type IIb fibers. The mitochondria
will be placed in physiological buffer solutions, provided various oxidative
fuels, and subjected to varying energy demand, much as they would encounter
within the cell at rest and during graded, steady state contractile activity.
Energetic parameters will be measured such as the rates of O2 consumption, fuel
utilization, ATP production, and the energy levels of intermediates in the
pathway of energy transduction. These measurements will provide the data
necessary to determine 1) thermodynamic flow:force relationships, 2) fuel
requirements, preferences, and interactions, and 3) the economy of O2
utilization, as they carry out oxidative energy transduction.&lt;br/&gt; The
proposed research addresses energetic and metabolic issues that have general
application to all vertebrate skeletal muscle cells. Examining these questions
in types I and IIb mitochondria, extreme examples of mitochondrial structure-
function relationships, may provide insight into biological design strategies.
&lt;br/&gt;