* 0116015
* MRI:  Development of a Femtosecond Time-Resolved Electron Diffraction System
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2006
* Hani Elsayed-Ali, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2006
* USD 191,752.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program supports the
development of a femtosecond electron diffraction system development at Old
Dominion Research Foundation. Time domain dynamical examination requires a probe
with comparable or shorter temporal resolution than the relaxation process of
the perturbed system, which for many solid-state and molecular reactions is in
the few picosecond or femtosecond range. There is a significant interest in
developing ultrafast time-resolved structural probes based on electron and x-ray
diffraction. Time-resolved electron diffraction has been used to study phase
transitions at surfaces and in thin films, and to probe the nuclear dynamics of
laser excited molecules. Because of the need for instrumentation development,
its use has been limited to few groups. An optimized time-resolved electron
diffraction system operating at 20-50 keV with 100 fs temporal resolution and
103-104 electrons per pulse will be developed. This will provide at least
several times higher temporal resolution and electron density than present time-
resolved electron diffraction systems. The design will minimize electron
trajectory differences due to photoelectron energy spread and space charge
effects. The introduction of a special electron dispersion compensation element
is also proposed. &lt;br/&gt;Graduate students will be involved in design,
construction, and use of the femtosecond electron diffraction system to probe
surface and thin film reactions. These students will gain experience in
ultrafast lasers, electron optics, pump-probe techniques, and material
characterization. Undergraduate students will participate as technical
assistants and as part of their senior design
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Major Research
Instrumentation Program supports the development a high-speed electron
diffraction system at Old Dominion Research Foundation. Many important reactions
in solids and molecules occur in a time scale of a picosecond or shorter,
therefore, there is a need to develop instrumentation capable of high-speed
probing. When electrons are diffracted from a solid or a molecular jet, the
produced diffraction pattern provides information on the solid or molecular
structure. Using an ultrashort laser pulse to initiate a reaction and an equally
ultrashort electron pulse, delayed from the laser pulse, as a probe, it is
possible to time resolve the reaction. Because of the need for complex
instrumentation development, the use of high-speed electron diffraction has been
limited to few groups. An optimized high-speed electron diffraction system will
be developed. This will provide at least several times higher temporal
resolution than present time-resolved systems, enabling the observation of many
phenomena not presently well understood. A new design minimizing electron pulse
spread and introducing special electron dispersion compensation element for
electron pulse compression will be developed. &lt;br/&gt;Graduate students will
be involved in design, construction, and use of the femtosecond electron
diffraction system to probe surface and thin film reactions of scientific and
technological interest. These students will gain experience in lasers, electron
optics, and material characterization. Undergraduate students will participate
as technical assistants and as part of their senior design projects. This
experience will prepare them for a career in high technology within an
industrial, governmental and academic setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;