* 0116408
* Acquisition of an Energy Dispersive X-Ray Analysis System and Confocal Microscope for an Interdisciplinary Microscopy-Imagery Center in Biology, Chemistry &amp; Geology at St. Lawr
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* John Bursnall, Saint Lawrence University
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Farmer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 300,968.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Thomas W. Budd at St. Lawrence University in
Canton, New York to acquire two major instruments that will complement and
expand opportunities for microscopic studies and enable the creation of an
Interdisciplinary, Multi-User Microscopy-Imagery Center within the science
facilities complex. The instruments to be acquired are: 1. A confocal microscope
system that will bridge the resolution gap between electron microscopy and
fluorescence microscopy. This instrument will allow optical sectioning and 3-D
reconstructions of fluorescent images with much better resolution and a wider
selection of dyes than conventional fluorescence microscopes. 2. An Energy
Dispersive X-Ray Analysis (EDAX) system to be fitted onto an existing scanning
electron microscope (SEM). This system allows elemental analysis and spatial
elemental mapping of a wide variety of research specimens applicable to biology,
chemistry, environmental studies, and geology research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several St. Lawrence science faculty are poised to direct
student projects with these instruments as part of their research programs. Dr.
T. Budd (biology and PI) plans to use confocal microscopy to three-dimensionally
map proteins on the surface and inside of glial-neural type cells in vitro as
part of his research to characterize tissue cultured cells used to study bone
formation. He will confirm the 3-D confocal results by using SEM-EDAX mapping
routines. Dr. Marano (chemistry) will use confocal microscopy to detect and map
the components of specialized membrane "domains" on the surface of
T-lymphocytes. These domains have been implicated in gene regulation during
immune responses. Dr. Erlichman (biology) will use confocal microscopy to three-
dimensionally map sodium/hydrogen exchange transport systems in the surface
membranes of pH sensitive neurons that regulate breathing in mammals. Dr.
Erickson (geology) will use SEM-EDAX elemental analysis and mapping to study the
sequence and biogeochemistry of fossilization of clams. Several other St.
Lawrence faculty are also poised to use the new instruments in their research
programs, all of which involve active participation by
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will greatly enhance faculty and
student research activity in the science departments at St. Lawrence, as well as
provide instrumentation support for two new majors in biochemistry and
neuroscience. As a small, private liberal arts undergraduate institution, access
to state-of-the-art instrumentation is often limited. The instruments requested
will enable us to better train the next generation of
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;