* 0116045
* Research in Quantum-Enhanced, Ultrafast Sensing and Imaging
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2006
* Ian Walmsley, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 06/30/2006
* USD 240,001.00

This document outlines a program of research to develop practical methods for
ultrabroadband imaging with quantum enhancement of the detection sensitivity. In
particular it presents several novel techniques for the characterization of
ultrafast optical and X-ray waveforms, and then discusses ways to apply them to
broadband dynamical imaging, including possibilities for going well beyond the
shot-noise limit for phase and&lt;br/&gt;amplitude measurement accuracy. The
program covers both development of appropriate dynamical image detection,
protocols for image transmission, and the sources of particular quantum states
needed for enhanced sensitivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program has four major
experimental objectives. (I) The first goal consists of developing a novel
method for measuring the conplete spatio-temporal properties of an ultrafast
optical pulse. The basic idea involves extending interferometric methods of
ultrafast pulse measurement into a new domain of accuracy and precision. In
particular we shall develop an ultrafast multi-wavelength interferometry: for
dynamical space-time imaging. (II) The second portion of our program entails the
development of a novel method for obtaining attosecond temporal resolution for
dynamical X ray imaging. The project will first study a recently demonstrated
nonlinear optical mechanism for atomic ionization to implement an
interferometric pulse measurement technique for completely characterizing the
electric field of the attosecond pulse. This technique is based on the quantum
interference on two pathways for ionizing an electron, which leads to an
interference pattern in the electron energy spectrum. From this pattern the
spectral phase of the ionizing attosecond pulse can be reconstructed using a
simple, noniterative, algorithm. (III) Another project involves the use of
entangled states of ultrashort photon wavepackets to implement time-resolved and
quantum-enhanced sensitivity for near-field microscopy. This provides phase
sensitivity in principle well beyond the shot noise limit, and will allow the
development of ultrasensitive nanoscale measurement when combined with standard
laboratory methods of near-field microscopy. A novel feature of the approach is
that the nonclassical light does not need to enter the interferometer and probe
the phase shifting object the quantum enhancement is achieved using local
entanglement. (IV) The final effort will be to develop a means for the secure
transmission&lt;br/&gt;of images encoded in ultrashort single photons: a type of
ultrabroadband quantum teleportation. This work explores new avenues in quantum
communications by exploring possibilities for multimode teleportation and builds
upon recent work in the applications in quantum optics of high-quantum
efficiency CCD array detectors. These provide a novel tool for both quantum
state measurement, which itself has useful imaging&lt;br/&gt;applications, and
for providing the broadband classical information needed for the teleportation
protocol.