* 0116834
* Conference on Neural Control of Behavior: Los Angeles, CA: March 14 -17, 2002
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2002
* Nancy Wayne, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 11/30/2002
* USD 10,000.00

This three-day conference will provide a forum for in-depth dialogue on
innovative research in the area of Neural Control of Behavior. The first two
days will be devoted to a symposium that will be open to the scientific
community. There will be four sessions: Neurosecretion Over Different Time
Domains; Genetic Dissection of Behavior; Local Protein Synthesis During Neuronal
Plasticity and Regeneration; and Learning and Memory: New Directions. The
speakers will discuss a wide spectrum of species (use of invertebrates to
mammals) and experimental approaches (from molecular and cellular to behavioral
levels of analyses). The third day of the meeting will be devoted to a workshop
among only the speakers, where they will explore ways in which information
discussed during the symposium can be used to take their respective research
areas in new directions. This conference aims to: Bring together researchers who
are asking similar questions, but are using different species and different
experimental approaches; Promote the use of simple systems for addressing
complex biological problems; Promote interaction between junior scientists -
women in particular - and established investigators and leaders in the field.
The speakers use modern, cutting-edge technologies for addressing problems in
the area of Neural Control of Behavior. By bringing together these researchers,
and giving them a forum for discussing their work, the message can be
effectively spread that these modern techniques are being used with great
success in a wide variety of animal systems. This conference will provide an
important interdisciplinary communications-mechanism for advancements in the
neuroscience community.