* 0116485
* Collaborative research:  magma reservoir-conduit dynamics as revealed by a borehole geophysical observatory and continuous GPS
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2002,12/31/2005
* Pamela Jansma, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Leonard E. Johnson
* 12/31/2005
* USD 747,707.00

0116485&lt;br/&gt;Jansma&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The ongoing eruption of the
Soufriere Hills Volcano (SHV) on Montserrat provides an unprecedented
opportunity to investigate complex magmatic processes at an andesitic volcano.
Growth of the lava dome has been unsteady and accompanied by cyclic patterns of
ground deformation, seismicity, and explosive eruptions. The cycles include a
short-term scale (6-18 hour), a meso-term scale (~7 weeks), and a long-term
scale (~30 y). They provide insights into eruption dynamics at andesite
volcanoes, with the short-term cycles suggesting that degassing, rheological
stiffening of the magma, and pressurization in the upper conduits are coupled
and control many of the geophysical and dynamical phenomena observed. The meso-
and long- term cycles may reflect deep-seated processes involving the magma
reservoir. This project will investigate the dynamics of the full system using
an integrated array of specialized instruments in four strategically located
200-m boreholes, and several shallower holes, surrounding SHV. The system is
active and dynamic and will remain so for the foreseeable future. Analysis of
the continuous perishable data provided by these instruments should provide
important new insights and specific constraints to theoretical models, involving
the dynamic behavior of the andesite magmatic system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
is a collaborative project involving P.I.s from Penn State University, Carnegie
Institution of Washinton, University of Arkansas, in collaboration with
Montserrat Volcano Obervatory (MVO) and scientists from Bristol and Leeds
Universities in the UK. The UK investigators have been funded to share drilling
costs and to support UK scientific analyses. The expertise, facilities, and
database of MVO also provide cost-share contributions.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;