* 0116205
* Acquisition of Test Equipment to Advance Research and Education in Distributed Energy Systems (DES)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2001,12/31/2005
* Prasad Enjeti, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 12/31/2005
* USD 150,000.00

0116205&lt;br/&gt;Enjeti&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A distributed energy system (DES)
is one in which electricity is generated at the location where it is consumed.
Interest in the use of distributed generation and storage has increased
substantially over the past five years because of the potential to provide
increased reliability and lower cost of power delivery to the customer. The
advent of competition in the electric power industry and customer choice have,
in part, been the stimulus for this increased interest. Also contributing to
this trend has been the development of small modular generation technologies,
such as fuel cells, microturbines, photovoltaic systems, wind energy systems and
diesel engines. In addition, flywheel type energy storage/discharge systems hold
promise to provide ride-through and enhance battery life in existing UPS
systems. Industry estimates are that distributed resources (DR) will account for
up to 30% of new power generation by the year 2010. The environmental benefits
of DR that feature renewable resources, combined heat and power, and hybrid
systems are substantial. In supporting customer choice, distributed power may be
the long-term foundation of competition in electric power
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the application of distributed
generation and storage can bring many benefits, the technologies and operational
concepts to properly integrate them into existing power systems must be
developed to realize these benefits and avoid negative impacts on system power
quality, reliability and safety. The current power distribution system was not
designed to accommodate active generation and storage at the distribution level
particularly to supply energy to other distribution customers. The technical
issues to allow this type of operation are significant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
view of all of the above, this project proposes to purchase advanced equipment,
which will be dedicated to supporting and enhancing research in the distributed
energy systems area. The new DES laboratory will have necessary facilities to
conduct research, education and training in the following areas: Microturbines,
Fuel Cells, Wind and Flywheel type energy systems. This project will foster the
development of innovative power converter topologies, advanced electric
generators and electronics needed for utility interconnection and the control
and operation of DES. It will aid in the development of new protection systems
for the safe and reliable operation of DES. It will also aid in investigative
methods to improve the reliability of DES. The laboratory will also assist in
the development of new stand alone hybrid DES such as: Fuel Cell &amp; Battery
combination for residential power systems and Microturbine &amp; Flywheel type
continuous power systems for critical loads such as buildings. Development of
modular power electronic converters along with modular electric generators for
the next generation of DES will be an important activity pursued with the
acquired equipment. The proposed DES laboratory will also assist in the
education of undergraduate, graduate students and industry personnel in this
important area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed DES laboratory will be
developed in cooperation with DES technology companies, local utilities, power
electronics &amp; electric machine industries. The power electronics and
electric machines research program at TAMU has established long standing
cooperative research programs with leading utility companies and industries.
Working together, the proposed laboratory will pave the way for advanced DES
development and education.&lt;br/&gt;