* 0116645
* MRI:  Acquisition of Near-Field and UV Raman Instruments
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,12/31/2002
* Mun Choi, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 12/31/2002
* USD 297,200.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program, Drexel
University will be able to acquire new kinds of Raman instrumentation, for
ultraviolet (UV) radiation sources and scanning near-field optical microscopes
(SNOM). These systems dramatically expand capabilities of Raman spectroscopy and
allow addressing new problems, that cannot be resolved using conventional
instruments, and to discover fundamental nanoscale phenomena in materials. An
example of use of UV Raman is analysis of carbon bonding in diamond, amorphous
carbon, graphite, nanotubes and fullerenes. Very thin surface layers of
semiconductors or monolayers of organic molecules can be studied using UV Raman
spectroscopy. Near-field Raman spectroscopy is of principal importance for
electronic devices, interfaces, carbon nanotubes and other submicrometer
objects, where a better spatial resolution compared to other Raman instruments
can make a great difference. Raman SNOM may allow a breakthrough of Raman
spectroscopy into nanotechnology. The new instruments will be an integral
component of a new Raman facility at Drexel University. This will create a
unique combination of Raman instruments, which will support materials research
and nanotechnology programs in such diverse areas as novel carbon
nanostructures, semiconductor films and devices, nanolaminate ceramics,
composites and biomaterials. Graduate and undergraduate students from Drexel
University and University of Pennsylvania will use the spectrometers,
researchers from local companies and high school students. %%% With this award
from the Major Research Instrumentation program Drexel University will be able
to acquire microspectrometers using ultraviolet (UV) radiation sources and
scanning near-field optical microscopes. These systems dramatically expand
capabilities of Raman spectroscopy and allow addressing new problems, that
cannot be resolved using conventional instruments, and to discover fundamental
phenomena in materials. An example of use of UV Raman is analysis of carbon
bonding in diamond, diamond-like carbon films and other novel carbon materials.
Another advantages of UV over visible Raman are a lower background increase with
temperature, which allows for high temperature measurements on a variety of
materials, lower fluorescence and resonance enhancement. Very thin surface
layers of semiconductors or monolayers of organic molecules can be studied using
UV Raman spectroscopy. Near-field Raman spectroscopy is of principal importance
for electronic devices, interfaces, carbon nanotubes and other submicrometer
objects, where a better spatial resolution compared to other Raman instruments
can make a great difference. New instruments will be an integral component of a
new Raman facility at Drexel University. This will create a unique combination
of Raman instruments, which will support materials research and training and
nanotechnology programs in such diverse areas as novel carbon nanostructures,
semiconductor films and devices, nanolaminate ceramics, composites and
biomaterials.