* 0116831
* Tree-Ring Based Reconstruction of Drought over the Past 500-1000 Years in the Eastern United States
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2005
* Edward Cook, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 01/31/2005
* USD 283,573.00

This award will support research to reconstruct the drought history of the
eastern United States over the last 500-1,000 years using the analysis of tree-
rings from two species of long-lived conifers; the eastern red cedar (Juniperus
virginiana) and the northern white cedar (Thuja occidentalis). This data will
greatly improve estimates of the full range of drought variability across the
United States.

The widespread discovery of ancient forests of these tree species living or
preserved on steep cliff faces in the northeast will enable the development of
tree-ring chronologies covering the past 1,000 years from living trees and well-
preserved fossil wood. Eastern red and northern white cedar may represent the
only widely distributed species that are available for developing a network of
such long drought-sensitive tree-ring chronologies in the eastern United States.

The dendroclimatic potential of black gum (Nyssa sylvatica) growing in wetlands
and swamps in the northeastern United States will also be examined. This is one
of the longest-lived hardwoods in the world with a documented age of 500-700
years. Preliminary analyses indicate that this species produces cross-datable
tree rings that correlate significantly with summer temperatures. A small
network of black gum chronologies will be developed to determine the feasibility
of using this species to reconstruct past summer temperatures in excess of 500
years before the present.