* 0116660
* MRI:  Acquisition of laser ablation for ICP-MS and electron microprobe upgrade, for geological and environmental research and research training
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2004
* Nicholas Pingitore, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2004
* USD 60,000.00

0116660 Pingitore

This grant, made through Major Research Instrumentation Program, provides
partial support of the costs for upgrading the operating system of UTEP's
14-year-old, first generation Cameca SX-50 electron microprobe. We will acquire
a control system upgrade to replace the antiquated DEC PDP-based software on our
Cameca microprobe. The DEC system is no longer supported by DEC or Cameca; newly
developed analytical and imaging capabilities have not been available to us. The
original Kevex EDS (energy dispersive spectrometer) system likewise is seriously
outdated and has no EDS imaging and mapping capability or light-element
detection. We will replace this with a system featuring a full imaging and
mapping package, high counting rate, and light-element detector window. UTEP's
electron microprobe laboratory is a multi-user and multi-disciplinary facility.
It serves research, research training and instructional functions for
individuals and groups from across our campus, including members of the Colleges
of Science, Engineering, Liberal Arts, and Health Sciences. The microprobe
laboratory also assists individuals, businesses, educational institutions,
government agencies, and non-governmental organizations in the El Paso-Juarez
community and beyond. The three co-investigators and their research groups have
15 projects, currently underway, which will make use of the upgraded facility.
These research projects include the following topics: tectonics, metamorphic
reactions, phytoremediation, environmental bio-sensors, desert varnish,
particulate matter air pollution, plutonism, biosorption of heavy metals, trace
elements in corals, microprobe data quantification, speciation of metals in
soil, and foram Mg/Ca paleothermometry. Additional microprobe equipment use on
funded projects from other UTEP researchers includes such topic areas as
pigments, catalytic materials, archaeology, health, soil salination, composites,
and exotic alloys. Early and continued exposure to research is an essential part
of UTEP's strategy to attract and retain students in science and engineering,
particularly under-represented minorities. Mexican-Americans comprise
approximately 2/3 of the student body at UTEP. Two of the Co-PIs are minority
members, who serve as special role models and close student mentors.
Instrumentation and hands-on laboratory experience are important to establish
the "connection" with students that often determines their academic choices,
success, and ultimate career paths. ***