* 0116224
* Acquisition of Molecular Biology Equipment for Undergraduate Biology Research at William Woods University
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Mary Spratt, William Woods University
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 08/31/2006
* USD 115,886.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Mary Spratt at William Woods University to
acquire a DNA automated sequencer with associated computers and software; this
will be used to determine the specific genetic "alphabet" of certain
invertebrate organisms. Two sets of micropipetters will be purchased for use in
DNA isolation and sequencing. A small ultracentrifuge with essential components
will be procured for separation and analysis of the sub-cellular components of
these organisms. &lt;br/&gt; The proposed research for which this equipment will
be used focuses upon invertebrate organisms, particularly host-parasite
interactions. An example of the research that will be carried out is the
relationship between various hard-bodied ticks and the bacterial species that
live within them. One of these groups of bacteria causes ehrlichiosis, an entire
family of tick-borne diseases. When these bacteria are injected with the tick's
saliva as it takes a blood meal, they can cause serious illness or death in
humans and various animals. Approximately ten species of bacteria that live
within different ticks cause various forms of this disease. However, little is
known about the relationship between the tick and the bacteria, such as which
bacteria are found in which kinds of ticks, whether a given species of bacterium
in this locality is identical to the same identified species elsewhere, how
similar the DNA of one bacterial species is to that of bacteria causing a
different form of the disease, and whether a given tick may be co-infected with
various species of Ehrlichia bacteria. This project will be carried out by
obtaining ticks (primarily found by sweeping vegetation on public lands such as
trails, state and national parks, and river or lake banks), extracting and
purifying the DNA, amplifying it on a thermal cycler to make a billion copies of
the particular DNA fragment, determining by running the DNA through a gel by an
electric current which DNA samples are positive for various species of
ehrlichiosis, and then through DNA sequencing and analysis, comparing these
results to sequences found from other ticks and to those recorded in gene bank
data.&lt;br/&gt; Obtaining this data will help to answer some basic biology
questions in an area that is of great importance, but has received relatively
little attention or research funding. Perhaps of even greater importance is the
opportunity that this grant provides for the critically important training of
future generations of science teachers, researchers, and technicians by
providing students at William Woods University (WWU) state-of-the-art equipment
on which to participate in research as undergraduates, as well as to learn
essential aspects of biology. This equipment will enhance their acceptance into
graduate programs and into the work force. Additional biology curricula will be
developed as a result of this grant, as will outreach to high school students,
exciting them about the possibilities of careers in science. WWU graduates a
majority of women; many of these are first-generation college students. Less
than a decade ago, the college had no science curriculum, faculty, or equipment.
Largely due to the impetus provided by NSF funding, we now have a biology major
with supportive course work in the physical sciences, in addition to
opportunities for undergraduate science research. This equipment will greatly
enhance these areas and will serve to attract both faculty and students. It is
anticipated that this new equipment will be utilized as well by other small
colleges in our rural mid-west area, providing faculty and students at each of
our institutions with the opportunity for state-of-the art teaching and research
in areas of molecular and cellular biology previously unavailable to us.
&lt;br/&gt;