* 0116551
* Acquisition of a Variable-Pressure SEM:  New Avenues in Collaborative Biologic, Paleontologic, and Museum Collection Research and Conservation for New York's Capital Region
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Samuel Bowser, Health Research Incorporated/New York State Department of Health
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Farmer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 451,046.00

A consortium of seven principal researchers and nine auxiliary users from
the&lt;br/&gt;New York Capital Region are funded for a variable-pressure, field
emission scanning electron microscope (VP-FESEM) equipped with an Energy
Dispersive X-ray Analysis System. Support includes several ancillary instruments
including a critical point drier, a freeze drier, and a high-resolution chrome
sputtering device. Major research areas to be addressed include: (i)cell
biological and molecular approaches addressing the origins of the skeleton; (ii)
microfossil taxonomy of the oldest skeletalized animals and the Cambrian
evolutionary radiation; (iii) nanotechnology in the neurosciences, (iv) the role
of mitochondria in cell death, (v) the evolution of prehistoric agriculture in
the northeastern United States; and (vi) post-glacial fish dispersal and
assemblage/community structure.&lt;br/&gt;This instrument will create new ties
between paleontologists, biologists,&lt;br/&gt;and museum curators in a research
web ranging back through 500 million years of&lt;br/&gt;biologic evolution up to
the Native American development of agriculture. A novel aspect of the proposed
instrument is the merging of research disciplines in two large but distinct New
York State government agencies: The Wadsworth Center, the flagship research
institution of the New York State Department of Health, and the New York State
Museum, a major branch of the New York State Education Department. As such, the
instrument will serve to link basic researchers in the biosciences and
paleontology with those engaged in museum collection research, conservation, and
dissemination of collection data. Both agencies have major education mandates to
the citizenry of New York State, and all of the investigators in this proposal
have time-tested local, regional, and national outreach commitments.&lt;br/&gt;