* 0116189
* Acquistion of an Image Analysis Work Station at Wesleyan College
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Wanda Schroeder, Wesleyan College
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Farmer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 113,180.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Holly Boettger-Tong at Wesleyan College, an
undergraduate liberal arts college for women, to acquire an imaging workstation.
The specific components of this imaging workstation include an imaging research
microscope with digital camera, combined with imaging software capable of high
resolution image acquisition and morphologic analysis capabilities. A scanning
laser densitometer, with software capable of quantifying stained electrophoresis
gels, blotting membranes and autoradiographs is also an integral component of
this workstation. Acquisition of this equipment is vital to the research
activities of the Biology faculty, and represents a significant improvement in
our ongoing efforts to integrate education and research by introducing students
to modern technologies which they will use to develop independent research
projects. In collaboration with faculty, students will explore the role of
cytoskeletal signaling in spermatogenesis, fertilization and early development.
In addition, students will examine the regulation of gene expression in
epithelial tissues during differentiation. This instrumentation will greatly
enhance the research training opportunities available at Wesleyan College and
will directly translate into more opportunities for scientific discovery by both
faculty and undergraduate researchers. &lt;br/&gt; At Wesleyan College, the
Biology department curriculum is student-centered, with specific emphasis on
student-directed research experiences. Students gain these experiences working
as research assistants with department faculty, and through independent research
projects in upper division Biology courses. Basic research applications of the
equipment will include use of the Axioplan II and imaging software for molecular
and immunohistochemical studies to analyze the expression pattern of select
cytoskeletal proteins in the reproductive tract and during early development. In
addition, the scanning densitometry equipment and software will be used for
quantitation of mRNA expression by Northern blotting, as well as the comparison
of levels of mRNA expression with protein expression by densitometry of Western
blots. This equipment will also serve to modernize courses in Histology,
Developmental Biology, Genetics, Cell and Molecular Biology and DNA Technology.
&lt;br/&gt; Acquisition of this image analysis workstation will assist the
Biology faculty at Wesleyan College in their goal of successfully providing
women with excellent research opportunities using modern scientific methods. As
a culturally diverse (35% minority) College, Wesleyan recognizes that it has a
unique opportunity to favorably impact the recruitment of minority women into
the sciences. This equipment will make a direct impact on the preparation of
young women for careers in the sciences and will greatly enhance their
competitiveness for admission at quality postgraduate institutions.&lt;br/&gt;