* 0116517
* MRI:  Acquisition of Instruments and Technical Support for an Interdepartmental Fossil Preparation Laboratory
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* David Krause, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2005
* USD 227,934.00

0116517&lt;br/&gt;O'Leary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant, funded though the
Major Research Instrumentation Program, provides support to upgrade
significantly the current facilities for fossil preparation in the Department of
Anatomical Sciences at the State University of New York at Stony Brook (SUNY-SB)
Vertebrate paleontological research at SUNY-SB is conducted in four separate
departments (Anatomical Sciences, Anthropology, Ecology and Evolution,
Geosciences) by nine full-time faculty, one postdoctoral associate, and a host
of graduate and undergraduate students. Through the establishment of a state-of-
the-art vertebrate fossil preparation laboratory in the Department of Anatomical
Sciences, which contains, by far, the highest proportion of paleontologists on
campus, this facility will be made available to all Stony Brook paleontologists
and their students. These paleontologists and paleontologists-in-training depend
directly on mechanical and chemical preparation of vertebrate fossils for their
research. Fossil preparation is, quite simply, the process by which fossils are
carefully extracted from their entombing rock matrix. It is a very time-
intensive process requiring great skill, knowledge, and experience, as well as
access to state-of-the-art equipment and tools. At present SBU vertebrate
paleontologists conduct some 20 field projects, many of them currently or
recently supported by the National Science Foundation. These projects span over
200 million years of Earth history, on four separate continents, and are
targeted at evolutionary hypotheses that can be tested by collecting new fossil
data. Fund from this grant will be used to purchase sample preparation equipment
(i.e. an air compressor and sand blaster, air filtration equipment, storage
cabinets, hand tools, and chemical supplies) and to support a full-time
technician trained in fossil preparation and curation techniques. The University
has committed to providing a separate laboratory equipped with sinks, cabinetry,
and a fume hood that would be dedicated strictly to fossil preparation.
Additional technical support will help to eliminate the significant backlog of
unprepared fossil specimens that has accumulated over the past decade, as well
as to mold and cast the most scientifically significant specimens prior to their
return to institutions in their country of origin. Establishment of a state-of-
the-art vertebrate fossil preparation facility and the hiring of a second
skilled technician will dramatically increase the research productivity of Stony
Brook paleontologists, eliminate the need for outside contract work, and assist
in the fundamental training of students. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;