* 0116552
* Acquisition of an X-ray Photoelectron Spectrometer and a Variable Angle Spectroscopic Ellipsometer for an Open Surface Analysis Facility at the University of Massachusetts
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Wei Chen, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2004
* USD 350,000.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program will allow the
University of Massachusetts to purchase a x-ray photoelectron spectrometer (XPS)
with integrated Auger analysis. The instrument will significantly enhance the
capabilities of Interface Analysis Laboratory at UMass by providing high-
resolution surface analysis and depth profiling capabilities that are currently
lacking. The facility is accessible to the UMass community as well as research
personnel from the surrounding Five College Community that includes Smith, Mt.
Holyoke, Amherst and Hampshire Colleges and local industry. The Interface
Analysis Laboratory and its director play an instrumental role in the support of
broadly funded research programs in the chemical biological and materials
sciences and for training of graduate and undergraduate students at these and
other institutions. Specific programs include assessment of composition,
contamination, interfacial properties and growth mechanisms for metal and
semiconductor multi-layer films deposited from supercritical fluids,
characterizing the chemical composition of polymer surfaces and interfaces
modified to control interfacial interactions, surface wetting and
biocompatability and the rational design of constrained-geometry catalysts for
olefin polymerization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Major Research
Instrumentation Program will allow the University of Massachusetts to purchase a
x-ray photoelectron spectrometer (XPS) with integrated Auger analysis. In
tandem, XPS and Auger spectroscopy provide precise information regarding the
atomic and molecular composition of surfaces that is crucial for the development
and application of the advanced materials that are fueling today's economy.
These include the assessment of metal and semiconductor films for
microelectronic and photonic devices, the characterization of modified surfaces
for consumer and medical applications, and the characterization of catalysts for
more efficient fuel and chemical production. The instrument will be housed in an
open Surface Analysis Facility that is easily accessible to the UMass Campus as
well as research personnel from the surrounding Five College Community that
includes Smith, Mt. Holyoke, Amherst and Hampshire Colleges and local industry.
The facility plays an instrumental role in the training of graduate and
undergraduate students at these and other institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;