* 0116666
* Acquisition of a High Performance Computer Cluster for Atmospheric Modeling
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2001,06/30/2004
* Vanda Grubišić, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 06/30/2004
* USD 193,838.00

Under this Major Research Instrumentation award the Principal Investigator will
acquire a high-performance computer cluster to be used as the primary
computational resource for the mesoscale dynamics and numerical modeling group
within the Division of Atmospheric Sciences (DAS) at the University of Nevada.
The recent expansion of DAS's research scope including two National Science
Foundation funded projects focusing on mesoscale atmospheric phenomena and
mesoscale numerical modeling has led to an immediate need for dedicated
computational resources to better support present and planned research
activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of a 32-node computer cluster
will be a significant and cost-effective expansion of the research
infrastructure at DAS. Such a dedicated, high-speed computing platform will
provide supercomputer performance at a fraction of the cost of a commercial
supercomputer, and is crucial for the numerical modeling group and associated
students to continue to conduct competitive research aimed at improving
numerical weather forecasting within current and future
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The graduate student research training is an
important part of the research enterprise at DRI. The requested equipment will
provide an environment to extensively train students pursuing advanced degrees
in the Atmospheric Sciences Program. It will foster a closer collaboration
between the Computer and Atmospheric Science Departments. In the long term, the
equipment is expected to provide a focal point for interdisciplinary
collaboration and, especially, facilitate a wider adoption of high-performance
parallel computing in earth sciences at the University of Nevada.