* 0116789
* Acquisition of Equipment for Genomics Research
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* David Marcey, California Lutheran University
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Farmer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 79,214.00

Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to Drs. Revie and Marcey at
California Lutheran University to purchase equipment to perform structural and
functional genomics research. The project will meet four goals. First, the
equipment will be used to more quickly sequence the genome of strain 122-1B2 of
the archaeon Thermoplasma acidophilum. Archaea are a group of microorganisms
that comprise a third branch of life, which are distinct from the other two
branches: (1) bacteria and (2) eukaryotes, a group that includes yeast and
multicellular organisms. Determining the sequence of bases in the genome of T.
acidophilum will allow for the identification of proteins that are involved in
respiration. Second, the equipment will be used by Dr. Marcey to study a protein
involved in cellular signaling in the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster. Third,
the equipment will allow students to perform a wider variety of research
projects in formal laboratory classes. For example, genomics research will be
conducted in Genetics, Molecular Biology, Developmental Biology, and Recombinant
DNA Techniques. Fourth, the equipment will allow Biology and Biochemistry
students to engage in faculty-mentored research experiences in structural and
functional genomics.&lt;br/&gt;The archaeon T. acidophilum can grow either
aerobically under normal oxygen concentrations, under very low oxygen
concentrations, or anaerobically in the presence of sulfur. The organism grows
optimally at pH 1.7 and 59 degrees C, but interestingly, lacks a cell wall.
Although it can reduce sulfur, little is known about this process. Even less is
known about how the organism survives under very low oxygen conditions.
Considering the hostile and extreme environment where T. acidophilum thrives,
this flexibility of respiration is quite remarkable, making the study of its
respiratory proteins an interesting and important part of the overall study of
Archaea. In order to find and study the respiratory proteins, the equipment will
more quickly determine the entire sequence of bases in the DNA. This will
primarily be done by sequencing T. acidophilum DNA that has been cloned into a
plasmid, then assembling the resulting pieces into one contiguous chromosome.
The DNA will then be analyzed to determine the entire complement of genes in the
organism. A gene, Dpez, that encodes a member of novel class of proteins
involved in cellular communication, the FERM domain Protein Tyrosine
Phosphatases (PTPs), will be studied in the model organism Drosophila
melanogaster. Equipment funded by this grant will be used to determine the DNA
sequences of genes encoding proteins that interact with Dpez. Also, the DNA
sequences of genes that produce mutant forms of the Dpez protein will be
determined. Spatial and temporal patterns of DPez expression will be
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;Archaea are a distinct group of organisms. Many of them,
including T. acidophilum, live in extreme environments such as high temperatures
and low pH. This project will aid the study of proteins that enable the organism
to thrive under the extreme conditions in which it grows. In addition, the
ability of T. acidophilum to grow under a variety of respiratory conditions
makes the study of these proteins even more interesting. Determining the entire
sequence of bases in the organism will also allow for comparisons between T.
acidophilum and other microorganisms that will increase knowledge of
evolutionary processes. The balance between the opposite actions of protein
tyrosine kinases (PTKs) and protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) can regulate
cell proliferation, differentiation, and morphology. PTPs have been cloned in
large numbers from a variety of organisms and are targeted to subcellular
locations and linked to specific signaling pathways. The Dpez protein is the
first invertebrate FERM-PTP described. Investigations of the functions of DPez
will be conducted with the goal of using the tractable genetics of Drosophila to
discover the roles of the protein in the development and cell physiology of a
model insect.&lt;br/&gt;