* 0116089
* MRI:  Acquisition of Integrated Mouse Test System
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Charles Locurto, College of the Holy Cross
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2005
* USD 113,312.00

This grant supports the purchase of an Integrated Mouse Test System (IMTS),
designed in conjunction with two leading manufacturers of this type of
instrumentation. IMTS will enable students and faculty at Holy Cross College to
conduct automated state-of-the-art experiments in comparative intelligence and
in interdisciplinary research that brings together the comparative intelligence
and neuroscience laboratories. This instrumentation will result in two
significant enhancements in our research and research training activities.
First, the system will expand the number and range of experiments that can be
initiated in our labs. As a consequence, this instrumentation will permit the
conduct of experiments not heretofore possible at Holy Cross and will facilitate
increased collaborative work between the two laboratories. Second, this
instrumentation will lead to significant improvements in the precision and
reliability of our research, particularly in the automated running of
experiments and recording of behavioral measures. Finally, IMTS represents a
significant expansion in the available equipment in our labs. As a consequence,
this system will directly result in a significant increase in the number of
students who can participate in our ongoing research programs.

This acquisition comes at a time when there is intense interest within the
scientific community in developing behavioral mouse models. As detailed in a
lead article in a recent issue of the American Psychological Association's
Monitor on Psychology, there are now a number of highly sophisticated genetic
techniques available for use with mice to link genes with behavior (Azar, 2000).
Unfortunately, the powerful techniques of molecular biologists have not been
matched by a parallel sophistication in the development of complex behavioral
techniques using mice. There is a pressing need for new and innovative
priorities in the training of scientists in this area. The research supported by
this instrumentation grant will provide Holy Cross students and faculty with the
means to participate significantly in this broadly-supported scientific
initiative at the undergraduate level.