* 0116032
* Acquisition of Scanning Laser Confocal Microscopy System
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Marten Edwards, Ohio Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 08/31/2004
* USD 129,750.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Marten J. Edwards at Ohio Wesleyan University to
purchase a confocal laser scanning biological microscopy system. Confocal laser
scanning microscopy offers significant advantages over conventional fluorescent
microscopy. It improves the resolution of images by recording fluorescence or
reflected light generated from a single focal plane within the sample, while
rejecting all other light coming from above or below the this plane. The
elimination of this out-of-focus light, which blurs conventional images, permits
resolution of sub-micron structures within cells and tissue sections. It can
produce optical sections through a 3-dimensional specimen - e.g., an entire cell
or tissue sample. By moving the focal plane of the instrument stepwise through
the depth of the specimen, a series of optical sections can be recorded. These
sections can be merged to reconstruct a 3-dimensional image that would be
impossible to achieve by conventional light microscopy. The digital images
produced by confocal microscopy are amenable to image analysis and processing.
Confocal microscopy also offers a major increase in sensitivity over
conventional light microscopy. The light source is a laser, and the image is
digitized by a highly sensetive photomultiplier tube. &lt;br/&gt;The principal
user of the confocal imaging system will be Dr. Marten J. Edwards who is
exploring the molecular interface between mosquitoes and the pathogens they
transmit. His research has focused on the temporal and spatial dynamics of gene
expression in the mosquito midgut and ovaries. Using confocal microscopy, it
will be possible to detect the expression of fluorescent marker proteins in
transgenic mosquitoes. &lt;br/&gt;The undergraduate research program at Ohio
Wesleyan University will be significantly enhanced by a scanning laser confocal
imaging system. Research in the Edwards lab has direct applications to the study
of the transmission of LaCrosse viral encephalitis by mosquitoes. The confocal
system will also serve an important role in the local research community,
primarily through long-term collaborations with investigators at the USDA
laboratories in Delaware, OH. The aim is to provide the highest possible level
of research training in the intensive learning environment of a small liberal
arts college. The confocal laser scanning confocal microscopy will provide
students and faculty with access to technologies that are expanding the
boundaries of the types of questions that can explored in the biology
laboratory. This will provide us with a unique opportunity to expose
undergraduate students to hands-on experience and discovery at the frontiers of
biological research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;