* 0116457
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Transmission Electron Microscope and Digital Imaging: Research and Research Training in an Undergraduate College Environment
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Jan Factor, SUNY College at Purchase
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 08/31/2005
* USD 246,022.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Jan Robert Factor at Purchase College, State
University of New York, to acquire a digital transmission electron microscope
(TEM) and related equipment for digital image processing and microscopical image
analysis. Specifically, a TEM will be acquired; an image analysis system will be
upgraded; as well as an ultramicrotome and diamond knife for preparing
biological samples for TEM. The TEM and related instruments will be used to
carry out several research projects and research training in an undergraduate
college environment. This equipment will enable research projects in the areas
of cellular immune defenses in the lobster (Homarus americanus); digestive
tissues of the lobster (Homarus americanus); characterization of the cell
surface of Renibacterium salmoninarum; uptake and growth of Renibacterium
salmoninarum in trout macrophage; cellular events induced by fatty acids. The
following research projects will be carried out. 1. Cellular Immune Defenses in
the Lobster, Homarus americanus, Jan Robert Factor. Removal of foreign particles
from the blood of the lobster by a large population of fixed phagocytes will be
studied using fluorescence light microscopy and analysis of digital images, to
determine if adverse environmental conditions and anthropogenic toxins cause
disease and mass mortalities. TEM will be used to elucidate the unusual
mechanism of phagocytic uptake by the fixed phagocytes. 2. Digestive Tissues of
the Lobster, Homarus americanus, Jan Robert Factor. Understanding of digestive
processes in this ecologically and economically important species has been
reliant upon electron-microscopical observations, and further progress in
understanding digestive tissues absolutely requires the use of transmission
electron microscopy. Studies will examine cells and tissues of the tegumental
glands, complex basement membranes, connective-tissue fibers, and tissue
organization. 3. Characterization of the Cell Surface of Renibacterium
salmoninarum: Fimbriae and p57 Surface Proteins, James G. Daly. R. salmoninarum
is a unique intracellular pathogen that causes bacterial kidney disease in
salmonid fishes. Its major cell surface antigen (p57) may be important to
pathogenesis. p57 and surface fimbriae may be the same, however, p57 antibody
fails to attach to the fimbriae. Transmission electron microscopy will be used
to examine the cell surface to determine whether p57 is indeed a fimbria or
whether they are distinctive proteins. 4. Uptake and Growth of Renibacterium
salmoninarum in Trout Macrophage, James G. Daly. This project will use both in
vitro and in vivo infected macrophages to follow the infection and survival of
R. salmoninarum within trout macrophage. 5. Ultrastructural Localization of
Cellular Events Induced by Fatty Acids, Joanne Kivela Tillotson. Biochemical
pathways of growth factor and eicosanoid signaling will be localized by TEM in
order to define the influence of specific dietary fatty acid administration upon
cell proliferation, and the effects of the fatty acids on programmed cell death.
Combined with cell culture and biochemical studies, this will further our
understanding of the role of exogenous factors in cell proliferation. This
equipment will significantly enhance the research capabilities at Purchase
College and enable faculty research that is not now possible, with an important
impact on the research of more than half of the Biology faculty. The research
includes several areas of practical scientific significance: disease defenses
and processes in two commercially important groups of animals (the American
lobster and salmonid fishes), and the influence of dietary fatty acids on cell
proliferation and programmed cell death. Undergraduate students will be trained
in the required techniques in two courses, providing the tools needed to
participate in the faculty research projects. The requested equipment will also
be used to encourage students to pursue science careers through a variety of
local school programs.

