* 0116640
* Acquisition of an ABI PRISM(r) 310 Genetic Analyzer
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Stephen Kilpatrick, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 08/31/2004
* USD 99,800.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr.'s Riegel, Kilpatrick, and Robart at the
University of Pittsburgh, Johnstown Campus to fund the acquisition and operation
of a genetic analzer. The genetic analyzer will be used to train undergraduate
students carrying out molecular biological research in the areas of virology,
population genetics, and plant systematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The genetic
analyzer will be used to support the undergraduate research initiatives
conducted by students directed by these three faculty members. Undergraduates
working with Dr. Riegel (Department of Chemistry) study the virus which affects
gypsy moths. One study involves the temporal expression of a gene and the other
study involves a mutant with an aberrant morphology. The analyzer will be used
to verify the DNA sequence of the mutants constructed in the course of the
temporal expression study, and to sequence the aberrant morphology mutation once
it is localized. This virus is important to study as it and related viruses are
used as biological control agents, and one of the related viruses is used in a
protein expression system. Proper understanding of the control of genetic
expression and the mutations that arise are important to the optimal use of
these viruses as control agents and expression systems. Students of Dr.
Kilpatrick (Department of Biology) carry out research in the area of population
genetics. They study fitness components in hybrid fruit flies derived from
crosses among geographically diverse populations, and the role of mitochondrial
DNA variation in determining organismal fitness. His students will use the
analyzer to sequence multilocus genotypes of individual flies and then to
analyze the patterns found. Because these data are often used to measure genetic
differences and gene flow among natural populations, this work will aid in the
interpretation of variations in the genetic patterns in many species. Dr.
Robart's students (Department of Biology) carry out research in the area of
plant molecular systematics. They are using molecular sequencing to reconstruct
the phylogenetic relationship of the lousewort. Dr. Robart's students will use
the analyzer to sequence particular genetic regions of the plants to construct a
phylogenetic tree. In addition the analyzer's ability to carry out
microsatellite and amplified fragment length polymorphism (AFLP) analysis will
allow students to measure gene flow and trace patterns of evolutionary
diversification among the different varieties of the plant. This work will
contribute to the understanding of the rise of new flowering plant species and
the diversification of their floral characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;The genetic
analyzer will be part of a major effort on the part of UPJ to enhance
undergraduate research and training in molecular biology and biochemistry.
Within the past 5 years, UPJ has added a biochemist to the chemistry department,
hired a second molecular biologist and constructed and equipped new laboratory
facilities for molecular/biochemical research. The genetic analyzer will greatly
enhance this effort. Undergraduate researchers trained on this equipment will be
able to better carry out research in the field of molecular biology and its
applications to virology, plant systematics, and population genetics.&lt;br/&gt;