* 0116685
* Development of Advanced Time-of-flight (TOF)-Mass Spectrometer(MS) for Proteomics
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* David Russell, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Farmer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 738,810.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. David H. Russell at Texas A&amp;M University
(TAMU) to develop matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization (MALDI) high
resolution time-of-flight (TOF) mass specroscopy for rapid, high-sensitivity
analysis of peptides and proteins. The instrument development project is a
collaboration involving scientist at TAMU and three of the leading manufacturers
of mass spectrometry instruments. Successful completion of the project
objectives will provide immediate improvements for macromolecule mass
spectrometry. A secondary objective of the proposed research involves the
development of a high-sensitivity, periodic focusing ion mobility (IM) drift
tube, which will be used for rapid separation of peptides and/or proteins
present in complex biological mixtures. Following successful development of the
IM drift tube it will be adapted to the high resolution TOF instrument. The
combination of IM and high resolution TOF mass spectrometry will provide
enhanced capabilities for protein identification, especially studies of protein
expression, post-translational modifications and peptide/protein sequencing.
&lt;br/&gt;The actual construction of the high resolution TOF mass spectrometer
involves extensive modifications to an existing instrument initially designed
and constructed by ABI-PerSeptive, Inc. and installed at TAMU in 1994. The
instrument is highly unique, only 3 such instruments were ever built, and the
basic instrument platform still represents cutting-edge capabilities in TOF mass
resolution (mass resolving powers of 15,000-25,000 are routine) and mass
measurement accuracy (mass errors of &lt;10 ppm). The instrument performance
will be enhanced by addition of new electronics and specially designed multi-
anode ion detectors, and the geometry of the reflectron will be changed from the
original co-linear configuration to a 1.5 degree reflecting angle to improve ion
transmission and temporal focusing. Mass resolving power of 75,000-100,000 and
mass measurement accuracy of 0.5-3 ppm is projected for the up-graded
instrument. The periodic focusing ion mobility drift tube (patented by TAMU)
will be designed and constructed at TAMU, and adapted to the high resolution TOF
instrument by the industrial collaborators. &lt;br/&gt;In the last decade mass
spectrometry has evolved as one of the most widely used analytical methods in
biology and chemical-biology. Of the modern mass spectrometers, TOF instruments
are the most user-friendly and versatile, and TOF instruments are the most
widely used by biologist and chemical-biologist. Consequently, development of
new, high performance TOF instruments will broadly impact biological research.
The PI has developed a large number of biology and chemical-biology
collaborators, which insures that the proposed instrument will be effectively
used by collaborators at TAMU and across the nation. A major challenge facing
biologist and chemical-biologist involves characterization and identification of
small amounts of biological materials present is highly complex mixtures, and
the development of IM and high-resolution TOF instruments have great potential
to raise the performance bar for macromolecule mass spectrometry. The
development of the instrumentation and the concomitant methods development will
have significant impact in the future training of bio-analytical chemists and
chemical-biologists. Lastly, the proposed research meets goals of the MRI
program aimed at promoting partnerships between academic researchers and private
sector instrument developers. &lt;br/&gt;