* 0116687
* Distributed Microsensor Packaging Based on Self-Assembly after Sensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Joseph Talghader, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Filbert J. Bartoli
* 08/31/2004
* USD 210,000.00

In this proposal, a post-operation packaging process is proposed where
distributed microsensors that are too small to include data transmission
electronics can be packaged and read using self-assembly after they have
performed their sensing operations. There are many systems in use today where
fluids move through extremely small channels. Examples include flow cytometry,
fuel injection, and chemical processing. Good information about the physical
state of the flow in such systems can be difficult to obtain because sensors set
into the flow can be difficult to position and may interfere with the very
processes that they are supposed to measure. One possible solution would be to
collect data using mobile microsensors that actually travel with the flow. This
is extremely appealing because sensing could be performed continuously and in-
situ, but it has some basic technical difficulties since power supplies and data
transmission electronics would be difficult to include due to size and cost
restrictions. In addition, if an extremely large number of sensors were used,
coordinating transmission protocols for all of them would be impractical. The PI
proposes to solve these problems by using fluidic self-assembly (FSA) to package
and read-out information from the devices after they have sensed. Since sensing
operations typically consume much less power than data transmission operations,
ambient energy from the environment such as light or RF could be used to drive
the sensors and all interfacing for data transfer would be provided by the self-
assembly process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program has both practical
engineering and fundamental scientific goals. Among the engineering goals is the
development of a fluid test apparatus to investigate post-operation packaging.
Power transfer to microsensors will be examined with emphasis given to the use
of ambient light, laser, and RF power. Since these power sources may be
intermittent, nonvolatile data storage is extremely important. Nonvolatile
memory technologies that write with very little power using tunnel processes
will be examined. Electronic interfacing to the self-assembled microsensors is
perhaps the most critical engineering issue. Metallic bonding, micro-electro-
mechanical switching, and capacitive coupling are considered. Micro-electro-
mechanical switches are singled out as particularly versatile because they
require no special circuitry on the microsensor and can release microsensors
back into the flow after their data has been read. Scientific goals include
studying the self-assembly capture process, that is, how free microsensors move
into the sphere of influence of the assembly site. A study of electrostatic
"fine-tuning" of the fluidic self-assembly process will also be performed, where
micron-scale misalignments might be eliminated using capacitive coupling to
guide the final stage of assembly. Studies will also be performed on device
lifetimes in a flow. These will attempt to ascertain if flow dynamics can be
modified or protective coatings used to minimize mechanical damage to devices
that have circulated repeatedly through a flow system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
program has been designed with educational objectives in mind. Certain projects,
such as the lifetime studies and parts of the self-assembly capture studies have
been identified as shorter-term projects suitable for introducing undergraduates
to research. Some of this work could be performed as part of the University of
Minnesota's Undergraduate Research Opportunities Program (UROP) or Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program for underrepresented students or
those from small universities. Both the graduate and undergraduate level work is
extremely multidisciplinary, allowing students to explore experimental as well
as theoretical aspects of physics, chemistry and engineering. Finally, the
technological impact of the project is broad, with potential applications in
medicine, remote sensing, and industrial process control, among others. This
project, since its philosophy is to include only those functions that are truly
necessary on a microdevice and then package the rest later, may also be a first
step in a long sought goal to create smart micro- or nanodevices with only
simple initial capabilities, but the potential to self-organize new functions in
response to their environment.&lt;br/&gt;