* 0116260
* MRI:  Acquistion of an X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy System for Surface Chemical Analysis
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* James Batteas, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2003
* USD 125,155.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program to City University of
New York-Staten Island is for the acquisition of an X-ray Photoelectron
Spectroscopy (XPS) system to carry out basic surface chemical analysis in
support of innovative surface and interfacial research efforts. The research
topics supported include: nanotribology; development of surface chemical
sensors; surface bound photonic devices; studies of molecular interactions at
interfaces, growth of II-VI wide bandgap materials and basic surface
functionaliztion. XPS is a highly sensitive surface analytical tool that allows
for the details of surface chemical composition and local chemical environment
(such as oxidation state and to some extent molecular connectivity) to be
evaluated for a variety of materials. The sensitivity of this technique provides
information on chemical concentrations at the surface for routinely of fraction
of monolayers of a material adsorbed on a surface. This instrumentation will
also support a large number of educational activities both at The College of
Staten Island and within CUNY. This includes annual use in an Instrumental
Methods in Chemistry Course (taught by the PI), undergraduate research
activities in The College of Staten Island's NSF supported REU program on
Polymers and Biopolymers, graduate education and training in our NSF supported
IGERT program on Nanostructural Materials and Devices, and as part of a 1
semester laboratory rotation course in our newly formed Ph.D. program in
Nanotechnology and Materials Chemistry. The instrumentation will have wide usage
and improve the overall research and educational capabilities of the
participating faculty as well as the institution. This award from the Major
Research Instrumentation Program to City University of New York-Staten Island is
for the acquisition of an X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) system to carry
out basic surface chemical analysis in support of innovative surface and
interfacial research efforts. The research topics supported include:
nanotribology; development of surface chemical sensors; surface bound photonic
devices; studies of molecular interactions at interfaces, growth of II-VI wide
bandgap materials and basic surface functionaliztion. XPS is a highly sensitive
surface analytical tool that allows for the details of surface chemical
composition and local chemical environment (such as oxidation state and to some
extent molecular connectivity) to be evaluated for a variety of materials. The
sensitivity of this technique provides information on chemical concentrations at
the surface for routinely of fraction of monolayers of a material adsorbed on a
surface. This instrumentation will also support a large number of educational
activities both at The College of Staten Island and within CUNY. This includes
annual use in an Instrumental Methods in Chemistry Course (taught by the PI,
undergraduate research activities in The College of Staten Island's NSF
supported REU program on Polymers and Biopolymers, graduate education and
training in our NSF supported IGERT program on Nanostructural Materials and
Devices, and as part of a 1 semester laboratory rotation course in our newly
formed Ph.D. program in Nanotechnology and Materials Chemistry. The
instrumentation will have wide usage and improve the overall research and
educational capabilities of the participating faculty as well as the
institution.

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program to City University of
New York Staten-Island is for the acquisition of an X-ray Photoelectron
Spectroscopy (XPS) system to carry out basic surface chemical analysis in
support of innovative surface and interfacial research efforts. The
instrumentation will have wide usage and improve the overall research and
educational capabilities of the participating faculty as well as the
institution. The research topics supported include: nanotribology; development
of surface chemical sensors; surface bound photonic devices; studies of
molecular interactions at interfaces, growth of II-VI wide bandgap materials and
basic surface functionaliztion. XPS is a highly sensitive surface analytical
tool that allows for the details of surface chemical composition and local
chemical environment (such as oxidation state and to some extent molecular
connectivity) to be evaluated for a variety of materials. This instrumentation
will also support a large number of educational activities both at The College
of Staten Island and within CUNY. This includes annual use in an Instrumental
Methods in Chemistry Course (taught by the PI), undergraduate research
activities in The College of Staten Island' s NSF supported REU program on
Polymers and Biopolymers, graduate education and training in our NSF supported
IGERT program on Nanostructural Materials and Devices, and as part of a 1
semester laboratory rotation course in our newly formed Ph.D. program in
Nanotechnology and Materials Chemistry.