* 0116743
* RUI:  Acquisition of Microscopy Equipment for Research and Research Training in Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Curt Peterson, University of Northern Colorado
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Farmer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 236,102.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. Curt M. Peterson, Catherine Gardiner, and John
Moore at the University of Northern Colorado to significantly improve the
ability of faculty and students in the biological sciences to utilize modern
microscopy tools in their research, enhance their opportunities to expand into
new research areas, and increase the competitiveness of their research programs
for external funding. The grant will be used to purchase ancillary support
equipment for a scanning electron microscope (SEM) including a digital image
analysis system, a critical point dryer, and a sputter coater. In addition, a
confocal microscope and equipment to prepare and observe biological specimens
for light and electron microscopy including a tissue processor, an
ultramicrotome, and a diamond knife will be acquired. At present, there are
active research programs in the department ranging from cellular biology of
early embryo development to studies of soil community ecology that will benefit
from the availability of this equipment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Five research
projects will utilize this microscopy equipment to advance current and projected
research efforts. One project will use confocal microscopy and fluorescent dyes
to study the three-dimensional distribution of specific cellular compounds that
protect cells during early cellular differentiation in developing mouse embryos.
This study will increase our understanding of the development of mammalian
embryos. A second project will use the ultramicrotome and confocal microscope to
record, reconstruct and analyze sectioned tissues of venom glands in rear-fanged
snakes in order to elucidate mechanisms allowing for long-term storage and
stabilization of venom components. The goal of a third project is to develop a
theoretical framework for the dynamics and stability of food webs that couple
primary producers, detritus, consumers and nutrients. Accurate identification of
invertebrate taxa using SEM and microbial biomass using confocal microscopy will
provide more precise identification of food web organisms than is possible with
existing techniques. The goal of a fourth study is to use SEM and confocal
microscopy to investigate the positional differentiation of the separation layer
leading to abscission or dropping of cotton leaves and the shattering or
breaking apart of seed heads of native grasses. Both forms of microscopy will
permit much clearer imaging of the cellular processes that lead to abscission
and shattering. The fifth project will use this microscopy equipment to
investigate the embryo anatomy and morphology of Eugenia, a very large and
poorly known genus in the plant family Myrtaceae. Embryo anatomy has been shown
to be an important source of variation in this genus and will further elucidate
the taxonomy of this ecologically widespread genus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
equipment will not only strengthen current and projected research efforts of
faculty in the biological sciences and each of the respective research areas but
will have a broad impact on undergraduate and graduate research training as
well. Many of the questions and problems forming the basis for the five research
projects described in this grant can be answered or resolved with this modern
microscopy technology. This equipment also will significantly improve access to
and increase the use of modern instrumentation and state-of-the-art microscopy
applications in the research training and education of both undergraduate and
graduate students in biology. Finally, this equipment will have a significant
impact on K-12 outreach efforts designed to increase college entrance and
graduation rates of minority students traditionally underrepresented in science,
mathematics, and technology disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;