* 0116252
* The Acquisition of Laboratory Equipment to Facilitate Micro and Nano Engineering at Michigan State University
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2001,07/31/2006
* Dean Aslam, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2006
* USD 272,000.00

Recently within the College of Engineering at Michigan State University (MSU)
faculty&lt;br/&gt;with research interests at the micro and nano dimensions have
coalesced about a new College of&lt;br/&gt;Engineering Center research activity
entitled the Micro and Nano Engineering Center (MNEC).&lt;br/&gt;MNEC builds
upon the past strong research capabilities of faculty within the College
of&lt;br/&gt;Engineering, such as carbon-based materials and plasma technologies
and combines them with&lt;br/&gt;newly hired research faculty and their
associated research initiatives in nano-device
technologies,&lt;br/&gt;miniaturized millimeter wave and optical systems and
micro/nano machine instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;MNEC's mission is concerned with
the application of frontier knowledge and techniques that&lt;br/&gt;synthesize,
characterize, manipulate and modify materials in order to create integrated
structures,&lt;br/&gt;electronic, and photonic devices and machines in the micro
and nano environment. The emphasis&lt;br/&gt;of the Center's research activities
is the development of novel devices, machines and systems in&lt;br/&gt;the micro
and nano world. Faculty form synergistic interdisciplinary research teams
which&lt;br/&gt;include cross-campus and multi-university collaborations.
Notable among these are the NSF&lt;br/&gt;MRSEC Center for Sensor Materials and
the NSF Wireless Integrated Microsystems (WIMS)&lt;br/&gt;ERC collaborations.
Additionally, MNEC's research activities provide the university setting
in&lt;br/&gt;which to train and educate both graduate and undergraduate
students. Presently, the Center&lt;br/&gt;includes ten faculty and 40 graduate
students of which over half are Ph.D. students. Of the ten&lt;br/&gt;faculty,
five have been newly hired during the past five years and it is anticipated to
expand to a&lt;br/&gt;total of 15-20 faculty over the next five years via
additional faculty interest reorientation and new&lt;br/&gt;hires. MNEC's
research activities have been and continue to be transferred to industry
and&lt;br/&gt;commercialized into applications relevant to manufacturing, health
care, the environment and&lt;br/&gt;national security.&lt;br/&gt;The rapid
advance of micro/nano-fabrication technology requires continual reassessment
of&lt;br/&gt;our facilities and capabilities. Micro-scale technology has been an
important economic driver for&lt;br/&gt;the United States as well as the entire
world. MSU's MNEC faculty have pioneered several&lt;br/&gt;important micro-
fabrication technologies, including microwave plasma processing machines
for&lt;br/&gt;etching and diamond deposition, IC-compatible diamond processing
and fabrication techniques,&lt;br/&gt;and diamond micro electro-mechanical
systems (MEMS). Now, as we enter a new millennium,&lt;br/&gt;nano-scale
technology is becoming increasingly important to the center, the college,
the&lt;br/&gt;university, and the nation. The instrumentation requested in this
proposal will improve the&lt;br/&gt;Center's faculty ability to perform research
activities and student training in nano-scale and&lt;br/&gt;micro-scale
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;Specific, new long-term goals of the Center have been
established over the past year through&lt;br/&gt;many strategic planning
discussions amongst the Center faculty. Current and developing
micro&lt;br/&gt;and nano-engineering research activities in MNEC can be
described and organized into five areas&lt;br/&gt;including: (1) carbon-based
technology, (2) microwave plasma technology, (3)
nanodevice&lt;br/&gt;technology, (4) manipulation and probe technology for micro
and nano applications, and (5)&lt;br/&gt;miniaturized millimeter wave and
optical systems. The proposed equipment acquisition described&lt;br/&gt;below is
part of the MNEC's multiyear strategy to improve its laboratory facilities,
which will&lt;br/&gt;facilitate research activities and student training in
these five areas. In developing our request, we&lt;br/&gt;have considered the
availability of similar instrumentation on campus and the capabilities of
such&lt;br/&gt;instrumentation. The equipment requested in this proposal will be
housed in common facilities in&lt;br/&gt;the Micro and Nano Engineering Center
(MNEC) cleanroom located on the MSU campus. The&lt;br/&gt;instrumentation
requested in this proposal includes the following systems:&lt;br/&gt; Plasma
Enhanced Chemical Vapor Deposition (PECVD) System&lt;br/&gt; Multisource
Physical Vapor Deposition (PVD) System&lt;br/&gt; Scanning Probe
Microscope&lt;br/&gt; Wet Chemical Processing Station&lt;br/&gt; Electrochemical
Plating Station