* 0116585
* Development of High Intensity Cold Neutron Spectrometer with Multichannel Analyzer
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2001,09/30/2008
* Jeffrey Lynn, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 09/30/2008
* USD 1,700,171.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program to Johns Hopkins
University supports the development of a Multi Analyzer Crystal Spectrometer
(MACS) for cold neutron spectroscopy. MACS will have two orders of magnitude
greater sensitivity than current instrumentation. Located at the NIST cold
neutron source, the instrument uses focusing Bragg optics to produce the most
intense cold neutron beam worldwide (f&gt;108 n/cm2/s for DEi=0.2 meV). The
detection system will energy-analyze neutrons scattered into a solid angle more
than an order of magnitude greater than conventional instrumentation. The goal
of the MACS project is greater insight into nano-scale dynamic phenomena in
materials science. It will expand the scope for inelastic neutron scattering
from a powerful specialized technique to a versatile probe of dynamic
correlations in a wide range of condensed matter. Research enabled by MACS
includes direct measurements of interactions in magnetic thin films,
determination of spin density wave structure in organic metals, elucidation of
spin and charge polarons in oxides, studies of dynamic correlations at pressure
and field driven quantum phase transitions, determination of order parameters in
weak broken symmetry phases, and studies of impurity generated composite spin.
With a different "foot print" in Q-E phase space, MACS will complement the
advanced pulsed neutron instrumentation now being developed for the Spallation
Neutron Source. The project will provide undergraduate, graduate, and
postdoctoral education to produce scientists that are knowledgeable about
cutting-edge neutron scattering instrumentation and its use in materials
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inelastic neutron scattering is a unique probe
of nano-scale dynamic phenomena in solids. The experiments are crucial for
determining the interactions and understanding the cooperative phenomena that
govern the solid state. Unfortunately, current instrumentation limits
applicability to cases where large crystalline samples are available. This award
from the Major Research Instrumentation program to Johns Hopkins University
supports the development of a Multi Analyzer Crystal Spectrometer (MACS) for
neutron scattering at the NIST Center for Neutron Research. Through its intense
incident beam and its multiplexing detection system, MACS will transform
inelastic neutron scattering from a powerful, specialized technique, to a
versatile probe of nano-scale dynamics in solids. Research enabled by MACS,
includes direct measurements of interactions in magnetic thin films,
determination of spin density wave structure in organic metals, elucidation of
spin and charge polarons in oxides, and analysis of impurity generated composite
spin. Graduate and undergraduate students will be involved, and a post-doc will
join for commissioning. The project thus educates scientists who are
knowledgeable about cutting-edge neutron scattering instrumentation and its use
in materials science. With a different data acquisition protocol, MACS will be
complementary to instrumentation now being developed for the Spallation Neutron
Source. The capability to probe excitations over a wide range of energies at the
SNS and then zoom in using MACS will help scientists develop new materials for
the twenty first century. &lt;br/&gt;