* 0116042
* Nanoscience Studies of Carbon Nanotubes and Bismuth Nanowires
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2001,01/31/2005
* Mildred Dresselhaus, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 01/31/2005
* USD 330,000.00

This project addresses nanoscience studies of carbon nanotubes and bismuth
nanowires. The research on carbon nanotubes is motivated by the Dresselhaus
group's recent observation of the Raman spectrum from an isolated single wall
carbon nanotube. This allows study of the vibrational structure of one nanotube
and also provides detailed information on the electronic structure through the
resonance Raman effect. It also provides, through the trigonal warping effect on
the electronic levels, a unique determination of the structure of a single
nanotube, including its diameter and chirality, or the orientation of the carbon
hexagons with respect to the nanotube axis, expressed in terms of two integers
(n; m). This ability to determine (n; m) for an individual nanotube non-
destructively opens new research areas in carbon nanotube research, since many
of the physical properties of a nanotube and the theoretical calculations which
predict and explain physical phenomena are strongly dependent on these (n; m)
indices. The proposed carbon nanotube studies are aimed specifically at
resonance Raman spectroscopy studies of an isolated carbon nanotube. Each of the
known spectral features of these Raman spectra will be studied in depth,
including the radial breathing mode, the tangential G-band, the D-band, and
overtones and combination modes of these features. The dependence of the spectra
on nanotube diameter, chirality, semiconducting vs. metallic behavior,
temperature, and laser power level will be investigated at the single nanotube
level, from which comparisons will be made to observations on single wall carbon
nanotube bundles and to theoretical predictions. The bismuth nanowire system,
because of the small effective masses, small L-point band gap and small band
overlap of crystalline bismuth, offers opportunities to study novel quantum
phenomena on nanowires with wire diameters (~ 50 nm) that can presently be
fabricated by the PI's group. The approach is to focus on the semimetal to
semiconductor transition induced by decrease in nanowire diameter, and to use
optical and transport techniques, building on the observations already made
using temperature dependent resistance measurements. Also, changes in the
electronic structure as a function of nanowire diameter and antimony
concentration in the isoelectronic Bi(1-x) Sbx alloy system will be explored.
Particular attention will be given to wire diameter and Sb concentration where
10 different carrier pockets (1 T-point, 3 L-point and 6 H-point) are all
predicted to have a degenerate hole subband edge, thereby giving rise to a very
large electronic density of states. Physical phenomena associated with this
unusually high density of states will be explored by temperature dependent
transport and optical properties and the interpretation of these measurements
will be made using model calculations. %%% The project addresses basic research
issues in a topical area of materials science with high technological relevance.
An important feature of the program is the integration of research and education
through the training of students and postdoctoral researchers in a fundamentally
and technologically significant area. The project assists development of
technical, communication, and organizational/management skills in students
through unique educational experiences made possible by a highly collaborative
forefront research environment. ***