* 0116086
* MRI:  Acquisition of Automated DNA Sequencer for Undergraduate Research and Training
* BIO,DBI
* 12/15/2001,11/30/2005
* Nancy Kirkpatrick, Lake Superior State University
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 11/30/2005
* USD 113,200.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Evans at Lake Superior State University to
acquire an automated Genetic Analyzer. The equipment will advance faculty
research and undergraduate research training involving DNA sequencing and DNA
fingerprinting. The goals of the project are as follows: 1) to discover how
photoreceptor opsin gene expression changes during retinal development in a
variety of teleost fish species. 2) to characterize the cross-breeding
(hybridization) occurring between pink salmon and chinook salmon in the St.
Marys River. 3) to determine if specific DNA markers can establish whether Great
Lakes sea lamprey return to their natal streams to spawn. 4) to provide research
training in DNA sequencing for Biology and Clinical Laboratory Science majors,
and to train students majoring in Criminalistics, and Fisheries & Wildlife
Management in DNA fingerprinting techniques. Three faculty projects will
incorporate undergraduate research training: 1) Spectral sensitivity in the eye
is mainly determined by the opsin proteins in the photoreceptor cells of the
retina. In the winter flounder, these opsin proteins change as the animals go
through metamorphosis. Before a cell can produce a protein, messenger RNA (mRNA)
must be copied from the cell's DNA. At selected developmental stages, fish
retinas will be examined for opsin mRNA expression, photoreceptor morphology and
cell specific opsin expression. Using "polymerase chain reaction" (PCR), the
opsin genes will be amplified and then sequenced using the Genetic Analyzer.
Once sequences are identified, mRNA tags will be created to follow the change in
photoreceptor opsin as the fish retina transforms from larval to juvenile state.
2) Hybrids between Chinook and pink salmon are frequently encountered in the St
Marys River, but apparently these hybrids only result from crossbreeding between
Chinook females and pink salmon males. Why the hybrids are occurring this way is
unclear. Mitochondria are only inherited from the mother; thus DNA fingerprints
created using mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) will allow the maternal species of the
hybrids to be identified. Using the Genetic Analyzer, a database of mtDNA
fingerprints will be established for the chinook, pink and "pinook" salmon
hybrids to determine if the hybrid crosses are truly restricted. If so, further
studies will examine the mechanisms involved. 3) Sea lamprey are a serious
parasite on native Great Lakes fishes. Protein (isozyme) analysis has indicated
that lamprey return to their natal spawning grounds. The current study will test
the utility of using DNA fingerprints of lamprey populations to assess the gene
flow between populations. Population genetic surveys commonly create DNA
fingerprints using microsatellite DNA, which are unique regions of the DNA. Such
methods have been used for many fish populations, but not for lamprey. The
Genetic Analyzer will be used create DNA fingerprints for the lamprey using
microsatellite DNA markers. The results from these genetic analyses will be
compared with the previous isozyme studies to assess their usefulness for
monitoring lamprey life cycles. 4) Undergraduate students will be hired as
research assistants on these projects. In addition, several courses will
incorporate DNA sequencing for Biology and Clinical Laboratory Science majors
and DNA fingerprinting technology for Criminalistics, and Fisheries & Wildlife
Management majors. Both techniques will be available for students to use in
their senior thesis research. The project contributes to several fields of basic
science research. 1) The neural retina of the eye is an accessible part of the
central nervous system where structure and function are clearly related.
Understanding how the retina is "built" gives insight into how other neural
networks develop. The teleost fish retina is a typical vertebrate retina and
presents a useful model for understanding normal development (i.e., how cells
divide and differentiate into specific tissues). In addition, the change in
opsin gene expression in the winter flounder eye may answer questions of how
cell-cell interactions determine a cell's fate. 2) In their natural habitat,
there are few opportunities for Chinook and pink salmon to crossbreed, but in
the St. Marys River, the number of 'pinook' hybrids appear to be increasing. In
the laboratory, pink and chinook crosses have been made in both directions
suggesting no physiological barriers to hybridization. The presence of
restricted crossbreeding in the wild may be a result of behavioral barriers such
as territoriality or courtship rituals. 3) Sea lampreys are a major problem in
the Great Lakes, and a solution may reside in understanding their life history
and spawning behavior. Protein analysis indicates that lamprey do return to the
region of their birth to spawn. Use of microsatellite DNA markers to create DNA
fingerprints is a method that can be automated, allowing fast, routine analysis
of gene flow. A better understanding of lamprey population genetics may allow
these populations to be brought under control in the future. 4) Student
learning, by active participation, is central at Lake Superior State University,
and faculty consider their personal research interests to be a mechanism to
stimulate student curiosity. DNA technology is becoming increasingly prominent
in our everyday lives. It is important that we not only train students how to
perform these techniques for research careers, but also train them to recognize
when these methods are being applied and interpreted correctly.