* 0116864
* MRI: Development of a Biology Research Laboratory for Art and Communication Students
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Zafra Lerman, Columbia College
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Farmer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 98,699.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Zafra Lerman and Dr. Ken Ilio at the Science
Institute of Columbia College, Chicago to establish a state-of-the-art cell and
tissue culture laboratory. The proposed laboratory will support the research of
Dr. Kenneth Ilio (co-PI) on prostate development that he will be conducting with
students taking Science Institute courses. In particular, he is devising a
method to isolate stem cells, the most primitive cells in the adult prostate
membranous tissue. A major component of this research is cell culture,
particularly defining culture conditions that will shift differentiation of
candidate primitive stem cells to a more differentiated adult cell. The long-
term goal of this research is to establish both normal and transformed cell
lines of specific lineages that are derived from the stem cells of the prostate.
The differentiated cells that arise from stem cells could be valuable tools as
cell culture models for the study of prostate normal and abnormal development,
particularly cancer development. The cell culture lab complements existing
laboratories in the Science Institute, namely (1) the Science Visualization and
Communications Laboratory where students can produce 2-D and 3-D models of
scientific concepts and processes, and (2) an analytical laboratory where
students can perform and replicate sophisticated experiments similar to those
used in forensic and environmental investigations. The proposed laboratory will
service the cell culture needs of all the biology courses taught at the Science
Institute. Students will gain hands-on exposure in and basic understanding of
cell biology in both microscopic and molecular levels. In addition, acquisition
of the cell culture laboratory will allow Chicago public school teachers in the
Science Institute's network to conduct projects during the summer as well as
during the academic year. These research projects will enhance the teachers'
instructional methods and materials in their classrooms. The benefits of this
curriculum to the general public are substantial by providing a strong science
background to Columbia College's television, radio, journalism, education and
other students, and to teachers in the Chicago public schools, the Science
Institute is positively influencing the education of millions of people through
these professionals. Providing these communication and education students with
first-hand research experience will guarantee that an accurate and positive
image of science will be communicated to the public, and will dramatically
improve the public understanding of science. It is anticipated that the exposure
of teachers to this proposed facility and to the creative methods of teaching
developed by the Science Institute will increase the number of students seeking
careers in the sciences. Project results will be reported in professional
conferences and in scientific journals, in addition to the print and electronic
media that regularly report on programs of the Science Institute.