* 0116895
* Studies of Spatial and Temporal Integration of Differing Chromaticities by the Human Visual System
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2006
* Eugene Switkes, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Martha Flanders
* 07/31/2006
* USD 275,415.00

Switkes Lay Abstract (0116895)

"Studies of Spatial and Temporal Integration of Differing Chromaticities"

In the normal visual environment spatial contours may be defined by variations
along a number of stimulus dimensions, e.g. luminance, chromaticity, texture,
velocity, and depth. During the past three decades, studies of early visual
processing have characterized and compared the ability of the human visual
system to extract individual spatial features (lines, edges, grating components)
defined by such variations. Subsequent steps of visual processing must integrate
individual features to attain the global perception of form. This grant
application describes a series of psychophysical experiments which investigate
aspects of this mid-level visual processing involving spatial, temporal, and
chromatic information. Similarities in the color or luminance contrast of
features serve as an important basis for segregating objects into differing
perceptual groupings; however, lighting and other factors can render variations
in luminance or color among the elements comprising an individual object. The
current proposal considers patterns whose elements are defined by luminance
contrast or by color contrast and investigates the ability of the human visual
system to perceive form and motion when integrating elemental features differing
in chromaticity or luminance. In addition to analyzing integration of features
in mid-level spatiotemporal processing, the proposed experiments will also
investigate the mechanisms of 'third-stage' chromatic processing. While many
phenomena involving color vision can be rationalized in terms of receptor
activation (first-stage) and retinal/LGN opponent processes (second-stage), both
electrophysiological and psychophysical studies are unclear regarding further
transformations of color information in visual cortex. Experiments in this
proposal will measure our ability detect correlations among individual features
both as a function of their differing chromaticities and their average
chromaticities. Comparative performance along various chromatic axes in three-
dimensional color space will be analyzed in terms of possible third-stage
mechanisms involved in processing chromatic information. Three general studies
are proposed: i) the nature of contrast matching for patterns defined by
luminance or color variations; ii) the ability to integrate spatial correlations
where the individual elements differ in color/luminance contrast; and iii) the
ability to integrate in the time domain features which differ in chromaticity.
The goal of the first set of studies is to establish a basic metric for the
perceived salience of patterns differing in color/luminance; the experiments
involve contrast matching of sinusoidal gratings. In the second set of studies
translational and rotational Glass patterns with luminance/chromaticity
variations both within and among dot-pair elements will be utilized to
investigate the degree of "color-blindness" (or not) of mechanisms which
integrate the local features in the perception of global patterns. The third
area includes experiments probing two types of temporal integration across
chromaticities: the visual system's ability to fuse two temporally noncoincident
flashes which fall along differing chromatic axes and its ability to detect
motion from the spatial and temporal displacement of dots whose chromaticity is
altered during the spatiotemporal displacement. The three studies are linked by
the question can the visual system integrate information initially segregated by
differing second-stage chromatic mechanisms? The proposal addresses questions of
fundamental importance in gaining an understanding of the linkage between brain
mechanisms and visual behavior. The work is also closely associated with the
PI's efforts in education and outreach. Techniques, equipment, and results
associated with the scientific goals of this proposal will be utilized in
activities such as the NSF funded Center for Adaptive Optics/COSMOS course
"Photons, Proteins, and Perception" which the PI has organized for 2001; a
course aimed at allowing high school students from underrepresented demographics
to be exposed to a university science environment
(http://www.chemistry.ucsc.edu/COSVIS/).