* 0116416
* MRI: Acquisition of a MALDI/FT-ICR mass spectrometer for multidisciplinary research
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Brian Linton, Bowdoin College
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Kuczkowski
* 08/31/2005
* USD 280,530.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, the
Department of Chemistry at Bowdoin College will acquire a Fourier transform ion
cyclotron resonance (FT-ICR) mass spectrometer equipped with external matrix-
assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) and electron ionization (EI)
sources. Faculty at Bowdoin College, Bates College and the University of
Southern Maine will have access to this equipment, which will enhance research
in a number of areas including a) studies of gas-phase ion-molecule reactions;
b) identification of biological, polymeric, and organometallic synthetic
targets; and c) characterization of samples that include neurons from marine
invertebrates, plant pigment extracts, soil samples, and oil residues from
archaeological collections. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mass spectrometry (MS) is a
technique used to probe intimate structural details and to obtain the molecular
compositions of a vast array of organic, bioorganic, and organometallic
molecules. This instrument will serve as a vehicle to educate students and
faculty about the new technologies of MALDI and FT-ICR mass spectrometry. In
addition, because this instrumental technique is well suited for the analysis of
a wide range of samples, the FT-ICR will catalyze new approaches to research and
new research activities in disciplines such as neuroscience, ecology, biology,
environmental studies and archaeology.