* 0116047
* Three-dimensional Surface Corrosion Growth Model for Materials Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2001,04/30/2005
* Mathew Palakal, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Yip-Wah Chung
* 04/30/2005
* USD 270,845.00

0116047&lt;br/&gt;Pidaparti&lt;br/&gt;Structural materials of the 21st century
will have to meet increasingly demanding standards for performance and life. The
strength and integrity of a structural component deteriorates mainly due to
corrosion and fatigue along with other failure mechanisms in structural
materials. Among various aspects of corrosion, pitting corrosion is a complex
process, and is a major problem in many engineering industries. Pitting
corrosion mechanism usually initiate at the micro/nano-structure level and the
details of the mechanisms depend on the material composition, electrolyte and
other environmental conditions. Even though much effort has been put into
assessing the material loss due to corrosion over the years, the mechanical
characteristics and its relationship at multiple levels due to pitting corrosion
are not yet known. The material loss information along with the topology and its
relationship at various material scales are necessary for better understanding
and designing of corrosion resistant materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of the proposed research is to develop a three-dimensional corrosion
growth model to aid in the assessment and design of materials and their effect
on structural integrity. Corrosion growth model will be developed as a discrete
dynamical system based on cellular automata approach. This approach incorporates
both macroscopic (corrosion pit distribution and the material loss) and
microscopic (chemical interaction mechanisms) scales of the corrosion process
into the model. Mechanisms involving both physical and mechanistic basis will be
used to obtain rules in developing corrosion growth models. The developed models
will be tested and validated using real data by collaborating with Naval Surface
Warfare Center, CRANE division, Indiana, and with the data obtained from
Raytheon Systems Company, Texas. A three-dimensional visualization software will
be developed to visualize the corrosion growth data in real time to see the
corrosion growth process. Algorithms developed through this project will be
directly used in materials and simulation courses in Engineering and Computer
Science disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will greatly
help to understand the corrosion growth process in materials. The 3D
visualization capability will provide insight into better understanding of the
characteristics of corrosion growth process, and may lead to the development of
more efficient corrosion growth and prediction algorithms. A fundamental
understanding of the macro- and micro-level corrosion growth models based on
local rules will provide valuable information and tools for designing corrosion
resistant materials for a variety of engineering applications. The proposed
approach will provide a general solution to structural corrosion in materials so
that it can be scaled up to other structural materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;