* 0116966
* X-ray Instrumentation for the Physics Research and Teaching Laboratory
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Anne Tabor-Morris, Georgian Court University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 08/31/2002
* USD 198,231.00

X-ray Absorption Spectroscopy and X-ray Diffraction are two scientific
techniques that assist scientists in understanding the atomic structure of
crystals and hence better understand the macroscopic properties of these
crystals, such as growth size, strength and color. Both techniques are needed to
verify the accuracy of the data. X-ray absorption data is taken at Brookhaven
National Laboratory at the National Synchrotron Light Source. This award from
the Major Research Instrumentation Program will allow Georgian Court College to
purchase an X-ray Diffractometer and an X-ray Fluorescence Spectrometry
instrument to be used at the home institution. This will support an ongoing
research project currently funded by Research Corporation. The project
specifically seeks to understand the important role that small amounts of
elements have on the crystal hydroxyapaptite. This crystal is important because
it is the key mineral in human bone. Success in understanding the role of these
elements may lead to the better ability to grow new bones for people, as well as
other uses. Undergraduates involved in this research who have had the
opportunity to travel to Brookhaven National Laboratory will have the
opportunity to finish the analysis of the samples at their home institution.

X-ray Absorption Spectroscopy and X-ray Diffraction are two scientific
techniques that assist scientists in understanding the atomic structure of
crystals and hence better understand the macroscopic properties of these
crystals, such as growth size, strength and color. Both techniques are needed to
verify the accuracy of the data. X-ray absorption data is taken at Brookhaven
National Laboratory at the National Synchrotron Light Source. This award from
the Major Research Instrumentation Program will allow Georgian Court College to
purchase an X-ray Diffractometer and an X-ray Fluorescence Spectrometry
instrument to be used at the home institution. This will support an ongoing
research project currently funded by Research Corporation. The project
specifically seeks to understand the important role that small amounts of
elements have on the crystal hydroxyapaptite. This crystal is important because
it is the key mineral in human bone. Success in understanding the role of these
elements may lead to the better ability to grow new bones for people, as well as
other uses. Undergraduates involved in this research who have had the
opportunity to travel to Brookhaven National Laboratory will have the
opportunity to finish the analysis of the samples at their home institution.