* 0116530
* Acquisition of an Energy Filtering Transmission Electron Microscope for Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Mandayam Parthasarathy, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2003
* USD 600,000.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program will allow Cornell
University to acquire an Energy Filtering Transmission Electron Microscope
(EFTEM). The new capabilities for atomic scale imaging provided by the LEO 922
OMEGA, particularly the abilities to rapidly obtain element-specific image
contrast and to image thick samples at low beam energies, will enable an
extraordinarily broad range of research. These research projects are led by
principal investigators from four Colleges and eleven departments at Cornell
University. It will also be available for use by outside collaborators and
users, academic, government or industrial organizations. The research topics
range from studies of complex polymeric, ceramic and metallic materials to
biological cells, their internal structures and metal ion concentrations.
Central to meeting these research goals is the training of many post-doctoral,
graduate and undergraduate students in the use and exploitation of such a
powerful research tool. Since it will be only the second machine of its type in
the US, this will be a fantastic and almost unique opportunity to carry out
frontier research. It is clear that the EFTEM will have a large institutional
impact and will be an important resource for the external community of
scientists and students who will be visitors and users, some of whom will be
coming primarily to use the EFTEM. It will further enable us to attract and
retain the best faculty and students, including women and minorities.
&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Major Research Instrumentation
program will allow Cornell University to acquire an Energy Filtering
Transmission Electron Microscope (EFTEM). The new capabilities for atomic scale
imaging provided by the LEO 922 OMEGA, particularly the abilities to rapidly
obtain element-specific image contrast and to image thick samples at low beam
energies, will enable an extraordinarily broad range of research. These research
projects are led by principal investigators from four Colleges and eleven
Departments at Cornell University. It will also be available for use by outside
collaborators and users, academic, government or industrial organizations. The
research topics range from studies of complex polymeric, ceramic and metallic
materials to biological cells, their internal structures and metal ion
concentrations. Central to meeting these research goals is the training of many
post-doctoral, graduate and undergraduate students in the use and exploitation
of such a powerful research tool. This will be only the second machine of its
type in the US, this will provide a unique opportunity to carry out frontier
research. The EFTEM will have a large institutional impact and will be an
important resource for the external community of scientists and students who
will be visitors and users, some of whom will be coming primarily to use the
EFTEM. It will further enable Cornell University to attract and retain the best
faculty and students, including women and minorities.&lt;br/&gt;