* 0116339
* Development of a Low-Temp  Scanning Tunneling Microscopy Facility with High-Resolution Electronic, Vibrational and Magnetic Spectroscopy Capabilities for Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Ludwig Bartels, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2004
* USD 300,000.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program supports the
development of a high-resolution low-temperature scanning tunneling microscope
(STM) for research and education in surface processing at the University of
California-Riverside (UCR). The research apparatus is based on an STM with a
temperature range between 10K and 350K. It will be set up to allows for in-situ
sample excitation with laser pulses and electrons of several tens of
electronvolts to 1kilo electronvolts energy. It will be used for the structural
and spectroscopic analysis of adsorbates and films before and after their
excitation similar to presently used or in the near future relevant surface
process: direct optical excitation as it is used in optical lithography; optical
excitation of the surface electronic temperatures to several hundred K for a
time span of a few ps as induced by (ultra-)short laser pulses; excitation by
impinging electrons of various energies as it is used in electron-beam
lithography; excitation by low energy electrons from the tunneling current. The
low-temperature capability of the instrument will permit to freeze out the
reaction intermediates created by the various excitation modes. They are thus
available for structural and spectroscopic analysis by STM. A comparison between
the resultant products offers important insight into the elementary steps of the
used reactions. The proposed instrument will be incorporated into the
educational program of UCR in the context of an introductory course to
semiconductor processing offered by the PI for senior undergraduate and graduate
students of chemistry, physics and engineering. Additionally, it will be
available to graduate students for their research projects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program
supports the development of a high-resolution low-temperature scanning tunneling
microscope (STM) for research and education in surface processing at the
University of California-Riverside (UCR). The research apparatus is based on an
STM with a temperature range between 10K and 350K. It will be set up to allows
for in-situ sample excitation with laser pulses and electrons of several tens of
electronvolts to 1kilo electronvolts energy. It will be used for the structural
and spectroscopic analysis of adsorbates and films before and after their
excitation similar to presently used or in the near future relevant surface
process: direct optical excitation as it is used in optical lithography; optical
excitation of the surface electronic temperatures to several hundred K for a
time span of a few ps as induced by (ultra-)short laser pulses; excitation by
impinging electrons of various energies as it is used in electron-beam
lithography; excitation by low energy electrons from the tunneling current. The
low-temperature capability of the instrument will permit to freeze out the
reaction intermediates created by the various excitation modes. They are thus
available for structural and spectroscopic analysis by STM. A comparison between
the resultant products offers important insight into the elementary steps of the
used reactions. The proposed instrument will be incorporated into the
educational program of UCR in the context of an introductory course to
semiconductor processing offered by the PI for senior undergraduate and graduate
students of chemistry, physics and engineering. Additionally, it will be
available to graduate students for their research projects.&lt;br/&gt;