* 0116773
* MRI:  Acquisition of Instrumentation for Measurement of Trace Gas Fluxes in the Arizona Highlands
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* John Herring, Prescott College
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Farmer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 183,251.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Jack Herring and Dr. Tim Crews at Prescott
College. The sophisticated research instrumentation provided by this grant will
allow measurement of the exchange of variety of trace gases between the
atmosphere and the land surface. The primary goal of the research is to better
understand the cycling of nitrogen in the highlands of central Arizona. A
secondary goal is to study the relationship between the cycling of nitrogen and
carbon in these ecosystems. Additionally, the instruments will play a central
role in training students at Prescott College in these analytical techniques.
Initially, the instrumentation will be installed in chaparral, an important
plant community in the southwestern U.S. for which there is little information
on the dynamics of nitrogen cycling. Chaparral is interesting because it has
among the highest, if not the highest, density of nitrogen-fixing woody plants
in the United States. Due to the potentially high inputs of nitrogen via
biological fixation, and an annual precipitation regime that favors extreme
drying and wetting events, it is suspected that the interior chaparral ecosystem
may support at least periodically high to very high rates of nitrogen oxide
emissions. Specifically, this equipment will be used to make continuous, long-
term measurements of exchanges of NO2, NO + NO2 (NOx), and N2O using a laser-
based technique. The instrument tower will also be equipped with a special
device for measuring vertical winds and a device for measuring CO2 and H2O
concentrations. In addition to these measurements of gas
exchange,&lt;br/&gt;supporting short-term chamber studies of N2O emissions by
gas chromatography and chamber measurements of NO emissions will be conducted.
These chamber studies will be conducted both in chaparral and in other
ecosystems that are characterized by human alteration of the N cycle; these
include fire-treated ponderosa woodlands, arid agricultural land and livestock-
grazed arid grasslands. The results will guide the use of the instrumentation
when the chaparral study is completed.&lt;br/&gt; As scientists from many
disciplines work toward a better understanding of the processes underlying
global change, it becomes increasingly clear that the knowledge of the
interactions between living organisms and the atmosphere needs to be improved.
The linkage between nitrogen cycling and global change is both direct (due to
the greenhouse effect of N2O emissions) and indirect (due to the effects of
nitrogen availability on the net absorption or release of key greenhouse gases
CO2 and CH4). A good understanding of these ecosystem dynamics is key
to&lt;br/&gt;understanding the potential for the biosphere to absorb the CO2
currently being released by fossil fuel combustion as well as to understanding
how ecosystems will respond to the many environmental changes they are now being
exposed to. Such information is vital to policymakers who are currently
wrestling with issues such as that of global climate change. The answers
to&lt;br/&gt;these questions will only come from extensive networks of such
instrumentation; this will necessitate the training of large numbers of
scientists in the specialized techniques involved in these measurements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;