* 0116425
* Analysis and Control of Time-Dependent Translating Media for High Speed, High Precision Mechanical Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Weidong Zhu, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* mario rotea
* 08/31/2005
* USD 230,309.00

PI's name: Weidong Zhu&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Maryland, Baltimore
County&lt;br/&gt;Proposal number: 0116425&lt;br/&gt;Proposal title: Analysis and
Control of Time-Dependent Translating Media for High Speed, High Precision
Mechanical Systems&lt;br/&gt;Project abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Translating
media model such high-speed slender members as magnetic tapes, conveyer belts,
transmission chains, and transport cables. While much is known about the
dynamics of translating media with constant length and transport speed, the
dynamic behavior of translating media with variable length and/or transport
speed is not well understood. This proposal addresses new analytical and
experimental techniques to analyze and control the vibration of translating
media with variable length and/or transport speed. A unified method that differs
from classical parametric excitation approach will be employed to analyze the
stability of both systems. Analytical and computational methods will be
developed to predict their free and forced responses. Active and parametric
control methodologies will be explored to dissipate their energies of vibration.
In conjunction with the experimental investigation, a novel scaled model will be
developed for a high-rise, high-speed elevator. Experiments will be conducted on
the model to validate the theoretical predictions. In collaboration with Otis
Elevator Company, the methodologies developed for translating media with
variable length will be applied to the design of high-rise elevators. The
developments for translating media with variable speed will be applied to
wiresaw manufacturing processes and magnetic tape drive systems. The success of
this research will enhance our fundamental understanding in the general field of
dynamic systems, as well as meet the immediate goal of enabling higher operating
speeds in a variety of technological systems featuring translating
media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;