* 0116836
* RUI: Establishment of a high-density event-related potential laboratory at an undergraduate college for the study of cognitive neuroscience
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Richard Lewis, Pomona College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2004
* USD 134,557.00

This grant supports the establishment of a 128-channel event-related potential
(ERP) laboratory at an undergraduate institution, Pomona College, in order to
investigate the spatial and temporal dimensions of brain activity associated
with cognition. In doing so, this project meets the criteria for the NSF
Cognitive Neuroscience initiative. Three projects will be conducted during the
grant period. The first is an exploration of how spatial and temporal patterns
of brain activity during the initial encoding of information are related to
subsequent source memory judgments. Specifically, we will investigate the
relationship between encoding event-related potentials during and subsequent
source memory judgments, including temporal order, spatial location, and
recollection versus familiarity judgments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second line
of research will investigate the extent to which stable individual differences
in psychological and biological measures of stress are predictive of memory
functioning and concomitant ERP activity. We are specifically interested in
assessing whether individuals with high chronic stress will have impaired memory
functioning and whether this will be evidenced in a decreased old/new amplitude
difference for the explicit but not implicit memory
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The third line of research will expose a
diverse group of students to the use of electrophysiological imaging methods to
explore issues from the classic psychological literature. We are designing a
student research project to investigate an issue of particular interest to
underrepresented students. Specifically, we will use high-density ERP recordings
to investigate how brain activity may be associated with cognitive processing of
information related to the individualism-collectivism dimension of culture. The
proposed research will serve as a model for how psychological issues can be
explored using high-density ERP recordings. We anticipate that the knowledge
gained from applying this technique to psychological problems will encourage the
use of ERP techniques among other psychology and neuroscience faculty in the
future.