* 0116213
* MRI:  Acquisition of Equipment to Support Lightwave and Microwave Research
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* S. Prasad Gogineni, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 08/31/2002
* USD 225,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;We propose an equipment grant to enhance ongoing and future lightwave
communications and&lt;br/&gt;radar remote sensing research and education at the
University of Kansas. The instrumentation&lt;br/&gt;we propose to acquire
includes various lightwave components, a network analyzer, a
portable&lt;br/&gt;spectrum analyzer, two arbitrary waveform generators, a high-
speed data acquisition system, and&lt;br/&gt;a high-speed oscilloscope. The
lightwave components includes lasers with integrated electro-
absorption&lt;br/&gt;modulators, high-power erbium-doped fiber amplifiers
(EDFA), a semiconductor&lt;br/&gt;optical amplifier (SOA), a 35-GHz photo
receiver with amplifier, fiber-optic delay lines,
optical&lt;br/&gt;splitters/combiners, an extended DWDM-band tunable laser, and
pump laser diodes for a Raman&lt;br/&gt;amplifier.&lt;br/&gt;We propose to use
the lightwave equipment to upgrade our 10 Gb/s test beds to 40 Gb/s
to&lt;br/&gt;support ongoing and future research activities. We will use the
high-speed oscilloscope and&lt;br/&gt;spectrum analyzer for testing and
calibrating our existing radars as well as the new ones
being&lt;br/&gt;developed for glacial ice studies and as prototypes for Mars
observation. We will use the&lt;br/&gt;arbitrary waveform generators as flexible
signal sources to support activities related to ongoing&lt;br/&gt;efforts on the
development of a pulse-compression LIDAR and also investigating
optimized&lt;br/&gt;waveforms for various remote sensing applications. We
propose to use the network analyzer&lt;br/&gt;primarily as a dedicated source
and receiver for our antenna testing range, which is needed to&lt;br/&gt;support
our radar development activities.&lt;br/&gt;In lightwave communications
research, the 40 Gb/s per optical channel is the next signaling
rate&lt;br/&gt;to be deployed to meet society's insatiable communication needs.
Extensive experimental&lt;br/&gt;testing is required to study and evaluate the
many questions critical to the implementation of this&lt;br/&gt;signaling rate.
The proposed upgrades to our testbed will allow us to evaluate the
performance&lt;br/&gt;of components, subsystems, and systems at this signaling
rate. To launch and then detect&lt;br/&gt;40 Gb/s signals for system evaluation,
short-pulse lasers, power dividers and combiners, and&lt;br/&gt;wide-bandwidth
photodetectors are needed. In addition, to manage fiber nonlinearities for
these&lt;br/&gt;increased signaling rates, distributed signal amplification with
Raman amplifiers will need to be&lt;br/&gt;employed.&lt;br/&gt;Three ongoing
projects in remote sensing will benefit significantly from the proposed
test&lt;br/&gt;equipment: (1) measurement of ice thickness and accumulation rate
over the Greenland ice sheet;&lt;br/&gt;(2) design and development of a radar
prototype for Mars; and (3) design and development of a&lt;br/&gt;pulse
compression LIDAR for a future satellite mission. The test equipment will allow
us to&lt;br/&gt;improve our existing coherent radar depth sounder for obtaining
ice thickness data over a few&lt;br/&gt;outlet glaciers that are thinning and
for which no ice thickness data are available. The ice&lt;br/&gt;thickness data
are essential to the study of the dynamics of these glaciers. The Mars
radar&lt;br/&gt;development involves design tradeoffs in modulation waveform,
frequency, sidelobe levels, and&lt;br/&gt;antenna size. The test equipment will
contribute to testing and evaluating an optimized&lt;br/&gt;prototype radar for
a future Mars lander or/and orbiter, as well as investigating the use of single-
sideband&lt;br/&gt;modulation techniques to improve the sensitivity of our pulse
compression LIDAR.&lt;br/&gt;Currently 17 graduate students, seven undergraduate
students, two post-doctoral research&lt;br/&gt;engineers, and five faculty are
involved in the ongoing research projects. We anticipate
similar&lt;br/&gt;numbers of students and research associates to be involved in
future lightwave communications&lt;br/&gt;and remote sensing research at this
institution. Thus the proposed equipment is a significant&lt;br/&gt;contribution
to the research and education mission of the University of Kansas.