* 0116099
* Acquisition and Development of a Prototype Instrumented City
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Ray Pethtel, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2005
* USD 650,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;There is an urgent need to develop tools for evaluation of
the efficiency, energy, environmental, and safety impacts of traffic flow
improvement projects, including Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) and
Intelligent Vehicle Initiative (IVI) alternatives. The development and
validation of such tools requires comprehensive field data. This proposal
attempts to develop a state-of-the-art real-life and comprehensive data
collection environment that can be utilized for the development, validation, and
testing of these highly demanded evaluation tools, and that can also be used as
a test bed for testing emerging communication, traffic management, and traveler
information systems. This test facility can set the stage for the US to
establish its lead in field traffic, energy, and environmental data collection
and the development and validation of transportation modeling
tools.&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this Major Research Instrumentation (MRI)
acquisition project is to develop a comprehensive instrumented test bed in the
Town of Blacksburg to achieve the following objectives:&lt;br/&gt;1. Develop a
real-life test facility that can be used for the evaluation and enhancement of
traffic flow theory. The test facility will also be utilized to develop,
enhance, and test alternative traffic control strategies, as well as other ITS
and IVI alternatives.&lt;br/&gt;2. Develop a database that can be utilized for
research on alternative means of disseminating real-time traveler information to
the public.&lt;br/&gt;3. Develop a real-life test facility for enhancing and
developing tools for the evaluation of network-wide energy and environmental
impacts of operational-level transportation projects.&lt;br/&gt;4. Develop a
real-life test facility for enhancing and developing tools for quantifying the
noise impacts of operational-level transportation projects.&lt;br/&gt;5. Develop
a test facility to evaluate emerging ITS technologies that can benefit transit
operations.&lt;br/&gt;6. Develop a test bed for the evaluation of emerging
surveillance and communication technologies.&lt;br/&gt;7. Develop a unique
educational tool that will allow practitioners, undergraduate students, and
graduate students to access and analyze real-life traffic data.&lt;br/&gt;In
achieving these objectives, surveillance technology will be installed at a total
of 20 out of 38 intersections in the Blacksburg area. Funding will also be
allocated to purchase on-board vehicle emission instrumentation, a fully
equipped emission measurement van, in-situ emission measurement sensors, noise
measurement instrumentation, transit vehicle passenger counting instrumentation,
instrumentation for a Traffic Management Center, and the use of US Wireless
geolocation technology to track vehicles. In particular, the proposed
instrumentation will be added to the use of an existing state-of-the-art Smart
Road test facility.&lt;br/&gt;With the requested instrumentation, multi-modal
transportation research will be conducted to develop modeling tools that are
reflective of real-world driving conditions. This effort includes research on
vehicle acceleration behavior, car-following, lane changing and lane selection
behavior at signalized intersections, as well as merge, diverge, and weaving
sections. In the area of ITS and IVI systems, research will be conducted on
emergency vehicle pre-emption and transit priority, on the evaluation of
technologies that can benefit transit operations such as automatic passenger
counting and automatic vehicle tracking and display, and on the dissemination of
traffic information using web-based and in-vehicle traveler information systems.
The Instrumented City will also serve as a test bed for the development,
evaluation, and testing of geolocation algorithms using wireless technology.
Other research will involve the development of comprehensive vehicle fuel
consumption and emission databases, the development and validation of
statistical tailpipe fuel consumption and emission models, and the modeling of
emission dispersion.&lt;br/&gt;The proposal involves collaboration with four
public agencies including the Virginia Department of Transportation (VDOT), the
Town of Blacksburg Department of Public Works, and Blacksburg Transit. In
addition, the proposal involves collaboration with a number of private agencies
including CleanAir Technologies and US Wireless. Further collaboration will be
sought between Virginia Tech and the University of Virginia's Smart Travel
Laboratory to collect and exchange data in Blacksburg, the Washington DC Area,
and the Hampton Roads Area. &lt;br/&gt;