* 0116398
* MRI:  A Networked Scanning Probe Microscope for Research Training
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* James Vesenka, University of New England
* Continuing Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2004
* USD 140,600.00

This is award from the Major Instrumentation program and the NSF/EPSCOR program
to the University of New England is for the acquisition of a networked scanning
probe microscope (SPM). The instrument will support undergraduate research and
training in the fields of biophysics, biochemistry and microbiology. The SPM
will provide the university with a multi-disciplinary research facility that
will help to bridge the artificial divide between life sciences and the physical
sciences. The SPM will support several research topics such as the study of the
growth process of biofilms, the study of the structure and property relationship
of metallocarbhedrenes, growth, kinetics and structure of novel four stranded G
-wires, and modeling and self-assembly. Students will have networked access to
the SPM. The award will provide research and training opportunity making
students from this EPSCoR state more competitive in the flourishing area of
biotechnology and semiconductor industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is award
from the Major Instrumentation program and the NSF/EPSCOR program to the
University of New England is for the acquisition of a networked scanning probe
microscope (SPM). The instrument will support undergraduate research and
training in the fields of biophysics, biochemistry and microbiology. The SPM
will provide the university with a multi-disciplinary research facility that
will help to bridge the artificial divide between life sciences and the physical
sciences. Students will have networked access to the SPM. The award will provide
research and training opportunity making students from this EPSCoR state more
competitive in the flourishing area of biotechnology and semiconductor
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;