* 0116006
* Ground Failure of Adapzari's Fine Grain Soils and Its Interaction with Building Response
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Jonathan Bray, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 09/30/2005
* USD 238,037.00

Documenting and learning from observations from major earthquakes are invaluable
to advancing the state-of-practice in earthquake engineering. Adapazari suffered
the largest level of gross building damage and life loss of any city affected by
the Kocaeli, Turkey, Earthquake of August 17, 1999, and subsequent major
shaking.

The building damage patterns and widespread ground failure in Adapazari provide
exceptional field performance data on critical seismic geotechnical phenomena.
Because the soils and earthquake shaking in Adapazari are representative of many
cases in the United States, the lessons learned from this earthquake are
directly applicable to earthquake hazard mitigation in the United State.
Adapazari provides an excellent opportunity to evaluate the effect of soil
liquefaction and ground softening on the built environment. The effects of
liquefaction included settlement, tilting, bearing failure, and lateral shifting
of some buildings. The seismic interaction between buildings and softened
foundation soils is an especially important feature in Adapazari, as ground
failure was more severe adjacent to and under buildings.

The primary goals of this research are to analyze the relationship between
ground failure and building damage and to assess the cyclic response of soils
with significant fines (both plastic and non-plastic). Well-documented case
histories of building performance at sites undergoing severe and minor ground
failure will be developed through field and laboratory testing. These case
histories will then be back analyzed to evaluate the ability to numerically
simulate the associated physical processes. Soil-structure interaction analyses
are required to evaluate the relationship between building response and ground
response on ground and building performance. The PI has formed collaborative
research associations with Dr. Turan Durgunoglu of Bogazici Univ. and Dr. Akin
Onalp of Sakarya Univ., both of whom will be involved in this project.

This research project is a follow-on to a one-year NSF-sponsored study that
documented key observations of building and ground performance in Adapazari.

Interim and final results of this study will be made widely available through
relevant Internet sites to ensure that all researchers and practitioners have
access to the collected data. These site are the Geotechnical Earthquake
Engineering Server (GEES) of the University of Southern California at
<http://rccg03.usc.edu>, the Pacific Earthquake Engineering Research Center at
<http://peer.berkeley.edu/>, and the EERC website at
<http://www.eerc.berkeley.edu>. The release of interim data reports will be
announced using the GEOTECH and USUCGER mailing lists. The final report will be
released as a web-based report that will be available as an Adobe Acrobat file
downloadable from the Internet.