* 0116833
* SGER:  High Resolution Imaging of Cancer Cells with Light Scattering Spectroscopy
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2003
* Lev Perelman, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 07/31/2003
* USD 119,832.00

0116833&lt;br/&gt;Perelman&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of the proposed
exploratory study is to develop a novel high resolution spectroscopic imaging
technique that utilizes light, elastically scattered from epithelial tissues in
near backward direction, to extract information about macroscopic tissue
composition as well as tissue structure at the cellular and sub-cellular scale.
The specific aims are as follows:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Experimental system.
Develop an experimental high resolution imaging system for imaging superficial
layers of turbid media, which uses both spectral and angular information to
study tissue phantoms, cells, and sub-cellular organelles. Develop experimental
techniques capable of separating single scattered and multiply scattered light
and extracting morphological information from tissue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2.
Modeling. Develop mathematical models that describe light scattering from
individual sub-cellular organelles, cells and extra-cellular tissues. Identify
spectroscopic signatures of sub-cellular organelles, and develop a mathematical
procedure for extracting physical properties of those organelles, such as size
distribution, refractive indices and absorption
coefficients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Experimental studies. Study wavelength and
angular dependence of single and multiple scattering from individual cells, sub-
cellular organelles, and cell monolayers. Develop methods based on spatial
distribution of scattered light to obtain information about degree of
organization/disorganization of superficial tissues and use this information to
reconstruct structural images of tissue on a cellular scale.&lt;br/&gt;