* 0116520
* Acquisition of a PALM Laser Trap Microscope
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Roger Sloboda, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Farmer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 231,081.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr Roger D. Sloboda at Dartmouth College to purchase
a Microscope for laser based micromanipulation and collection of living or fixed
cells and manipulation of subcellular particles. This instrument will provide
new capabilities for the Department of Biological Sciences at Dartmouth, with
respect to faculty and graduate student research and undergraduate instruction.
The capabilities of this microscope are currently unavailable to this group of
faculty anywhere else within a reasonable distance in New Hampshire or Vermont.
The microscope uses laser-based technology under computer control to move,
manipulate, and collect cells and subcelluar parts of cells for further
analysis. The characteristics of design and ease of use indicate this microscope
will bring these capabilities to the students and faculty at Dartmouth. The
faculty that will make use of this instrument are members of the Molecular and
Cellular Biology graduate program, and they cover in their research the
biological spectrum from yeast to higher plants and animals. All of the ongoing
research projects are amenable to approaches using modern, computer enhanced
microscope image acquisition and analysis techniques. Thus, this instrumentation
provides a unifying focus for the research efforts of the user group. Some
specific examples of the projects at Dartmouth that will benefit from this
instrumentation here are studies on: membrane bound vesicle trafficking during
lipid homeostasis, formation and maintenance of the poles of the mitotic
spindle, the cell component responsible for separating the chromosomes at cell
division, the effect of endogenous and exogenous steroids on early embryological
development, the axoplasmic transport of membrane bound vesicles in neurons,
changes in cellular autofluorescence as an indicator of future cancerous growth
of cells in culture, and the role of specific nuclear proteins in cell division.
This brief list highlights just a few of the projects that will immediately
benefit from the awarded equipment. High resolution light microscopy and
enhanced visualization technologies have long been the focus of faculty in the
Biological Sciences at Dartmouth, and this award is coincident with the
historical development of this department over the past three decades. The
acquisition of a microscope capable of laser ablation, laser based cell
isolation, and laser trap manipulations of cells and subcellular particles will
complement nicely the current instrumentation and greatly improve the research
and training environment for the faculty and for the graduate and undergraduate
students in this department. The laser microscope will enhance the research
productivity of the faculty as well as the training environment for the
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students at Dartmouth. Thus, the
research enterprise in the Biological Sciences at Dartmouth will be
significantly enhanced.

