* 0116075
* Acquisition of an Environmental Scanning Electron Microscope for Undergraduate Education in Materials Characterization
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2004
* Bahram Roughani, Kettering University
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 07/31/2004
* USD 299,867.00

Abstract

The research equipment being acquired through this grant is an environmental
scanning electron microscope (ESEM) with analytical accessories and sub-stages.
Modern ESEMs offer more flexibility than conventional scanning electron
microscopes in obtaining qualitative and analytical results for a wider variety
of applications. The system to be acquired will combine high vacuum, low vacuum
and gaseous environment operation to support a wide array of research projects.
The ESEM will permit examination of non-conducting, contaminated, hydrated and
even living samples, which will in turn promote a greater degree of cross-
disciplinary research. Standard secondary and back-scatter electron detection
can be used in high vacuum mode for conventional operation or low vacuum mode
for low overview magnifications. These detectors are also compatible with
gaseous environments allowing for examination of hydrated or solvent-based
samples. They are also tolerant of elevated temperatures making examination of
samples at temperatures up to 1000 C possible. The microscope's capability can
be further improved by adding a x-ray detector for energy dispersive
spectroscopy. The overall system will be integrated with several sub-stages as
well. These sub-stages allow for dynamic experiments (mechanical and thermal)
under any of the environments compatible with the microscope.

The microscope is to be used to support various research activities at Kettering
University. While the majority of research at Kettering University has focused
on more applied industrial projects, an ESEM permits more fundamental research
of material characterization and behavior. The research conducted using the ESEM
will include in-situ characterization of the mechanical behavior of metallic
samples, phase transformations in polymeric systems, biomedical research in
musculoskeletal pain and bone/implant interfaces and anti-oxidative mechanisms
in cancer resistant cells, to name a few.

The ESEM will also be used for undergraduate education and training in materials
behavior and characterization. The intuitive, computer-based interface permits
rapid training and ease of use. Students at Kettering University are required to
participate in a co-operative employment program. Giving students the skills
needed to operate an ESEM could have direct benefit to their co-op employers,
possibly resulting in industry-sponsored research for faculty and an increase in
external users of the equipment. Further, the potential to interface with the
ESEM control software over the network will make remote control of the
microscope from a classroom environment an important aspect of the educational
benefits of the instrument.