* 0116144
* Acquisition of Deep Reactive Ion Etching Instrument
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Marc Porter, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Cyndi Nguyen
* 08/31/2003
* USD 305,844.00

0116144&lt;br/&gt;Dalal&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, the advent of MEMS and
the ability to deposit thin film electronic devices on virtually any substrate
has made many novel electronic, MEMS, microfluidic and biological devices
possible. Examples of such devices would be in-situ thin-film electronic sensors
and thin film transistors deposited in etched groves for detecting and
controlling fluid flow in microfluidic and biological devices; neural
reconnection using trenches etched in quartz or Si; electrical stimulation of
nerve growth in trenches using in-situ deposited active devices; MEMS devices
for sensing chemical pollutants, using ultra-thin piezoelectric membranes and
selective receptor sites; DNA analysis using microchambers; implantable
micropumps for drug delivery; Soi1CHIP for in-situ testing of soils; chemical
lab on a chip etc. Most of these devices need the ability to etch deeply and
controllably in a variety of substrates, such as Si wafers, polymers and quartz
microplates. Some of the etching has to go ~100 micrometer
deep.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At Iowa State University, and also at the PIs sister
institution, the University of Iowa, a number of innovative projects are
underway in this area which integrate electronic technology with biological and
microfluidic technologies. Some of the noteworthy projects involve directed
nerve regrowth in severed central nervous systems, using trenches in Si ,quartz
or polymers to guide the direction of the regrowth; microfluidic channels for
implantable micropumps; detection of trace chemicals for forensic testing using
specialized chemical coatings on MEMS type structures; analytical laboratory on
a chip; development of thin film transistors in deep trenches; development of
nanocoatings for surfaces in MEMS type channels; measurement of structure and
stress in cytoskeletons etc. All these projects need a deep reactive ion etching
system. The one the PIs have stops at about 5 micrometer. In this project, they
propose to purchase a versatile, laboratory-scale, deep uv reactive ion etching
system from Oxford Instruments, which uses the patented Bosch process to achieve
etching as deep as 100 micrometer. It is expected that this new system will
allow them to successfully carry out some of the current and future projects in
these very new and exciting fields of electro-biology, chemical MEMS, medical
MEMS and opto-mechanical MEMS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This instrument is capable
of deep etching, using both Chlorine and Fluorine-based gases. The Oxford
Instruments system is a proven lab-scale system, with a high density ICP plasma
source, RE biasing of the substrate, capabilities for backside cooling of
substrates and the provision for a load-lock. It is a cluster tool which can be
added on to in later stages. It comes equipped with the appropriate flow
controllers and corrosive service pumps. They propose to add to it, at their
cost, an in-line high-resolution, computer-controlled optical emission
spectroscopy (OES) system from Acton Research which will be very useful for
understanding and controlling the different plasmas that one needs when etching
quartz and polymers such as polyimide, PET and biological
polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This instrument will be housed at the
Microelectronics Research Center(MRC) at Iowa State University. MRC is an
interdisciplinary facility set up by Iowa State to provide research capabilities
in the general area of semiconductors and MEMS for faculty and students from all
departments. The PIs currently have students and faculty from EE, Materials
Science and Engineering, ChemE, Physics, Chemistry, Mechanical Engineering,
Industrial Engineering and Biology using MRC facilities extensively. They have
many federally and industrially supported projects, and this new instrument will
be useful to a wide group of faculty. Nearly 30 graduate students would benefit
from having this instrument at MRC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MRC has qualified,
experienced, technicians available for installing and running this instrument.
They have the necessary environmental monitoring and gas-disposal facilities
required for such an instrument. And they have over 20 years of experience in
running plasma reactors, including a PIE system, which unfortunately does not do
deep etching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrument will also help the PIs develop
new courses in this area. They already have an extensive offering in the general
semiconductor field, including several lab-based courses. They expect to add two
inter-disciplinary course on plasma based manufacturing of electronic, MEMS and
biological devices, and on measurement techniques if we get this instrument.
Note that these courses will be open to both senior--level and graduate-level
students. Thus, the educational impact will be felt both at undergraduate and
graduate levels. The semiconductor and MEMS industries are very interested in
having trained engineers in this field. So is the biomedical
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs have planned an extensive
outreach&lt;br/&gt;