* 0116484
* MRI:  Inductively Coupled Argon Plasma Spectrometer - Dept. of Geosciences, Franklin &amp; Marshall College
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Carol deWet, Franklin and Marshall College
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2003
* USD 123,695.00

0116484&lt;br/&gt;de Wet&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant, made through the Major
Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, provides partial support for costs of
acquiring a Thermal Jarrell Ash IRIS Advantage Inductively Coupled Argon Plasma
Spectrometer (ICAP) with Extended Wavelength Range Dual Plasma. This equipment
includes settings for both a vertically oriented (radial plasma) torch and a
horizontally oriented (axial) torch. Such a dual system is a significant
improvement over earlier types of ICP spectrometers that contained a fixed,
radial plasma torch orientation because low wavelengths can be measured more
accurately using the axial orientation. Long wavelength analysis is optimized
using the vertically oriented torch configuration. This instrumentation provides
maximum flexibility for an undergraduate institution servicing diverse research
and teaching needs. This increased flexibility increases our user base and
ensures maximum access to the equipment. Funds are also allocated for
microdrilling equipment, specifically a New Wave Research Micromachining System
with a high speed precision drill. The microdrilling system enhances small scale
sampling by combining speed and precision relative to hand-held devices that are
prone to user error. Both the ICAP and micromachining system work in conjunction
to produce data more accurately, more precisely, at a faster rate, in a more
user-friendly manner. This is important in undergraduate research where students
have less time to devote to their research, but where solid research
methodologies and techniques are first learned. Instrumentation that facilitates
the learning process, with fewer frustrations and set-backs, is important in
retaining students in science and encouraging them to continue with graduate
research. Specific research areas that will benefit from the new instrumentation
include: diagenesis of Cambrian microbial carbonates; trace element geochemistry
of Devonian reefal carbonates from the Canning Basin, Australia; trace element
distribution in igneous feldspar growth zoning; minor element chemistry of
watershed and wetland sites (soil and water); and interdisciplinary studies in
Archeology (local artifacts and chert provenance), and Art History (paint fleck
analysis). &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;