* 0116744
* MRI:  Acquisition of an Electron Paramagnetic (epr) Spectrometer for Research in Condensed Matter, Chemistry, and Biology at a HSI-PUI
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* John Tate, University Enterprises Corporation at CSUSB
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2004
* USD 141,500.00

&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation program
California State University- San Bernandino Foundation will acquire an electron
paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectrometer for scientific research in physics,
chemistry and biology at a Hispanic serving, predominately, undergraduate
institute. It will improve the quality of research by providing access to a
research instrument, which is currently unavailable. It will greatly expand the
research capabilities in three research all from different departments. The
instrument will be used to study domain dynamics in ferroelectric materials,
which have applications to the electronics industry, including "smart cards"
(physics), environmentally mediated oxidative stress in plants, which is
important in evaluating ecological impact on plants (biology), and binuclear
transition metal complexes, which has applications in computer memory
(chemistry). The research projects would result in scientific publications, and
presentations, but perhaps the most important result will be students that are
motivated and capable of doing research. This project would help CSUSB add to
its reputation of combining research with a strong commitment to undergraduate
education, particularly for first generation and students from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Major Research
Instrumentation program California State University-San Bernandino Foundation
will acquire an electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectrometer for
scientific research in physics, chemistry and biology at a Hispanic serving,
predominately, undergraduate institute. It will improve the quality of research
by providing access to a research instrument, which is currently unavailable. It
will greatly expand the research capabilities in three research all from
different departments. The instrument will be used to study domain dynamics in
ferroelectric materials, which have applications to the electronics industry,
including "smart cards" (physics), environmentally mediated oxidative stress in
plants, which is important in evaluating ecological impact on plants (biology),
and binuclear transition metal complexes, which has applications in computer
memory (chemistry). The research projects would result in scientific
publications, and presentations, but perhaps the most important result will be
students that are motivated and capable of doing research. This project would
help CSUSB add to its reputation of combining research with a strong commitment
to undergraduate education, particularly for first generation and students from
underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt
;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;