* 0116273
* ACQUISITION OF AN INTEGRATED TESTING SYSTEM FOR CIVIL INFRASTRUCTURE ENGINEERING RESEARCH AND EDUCATION
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2004
* William Schonberg, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Peter Chang
* 07/31/2004
* USD 338,325.00

PROJECT SUMMARY

The University of Missouri-Rolla (UMR) was awarded funds for the acquisition of
state-of-the-art equipment and associated instrumentation to increase access and
promote research, research training, and integrated research/education
activities primarily in the area of civil infrastructure engineering. UMR has
identified civil infrastructure engineering as one of six areas for development
under the 'Mission Enhancement Program' of the University of Missouri System.
The awarded equipment will support activities that are in line with the research
and educational goals of the University and the National Science
Foundation/Major Research Instrumentation (NSF/MRI) program goals.

A new state-of-the-art structural engineering research/education laboratory has
just been completed in the Civil Engineering Department at UMR. With this brand
new facility in place and in combination with the awarded equipment, UMR will be
in the position to offer experimental facilities to its faculty, graduate and
undergraduate students and to carry out significant research and education
activities that address the nation's needs. In addition, cooperative research
and development activities with government agencies and private industries will
result in the advancement and implementation of scientific knowledge that is
required for the safety of state and national civil engineering infrastructures.

The equipment and instrumentation awarded in this proposal consists of: (1)
three hydraulic actuators with servo-controlled valves capable of static,
fatigue, dynamic and high-velocity testing; (2) hydraulic service manifolds and
hydraulic power pump; (3) electronic control system; and, (4) high-capacity data
acquisition system unit. UMR faculty members are actively pursuing
research/education activities at the national and international levels that
address some of the world's needs for the development of modern design and
repair methodologies for civil infrastructures. These research/education
activities demand equipment capabilities that far exceed current levels in the
state of Missouri and/or at nearby regional universities. Additionally, the
newly constructed and equipped laboratory will allow UMR and its centers of
excellence in attracting significant corporate and government research funding
and draw a larger number of graduate and undergraduate students to pursue
careers in engineering.

The new state-of-the-art structural engineering research/education laboratory
will benefit students and faculty in the Civil Engineering Department as well as
students and faculty from other academic departments such as Aerospace
Engineering, Engineering Mechanics, Electrical Engineering, Mechanical
Engineering and Mining Engineering. Faculty in these departments are actively
pursuing and conducting interdisciplinary research projects and have been
successful in obtaining the support of private industry as well as state and
federal agencies. The primary areas of research, research training, and
educational activities that will be supported by the proposed equipment are: (i)
structural testing of components and subassemblies; (ii) earthquake engineering
and intelligent control of smart structures; (iii) use of advanced materials and
FRP composites in construction; (iv) repair and rehabilitation of structural
components in aging aircraft; (v) behavior of cold-formed steel structures; and,
(vi) behavior of reinforced/prestressed concrete structures.

This award will enable UMR to address the following University and NSF/MRI
program goals: (1) strengthen and expand existing experimental research,
research training, and education activities and facilities; (2) increase the
population of women and under-represented minority groups in the university's
graduate and undergraduate programs through access to and use of state-of-the-
art research/education equipment; (3) expand university-wide integrated
interdisciplinary research and education activities; and, (4) build and
strengthen industrial contacts and partnerships to promote and increase the
scope of research, research training, and education opportunities available
nationally as well as in the state of Missouri.