* 0116097
* MRI:  Development of a Phytotron Facility for Vassar College Biological and Environmental Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Mark Schlessman, Vassar College
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Farmer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 158,103.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. A. Marshall Pregnall at Vassar College develop a
phytotron facility in the Biology Department in order to enhance faculty
research and student research training in biology and environmental science. By
acquiring seven new controlled environment chambers, the Biology Department will
increase its growth chamber capacity from five to 12, which will expand the
number of concurrent research projects and improve treatment replication for
controlled-environment experiments on seagrass and algal physiological ecology,
plant-mycorrhizal interactions, and plant reproductive ecology. Moreover, the
Biology Department will be able to maintain long-term selection lines for
student research on quantitative genetics, better control conditions for student
experiments in plant physiology, and enhance research training for upperclassmen
in biological and environmental sciences.&lt;br/&gt; Dr. Pregnall will utilize
the phytotron facility in several research projects. Growth chambers will be
used to determine seasonal and environmental cues that regulate inorganic
nitrogen assimilation by the seagrass Zostera marina. Dr. Pregnall will create a
matrix of photoperiod-times- temperature-times- nitrate enrichment treatments to
isolate the discrete and interactive effects of winter vs. summer conditions of
light and temperature along with variable nitrogen availability. Dr. Pregnall
will also measure the tolerance and physiological responses of coastal
macroalgae to pulsed episodes of hypoxia and anoxia by manipulating temperature,
aeration and the presence of sediments. Additionally, he will assess the
contribution of water-column and sediment microbial nitrification to the
inorganic nitrogen cycling in a watershed. Dr. Margaret Ronsheim will use the
phytotron in her studies of the interactions between plant genotype, mycorrhizal
associations, and soil pathogens on reproductive allocation and success in
Allium vineale. Dr. Mark Schlessman will perform experimental tests of
hypotheses relating optimal plant size and flowering time using rapid-cycling
Brassica rapa. Additionally, undergraduate students will utilize the phytotron
facility for research projects in 200- and 300-level courses in Biology and
Environmental Science, for independent honors projects and during summer
research internships with individual faculty. In each of these studies, students
would work with experimental designs and statistical analyses utilizing split-
plot, factorial, repeated measures ANOVA, thus gaining important experience with
assessing primary and interaction effects and dependence of time responses on
initial conditions. &lt;br/&gt;The development of the phytotron facility at
Vassar College will greatly expand faculty and student research in physiological
ecology, plant reproductive ecology and environmental sciences by permitting
statistically powerful experimental designs while simultaneously supporting
long-term manipulations and organism growth in controlled conditions. Precise
control of temperature, humidity, daylength, and light intensity in multiple
growth chambers will allow experiments to consider more than one factor and
their possible interactions as the organisms respond through time to the
different treatments. Since organism and ecosystem responses are usually
sensitive to multiple factors, use of the phytotron by faculty and students will
allow more complex, realistic experiments with sufficient replication to achieve
valid testing of hypotheses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;