* 0116323
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Short-pulse Ti:Sapphire Laser for Terahertz Studies of Semiconductor Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* James Heyman, Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 08/31/2002
* USD 133,580.00

&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation program
Macalester College will be able to acquire a short Titanium-Sapphire laser for
Terahertz studies of semiconductor heterostructures. The laser system will
permit time-resolved spectroscopy of materials at terahertz and mid-infrared
frequencies. Initial research will use the instrument to support the Principal
Investigator's NSF-funded program to study spin and charge dynamics in
semiconductors (NSF-RUI DMR-0074622). Projects will include ultrafast Terahertz
spectroscopy of spin-dynamics in semiconductors; time-resolved measurements of
magneto-plasma oscillations in semiconductors; and quantum transitions in
strongly driven semiconductor quantum wells and heterostructures. The equipment
will also support undergraduate research training in Photonics and Condensed
Matter Physics at Macalester College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from
the Major Research Instrumentation program Macalester College will be able to
acquire a short Titanium-Sapphire laser for Terahertz studies of semiconductor
heterostructures. As the switching rates in electronic devices are pushed to
ever higher frequencies, it becomes increasingly important to understand carrier
transport phenomena in semiconductors on picosecond (10-12s) and femtosecond
(10-15s) time-scales. Using ultrafast terahertz spectroscopy it is possible to
impulsively excite a material with a femtosecond optical pulse or single-cycle
electromagnetic pulse, and record the resulting motion of charge in time. This
award supports equipment to enable time-resolved spectroscopy of materials at
terahertz and mid-infrared frequencies. Initial research will use the instrument
to support the Principal Investigator's NSF-funded program to study spin and
charge dynamics in semiconductors (NSF-RUI DMR-0074622). The equipment will also
support undergraduate research training in Photonics and Condensed Matter
Physics at Macalester College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;