* 0116149
* Acquisition of Microscopy Core Facility for Biological Research
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Jean Hardwick, Ithaca College
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Farmer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 78,643.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Jean Hardwick at Ithaca College for the
acquisition of a core microscopy facility for the Biology Department. This
instrumentation will be used by four separate faculty members with diverse
research interests in developmental biology, comparative physiology,
neurobiology and plant ecology. Specifically, these funds will be used for the
acquisition of a research-quality compound microscope equipped with advanced
imaging capabilities such as DIC, phase contrast and fluorescence imaging. This
microscope will also be equipped with a cooled digital camera (CCD) and image
analysis system for the capture of publication-quality electronic images as well
as advanced image analysis. In addition, this facility will included a
stereomicroscope with a epi-fluorescence for imaging of fluorescently-labeled
plant and animal specimens and a dual viewing bridge for training students in
various procedures. This instrumentation will become a major component of a core
departmental facility for microscopy which will complement existing equipment as
well as expanding our facilities to include electronic imaging and analysis.
Several faculty members use microscopy as part of their ongoing research efforts
in projects including the localization of neuropeptides in the amphibian nervous
system, analysis of the regulation of embryonic development in Xenopus, the
physiology and biochemistry of mucus production in invertebrates, and the
response of plants to injury. All of these projects require significant analysis
of tissue specimens using a variety of optical techniques. For example, analysis
of neuropeptide localization utilizes the technique of immunohistochemistry to
determine the specific organization and function of neurotransmitters in the
nervous system. The developmental studies use gene markers, such as the green
fluorescent protein (GFP), to investigate the molecular signals underlying
specific aspects of development. The study of mucus production requires
histological analysis of the mucus producing organs themselves, and the analysis
of plant response to injury will also use a GFP marker to determine the cellular
responses to insect herbivore. Thus, this facility will become an integral part
of the research facilities for a wide range of current faculty as well as future
hires. The Biology department at Ithaca College has a long-standing commitment
to the involvement of undergraduates in research. All biology majors are
required to spend at least one semester doing research in a faculty member's
lab. Undergraduates are involved in every facet of faculty research and are
trained in the use of all equipment associated with that work. This would mean
that, with at least four different faculty members using this facility as a part
of their research program, a significant number of undergraduates will also have
the opportunity to use this equipment. Undergraduates at Ithaca College
routinely present their research efforts at conferences and are included as co-
authors on publications. Continued involvement of undergraduates in ongoing
scientific research is critical in stimulating students to pursue careers in
science, as well as increasing their overall scientific literacy.