* 0116414
* Vibrations and Nonlinear Dynamics of Microcantilevers Interacting with Nanoscale Structures: Applications to Atomic Force Microscopy
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Arvind Raman, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2005
* USD 214,045.00

Modeling and Development of Gradient Based Smart Polymer Sensors and
Actuators&lt;br/&gt;Gregory Washington, PI &lt;br/&gt;Ohio State
University&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #
0102310&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
study is to develop a novel gradient-based sensor for spatial measurement of
distributed systems. The sensors and actuators in this study are developed from
polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF). Previous studies have used spatial aperture
shading techniques (spatially varying electrodes to achieve a particular
performance function) to measure a myriad of distributed systems. A major
limitation of the spatial aperture shading techniques was that the apertures
have a heavy dependence on 1-dimensional variation for most cases. In this study
spatial gradient polarization and aperture shading techniques are used to
develop the next generation of sensors. In spatial polarization the material is
polarized in a manner such that its piezoelectric constant is allowed to vary in
controlled manner. Specifically, the objectives of this research are to: (1)
Develop the analytical basis for spatial gradient polarization. Inherent in this
part of the study is the development of techniques for analytically calculating
weighting functions for various structural configurations. (2) Develop the
experimental hardware and facilities necessary for making spatially polarized
sensors and actuators. (3) Develop control techniques necessary for the
production of user defined film actuators and sensors. (4) Develop a non-contact
measurement technique for deflection verification. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research goals are accomplished by applying differential calculus, the
principles of mechanics, and piezoelectric polymer modeling to a given sensor
system. The experimental hardware that will be developed for polarizing the
films consist of a corona charging system with an appropriate stretch and drive
mechanism for correct placement and rastering of the film. A wide-angle stereo-
photogrammetry system similar to those used in particle tracking applications
will be modified to accurately measure the location of the distributed system
when actuated. The sensors market is an $18 billion market and growing. These
new sensors can be utilized in a host of applications including Automotive,
Biomedical sensors, Aerospace Structural, and Impact sensors in Military
applications, like sonar sensing equipment and so on. In addition, there is a
possibility that this novel technology can be applied directly to piezoceramic
actuators as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;