* 0116352
* Acquisition of a Confocal Microscope to Support Research in Cell and Molecular Biology at Susquehanna University
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Margaret Peeler, Susquehanna University
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 08/31/2004
* USD 129,522.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Thomas C. Peeler at Susquehanna University to
acquire a confocal microscope system to support student/faculty collaborative
research in cell and molecular biology. This instrument is an advanced laser
scanning confocal microscope that offers enhanced resolution in
immunofluorescent applications and the ability to reconstruct 3D images from
ultathin optical sections.

There will be three main faculty users of this instrument. Dr. Thomas Peeler's
work examines the interaction of external signals, specifically angiotensin II,
on actin cytoskeleton structure in cardiac cells. The confocal microscope will
allow Dr. Peeler to visualize the cytoskeletal network in heart cells.
Disruption of this network stimulated by external signals may play a role in the
development of the cardiac hypertrophy associated with hypertension. Dr. David
Richard's lab explores the endocrine control of vitellogenesis, or yolk
deposition, in Drosophila oocytes. Dr. Richard hopes to use this instrument to
better understand the role of certain key proteins in the uptake of yolk during
egg development. Disruption of this process may be a key to novel methods of
insect population control. Dr. Margaret Peeler's lab focuses on the role of
signal transduction pathways in cell fate determination during the early
development of the sea urchin embryo. The confocal microscope will be used in
experiments to follow the expression of regulatory proteins believed to be
responsible for directing cell fate in embryonic development.

The acquisition of the confocal microscope will have significant impact on the
research training of undergraduate students at Susquehanna University.
Approximately 15 to 20 undergraduates will use the instrument each year as part
of their capstone senior research experience. The availability of this
microscope system will enhance and expand the scope of the research projects
being pursued and provide significant training opportunities for these students,
many of whom intend to pursue careers in biomedical research either through
graduate work or through employment in academic or biotechnology labs.