* 0116113
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Thin Film Deposition System for Sample Preparation
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Marco Fatuzzo, Xavier University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 08/31/2002
* USD 123,800.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program will support Xavier
University with the acquisition of a thin film deposition system for growth of
thin films of materials (primarily metals) that range in thickness from tens of
nanometers to several micrometers. Three main thrusts of research would benefit
from this piece of equipment. These are: 1) the study of the electrical
transport properties of superconductors and Josephson junction arrays; 2) the
study of the growth and surface morphology of metal films; 3) and the study of
the electrical properties of carbon nanotubes. Each of these areas requires
metal films for sample fabrication and/or preparation. The deposition system is
the next logical step in building existing infrastructure at the institution. In
addition, the Xavier University Department of Physics requires all of its
undergraduate majors to complete a senior research project. These research
projects are usually consistent with, and often directly linked to faculty
research program. This deposition system would significantly advance
undergraduate education and training by offering viable avenues for
undergraduate students to carry out their research requirement. Its use will
expose students to an important experimental research tool, as well as to
important sample fabrication techniques that are not taught in class but are
learned through experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Major
Research Instrumentation Program will support Xavier University with the
acquisition of a thin film deposition system for growth of thin films of
materials (primarily metals) that range in thickness from tens of nanometers to
several micrometers. Three main thrusts of research would benefit from this
piece of equipment. These are: 1) the study of the electrical transport
properties of superconductors and Josephson junction arrays; 2) the study of the
growth and surface morphology of metal films; 3) and the study of the electrical
properties of carbon nanotubes. Each of these areas requires metal films for
sample fabrication and/or preparation. The deposition system is the next logical
step in building existing infrastructure at the institution. In addition, the
Xavier University Department of Physics requires all of its undergraduate majors
to complete a senior research project. These research projects are usually
consistent with, and often directly linked to faculty research program. This
deposition system would significantly advance undergraduate education and
training by offering viable avenues for undergraduate students to carry out
their research requirement. Its use will expose students to an important
experimental research tool, as well as to important sample fabrication
techniques that are not taught in class but are learned through
experience.&lt;br/&gt;