* 0116829
* Empirical Evaluation of Foreign Outsourcing Decisions and Trends in Vertical Specialization
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2001,10/31/2004
* Deborah Swenson, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 10/31/2004
* USD 75,072.00

One of the most notable trends in international trade is the growth of vertical
specialization. Thanks to reduced costs of international communications and
transportation, firms have increasingly fragmented their production into
multiple stages. Such production means that a single final good may be worked on
in many countries, as each sequential production stage is performed in the
location that is most advantageous for the process. By studying two U.S.
programs that facilitate foreign outsourcing operations- the 9802 tariff
provisions in the Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States and the U.S.
Foreign Trade Zones Program- this research project deepens our understanding of
trends in vertical specialization and the responses of foreign outsourcing to
changes in country and industry conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To evaluate
the effects of country costs on outsourcing decisions, this project studies
three questions. The first component of the project studies how outsourcing is
allocated across countries. In examining this topic, it is important to identify
which countries are regarded as competitors. In contrast with previous work that
has assumed that all countries are in competition with all others, this analysis
will examine whether factors such as geography, education, income, or other
national characteristics place countries in competition with each other. The
second part of this project examines whether foreign investment plays a special
role in mediating firm production sharing decisions. Such a role may be
expected, as foreign investment provides a physical infrastructure of
manufacturing sites that are tailored to foreign assembly. In addition, foreign
investments may influence sourcing decisions, as foreign investment provides a
conduit for information about country characteristics. The third component of
the project studies how firms decide whether to deploy resources, either keeping
production at home or moving it abroad.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;