* 0116545
* NSF-CONACyT:  Binational Collaborative Development of Spoken Language Technology in Latin American Spanish
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2003
* Richard Stern, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Mary P. Harper
* 09/30/2003
* USD 93,570.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CONACyT: Binational Collaborative Development
of Spoken Language&lt;br/&gt;Technology in Latin American
Spanish&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a standard
award. As the use of handheld computing devices becomes more widespread it will
be increasingly necessary for these devices to support speech input and output
that can maintain robust performance under all conditions. In this project the
CMU Robust Speech Group will develop a series of complementary algorithms that
will substantially improve the accuracy of automatic speech recognition systems
in the presence of difficult acoustical environments including high levels of
noise, sources of interference with time-varying characteristics (such as
competing speech sources and background music), and a variety of transient noise
sources encountered in office, highway, and industrial settings. The research
includes three complementary components: the development of "synergistic" sets
of features that when used in combination will provide better recognition
accuracy than can be obtained by any single feature set in isolation;
development of a series of new procedures that produce the best combination of
information from multiple parallel recognizers; and development of improved
methods to achieve robust speech recognition by the explicit identification and
reconstruction of features in time-frequency displays of speech that are
"missing" by virtue of being damaged by noise or other types of interference.
The PI will transfer the technology developed in the course of this project to
industry and to the general public by releasing the code of successful
algorithms in Open Source form.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;