* 0116567
* MRI:  Development of a Surface Scattering System for Real-time X-ray Studies of Growth and Processing
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* Karl Ludwig, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2003
* USD 120,000.00

This award funds the development of a system for the in-situ synchrotron x-ray
study of thin film growth with molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) and of surface
modification with plasma processing. The system will permit extensive x-ray
access to the sample and incorporate standard characterization tools (e.g.
RHEED) to better correlate the synchrotron results with in-house studies. In the
area of film growth, particular attention is paid to surface structure during
the MBE growth of III-V nitride films, both GaN and Ga-Al-In nitride alloys.
Among other issues, research will focus on buffer layer formation and atomic
ordering/phase separation in the alloy systems. Investigations of surface
structure during plasma processing will initially focus on silicon, since it has
been widely studied with complementary methods. Future experiments will be
directed at processing of compound semiconductor surfaces, such as those of the
arsenides and nitrides. Students trained with the system will be exposed to a
broad range of materials issues ranging from basic surface structure research to
understanding how surface structure can effect device performance. They will be
well prepared to bring their experience and new insights to industry and
academia following graduation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award funds the
development of a surface scattering system for real-time x-ray studies of growth
and processing. The system will enable the fundamental study of two processes
that are vital for the semiconductor industry. These are, first, Molecular Beam
Epitaxy, which allows the highly controlled growth of thin films a single atomic
layer at a time, and, second, the modification of surfaces with energetic
particles in a set of processes that is known collectively as "plasma
processing". Using a very intense beam of x-rays from a synchrotron source, the
atomic structure of surfaces will be investigated as these technologically
important processes are occurring. The basic understanding gained from these
experiments may eventually lead to methods for growing new high quality
materials for the optoelectronics and high power industries and to better
methods of etching and passivating semiconductor surfaces throughout the
electronics industry. In addition, this equipment will provide a unique resource
to train students in these rapidly developing interdisciplinary areas that cut
across traditional boundaries of physics, materials science and electrical
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;