* 0116358
* Enhanced Processing and Characterization Resources for Micro- and Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Gary Harris, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2005
* USD 471,834.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program to Cornell University
supports instrument acquisition for the National Nanofabrication User Network
(NNUN). The NNUN consists of sites at Cornell, Stanford, Howard, Penn State, and
Howard University, provides advanced nanofabrication resources to users from
around the country. In the most recent year, NNUN served over 1500 users from
fields as diverse as microelectronics, micromechanics, optics, biology,
materials science, chemistry, and physics. Modern equipment is key to our
ability to serve this diverse user community. This award includes funds to
upgrade critical NNUN facilities.

Under this award, CNF will purchase a Laser Pattern Generator. This instrument
is crucial not only for fabrication of advanced photomasks but also for direct
laser fabrication at dimensions as small as a quarter of a micrometer. Howard
University will install an advanced ion source to its SIMS system to increase
its capability for microanalysis. Under this award, the facility at Penn State
will purchase an advanced field emission SEM. When combined with an integrated
scanning tunneling microscope from another award, an advanced nanoscale
characterization tool will be made available to NNUN users. UCSB will purchase a
new computer control system to upgrade its JBX5 electron beam lithography tool
to allow it to continue to support microfabrication in the sub Micrometer range.

The National Nanofabrication User Network (NNUN), consisting of sites at
Cornell, Stanford, Howard, Penn State, and Howard University, provides advanced
nanofabrication resources to users from around the country. In the most recent
year, NNUN served over 1500 users from fields as diverse as microelectronics,
micromechanics, optics, biology, materials science, chemistry, and physics.
Modern equipment is key to NNUN's ability to serve this diverse user community.
This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program includes funds to
upgrade mask-making facilities at Cornell, to expand microanalysis capabilities
at Penn State and Howard University, and to upgrade electron beam lithography
facilities at UC Santa Barbara. This equipment is critical to enable NNUN to
serve an exponentially growing number of users, faculty, students postdocs and
users from industry.

