* 0116655
* US-Tunisia Cooperative Research:   Scheduling with Due Dates
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2001,12/31/2006
* Robert Bulfin, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 12/31/2006
* USD 30,580.00

0116655&lt;br/&gt;Bulfin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project supports
a cooperative research project between Dr. Robert Bulfin, Department of
Industrial Engineering, Auburn University, Auburn, Alabama and Dr. Rym M'Hallah,
Department of Quantitative Methods, Institute Superior de Gestion de Sousse,
Sousse, Tunisia. The focus of the research will be on using surrogate relaxation
approaches to solve large scale scheduling problems with due dates. The two
scientists have already modeled the weighted number of tardy jobs for single and
parallel machine systems as integer programs, induced knapsack structure for
surrogate bounds, and developed heuristic and exact algorithms to solve the
resulting problems. This limited work has produced algorithms capable of solving
the largest problem instances to date in short computer time. The present
research extends these ideas to other performance measures (tardiness, number of
tardy jobs and their weighted counterparts) and various machine environments
(single, parallel and flow shop problems). Specifically the work will center on
developing heuristic and exact algorithms to solve the single and parallel
machine tardiness scheduling problems, and flow shop number of tardy jobs
scheduling problems, and the flow shop number of tardy jobs scheduling
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: Dr. Bulfin's research interests are on
solving real world applications in production control and scheduling. Dr.
M'Hallah has been working on developing computer based solutions for the
industrial sector, especially the chemical and garment industries in Tunisia.
She will make the results of this research available to the Tunisian garment
industry and use them in a scheduling module as part of a computer-aided
management software system. &lt;br/&gt;