* 0116635
* NSF-CONACyT:  Incorporating Global Manufacturing into Engineering Coursework
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2001,02/28/2005
* Cesar Malave, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 02/28/2005
* USD 119,324.00

The objective of this NSF-CONACyT project between Texas A&amp;M University
(College Station, Texas, USA) and the Universidad de las Americas (Puebla,
Mexico) is to develop and deploy instructional material that allows the easy
incorporation of global manufacturing knowledge into the industrial, mechanical,
manufacturing or similar curricula. The material developed in this project will
be implemented in the industrial engineering, mechanical and manufacturing
curricula affecting more than 1,200 students in these institutions. The approach
is to develop lecture supplements and case studies based on real industrial
situations. Case studies provide the student and instructors with realistic
industrial context that includes technical data, as well as, a description of
the cultural and socio-economic environment of the community in which the
facility is located. Companies targeted are in industry sectors where there is
significant trade between Mexico and the USA including the auto, electronics and
textile industries. Lecture supplements are focused analytical modules,
developed within the context provided by a case study, that deal with problems
specific to topics taught in engineering and science courses. Lecture
supplements will be carefully designed for their easy adoption in the curricula
of the participating organizations. Detailed guidelines for deployment will de
developed based on the educational methodologies developed by the Foundation
Coalition at Texas A&amp;M University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Active learning and
teaming will constitute the essential pedagogical method for the in-class
delivery of all course material. Moreover, the use of technology-enabled
education such as web technologies and instructional software will be
incorporated in all CS and LS. The assessment, evaluation, and dissemination
techniques developed and implemented by the Foundation Coalition will be central
to these activities in the proposed project. It is expected that the results of
this project will help future engineers and scientists understand how to
efficiently exchange and deploy technology and scientific knowledge, and conduct
business across the USA-Mexico border.