* 0116395
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Multi-collector Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer for Research and Training in the Earth and Environmental Sciences
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Christina Gallup, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2004
* USD 500,000.00

0116395&lt;br/&gt;Edwards&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant, made through the
Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, provides partial support for the
purchase of a Multicollector Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer (MC-
ICP-MS), associated hardware, and some technical costs associated with the
instrument. The instrument will be housed in the Minnesota Isotope Laboratory at
the University of Minnesota, Twin Cities Campus. The main focus of the
laboratory as well as the new instrument will be on problems that can be solved
with high-precision, high-sensitivity measurements of actinides in natural
materials. The instrument will have multiple ion counting detectors, and
therefore have the capability to measure more than one small ion beam
simultaneously. Testing and refining of the multiple ion counting system will be
a major portion of our group's effort on this proposal. The goal is a
significant improvement in precision and/or sensitivity in measuring rare
actinide isotopes. One of the main results of such technical improvements will
be increases in the precision with which uranium-series ages can be determined.
This improvement should impact a wide range of fields in the natural sciences,
including climate change, paleoecology, paleoceanography, igneous petrology,
anthropology, and geochemistry. Among the specific areas that the new
instrumentation will impact are: calibration of the carbon-14 time scale and
implications for the earth's carbon cycle, factors that control rapid climate
and vegetation change, factors that control the removal of particle-reactive
metals in the oceans, paleo-ocean circulation, rates of late Quaternary
evolution, and factors affecting the formation of silicate melts in the mantle.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;