* 0116564
* Development of an Ultrasensitive Ultrafast Phase Spectrometer
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Rick Trebino, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 08/31/2005
* USD 700,000.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs Trebino and El-Sayed at the Georgia Institute of
Technol-ogy to develop a novel ultrasensitive ultrafast intensity-and-phase
spectrometer, which yields the full intensity and phase vs. time (or frequency)
of luminescence and other light pulses relevant to biology and many other
fields. The spectrometer will have a very high sensitivity for single-shot
measurements and a <1-photon-per-pulse sensitivity for multi-shot measurements.
These sensitivi-ties are approximately six orders magnitude better than those of
current measurement techniques. The proposed instrument involves combining a
spectrometer with a coherent reference light pulse. Specifically, it will use an
ultra-short pulse with a spectrum ranging from 400 nm to 1600 nm and generated
by propagating readily available, low-energy, 100-fs pulses through microstruc-
ture optical fiber (recently developed by Lucent Technologies. Demonstrations of
the new instru-ment will involve simple photochemical systems relevant to
photobiology. Examples include dou-ble proton transfer processes in 7-azaindole
and its analogues (important in understanding radiation-induced DNA mutation)
and the photo-isomeri-zation around double bonds, e.g., in the merocyanine dyes
(important for understanding of the primary processes in proteins of vision,
such as rhodopsin and bacteriorhodopsin photosynthesis). Later, we propose to
use this device to further understand the complex primary dynamics in
bacteriorhodopsin and to distinguish between different theoretical models
proposed for its primary photo-dynamics. This instrument will also have
applications far beyond biology. For example, semi-conductor experiments often
generate weak light pulses of new wavelengths, which cannot be measured with
conventional methods, but potentially can with this. Also, astronomers routinely
measure the intensity vs. frequency (the spectrum) of light from astrophysical
sources, but they cannot currently measure the spectral phase. With this
instrument it should be possible to do so and yield information previously
unavailable regarding extraterrestrial light sources. In addition, the
spectrometer will allow measurements of the phase of signal and idler beams in a
broadband optical parametric generators-a system that is interesting because the
phase of these two beams is quan-tum-mechanically entangled with many degrees of
freedom and so can be used for quantum com-puting. Finally, the ultrafast
intensity and phase vs. time of virtually any light-emitting medium could be
studied using this highly sensitive instrument.