* 0116673
* Acquisition of an Integrated FT-Raman/Microscope for Advanced Battery Materials Research and Student Training
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Ralph Wheeler, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 08/31/2002
* USD 128,728.00

This is an award from the Major Research Instrumentation program to the
University of Oklahoma Norman campus. The University of Oklahoma Norman campus
will acquire the Equinox 55 (Buncker Optics INC) Fourier-Transform Raman (FT-
Raman) system and a far-infrared spectral range expansion package. The
instrument will have impact on an existing interdisciplinary research program of
faculty in the Physics and Astronomy, and the Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry. The researchers seek a fundamental understanding of polymer
electrolyte and intercalation materials for next generation lithium rechargeable
batteries. The new instrument will enhance an existing interdisciplinary
research and will benefit graduate and undergraduate students. It will be
integrated into an active education and research program which includes junior
and senior undergraduates as well as in an existing summer REU program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an award from the Major Research Instrumentation
program to the University of Oklahoma Norman campus. The University of Oklahoma
Norman campus will acquire the Equinox 55 (Buncker Optics INC) Fourier-Transform
Raman system and a far-infrared spectral range expansion package. The instrument
will have impact on an existing interdisciplinary research program of faculty in
the Physics and Astronomy, and the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry. The
researchers seek a fundamental understanding of polymer electrolyte and
intercalation materials for next generation lithium rechargeable batteries. The
new instrument will enhance an existing interdisciplinary research and will
benefit graduate and undergraduate students. It will be integrated into an
active education and research program which includes junior and senior
undergraduates as well as in an existing summer REU program.&lt;br/&gt;