* 0116835
* Acquisition of a Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Richard Crooks, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Farmer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 330,750.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Andreas Holzenburg (PI) and Dr. Richard Crooks
(Co-PI) at Texas A&amp;M University to acquire a state-of-the-art field-emission
scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM) equipped for electron backscattered
diffraction (EBSD), cathodoluminescence (CL), energy dispersive analysis (EDS),
and tensile/heating stage testing, in addition to the more standard secondary
electron (SE) and backscattered electron (BSE) imaging. The microscope as
specified in the proposal will allow high resolution imaging using BSE, SE and
CL, elemental microanalysis, orientation contrast imaging and automatic
orientation analysis. The tensile heating/cooling stage will allow imaging
during experiments in tension or compression, with heating functions to 1200 C.
Another strength of the microscope is the geometric arrangement of the detectors
and stage enabling CL, EDS, EBSD and tensile/heating stage testing in various
simultaneous applications. The instrument will also support projects requiring
imaging of uncotaed biological specimens. It therefore lends itself to uniquely
support a wide range of diverse and interdisciplinary research activities in
engineering as well as the biological, chemical, geological and physical
sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The imaging and analytical capabilities of the
instrument as described above will enhance specific research projects in a
number of areas including the following: development of novel chemical sensors
and catalyst materials; semiconductors, high-temperature superconductors; micro-
electromechanical systems; morphology and composition distribution in polymer
systems; soil morphology; contaminants in near-surface geologic systems and
hazardous waste sites; roles of fluids in rock deformation; evaluation of
earthquake risks; creep compaction of reservoir sands; origin of magma; rheology
of the Earth's crust and mantle; mechanical property-microstructure relationship
of advanced materials; and phospholipid bilayers and integral membrane proteins;
surface topography of biological specimens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The exact
configuration was chosen to effectively underpin interdisciplinary research and
training needs existing on campus at Texas A&amp;M University (College Station)
as well as within the region (Lamar University, Sam Houston Sate University and
Prairie View A&amp;M University, USDA). The instrument will also enhance
educational activities directed towards undergraduate and graduate studies.
Research activities at Texas A&amp;M and other regional universities (including
primarily undergraduate institutions) are intimately linked with teaching, and
the FE-SEM will be used within coursework as well as to advance student
research. Furthermore, ongoing educational outreach, through web-based
activities, provides access to these technologies to K-12 students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;