* 0116481
* MRI:  X-Ray Diffraction at the University of Southern Maine
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2003
* Stephen Pollock, University of Southern Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2003
* USD 120,174.00

0116481 Pollock

This Major Research Instrumentation grant provides funding for the acquisition
of a high-performance X-ray diffraction (XRD) system and supporting computer and
software. The XRD will support research projects in geology, soil science and
archaeology. Primary use of the XRD will be to determine qualitative, semi-
quantitative and quantitative mineralogical compositions of very fine-grained
rocks, glacio - marine and glacio - lacustrine clay, mangrove swamp clay, urban
soils, and pottery. Individual research and research collaborations (between the
departments of Geosciences, Environmental Science & Policy and Geography &
Anthropology) range from advanced research in fine-grained rocks, urban soils
and archaeological artifacts to research training issues for individuals working
with disabled students. Archaeological geology research characterizes
archaeological stone artifacts, pottery and ceramics. Additionally this
instrument will support research on very fine-grained consolidated and
unconsolidated archaeological source materials. The multidisciplinary research
efforts that this instrument supports are fully in line with long-term
infrastructure objectives at the University of Southern Maine. MRI funding
greatly enhances the research and education environment in that it broadens and
deepens the research and teaching potential of three undergraduate departments.
The total incorporation of the proposed scientific research with undergraduate
education will greatly increase the scientific literacy of our students.
University of Southern Maine undergraduates will be active participants in
research that is conducted with this equipment. Students involved with this
instrument will actively collaborate with faculty through in-depth involvement
in data collection and interpretation. Women and other underrepresented groups
choosing to take courses offered by these departments will have the opportunity
to gain experience and competence in working with advanced technological
equipment as a normal part of their education. Instructuction will emphasize
direct, 'hands-on' experience in field and laboratory research. ***

