* 0116430
* Acquisition of a 400-MHz Solid-State NMR Spectrometer for Investigations of Synthetic and Naturally Occurring Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Jay-lin Jane, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2003
* USD 259,784.00

The new 400-MHz solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer
supported by this Major Research Instrumentation award will enable an
interdisciplinary team of researchers at Iowa State University to characterize
complex polymeric materials in unprecedented detail. Multidimensional NMR in
particular will be applied to provide detailed and quantitative information on
the chemical structure, conformations, inter segmental distances, and
reorientations of molecules in disordered macromolecular solids. The insights
obtained will be the basis for the rational design of improved materials and for
controlling the interactions of macromolecular organic substances in the natural
environment with contaminants and nutrients. Specifically, the new NMR
instrument will enable the investigators to perform research on: 1) chain
conformation, packing, and dynamics in amorphous synthetic polymers, and their
effects on macroscopic materials properties, including physical aging; 2) the
configuration and sequence distribution of polymers containing new polar,
functionalized dienes; 3) nanometer-scale structures in technologically
important heterogeneous polymer systems; 4) structure and dynamics in nano-
composites of polymers with novel inorganic glasses of low glass-transition
temperature; 5) the structure and improved properties of plastics from renewable
resources; 6) the structure of soil organic matter, its formation, and its
influence on the sorption of organic and inorganic contaminants; 7) mechanisms
of carbon sequestration in soil, which can reduce atmospheric "greenhouse
gases"; 8) the development of advanced, often multidimensional NMR pulse
sequences to provide an "arsenal" for NMR analysis of organic solids with at
least three-fold increased structural resolution. The diversity of the faculty
collaborating in the use of this instrument will provide an excellent
environment for students of chemistry, materials science, agronomy, and food
science to learn and perform research in a stimulating interdisciplinary
atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Major Research
Instrumentation program to Iowa State University supports the acquisition of a
400 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) instrument. NMR is one of most powerful
methods for analyzing complex organic materials. It uses the magnetic properties
of the nuclei of many atoms. These nuclear magnets act as local "spies"
reporting on their molecular environment, and they do so in response to radio-
frequency pulses. These pulses can be designed to "tease out" specific
information about the chemical structure, about nanometer-scale domains, or
about motions of segments in the material under investigation. The new NMR
instrument will help researchers to develop materials with tailored properties,
such as less brittle biodegradable plastics, better membranes for use in fuel
cells, strong plastics from renewable resources, improved adhesives, or
lightweight materials providing increased fuel efficiency in vehicles. It will
also enhance our understanding of how soil organic matter and fossil fuels are
formed, and aid in the development of improved procedures for environmental
clean-up and for the sequestration of "greenhouse gases" from the atmosphere.
The diversity of the faculty collaborating in the use of this instrument will
provide an excellent environment for students of chemistry, materials science,
agronomy, and food science to learn and perform research in a stimulating
interdisciplinary atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;