* 0116080
* Acquisition of a Digital Image Documentation Station and a High Speed Refrigerated Centrifuge for Core Molecular Biology Lab
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Yu-Wai Peter Lin, Barry University
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 08/31/2004
* USD 85,290.00

ABSTRACT NSF Proposal # 0116080

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Petrino at Barry University to acquire a
Digital Image Documentation Station and a High-Speed Refrigerated Centrifuge for
the Core Molecular Biology Laboratory. The scientific objective of this proposal
is to comprehend the basic molecular mechanisms underlying oocyte
differentiation and embryonic development using two well-established
neuroendocrine model systems: the killifish (Fundulus heteroclitus) and the
zebrafish (Danio rerio). The project using the killifish focuses on
understanding the relationship between the pituitary gland and the ovary in
controlling cyclic reproduction. The long-term goal of the zebrafish project is
to evaluate the role of genes involved in embryonic development. The first part
of the project will involve gene cloning techniques for which the High-Speed
Refrigerated Centrifuge is crucial. Once the genes of interest are cloned, they
will be used in a variety of molecular procedures in order to determine the
spatial and temporal expression of these genes during egg and early embryo
development, for which the Digital Image Documentation System will be used to
analyze the results. Results from this study may provide new insights for
understanding not only the basic reproductive process but are also expected to
further clarify the regulation of gene expression in early embryonic
development. Furthermore, since the loss of some of these genes has been linked
to various cancers, the results are expected to lead to further studies that may
help in understanding mechanisms involved in the development of cancer. In
addition to the proposed research, the instruments requested will be used for
summer research training activities through workshops providing "hands-on"
experience to minority undergraduates, high school science students and high
school science teachers from Miami Dade and Broward counties. Some of the
techniques learned by high school teachers are then incorporated into the
curriculum thus exposing more high school students to modern biotechnology
techniques. These equipments will also be available to new faculty members,
including underrepresented female faculty, who are currently establishing their
own research. Therefore, these two pieces of equipment will very much enhance
the ability of this minority institution to provide an up to date
research/learning environment for both, faculty and its diverse student body.

