* 0116711
* MRI:   Instrumentation for the Chemical and Biological Characterization of Factors Affecting the Distribution and Phytoremediation of Seagrasses in Coastal Bays and Estuaries
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Patrick Louchouarn, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Farmer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 180,710.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Patrick Larkin, Dr. Kirk Cammarata, Dr. Eugene
Billiot, Dr. Feri Billiot, Dr. Patrick Louchouarn and Dr. Mark Morvant at Texas
A&amp;M University-Corpus Christi to &lt;br/&gt;Acquire instrumentation to study
the environmental factors affecting the distribution of seagrasses along the
south Texas Gulf coast. The instruments to be acquired include (1) a genetic
analyzer for DNA sequencing and molecular marker analysis, (2) an
ultracentrifuge for the preparation of subcellular fractions, organelle DNA,
proteins and peptides (3) a capillary electrophoresis system for the analysis of
environmental pollutants such as herbicides, organometallic compounds and
inorganic ions and (4) a freeze dryer for the preparation of sediment and plant
tissues for analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals and scope of this research
will be to 1) assess the distribution, heterogeneity and flow of genes among
seagrass meadows along the south Texas gulf coast; 2) advance our understanding
of the significance of organic and metal pollutants in our unique environment;
and 3) develop plant-based systems (or microcosms) which can specifically
detoxify contaminants in soil or water. Studies will include the analysis of
seagrass species (Halodule beaudetteii, Halophila engelmannii, Cymodocea
filiformis, Thalassia testudinum, and Ruppia maritima) for genetic diversity and
gene flow among populations highly impacted by agricultural, recreational and
industrial activity. Analysis of genetic diversity will be undertaken by the
development of molecular markers, direct DNA sequencing and statistical
analysis. Seagrasses and associated aquatic plants will be studied to assess
their ability for the bioaccumulation and/or detoxification of environmental
contaminants. In particular, mechanistic studies will utilize capillary
electrophoresis technology to characterize the occurrence of relevant chelators
in study plants. Parameters to be identified and quantified include metal
concentrations, organic acids, amino acids, phytochelatins, and transport
proteins. We also wish to study how plants and seagrasses in particular, respond
to/remove organic pollutants, since a number of such contaminants exist along
the Texas gulf coast's unique environment. We would like to: 1) quantify
hydrophobic organic carbons (HOC's) in aquatic/wetland plant tissues to
determine partitioning and biological fate, and 2) compare HOCs in rhizosphere
vs. non-rhizosphere sediments for various plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Our
research proposes to answer many questions concerning habitat requirements,
potential mechanisms of pollutant phytoremediation and the importance of
genetics for conservation, propagation and establishment of seagrass and
associated aquatic plant beds.&lt;br/&gt;