* 0116354
* Seismic Response of Rigid-Block Assemblies:  Experimental Studies and Validation of Discreet Element Numerical Tools
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2004
* Nicos Makris, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Mahendra P. Singh
* 08/31/2004
* USD 146,178.00

Recent shake table tests on wine-barrel stacks have revealed several dislocation
patterns and various modes of failure including sliding or rocking of the entire
stack, sliding or rocking of an upper portion of the stack, lift-off of the top
barrels and in few occasions appreciable twisting of the stack around its
vertical axis. While initial observations suggested a chaotic response, further
examination of the experimental results indicate that the dynamic response of
rigid-block assemblies might be much more ordered than initially thought. Order
emerges when the response of the block assembly is correlated with the
appropriate parameters of the excitation (not just the acceleration level) and
the appropriate parameters of the configuration of the entire assembly as well
as these of the individual blocks. The need to improve our understanding of the
dynamic response of rigid-block assemblies motivated the study proposed herein.
The main objectives of this grant are: (a) to experimentally verify theoretical
findings on the rocking response of single blocks; (b) to validate the
performance of existing discrete and finite element software to analyze the
dynamic response of rigid-block assemblies; and (c) establish a dependable
procedure that engineers can use with confidence to estimate the earthquake
response of rigid-block assemblies. In this project we first propose a series of
shake table experiments on single free-standing and anchored blocks to validate
recent theoretical findings on their rocking response under ground shaking. The
study will examine the ability of numerical tools to predict the overall
dislocation patterns and the appropriate model of failure and will document
their advantages and limitations. Finally the most dependable existing software
will be used to construct a set of drift, rotation and overturning spectra for a
family of rigid-block assemblies of interest. It is expected that the study will
establish a practical procedure for estimating the earthquake response of rigid-
block assemblies and provide practical retrofit recommendations for enhancing
their earthquake resistance.