* 0116753
* MRI:  Acquisition of Instrumentation for Vision Based Control of Welding and Droplet Manufacturing Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2004
* David Munoz, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 09/30/2004
* USD 155,711.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) grant provides funds for the purchase
of high speed digital imaging systems and fast processing hardware along with a
droplet deposition platform, and a robotic Gas Metal Arc welder. This equipment
will be used to build advanced vision based sensing capabilities that can be
applied to arc welding and droplet-based manufacturing processes. These
processes are intimately related, as they both involve the transfer of droplets
of molten material to a work piece, although the particular method of delivery
is different.

This equipment will allow high-speed imaging of droplets and weld pools, with
the goal of tight control of the solidification process. Because droplet
processing can play a key role in advanced manufacturing processes, including
net-shape manufacturing and rapid prototyping, the sensing and control of these
processes will be critical. Several aspects of vision based control will be
explored. For example, by extracting the dynamic behavior of the droplet
deposition process and utilizing models of droplet transfer and solidification,
control of the material micro-structure is possible. Similarly, dynamic imaging
of the weld pool will enable the determination, and thus control, of weld
quality in real time. Vision-based control of welding and droplet manufacturing
processes encompasses several different theoretical areas, including fluid
dynamics, heat transfer, computer vision, control systems, and robotics. This
instrumentation will thus strengthen the interdisciplinary connections within
the Engineering Division at the Colorado School of Mines, as well as across
campus.

