* 0116361
* Laser Heated Gradient NMR Studies of Ceramic Liquids
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2007
* Robert Marzke, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 04/30/2007
* USD 228,000.00

The growing technological importance of ceramics has highlighted the need for
new studies of the fundamental physical and chemical properties of ceramic
melts, where temperatures are very high (up to and beyond 2,000 Celsius) and
where much industrial processing is performed. We have built the apparatus
required for both spectroscopic and time-domain NMR measurements of the
properties of insulating materials at ultra-high temperatures, and have to date
determined both chemical shifts and nuclear spin relaxation times of 27Al in
several molten ceramics between 1700 and 2600 C. This apparatus will be used to
extend these measurements in well-known refractory systems, e.g. silica-alumina,
calcium-alumina and yttrium-alumina, as well as in new systems under
investigation. In addition, we plan to further develop the technique of ultra
high-temperature NMR measurements by incorporation of a magnetic field gradient
into our NMR probe. This has the twin purposes of improving our understanding of
sample temperature gradients in the apparatus, and of implementing the direct
measurement of diffusivities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the addition of these
innovations to the well-known repertory of basic measurements, the application
of NMR has the potential for significantly increasing our understanding of
liquid phases over a broad range of ceramic systems. In molten ceramics,
however, measurements are particularly challenging. The high temperatures and
strong reactivities of a typical ceramic liquid's constituents preclude the use
of sample containers. In our experiments a small sphere of material, about three
mm in diameter, is levitated in an upward flow of argon gas and heated above
~2000 C by a CO2 laser. For NMR measurements the sample must also be located in
a large magnetic field, at the center of a superconducting magnet. Sample
temperature and composition may be varied, and the NMR data provide direct
information about the effect of these variations upon the average chemical
environments of different nuclei in the liquid. Diffusion rates can also be
obtained. From this information a clearer understanding emerges, of the atomic
scale structural and dynamic properties of molten ceramics. With this, we can
better understand the macroscopic properties of a melt, for example its
viscosity, and better control the properties of the resulting ceramic material
for many applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded with AFOSR
(6.1).&lt;br/&gt;