* 0116347
* MRI:  Acquisition of an Automated DNA Analysis System for Biology Teaching and Research
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Russell Pfau, Tarleton State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Farmer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 99,677.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Sudman at Tarleton State University to purchase
an automated DNA analysis system. This instrument package will be used to
enhance the teaching and research activities within the Department of Biological
Sciences, specifically those related to molecular biology and genetics. The use
of this DNA analysis system, combined with the introduction of DNA and protein
analysis components into the laboratory portions of many of their classes, will
greatly enhance the educational experiences of all of the students associated
with the Biology Department. This modern, technological approach to biology will
give Tarleton students advantages on three different levels. Exposure to modern
research techniques and instrumentation will 1) better prepare the students to
enter post-baccalaureate educational settings - either traditional academic
settings or medical related fields; 2) prepare future K-12 teachers with a basis
for explaining and perhaps demonstrating the uses of modern molecular
techniques; and 3) prepare students for entrance into the rapidly changing,
high-tech workplace.

From an educational standpoint, individuals that will benefit from the
acquisition of a DNA analysis system will include undergraduate students,
Masters level graduate students, area high school teachers, and researchers both
at Tarleton State University and the Stephenville branch of the Texas A&M
Agricultural Research and Extension Center. Undergraduate students enrolled in
courses in the Department of Biological Sciences such as Heredity, Molecular
Biology, and Laboratory Techniques in Biochemistry will utilize the automated
DNA analysis system in a variety of laboratory situations. Students in the
graduate course Laboratory Practicum in Molecular Biology will also benefit from
the apparatus. From a research standpoint, undergraduate and graduate students
involved with several ongoing projects will directly utilize the automated DNA
analysis system. These research projects include generating data for
investigating the past history of various mammal species, DNA variation in an
endangered bird (Attwater's prairie chickens), determination of the origin of
introduced crabs in freshwater Texas lakes, introducing foreign genes into
baculoviruses to enhance insect resistance in plants, examining the origin of
specific "hybrid" plant species (such as peanuts), searching for genes related
to drought tolerance in plants, and investigations into the genetic diversity of
immune response genes in various species of mammals.

The acquisition of this DNA analysis system will have a tremendous impact on the
academic and research community associated with the Department of Biological
Sciences at Tarleton State University. From students seeking teacher
certification to those conducting Masters level research, an onsite instrument
for determining DNA sequences or other genetic differences between or within
organisms will provide a vital boost to the biological teaching and research
fields. The automated DNA analysis system will allow more than 100 students per
year the opportunity to obtain essential training with a state-of-the-art
biochemical analysis instrument. Finally, the system will provide local access
for the research community at the Stephenville branch of the Texas A&M
Agricultural Research and Extension Center, fostering additional collaborative
research activities between the two institutions.

