* 0116871
* ACQUISITION OF MATERIALS TESTING SYSTEMS FOR MULTIPLE USAGE INCLUDING MULTI-AXIAL FATIGUE ANALYSIS
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Jinghong Fan, Alfred University
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 08/31/2006
* USD 361,372.00

OIA-0116871 Institution: Alfred University PI: Jinghong Fan Title: "Acquisition
of Materials Testing Systems for Multiple Usage Including Multi-Axial Fatigue
Analysis

Abstract:

The research equipment being acquired through this grant is a 100 KN Servo
Hydraulic Axial Tension - Torsion Materials Testing System (MTS) with an
environmental chamber and other supporting facilities for measuring crack
propagation rates and characterizing material microstructures. On-going research
projects and the mission to strengthen the graduate engineering education
program at Alfred University led to this acquisition.

Results from multi-axial fatigue tests of A356 aluminum alloy conducted
previously by this PI and a multi-scale computational and microstructure-based
fatigue analytical modeling effort conducted in conjunction with Dr. McDowell of
Georgia Tech and Dr. Horstemeyer of Sandia National Labs show great potential
for increasing fatigue life of particular aluminum alloys. These instruments
will allow the extension of those results to industry.

The new equipment will be used by faculty members and students at Alfred
University. They will also be used by members of the USCAR/USAMP team and
companies and colleges in western New York State. Besides the above-mentioned
projects, the planned activities include: - Modeling and analysis of
electrostrictive, piezoelectric, and ferroelectric ceramics. - Damage and
failure analysis of carbon-carbon composites under complex loading. - Testing of
non-proportional cyclic plasticity of metals and light-weight alloys. - Analysis
behavior of brittle materials such as glass, ceramics, and concrete. -
Mechanical behavior characterization and multi-scale analysis of bio-materials.
- Environmental effects on material behavior, such as moisture and temperature
effects. Courses such as Fatigue, Fracture, and Mechanical Behavior of
Engineering Materials.