* 0116932
* Mechanisms of Memory Modulation by Vagus Nerve Stimulation and Arousal
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Douglas Smith, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Continuing Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/2005
* USD 317,647.00

It is generally accepted that some memories, such as those associated with
important events, are retained better than others. One factor that appears to be
important in the modulation of memory storage processes is the degree of arousal
associated with the experience. Memories of events that are associated with
moderate degrees of behavioral arousal tend to be retained better than memories
associated with either very low or very high levels of arousal. Research over
the past two decades has demonstrated that memory modulation is mediated by the
presence of hormones from the pituitary and the adrenals that are associated
with arousal. For example, injection of epinephrine, norepinephrine, ACTH,
vasopressin, enkephalins, or the endorphins all modulate retention performance.
However, none of these substances freely crosses the blood brain barrier to
influence activity in the brain that mediates memory storage. In an attempt to
resolve this apparent problem, recent research suggests that the vagus nerve may
be a pathway by which peripheral arousal enhances memory. These studies
demonstrated in laboratory rats that subdiaphragmic vagotomy attenuates the
memory modulatory effects of some of these agents and that electrical
stimulation of the vagus nerve, at a moderate intensity, can enhance memory of
an avoidance task. Further, low-, but not high-intensity vagus nerve stimulation
can enhance verbal learning in human subjects. Therefore, it appears that
arousal results in the release of adrenal and pituitary hormones that activate
peripheral receptors. These receptors then initiate neural messages, which
travel to the brain via the vagus to modulate mnemonic processes. The goal of
the current research project is to gain a better understanding of the neural
events produced by activity in the vagus nerve that alters the strength of
memory storage. A series of pharmacological, electrophysiological, and
behavioral studies will be conducted. The behavioral studies are linked to
electrophysiological studies that focus on characterizing changes in hippocampal
responses produced by vagus nerve stimulation and a search for their underlying
causes. The goal of the first set of studies is to characterize changes in
electrical activity in the hippocampus, a brain structure known to be
importantly involved in memory, produced by vagus nerve stimulation. Other
studies will determine whether pharmacological agents that enhance memory
produce effects similar to those seen following vagus nerve stimulation and
whether blockade of vagus nerve activity alters these responses. The results
obtained from these studies should yield a better understanding of the brain
mechanisms that underlie the modulation of memory storage processes.