* 0116419
* MRI:  Acquisition of an ICP-OES Spectrometer for Undergraduate Research and Teaching
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Duane Hrncir, Colorado Mesa University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2004
* USD 96,922.00

0116419&lt;br/&gt;Hrncir&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant, made through the Major
Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, will provide funds for the purchase of
an ICP-OES spectrometer for Mesa State College. Mesa State is a predominately
undergraduate institution with a growing emphasis on undergraduate research and
educational outreach. The instrument will be used by the geology and
environmental science programs, which are experiencing significant growth. The
faculty in these programs have a number of funded research projects involving
undergraduate students. Specific projects that would utilize the ICP-OES include
a study of manganese biogeochemistry in streams impacted by acid mine drainage,
analyses of dissolved metals in soil pore waters to elucidate factors affecting
soil mineral weathering in the high desert ecosystem of western Colorado,
studies of non-point source pollution to the Colorado River, and a study of the
sources and fate of Selenium in shallow groundwaters of the Grand Valley of
western Colorado. Acquisition of this instrument will provide support for this
research. The ICP will complement other major instrumentation at Mesa State and
will fill a need for modern atomic spectroscopy. Mesa State College provides
higher education for a large portion of western Colorado and eastern Utah.
Educational outreach programs to K-12 teachers and students are becoming
increasingly important. There are a number of collaborative programs underway
and more are planned. The ICP spectrometer will be used to provide access to
modern atomic spectroscopy to the participants in these outreach collaborations.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;