* 0116442
* Acquisition of a Micro-Respirometry System for Measuring Development of Oviparous Vertebrates and for Faculty-Mentored Undergraduate Research
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Paul Sotherland, Kalamazoo College
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 08/31/2004
* USD 77,108.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Paul Sotherland at Kalamazoo College to purchase
a Columbus Instruments Micro-Oxymax Multiple Sensor O2/CO2 20 Chamber System and
three Precision Low-temperature Incubators. The Columbus Micro-Oxymax system is
the best multiple-chamber system available for sequentially measuring metabolic
rates (i.e. rates of oxygen consumption and carbon dioxide production) of a wide
variety of small organisms, maintained at various gas concentrations , via
closed-system respirometry. The Precision incubators are dependable, standard-
refrigerator sized, incubators that typically are used to maintain small
organisms at a constant temperature (set point + 0.5 degree C). The equipment
will be used to attain the following two goals: (1) to investigate the metabolic
responses of turtle embryos to hypoxia at different stages of development and,
thereby, (a) elucidate general patterns of physiological response to hypoxia by
three turtle species that typically experience different degrees of hypoxia in
the nest during incubation, and (b) determine whether hatchery nests of
leatherback turtles, one of the three species studied, would produce relatively
more hatchlings if they were ventilated with humidified air toward the end of
incubation; and (2) to train undergraduate students in the use of the purchased
equipment while carrying out the proposed research and other research projects
that involve the measurement of metabolism. The PI and undergraduate student
collaborators will incubate eggs of snapping turtles (Chelydra serpentina),
olive ridley turtles (Lepidochelys olivacea), and leatherback turtles
(Dermochelys coriacea) (half-buried in sand in plastic boxes ventilated with air
or gas maintained at levels of nest normoxia and held in two of the incubators)
and assess their responses to different levels of acute hypoxia by measuring
their metabolic rates (while holding them in small chambers at the incubation
temperature in the third incubator). Egg and hatchling size, along with blood
parameters (hematocrit and hemoglobin concentration) of hatchlings, will also be
measured. This research will expand our understanding of the developmental
physiology of oviparous amniotes while enriching the education of many
undergraduate students. Because an embyro's environment and its genome both
affect developmental trajectories followed by the embryo and phenotype of the
hatchling, research on the effects of hypoxia on embryonic development will
provide new insights into the ecological and evolutionary consequences of
hatchling phenotypes. Experiments required to complete this research will be
performed through a collaboration between the PI and Kalamazoo College
undergraduate students working in the lab to measure metabolism and in the field
to collect eggs at Playa Grande, Costa Rica, and at Kalamazoo College's Lillian
Anderson Arboretum. These projects, and others using the equipment, will
therefore have positive impacts on the life-long learning of many students.