* 0116068
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Network Cluster of Advanced Workstations for First Principles Electronic Structure Calculations of Complex Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Gabriel Kotliar, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2003
* USD 224,058.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation program, Rugters
University will acquire instrumentation for the setup of a network of clusters
of advanced workstations. This system will be used for first-principles
investigations of physical properties of complex materials of technological and
scientific importance. The ultimate goal is to be able to predict the physical
properties of solids with the same accuracy and reliability that one can achieve
for small molecules using quantum-chemistry methods. These computations will
implement novel, state-of-the-art algorithms for electronic-structure
calculations in a massively parallel setting. The techniques span three general
areas: (i) Kohn-Sham density-functional theory in a plane-wave pseudopotential
formulation, for static calculations of systems for which electronic
correlations are weak or of intermediate strength; (ii) Standard extensions of
density functional theory and dynamical mean-field theory for strongly-
correlated electron systems; and (iii) effective-Hamiltonian statistical methods
for bridging from these microscopic methods to finite-temperature
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The materials systems to be investigated span
a wide range, including high-K dielectrics (mostly Zr, Hf, Ta, Nb, Si, and Y
oxides and oxynitrides), systems exhibiting complex martensitic transitions,
ferroelectrics, oxides and selenides, Yb- and Ce-based heavy-fermion compounds,
actinides, high temperature superconductors, and oxygen and hydrogen absorbed on
W and other transition-metal surfaces. The research will involve the training of
students and postdoctoral researches in computational materials
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Major Research
Instrumentation program, Rutgers University will acquire instrumentation to
build an appropriate system on the basis of low cost high performance Linux
PC's. These will be used in research on complex materials and carry calculations
requiring high-speed parallel computer platforms. Complex materials, with
tunable properties that can be controlled and optimized for a given application,
will continue to play a role of ever-increasing importance in the new century.
As our understanding of the laws that govern complex materials improves, and as
computer technology and computational methods advance together, our ability to
design and modify such materials will have an ever-expanding impact on science
and technology. Computational condensed-matter science plays a very important
role in this quest by providing new approaches to the modeling of material
properties and by shedding light on the unusual properties of materials via
simulations at the atomistic scale. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to this
scientific objectives, the project will have a significant impact on the
education and training of graduate and undergraduate students and postdoctoral
researchers in computational materials science at Rutgers University.&lt;br/&gt;