* 0116033
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Thermal Ionization Mass Spectrometer for Geochemical and Geochronological Applications
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* William Hart, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2004
* USD 309,962.00

0116033 &lt;br/&gt;Widom &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) program provides 51% of the cost for the acquisition of a
multi-collector thermal ionization mass spectrometer at Miami University in
Oxford, Ohio. The instrument will be equipped with ion counting and negative ion
capabilities, and will have a second-stage energy filter for measurements
requiring high abundance sensitivity. The instrument will be used for
measurement of a variety of isotope systems, including Rb-Sr, Sm-Nd, U-Th-Pb,
Re-Os, Pt-Os, and U decay-series nuclides, with a wide range of geochemical and
geochronological applications. Specific research areas that will be pursued with
the instrument include: mantle enrichment processes at convergent boundaries;
identification and dating of meteorite impact structures; sources of ocean
island basalts; petrogenetic processes and timescales in active magmatic
systems; isotopic dating of clay diagenesis; isotopic studies of microbial
processes and elemental cycling; petrogenesis of bimodal and heterogeneous
magmatic systems; spatial and temporal evolution of basalt sources and processes
in continental extensional settings; applications of tephrostratigraphy and
tephrochemistry; single-crystal dating methods; and U-Pb dating of paleosol
carbonates. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;