* 0116314
* Acquisition of Instrumentation for the Electric Energy Processing Systems Laboratory at UPRM
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Miguel Velez-Reyes, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 12/31/2004
* USD 150,000.00

The Energy Systems Group at the University of Puerto Rico in Mayaguez (UPRM)
proposes the acquisition of instrumentation to upgrade energy research
infrastructure to 15 kVA. Proposed instrumentation includes power electronics
converters, dynamometers, transformers and motors for testing, a surge
generator, power quality analyzers, computers and data acquisition cards, and
measuring devices. The Group is requesting these instruments to improve existing
computational and experimental facilities at the Electric Energy Processing
Systems Laboratory (EEPSL). Improving this research facility is vital in order
to carry out research projects and meaningful industry collaborations in energy
systems, especially in power electronics and power quality. The requested
instruments will also be used to develop design projects and laboratory
experiments that will improve research training activities (graduate and
undergraduate levels). These tools will bring research to the classroom through
undergraduate research projects, seminars, special topics courses and
demonstrations.

The proposed instrumentation will provide resources needed to expand the scope
of research and education in power systems, power electronics applications,
alternate energy sources, and power quality. EEPSL will be better equipped to
integrate UPRM work to mainstream research of the Center for Power Electronics
Systems (CPES). UPRM is a core academic partner in CPES, an NSF ERC led by
Virginia Tech. Current capabilities at EEPSL only allow testing of models and
equipment below 500 Watts. The equipment will provide tools for the validation
of models using scaled-versions of a power system at higher power levels. The
laboratory will also serve as a testing facility for devices such as motors,
drives and other industrial-size loads. A facility such as EEPSL, its personnel
and improved resources, does not exist in the Caribbean.

