* 0116649
* MRI:  Development of a Silicon Vertex Detector for the Higgs Search at the Tevatron Collider
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2005
* Cecilia Gerber, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 07/31/2005
* USD 1,683,566.00

This proposal requests support for the development of a Silicon Vertex Detector
to allow discovery of the long-sought Higgs boson using the D0 detector in Run
II at the Fermilab Tevatron proton-antiproton collider. The Tevatron collider is
currently the only facility in the world capable of making a Higgs discovery.
Simulation studies have shown that the two Tevatron collider experiments, CDF
and D0, are sensitive to the Higgs over almost all its presently allowed mass
range. Furthermore, there is some evidence from the recently decommissioned LEP
electron-positron collider at CERN for a light Higgs (~115 GeV) in the region
where the Fermilab experiments have their greatest
sensitivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key element in the Higgs search is the
ability to detect the b-quarks from Higgs decay. The b-quark lifetime is
sufficiently long (~1.5 picoseconds) that it can be identified by a Silicon
Vertex Detector that precisely measures charged particle tracks. The current D0
silicon detector was designed well before the potential for making a Higgs
discovery was appreciated and is not sufficiently radiation-hard for the Higgs
search. Thus, the D0 collaboration has embarked on designing a new Silicon
Vertex Detector that is specifically optimized for the Higgs search, to be
installed by 2004 when the performance of the current vertex detector will have
been diminished by radiation damage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this MRI
proposal, a consortium of eight university groups, five of which are currently
supported by the NSF for their D0 work, propose to develop, procure, assemble,
and test the silicon sensor assemblies for five of the six layers that will be
built. These assemblies are the active elements that make the charged track
measurements and constitute a major contribution to the detector. The
development of this new silicon vertex detector would be a joint development
project between university groups and Fermilab. Much of the intellectual and
technical leadership for this effort originates in the university groups. NSF
support will bring strong intellectual and technical input to the project
through the design, fabrication, and testing of detector components by
university faculty and students working closely together at their home
institutions. &lt;br/&gt;