* 0116498
* Acquisition of Instrumentation Cluster to Establish a Nanomagnetics Characterization Facility
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2004
* Paul Lahti, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 07/31/2004
* USD 320,000.00

CTS- 0116498&lt;br/&gt;MRI: Acquisition of an Instrumentation Cluster to
Establish a Nanomagnetics Characterization Facility&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mark T.
Tuominen&lt;br/&gt;University of Massachusetts Amherst&lt;br/&gt;$320,000&lt;br/
&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New nanofabrication methods are
emerging that serve to provide a pathway to single-domain magnetic terabit
technology. Such data-storage density is equivalent to storing 25 full-length
DVD-quality movies on a disk the size of a quarter. This grant involves the
acquisition of an equipment cluster for characterizing the properties of
designer nanoscale magnetic materials. This facility will consist of a three
instruments: a SQUID-based magnetometer, a high-resolution magnetic force
microscope (MFM), and a swept-field NMR probe. These instruments provide
complementary experimental information that advances the development of
nanomagnetic materials fabricated using self-assembly and chemical techniques.
The SQUID magnetometer will be used to obtain magnetization characteristics on
arrays of nanoscopic magnetic elements, including hysteresis curves, switching
fields, coercivity, saturation magnetization, and remanent magnetization. The
MFM will provide local magnetic information on individual nanoscopic elements,
heterostructures, and patterned nanomagnetic media. The swept-field NMR probe
will developed at UMass and be used to identify different crystalline phases and
crystalline orientations of magnetic nanostructures through the swept-field
spectrum.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;These instruments will impact many different
research projects and provide an education and training environment for numerous
users. The facility will be used to develop techniques to engineer the magnetic
properties of terabit arrays of magnetic elements made by oriented diblock
copolymer templates. Magnetic behavior will be manipulated through nanowire
growth conditions, array scale, and hybrid patterning. These efforts will be
augmented by supplemental neutron and x-ray scattering measurements at National
Laboratory facilities. The scope of this research is broadened by international,
federal, and industrial collaborations. Unique configurations of magneto-
transport devices will be developed and investigated using laterally patterned
magnetic arrays, magnetic heterostructures, and engineered magnetic nanoparticle
assemblies. New synthesis and assembly approaches will be explored in studies of
molecular magnetism. Education and training activities include instrumentation
training and nanofabrication process training through the use of interactive
digital-video.&lt;br/&gt;