* 0116504
* Acquisition of an Electron Beam Lithography System for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology Research and Education
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Paul Barbara, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Eric S. Peterson
* 08/31/2002
* USD 784,000.00

CTS-0116504&lt;br/&gt;MRI: Acquisition of an Electron-Beam Lithography System
for Nanoscience Research and Education&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Brian A.
Korgel&lt;br/&gt;University of Texas
Austin&lt;br/&gt;$784,000&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
electron beam lithography (EBL) system (JEOL JBX-5000LS) will be acquired for
nanoscience and nanotechnology research and education at the University of Texas
at Austin (UT Austin). EBL is the standard method for defining structural
features on substrates with dimensions of 100 nm or less. This EBL instrument
will aid ongoing research in a diverse range of fields including resist-material
development, which includes efforts to use EBL-defined structures for
applications in microelectromechanical systems (MEMS-both microfluidics and
sensors), characterization of electrically erasable and programmable read-only
memories (EEPROM), and fundamental studies of mesoscopic physics in
nanostructures, such as silicon nanowires and carbon nanotubes. UT Austin is
also a leader in the area of bionanoelectronics, with the development of new
evolutionarily engineered peptides for electronic materials processing, and
interfacing EBL will aid these efforts. The acquisition of the EBL instrument
will help promote an environment where students with diverse backgrounds work
together to make small structures for future technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UT Austin, as an institution, has recognized the critical
need for on-site EBL. The Texas Materials Institute (TMI), the Center for Nano-
and Molecular Science and Technology (CNM), the Microelectronics Research Center
(MRC), the College of Engineering, and the Departments of Chemical Engineering,
Chemistry and Biochemistry, and Physics have committed $466K in matching funds
toward the instrument purchase along with support for a full-time technician at
a salary of $70K per year. The instrument will be managed through the MRC and
located in the cleanroom (12,000 square feet of class 100 and class 1000 space)
at the Pickel Research Campus at UT Austin where it will greatly strengthen and
complement the existing microfabrication and nanofabrication facilities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;