* 0116150
* Acquisition of Magnetic Source Imaging System for Cognitive and Educational Neuroimaging
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Panagiotis Simos, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2004
* USD 2,000,000.00

This grant supports the acquisition of a multi-channel biomagnetometer system
for Magnetic Source Imaging (MSI). This system will be used for non-invasive
recording of magnetic signals emitted naturally by the human brain during
performance of sensory-motor, cognitive and linguistic tasks, and for
constructing functional images of brain activation. These images reflect the
spatio-temporal patterns of brain activity mediating the psychological and
behavioral functions required by the experimental tasks. During the past three
years, we have used MSI to establish (i) the reliability and validity of
functional maps of the brain mechanisms underlying cognitive functions,
including motor, somatosensory, and receptive language (Breier et al., 1999a,b;
Breier et al., 2000, in press; Papanicolaou et al., 1999; Simos, 1998a,b;
1999a,b; 2000a). These maps have proven so accurate that MSI is routinely used
in our institution for outlining the borders of language-specific cortex in
neurosurgical candidates in order to avoid damage to normally functioning neural
mechanisms during resection of brain lesions lying close to these areas of the
brain, thus reducing post-operative morbidity. (ii) We have accumulated
sufficient data for constructing reliable maps of brain mechanisms associated
with reading and phonological decoding in adults (Breier et al., 1998, 1999c,
Simos et al., 1998a, 2000a, in press) and in school-age children (Simos et al.,
2000b,c, in press) as well as kindergarten children learning to read. (iii) We
have identified brain activation maps specific to children with identified
reading difficulties and children at-risk for developing reading difficulties.
We are following these children as they learn to read through different
instructional methods to determine how these maps change with improved reading
proficiency (Simos et al., 2000b,c,d).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These discoveries
led us to consider a host of experimental questions ranging from the layout of
the mechanisms of oral and written language in the brains of bilingual and
polyglot children and adults to questions regarding the formation of such
mechanisms in the course of brain maturation and development, and to questions
relating to specific spatio-temporal activation patterns underlying component
cognitive and linguistic functions. We have begun addressing these questions
with the support of several NSF and NIH grants (NSF grant #9979968; NIH grants
RO1 NS37941 and RO1 HD38346) using a 148-channel biomagnetometer acquired for
clinical studies belonging to Hermann Hospital. Not surprisingly, the use of
that system for the conduct of basic research involving normal volunteers and
children has become problematic. The system we will purchase will be located on
the U of Texas- Houston campus, outside Hermann Hospital, and will be
exclusively used for basic research involving children and
adults.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our group has advanced MSI technology, especially
in areas involving higher cortical functions. We have developed specific
applications to education, literally bringing neuroscience into public schools.
In order to continue to advance the technology and expand educational and
training applications, a MSI laboratory dedicated to research is needed, leading
to this grant under the Major Research Instrumentation Program.