* 0116240
* Design of Elastomeric-Piezoceramic Smart Structures for Use as Tunable Resonators
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Raul Ordonez, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Alison Flatau
* 08/31/2003
* USD 84,820.00

The investigation and analysis of the behavior of piezoceramic-elastomer
composites is the focus of this work. This newly emerging class of smart-
structures combines the adaptability and passive damping characteristics of
elastomers with the active capabilities of piezoceramics to create smart-
structures with both passive and active vibration suppression
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of predictive constitutive
models and effective control algorithms for the composites are the two primary
objectives of this research project. A prototype composite, tested in a two
degree of freedom vibratory system, is used as a test
case.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The piezoelectric-ceramic composite is modeled using
a novel strain energy approach, following the rubrics of composite mechanics and
rubber elasticity, that incorporates state of deformation dependence, composite
geometry and anisotropy, the hyperelastic mechanical response of the elastomer
and the piezoelectric component's electro-mechanical behavior. Experimental
investigation of the composite's response to sinusoidal loadings is performed to
develop a transfer function and thereby more robust control algorithms.
Experiment and theory are combined to generate analytical control algorithms
that follows from the constitutive model of the composite, but allow for model
dynamic uncertainty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In completion of this project,
constitutive models for the behavior of a new class of smart-structures, control
algorithms for their use as vibration absorbers, and working prototypes of these
absorbers are produced. The adaptability of the composites allows for the
creation of highly functional surface mounted, in-line, or molded components.
This work will impact the field in a variety of applications, including but not
limited to, active automotive mounts, vibratory isolation of specific components
in assembly such as shock-proof CD players, telescopes, or rotating machinery,
and in other situations where conventional techniques can not be
applied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;