* 0116325
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Ecological Boundaries and Cultural Frontiers in the Later Holocene Prehistory of the Central Alaska Peninsula
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2001,05/31/2004
* R. Barry Lewis, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 05/31/2004
* USD 10,882.00

ABSTRACT OPP-0116325

This dissertation project examines the effects of volcanism and other
paleoenvironmental factors on the movement, boundary behavior, and settlement
pattern and chronology of Late Holocene human populations on the Alaska
Peninsula. Geologic sections on the Alaska Peninsula will be sampled and
analyzed for both paleoenvironmental reconstruction and comparison of
compositions of historic and prehistoric pyroclastic flows. A 4.5m geologic
profile on the Pacific coast of the Aniakchak National Monument and Preserve
will be sampled for pollen, microfossils, and other organics to reconstruct how
Holocene vegetation reacted to both periodic and catastrophic volcanism. One
focus here will be on the rate at which vegetation recolonized the 3400 B.P.
Aniakchak pyroclastic flow, allowing the eventual cultural reoccupation of the
region. Pollen and other samples will be taken at least every 5cm through much
of the 4.5m profile, with sampling every centimeter after major volcanic events.
Samples will be recovered from the 3400 B.P. Aniakchak pyroclastic flow and from
the Katmai pyroclastic flow in the Valley of Ten Thousand Smokes. Comparison of
variables between these two flows will determine the utility of using the Katmai
PF as a historic revegetation analog for the Aniakchak flow. Surface testing and
both surface and subsurface samples will be taken from the pyroclastic flow
exposures, with samples compared for percent of silica, abrasiveness, and other
variables. The research will contribute to the understanding of volcanism's
effects on human paleogeography in other northern and maritime regions of the
globe.