* 0116153
* MRI:  Acquisition of Xray Diffraction System for Interdisciplinay Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Ku-Yen Li, Lamar University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2004
* USD 250,000.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program for Lamar University
supports the acquisition of a multifunctional x-ray diffraction system to
support interdisciplinary materials research and educational activities at Lamar
University and Lamar's research and educational collaborators in other
universities and industry. This system will supply the following advanced
materials characterization capabilities: powder diffraction, particle sizing,
strain analysis, texture, phase identification, quantitative phase composition,
lattice parameter determination, amorphous component characterization, and thin
layer analysis. These capabilities will be used to support research in the
following areas: environmental science and engineering, polymers, nano-
structured materials, structured thin films, high technology alloys,
superconducting and magnetic materials, and geological and paleontological
materials. The research will involve 19 senior personnel and numerous graduate
and undergraduate students from Lamar University, Prairie View A&M University,
Texas A&M University, and the Technological Institute of Saltillo, Mexico, as
well as the steel and mining industries. The project will promote regional and
international research collaboration and will give numerous research and
educational projects access to high quality x-ray diffraction.

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program, Lamar
University will acquire a high quality x-ray diffraction system to support
interdisciplinary materials research and educational activities at Lamar
University and research collaboration activities with other universities and
industry. The system will provide advanced capabilities to characterize physical
and chemical structural phenomena in a wide range of research and educational
projects involving environmental samples, nanoscience and engineering, thin
films, high technology alloys, advanced electronic and magnetic samples and
geological materials. It involves several universities (Lamar, Prairie View A&M
University, Texas A&M and the Technological Institute of Saltillo, Mexico).
Nineteen senior personnel and numerous graduate and undergraduate students will
be given access to a high quality research system that will promote regional and
international collaboration.

