* 0116795
* Introducing Research-Based Curricula to Rochester Institute of Technology
* EDU,DGE
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2003
* Scott Franklin, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 05/31/2003
* USD 47,229.00

&lt;br/&gt;Explorations in Science is an activity-based physics course for non-
science majors. Developed during my&lt;br/&gt;tenure as an NSF Postdoctoral
Fellow in Science, Mathematics, Engineering, and Technology Education (PFSMETE),
Explorations in Science uses the study of common, natural phenomena and student-
directed&lt;br/&gt;group projects to stimulate interest in a population
traditionally quite apathetic towards physics. Activities&lt;br/&gt;use
sophisticated computer tools to take, display, and interpret data. I would like
to bring this curriculum to&lt;br/&gt;my new, permanent, institution, the
Rochester Institute of Technology. While RIT is an institution
of&lt;br/&gt;technology, it has a significant population of students who will
benefit from Explorations in Science&lt;br/&gt;including students of imaging
science, business, and the social sciences. Faculty from the College
of&lt;br/&gt;Imaging Arts &amp; Sciences have already expressed interest in
Explorations in Science, particularly the&lt;br/&gt;projects dealing with human
body motions as these are relevant to students studying computer
animation.&lt;br/&gt;To successfully offer Explorations in Science at RIT,
computer sensors (e.g. force sensors, temperature&lt;br/&gt;probes, and light
sensors) must be purchased. Roughly half of this proposal is for equipment that
are not&lt;br/&gt;currently available in our existing labs.&lt;br/&gt;A
necessary condition for the successful implementation of new materials is
faculty support. To facilitate&lt;br/&gt;the implementation of a research-based
curricula, I would like to begin a new project on faculty
objectives&lt;br/&gt;for introductory physics courses. RIT has a national
reputation of excellence in engineering and the&lt;br/&gt;imaging arts.
Therefore, an overwhelming majority of students taking introductory physics at
RIT are not&lt;br/&gt;physics majors. It is important to understand why other
departments require these students to take physics&lt;br/&gt;and what they want
their students to take from the class. The traditional answers, including "how
to think"&lt;br/&gt;and "problem-solving ability," are too vague to be useful.
Recent work in physics education has attempted&lt;br/&gt;to uncover exactly what
is meant by "how to think," i.e. what we the physics community see as
the&lt;br/&gt;fundamental diamond in the physics rough. By using the ideas and
vocabulary from this research, 1 hope to&lt;br/&gt;be able to better
characterize how other departments see physics. This will allow physics
departments to&lt;br/&gt;better suit the needs of the majority of their students
and make it easier to introduce new curricula such as&lt;br/&gt;Explorations in
Physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;