* 0116972
* Collaborative Research: Larsen Ice Shelf: A Model for Antarctic Ice Shelf-Ocean Dynamics
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2001,05/31/2005
* Michael Prentice, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 05/31/2005
* USD 88,748.00

0107167&lt;br/&gt;Prentice&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award, provided by the
Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the Office of Polar Programs,
supports a collaborative research project between the University of Southern
Illinois at Carbondale and the University of New Hampshire. Foraminiferal and
stable isotopic analyses of modern sediments and core samples from the Weddell
Sea shelf will be used to address the mechanisms underlying the recent collapse
of the Larsen Ice Shelf, Antarctica. The Larsen Ice Shelf, located on the
northwestern margin of the Weddell Sea along the east side of the Antarctic
Peninsula, may be collapsing due to a marked increase in mean annual atmospheric
temperature (~+2.5 degrees C) that has resulted in sea-ice free conditions for
at least 4 months per year. Alternatively, basal ice shelf melting due to
intrusion of relatively warm deepwater may be primarily responsible. From May 6
to June 1, 2000, the Research Vessel Nathaniel B. Palmer (NBP) was used to
collect a series of surface sediment grab samples, hydrographic casts, high-
resolution seismic data, and gravity cores from a large region of the Weddell
Sea shelf formerly covered by the Larsen Ice Shelf-A
(LIS-A).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Samples collected from surface sediment grabs and
gravity cores will be analyzed for foraminiferal distribution (planktonic and
benthic; living and dead) data as well as planktonic and benthic foraminiferal
oxygen and carbon isotopic analyses (d18O and d13C). Past work has shown a
strong correlation between foraminiferal distributions and bottom water masses
on the Antarctic continental shelf. Water samples collected from the major water
masses in the western Weddell Sea will be measured for their d18O and d13C
compositions. The extent of equilibrium d18O and d13C precipitation will be
established for selected benthic foraminifers, as well as their d18O and d13C
values calibrated to the modern oceanography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The modern
foraminiferal distribution and geochemical data will be applied to kasten core
and jumbo piston core samples, in addition to other collaborative research, to
reconstruct the oceanographic and biotic changes associated with the recent
collapse of the LIS-A. The following hypothesis will be tested: That incursions
of relatively warm Weddell Deep Water onto the western Weddell Sea shelf has led
to the retreat of the LIS-A. The results will contribute to understanding
oceanic causal mechanisms for ice shelf collapse and provide a link between
Northern Hemisphere climatic and oceanographic change and the Southern
Hemisphere. A detailed record of benthic foraminiferal distribution and also
planktonic and benthic foraminiferal d18O and d13C will be reconstructed for
much of the Holocene in order to determine the natural variability of the LIS
and underlying ocean. This work will contribute to detection of anthropogenic
forcing of Antarctic ice shelf collapse. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;