* 0116577
* Development of Integrated Seismic, Geodetic and Volcanic Gas Surveillance Instrumentation for Volcanic Research
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Philip Kyle, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 08/31/2003
* USD 148,363.00

0116577&lt;br/&gt;Kyle&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award, provided by the Office
of Polar Programs, the Division of Earth Sciences, and the Office of Integrative
Activities at NSF, supports development of an integrated instrument package for
surveillance of volcanic gas, seismic activity, and elevation change. Seismic
and geodetic methods are the principal tools used to monitor volcanoes, as these
have been shown to be the most useful means of forecasting volcanic eruptions
through the remote sensing of deviatoric stress release and intruding and
withdrawing mass fluxes of magma. During the past 10 years, technological
advances have resulted in a new generation of instrumentation and data
acquisition methods in both seismology and geodesy. This collaborative project
involving NM Tech researchers, staff from UNAVCO, and Guralp Systems will
develop and deploy a low-power cost-effective real-time integrated instrument
package of seismic, geodetic and environmental sensors primarily for monitoring
the activity at active volcanoes and in tectonically active areas. The
Integrated Surveillance Instrumentation (ISI) stations that will be developed
and installed under this project are intended to have low power requirements
(approximately 2 watts) and to run unattended for periods of up to 12 months
under the harshest of environmental conditions. The plan calls for deployment of
5 ISI stations at Mt. Erebus and one in New Mexico. At Mt Erebus, the project
will monitor on-going volcanic activity associated with the persistent
anorthoclase phonolite magma lake. The NM station will monitor ongoing seismic
and long-term deformational activity associated with the inflating Socorro magma
body in the Rio Grande rift. The instrumentation developed should have wide
application in both applied and basic earth science projects with the potential
to contribute significantly to societal goals of better predicting volcanic and
seismic natural hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;