* 0116236
* Collaborative Research:  Initiation and Maintenance of Population Maxima of the Ctenophore Mnemiopsis leidyi in Northern Coastal Waters
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* John Costello, Providence College
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/2005
* USD 328,528.00

Initiation and Maintenance of Population Maxima of the Ctenophore Mnemiopsis
leidyi in Northern Coastal Waters&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Substantial increases in
peak concentrations of the ctenophore Mnemiopsis leidyi have occurred in the
last decade in Narragansett Bay, an estuary at the northern boundary of the
geographic distribution of this species. The seasonal timing of Mnemiopsis
pulses has also shifted from late summer to early spring during years with
earlier warming of bay water temperatures. Significant ecological consequences
of this temporal introduction are potentially great. Mnemiopsis is now abundant
during the peak period of fish spawning in the region. Severely depleted stocks
of zooplankton have been observed in spring and summer of 2000. Similar changes
in seasonality and abundance of the species are likely to be occurring in other
estuaries in the northeast. Despite the clear ecological importance of large
pulses of ctenophores, the quantitative basis for understanding conditions
giving rise to rapid population increases is limited. While temperature and food
supply must ultimately be dominant variables controlling growth and reproduction
of this species, there is little information about reproduction of over-
wintering populations or conditions&lt;br/&gt;which favor growth of larvae in
spring. In this study the investigators will conduct field and laboratory
studies of Mnemiopsis over the full annual cycle to determine effects of
temperature, food supply and food quality on reproductive rates and larval
growth. The role of microzooplankton, addressed in only two previous laboratory
studies will be fully addressed in both field and laboratory components. Areas
of Narragansett Bay which have recently been observed to sustain unexpectedly
large population of Mnemiopsis in winter, as well as areas in which populations
pulses are delayed until spring will be compared. Hydrographic data will be
collected and examined for both direct and indirect effects of physical factors
on population growth, including the role of thermal stratification in population
pulse initiation. Given the evidence for disruptive effects on ecosystems of
seasonal or geographic invasions of Mnemiopis leidyi and the limited number of
studies of this species at the northern edge of its geographic range,
justification for this study is compelling. Quantitative information on the
influence of temperature and food on both larval and adult M. leidyi at the
level of detail collected in this study will significantly advance our
understanding of factors required for initiation and maintenance of population
pulses of this species.&lt;br/&gt;