* 0116511
* Acquisition of a Dual-Photon/Confocal Microscope for a Greater New Orleans Consortium of Biological Researchers
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Kay C Dee, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Farmer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 377,728.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Kay C Dee at Tulane University to acquire a
dual-photon/laser scanning confocal microscope. This microscope will support the
activities of a diverse consortium of biological researchers and educators in or
near New Orleans, Louisiana (from Tulane University, the University of New
Orleans, Xavier University, the Audubon Center for Research of Endangered
Species, and the USDA Southern Regional Research Center). A broad range of
biologically-oriented research and education efforts will be significantly and
positively impacted by the new instrumentation, ranging from fundamental studies
of embryonic development, to examinations of cellular and molecular functions,
to studies of bacterial biofilms and cotton fiber organization. These distinct
projects are connected through geographic location (greater New Orleans area)
and through the need to obtain high-resolution, three-dimensional images of
subcellular structures, in real-time or time-lapse, without associated
phototoxicity or bleaching. Confocal microscopy offers image resolutions far
superior to those obtainable via conventional fluorescence microscopy, and
allows the collection and assembly of sequential two-dimensional images to
construct three-dimensional representations of a sample. Dual-photon microscopy
utilizes short pulses of a lower energy laser to control fluorescence from a
sample in three dimensions, increasing sensitivity and drastically reducing the
problems of photobleaching and phototoxicity. The dual-photon microscope is a
state-of-the-art imaging tool, ideal for use in the research-intensive learning
environments of the consortium.&lt;br/&gt;The microscope will be housed in the
Coordinated Instrumentation Facility (CIF) at Tulane University. The mission of
the CIF is to maintain, manage, and operate high-priced instrumentation for
academic, non-profit, and private sector researchers; the CIF is a well-
established provider of maintenance, operation, and technical support for
instrumentation. The CIF microscopy laboratory at Tulane is a convenient,
central location for the new microscope, easily accessible by all members of the
consortium of contributing researchers. A summary list of the types of
consortium research/educational projects for which the microscope will be used
includes: embryo development and preservation; bacterial biofilms; tissue
engineering, cellular signal transduction, and biomechanics; neurophysiology,
endocrinology, and renal hemodynamics; cotton genetics and fiber quality;
pharmaceutical and biotechnology applications; and oocyte maturation and
fertilization.&lt;br/&gt;By housing this state-of-the-art microscope in the CIF,
whose goal is to supply instrumentation to researchers at Tulane as well as any
and all neighboring institutions, the cutting-edge technology of dual-photon
microscopy will certainly benefit researchers in the greater New Orleans area.
Moreover, this award has potential impact far beyond New Orleans, since no
instrument with similar capabilities is currently available in the entire state
of Louisiana. The new microscope system will not only be accessible to
researchers, but will also be used in mentored training opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students. Furthermore, programs (such as the
Louisiana Alliance for Minority Participation, a "3+2" program between the
Tulane School of Engineering and Xavier University, etc.) are in place to make
these educational opportunities available to minority students. In summary, the
installation and shared use of the microscope will significantly strengthen
scientific expertise and collaborations in Louisiana, and will therefore have a
major impact on an area of the country geographically underrepresented in
nationally-recognized scientific and engineering efforts.&lt;br/&gt;