* 0116574
* Acquisition of Computing Infrastructure for Bioinformatics Research and Education
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Charles DeLisi, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 08/31/2005
* USD 406,000.00

Acquisition of Computing Infrastructure for Bioinformatics Research and
Education

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Zhiping Weng at Boston University to establish a
high-performance, cost-effective computing infrastructure to support the
research and educational needs of the University's Bioinformatics Program. Dr.
Weng and six co-investigators of this grant form the computational core of the
program. Their research spans structural proteomics, functional genomics and
gene expression/regulatory networks. On a daily basis they work with all known
sequences, all available genomes, all known protein structures, transcriptional
levels of all genes in an organism, and the like. Their computational needs far
exceed currently available facilities. Boston University is among the first to
establish a graduate degree program in Bioinformatics. The program is currently
funded by an NSF IGERT grant and has been growing very rapidly. The large number
of students in the program places great demand on computing resources. This NSF
grant will allow for the purchase of a computer cluster dedicated to
Bioinformatics research and educational activities at Boston University. The
cluster will have the following components: a file server with 1 terabyte
storage, an 80-node compute server with dual Intel 1GHz processors, 2 GB RAM,
and 106 GB storage per node, a backup file server and a web server. A fast giga-
bit network will connect the file server and the compute server. Such a cluster
coincides ideally with the high-throughput, large-scale nature of Bioinformatics
research programs. The computer cluster will be able to support innovative
research in biomolecular systems including functional genomics, structural
proteomics, and cell systems analysis. It will enable the faculty, postdoctoral
researchers, graduate and undergraduate students to attack research questions
that require months of CPU time, and which could not otherwise be addressed
within the constraints of currently available facilities. It will also greatly
strengthen our Bioinformatics Program at Boston University, which is dedicated
to training a new generation of scientists and biotech industry leaders capable
of implementing high-performance computational solutions to the biological
problems of the 21st century.