* 0116630
* MRI:  Acquisition of an Image Analysis Suite for Aquatic Ecology Research and Research Training at the University of Illinois at Springfield
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Michael Lemke, University of Illinois at Springfield
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 08/31/2004
* USD 112,396.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. David Jenkins and Michael Lemke at the
University of&lt;br/&gt;Illinois at Springfield (UIS) to purchase an image
analysis suite to be used in aquatic ecology&lt;br/&gt;research and st udent
(B.S., M.S.) research training. The image analysis suite will also be
available&lt;br/&gt;to o ther scientists and students at t he UIS campus. The
suite will be composed of three different&lt;br/&gt;research-grade Olympus
microscopes: a compound light microscope with epifluorescence
and&lt;br/&gt;phase-contrast capabilities; a stereo dissecting microscope; and
an inverted light microscope. All&lt;br/&gt;three microscopes can be connected
to a computer Image Analysis System with a digital camera,&lt;br/&gt;plus that
camera can be used to photograph electrophoresis results. Finally, a Polaroid HR
6000&lt;br/&gt;Digital Palette Color Film Recorder will allow digital images to
be converted to film suitable for&lt;br/&gt;publication or presentation at
scientific meetings or in the classroom, and a printer will
provide&lt;br/&gt;hardcopy capability.&lt;br/&gt;Research with the image
analysis suite will focus on two related disciplines of aquatic
ecology:&lt;br/&gt;invertebrate and microbial ecology. Aquatic invertebrate
ecology research at UIS investigates:&lt;br/&gt;the potential of invertebrates
as wetland indicators in central Illinois; mechanisms of
organismal&lt;br/&gt;spatial patterns in temporary freshwat er ponds;
empirically-based models of metapopulation&lt;br/&gt;networks and gene flow; and
endosymbionts in microcrustaceans. The microscopes will be
used&lt;br/&gt;frequently for all of that research (e.g., taxonomic
identification, fluorescence microscopy to&lt;br/&gt;indicate symbiont
presence), and images of electrophoresis gels will facilitate research
on&lt;br/&gt;population genetics. Aquatic microbial ecology research at UIS
heavily relies on microscopic&lt;br/&gt;analysis (e.g., fluorescent staining for
enumeration and biomass) to investigate: bacterial&lt;br/&gt;population dynamics
in anthropogenically-impacted st reams, t he identification of culturable
and&lt;br/&gt;non-culturable river microbial communities by advanced molecular
biology techniques,&lt;br/&gt;degradation of natural and t oxic subst ances by
microbial assemblage (i.e. domains Bacteria and&lt;br/&gt;Archaea), and rain-
pulse effects on bacterial and viral abundance. Students will be trained in
use&lt;br/&gt;of the suite, and will then conduct research for independent and
honor's projects, Masters theses,&lt;br/&gt;and advanced courses (e.g., Aquatic
Ecology, Microbial Ecology). Ot her science faculty and&lt;br/&gt;students will
also share in use of the microscopes.&lt;br/&gt;The requested instruments will
permit an expansion of current research and research training,&lt;br/&gt;and
will facilitate the collaboration of UIS faculty with investigators at other
institutions. UIS&lt;br/&gt;students will have greatly improved training and
access to important scientific equipment for&lt;br/&gt;aquatic ecology, which
will in turn advance UIS r esearch capabilities and st rengthen the
curricula&lt;br/&gt;in the UIS Biology and Chemistry departments.