* 0116362
* Acquisition and Development of a Synchrotron Compatible Growth and Characterization Facility
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Yves Idzerda, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2004
* USD 304,534.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program to Montana State
University is for instrument development of a movable magnetic films-growth
facility designed to be connected to an X-ray synchrotron beamline for advanced
in-situ characterization of as grown magnetic multilayers. The growth facility
will have both chemical vapor deposition capability that will grow superior
performance magnetic semiconductors and half-metallic ferromagnets (HMF) and a
thermal deposition capability for growth of single-element magnetic films. It
will also be available for use by other researchers through research
collaboration with the PI. This project will provide a powerful means for
understanding, quantify and control interfacial behavior for the creation and
study of established and new phenomena that potentially have tremendous impact
on the explosive growth of spintronics. This instrument development project will
help train graduate students and postdocs in instrument science and forefront
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Major Research
Instrumentation program to Montana State University is for instrument
development of a movable magnetic films-growth facility designed to be connected
to an X-ray synchrotron beamline for advanced in-situ characterization of as
grown magnetic multilayers. The growth facility will have both chemical vapor
deposition capability that will grow superior performance magnetic
semiconductors and half-metallic ferromagnets (HMF) and a thermal deposition
capability for growth of single-element magnetic films. It will also be
available for use by other researchers through research collaboration with the
PI. This project will provide a powerful means for understanding, quantify and
control interfacial behavior for the creation and study of established and new
phenomena that potentially have tremendous impact on the explosive growth of
spintronics. This instrument development project will help train graduate
students and postdocs in instrument science and forefront research.&lt;br/&gt;