* 0116642
* MRI: Development of a Six-Axis, Magnetically Levitated Instrument for Nanoscale Science and Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Won-jong Kim, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* mario rotea
* 08/31/2005
* USD 290,566.00

OIA-0116642&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Texas Engineering Experiment
Station&lt;br/&gt;PI: Won-jong Kim&lt;br/&gt;Title: "MRI: Development of a Six-
Axis, Magnetically Leviatated Instrument for Nanoscale Science and
Engineering&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Nanoscale science and engineering is an emerging technological field and has
immense economic and societal impacts. This NSF MRI project presents an
innovative concept of a six-axis magnetically levitated (maglev) instrument.
This novel instrument can be a fundamental research tool in many crucial
research activities in nanotechnology and other precision applications dealing
with delicate motions and forces. They include manufacture of nanoscale
structures, atomic-level manipulation, assembly and packaging of microparts,
vibration isolation for instrumentation, and seismic motion detection. A
compact, lightweight, single-moving part that holds the specimen will eventually
be magnetically levitated in all six degrees of freedom. The objective of this
MRI project is development of a maglev prototype design concept and to
demonstrate its applicability in nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Magnetic
levitation is an enabling technology for high-precision multi-axis motion
generation and control. During the first year of this instrument development
program, we will derive a dynamic model and analyze mechanical and
electromagnetic characteristics. After completing detailed design, we will
construct a single-axis unit lenear actuator, compare its behavior with the
theory, and calibrate it experimentally. This unit actuator will be a corner
stone for the full 6-axis instrument to be constructed by the end of the second
year. During the last year of this MRI project, we will design and implement
real-time digital controllers based on the dynamic model obtained previously,
and perform various tests and experiments.