* 0116808
* Experimental Studies in High-Spin Molecular Magnets
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Myriam Sarachik, CUNY City College
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 12/31/2004
* USD 283,000.00

This project investigates the magnetic properties of molecules containing
clusters of magnetic atoms that are exchange coupled to produce a lattice of
identical "nanomagnets; in particular, Mn12-Acetate and Fe8. These materials
have a number of interesting properties: resonant spin tunneling, quantum
interference (Berry's phase) effects in the magnetic relaxation, quantum
coherent oscillations of the spin, and evidence for an abrupt crossover between
thermally assisted magnetic relaxation and relaxation by pure quantum tunneling.
Although much progress has been made, a full understanding of these materials
awaits the resolution of a number of important issues, including the strength of
spin-phonon coupling, the roles of dipolar interactions and hyperfine fields,
and the nature of the crossover between thermally-assisted and pure quantum
tunneling. Through measurements at very low temperatures using micron size Hall
bars, this project will study the effect of externally applied transverse
magnetic fields, the effect of microwave radiation, and to search for possible
ferromagnetic or dipolar ordering. Molecular magnets are interesting from a
fundamental point of view because they represent the borderline between
classical and quantum magnetism. They are also interesting for their possible
use for very high-density storage, and as potential candidates for elements in
quantum computation. Graduate students involved in the project receive training
in fundamental experimental techniques with cutting edge technology. This
training will prepare them for a range of careers in academe, industry or
government.

Mn12-acetate and Fe8 are organic molecular crystals containing a very large
number of regularly spaced, magnetically identical spin-10 clusters of a size
that is borderline between the quantum and classical regimes. Interest in these
materials has been sparked by a remarkable series of experimental observations
of quantum-mechanical effects, including quantum tunneling of the spin magnetic
moment, quantum-mechanical phase interference and the superposition of quantum
states. Although much progress has been made, a full understanding of these
materials awaits the resolution of a number of important issues, including the
strength of the coupling of the spin magnetic moment to lattice vibrations, the
roles of dipolar interactions and nuclear fields, and the nature of the
crossover between the quantum and classical regimes. Through measurements at
very low temperatures using micron size Hall bars, we propose to investigate the
effect of externally applied transverse magnetic fields, the effect of microwave
radiation, and to search for possible ferromagnetic or dipolar ordering. In
addition to their interest for fundamental reasons, these materials are
important for their possible use in very high-density storage, and as potential
candidates for elements in quantum computation. Graduate students involved in
the project receive training in fundamental experimental techniques with cutting
edge technology. This training will prepare them for a range of careers in
academe, industry or government.