* 0116384
* MRI/RUI(Chemistry): Development of High Speed Gas Chromatography - Multiplex Coherent Raman Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Peter Chen, Spelman College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Kuczkowski
* 08/31/2005
* USD 316,800.00

With support from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, Prof. Peter
C. of Spelman College will develop a state-of-the-art high speed (100 Hz) Raman-
based spectroscopic detector to identify eluents from a high speed gas
chromatograph (GC). The resulting instrument will be capable of rapid and
accurate identification of GC eluents, able to distinguish among isomers and
provide functional group information. Potential applications include a) analysis
of air, water or sediment for pollutants; analysis of unknown reation products
or compounds found in natural products; c) study of the degradation products of
pesticides and herbicides; d) analysis of petroleum products, for example, the
presence or fate of additives such as MTBE in groundwater; e) study of the
presence or fate of additives or allergens in foods, flavors, feedstock and
fragrances; and f) study of polymer decomposition and degassing upon heating.
These studies will also provide intensive research training for undergraduate
students who are members of underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tandem techniques that interface chromatography with
spectroscopic detectors are among the most powerful tools available for
analyzing mixtues. By combining two techniques, tandem instruments can overcome
the limitations of a single technique, for example spectral congestion due to
mixtures, or difficulty identifying unknown species using only chromatographic
retention times. This high speed GC/Raman instrument will advance the knowledge
in high speed separation science, and find applications in many areas of
science, including materials chemistry and environmental sciences.