* 0116622
* Development of an all-optical, broadband electron paramagnetic resonance spectrometer with picosecond time-resolution
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* James Longworth, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Wade N. Sisk
* 08/31/2005
* USD 949,999.00

With support from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF) Programs, W. Andreas Schroeder,
Charles E. Brown and James W. Longworth of the University of Illinois in
Chicago, and James R. Norris of the University of Chicago will develop an all-
optical, broadband electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectrometer with
picosecond time resolution. This ultrafast EPR spectrometer will allow the
investigators to perform picosecond time-resolved absorption and echo
spectroscopy on the formation and decay of triplet states, radicals, and radical
ion pairs in both chemical systems and biochemical enzymes. The spectrometer
will have 10 picosecond temporal resolution, which is three orders of magnitude
faster than conventional EPR spectrometers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
instrument will require the construction of a high-power picosecond laser
system, the generation of optical frequencies by optical parametric generation,
the generation of ultrashort microwave pulses by optical rectification, its
optical propagation, detection by electro-optic sampling and analysis of the
detected microwave signals by advanced signal processing. Each of these
exemplifies the current state-of-the-art and thus represents an education
opportunity for both graduate and undergraduate students. This technology will
become widely adopted, due to the significance of photochemistry and
photobiology in both research and industry.