* 0116098
* Development of a Multi-Purpose Laser Deposition Facility for Research and Education in Nanostructured Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,03/31/2005
* W. Lacefield, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 03/31/2005
* USD 146,642.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program to the University of
Alabama Birmingham (UAB) is for the development of a multipurpose laser
deposition facility for research and education in nanostructured materials. The
first phase of the project consists in the development of a novel nanoparticles
pulsed beam laser deposition technique that delivers size-selected nanoparticles
to deposit arbitrarily shaped patterns on a substrate. The second phase of the
project consists in the integration of the new technique with conventional
Pulsed Laser Deposition technique into a single deposition facility. The new
facility will provide a new method for creation of nano composite materials. The
facility will be a multi-user tool for research and training in nanostructured
material at the UAB. The instrument will help establish five new research
initiatives at UAB. This instrument development project will complement an
existing NSF-Supported REU -site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Major
Research Instrumentation program to the University of Alabama Birmingham (UAB)
is for the development of a multipurpose laser deposition facility for research
and education in nanostructured materials. The first phase of the project
consists in the development of a novel nanoparticles pulsed beam laser
deposition technique that delivers size-selected nanoparticles to deposit
arbitrarily shaped patterns on a substrate. The second phase of the project
consists in the integration of the new technique with conventional Pulsed Laser
Deposition technique into a single deposition facility. The new facility will
provide a new method for creation of nano composite materials. The facility will
be a multi-user tool for research and training in nanostructured material at the
UAB. The instrument will help establish five new research initiatives at UAB.
This instrument development project will complement an existing NSF-Supported
REU -site. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;