* 0116039
* Development of an Eyesafe Micropulse Lidar at Agnes Scott College for Atmospheric Science Research
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2001,02/28/2005
* Arthur Bowling, Agnes Scott College
* Standard Grant
* Johannes Verlinde
* 02/28/2005
* USD 152,797.00

Through this Major Research Instrumentation award, physicists at Agnes Scott
College, in collaboration with electrical engineers at Georgia Institute of
Technology, are developing a lidar system (Light Detection and Ranging) for
atmospheric research. Students will construct the instrument under the
supervision of faculty members from Agnes Scott and Georgia Tech, and will
operate it routinely over a period of several years. The objective is to provide
hands-on experience for undergraduates, in particular undergraduate women, in
state-of-the-art equipment design and research. Scientific applications include
measuring the optical properties of clouds, studying the vertical structure and
variability of the stratospheric aerosol layer, and monitoring low-level haze
and pollution over the site of the instrument in Atlanta. The lidar is based on
a diode-pumped solid state laser. It produces visible (green) light and is eye-
safe even at close range. It is of a simple design, appropriate for an
undergraduate teaching environment. Though the research application is
atmospheric science, the experience of designing and constructing the instrument
will familiarize the students with elements of engineering, data processing, and
optical remote sensing. &lt;br/&gt;