* 0116814
* STS: Citizen Science in Ornithology: The Co-production of Knowledge by Scientists and Lay People
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Bruce Lewenstein, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Ronald Rainger
* 08/31/2004
* USD 14,032.00

SES 0116814 Bruce Lewenstein, Cornell University The Co-Production Of Knowledge
By Scientists And Lay People : The "Citizen Science" Approach In Ornithology

The proposed study utilizes qualitative methods (ethnography, semiotics,
discourse-analysis, and cross-national comparison) to examine an innovative
"Citizen Science" program developed by the Cornell University Lab of Ornithology
(CLO) and its counterpart in France. The Citizen Science program enrolls
volunteers from the general public into field surveys and other scientific
research projects. This program is interesting from a sociological point of view
because it integrates in a single project people with different skills,
scientific backgrounds, and interests into a coherent research program on a
continent-wide (in North America) or national (in France) level. These programs
provide a unique opportunity for observing change in the way scientific
communities incorporate more and more lay experts to produce knowledge; our
analysis encompasses a large network of non-scientists (15,000 participants in
the United States and Canada; in the French case, a different form of network
defies enumeration) and a sophisticated process for concentrating data in a
single center of calculation. It also exemplifies a form of hands-on science
education that differs fundamentally from the more traditional forms of one- way
communication from experts to novices. The Principal Investigator and a French
collaborator develop their existing involvement in the CLO and in ornithology in
France into a systematic analysis exploring definitions of "scientist,"
"citizen," and "participation" revealed by the projects, which also allows for
an international comparison. The CNRS is supporting the efforts of the French
co-PI.

This study's objectives are: (1 identification and description of emergent forms
of lay-professional collaboration that are not covered by standard models in
public understanding of science; (2) description of the "natural history of
data" transformations in the form, personal significance, and scientific value
of data collected by lay participants in field surveys and relayed to a research
laboratory; and (3) analysis of written, electronic, and face-to-face
communications between lay and professional participants in Citizen Science
projects to assess the way the process of intersubjectivity, which is
instrumental for groups to identify themselves, is created by the tools of
action at a distance used by laboratories like the CLO and similar projects in
France. Findings from the research have intellectual value for the
interdisciplinary field of science and technology studies (S&TS), including the
particular area of public understanding of science. The study's findings also
have significant importance for science education, because they identify
strategies, problems, and dilemmas associated with projects that involve schools
and other lay organizations in actual research projects.