* 0116849
* RUI: Opioid Modulation of Circadian Rhythms
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2001,01/31/2005
* Robert Gannon, Dowling College
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 01/31/2005
* USD 159,916.00

The organization of animal behavior into twenty-four hour, or circadian,
rhythmic cycles is a fundamental feature of the mammalian nervous system. There
appear to be many physiological systems within mammals that are capable of
generating their own twenty-four rhythms, although each is probably synchronized
by one master time-keeping pacemaker within the brain. This master pacemaker is
located in a group of cells organized into the suprachiasmatic nucleus, found
just above the optic chiasm at the base of the mammalian brain. The
suprachiasmatic nucleus receives input from multiple brain regions, but the
major inputs come from the retina, intergeniculate nuclei of the thalamus, and
the raphe nuclei in the brainstem. The timing of the circadian clock can be
adjusted by input from each of these areas, analogous to moving the hands of the
clock forward or backward in time. In this study, we will be focusing on input
from the intergeniculate leaflet, input that adjusts the clock in response to
behavioral stimuli independent of photic information arriving from the retina.
In hamsters, intergeniculate input to the suprachiasmatic nucleus is mediated in
part by endogenous enkephalin opioid systems and can be mimicked by
administration of delta opioid drugs that activate the receptors for enkephalins
(delta opioid receptors).

Circadian rhythms in hamsters are modified by running in novel wheels, and also
by the administration of benzodiazepines and serotonin-like drugs. Each of these
stimuli involves the intergeniculate nuclei and thus may be mediated by delta
opioid receptors. Therefore, this project will examine the connection between
delta opioid receptors and the modification of circadian rhythms by running
behavior and benzodiazepines. The results of this project will enhance our
understanding of how the suprachiasmatic nuclei integrates information from
various brain regions in determining how the time of the clock will be adjusted.
This project will also significantly enhance the training of undergraduate
students in the sciences, many of whom are planning a career as science
teachers.

