* 0116494
* Acquisition of Instrumentation Used for the Non-Contact Measurement of Strains and Displacements on the Surface of Composite Materials with High Strain Gradients
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* William Keat, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 08/31/2002
* USD 209,847.00

OIA-0116494 PI: Ronald Bucinell Institution: Union College Title:
"Instrumentation Used for the Non-Contact Measurement of Strains and
Displacements on the Surface of Composite Materials with High Strain Gradients"

Abstract:

The research equipment being acquired through this grant includes non-contact
strain measuring apparatus that will provide all components of strain on complex
geometric surfaces in the presence of high strain gradients. A Moire
interferometer and video image correlation strain and displacement measuring
systems will be acquired. The Moire interferometer provides high-resolution
strain and displacements over a relatively small area and the video image
correlation system provides medium-resolution strains and displacements over a
relatively large area. These features make the two systems complementary. Also
included in this grant is the renovation of a 20kip screw-driven electro-
mechanical load frame. The renovation will include a rehabilitation of the load
frame, upgrading of the electronics, integration of MTS TestStar control
software, and a dedicated computer to run the load frame and collect data. The
load frame will be fitted with custom fixtures for mounting the non-contact
strain apparatus and it will be dedicated to projects that utilize this
apparatus.

Undergraduate research is one of the pillars of Union College's undergraduate
engineering programs. Many of Union College's engineering students graduate and
enter graduate programs in engineering. Union's laboratory based curriculum
prepares students well for careers in engineering and continued studies in
graduate programs. This program relies on maintaining laboratory facilities that
expose students to the current state of the art laboratory equipment. The
equipment being purchased will go to support the PI and co-PI's research
programs that make extensive use of undergraduate students. The equipment will
be used to investigate the optimization, characterization, and evaluation of
composite structures and test specimens. This equipment will allow for strains
and displacements on these structures to be evaluated and used to optimize the
configurations. Programs that will be able to take advantage of this effort
include the study of composite grid structures for infrastructure applications,
evaluation of material performance for reusable launch vehicle applications, and
for the development of composite material test methods. Additionally the
equipment will be used to investigate the fracture behavior of monolithic
materials.

The new equipment provide undergraduate engineering students in the mechanical
and civil engineering programs at Union College the opportunity to visualize
surface strains on complex structures in regions of high strain gradients as
part of their research projects. This will give them a unique opportunity to
visualize these fields and be able to compare them to finite element and other
results. This opportunity will help students to understand the complexity of
strain in structures and encourage them to continue their education exploring
opportunities in the field of engineering mechanics.