* 0116126
* Development and Application of a New Model for High Temperature Creep Based on the Jogged-Screw Model
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Michael Mills, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 08/31/2005
* USD 283,500.00

This project is aimed at the development of a new model for high temperature
deformation behavior of structural metals and alloys based on direct
microstructural evidence using transmission electron microscopy. The emphasis of
the work is on Ti alloys that find application in many technologies including
transportation, power and energy, etc. Currently there is no adequate model for
the dislocation creep of these materials. The jogged-screw model in its
conventional form severely over-predicts the observed creep rates. In the
absence of such a fundamental understanding of this critical deformation mode,
prediction of creep response, and developing improved alloys and microstructures
for future applications, will remain a costly and time-consuming empirical
process. The main goals of this study are to incorporate the recent
microstructural observations on the nature and character of jogs on screw
dislocations so that a predictive, physically based description of creep can be
put forth. These are accomplished by combined experimental work on creep testing
and detailed electron microscopy analyses of dislocation characteristics; by
extending the application of the model to single-phase single crystals of Ti2AI
and Ti6AI; and finally by applying these models to a wider range of materials
including BCC solid solutions, diamond-cubic and zinc-blend structures. The
model provides a link between atomic-level processes and macroscopic properties,
and is a natural platform from which to build multi-scale treatments of
dislocation creep. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This research develops new
understanding of the ftmdainental mechanisms involved with high temperature
creep and has significance in several important materials systems where a
fundamental knowledge of high temperature performance is crucial for present and
future applications.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;