* 0116274
* MRI:  Acquisition of Micro-Scale Fabrication Equipment
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2004
* Walter Varhue, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 07/31/2004
* USD 123,334.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award provides funds for the
acquisition of equipment necessary for the establishment of a Micro-Scale
Fabrication Facility at the University of Vermont. Specific equipment to be
acquired are a reactive ion etcher for microscopic patterning of substrates, a
wedge bonder for the attachment of electrodes, a vacuum furnace for annealing, a
diamond saw for dicing of individual micro-structures from substrates, and a
miniature clean environment for handling and assembly of structures. This
equipment will permit the precise microscopic fabrication of physical structures
necessary for a number of interdisciplinary micro- and/or nano-scale engineering
and scientific initiatives. Planned research projects include micro-scale fluid
mixing systems; design and development of micro-scale satellite thruster
prototypes; advanced materials and thin film/membrane development; micro-scale
environmental contaminant models; nanobiology of human molecular "motors"; and
micro-scale ultrasonic bio-sensors for chemical vapor and gas detection. In
addition to research efforts, the Micro-Scale Fabrication Facility will be used
to develop new interdisciplinary curricula for undergraduate and graduate
students centering broadly on issues of microfabrication, micro-scale
engineering systems and nanotechnology. Lecture and lab curricula, which focus
on micro-fabrication science and technology and make extensive use of the lab
facilities, will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The benefits of this
equipment include enhanced research capabilities; improved educational
opportunities and curricula; and increased opportunities with local Vermont
industry. The ability to perform in-house micro-fabrication will benefit and
expedite research in the areas of micro-electromechanical systems, satellite
micro-propulsion concepts, microfluidic mixing, chemical analysis and detection,
and advanced materials development. Results of these projects could in turn aid
the advancement of miniaturized devices and sensors relevant to space satellite
propulsion, pharmaceutical, biomedical, automotive, semiconductor and
environmental monitoring applications. The equipment will also lead to new
graduate and undergraduate curricular and research opportunities. Students will
directly benefit by obtaining advanced and highly-marketable job skills.
Finally, opportunities for collaborations between the University of Vermont and
state and local industry will be improved. Companies which lack sufficient
infrastructure to pursue micro-scale initiatives will have the ability to
partner with the University of Vermont and its researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;