* 0116164
* Acquisition of Instruments for Environmental Science Laboratory
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Jason Kelsey, Marymount University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence M. Fritz
* 08/31/2002
* USD 23,199.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Jason W. Kelsey at Marymount University to
purchase an HPLC Chemstation and a Protector fume hood. The equipment will be
used to study the bioavailability and toxicity of soil-aged organic pollutants.
Important components of the research are the detection and extraction of
compounds from soil and organisms that have been exposed to contaminated soil.
High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) is used in the Marymount
environmental science laboratory to quantify both recovery of the compound from
soil as well as biological uptake. The Chemstation will greatly enhance the
analysis of HPLC data. Currently, data are printed onto paper by means of an
integrator, making complex analysis difficult. The fume hood will allow work on
a wide range of volatile organic pollutants that are otherwise difficult to
handle. The absence of a fume hood in the environmental science laboratory makes
investigation of volatile compounds difficult and dangerous. The equipment will
also be used in the teaching of Integrated Advanced Environmental Laboratory, a
course in which upper-division biology undergraduates learn a number of
analytical techniques used in experimental environmental science. The
bioavailability of phenanthrene, a constituent of petroleum, and atrazine, a
widely used herbicide, to earthworms and turtle eggs will be assessed. Of
interest is the effect of species differences on the bioavailability of soil-
aged pollutants. Sterile soil samples will be amended with phenanthrene or
atrazine and allowed to age for a predetermined number of days. The experiments
will be designed to yield samples in which the compounds have been aged for
different lengths of time (e.g., 120, 60, 30, and 0 days). Organisms will be
added to the samples and then extracted to determine the tissue concentration of
the compounds. Parallel samples will be extracted to confirm that the unaltered
parent compounds (i.e., the added phenanthrene or atrazine) are present in the
soil after aging. Extracts will be analyzed using HPLC (with the Chemstation) to
quantify uptake and recovery from soil. This work is important for the accurate
assessment of the risk of pollutants in soil. Although data reported by the
investigator and others demonstrate that many contaminants become progressively
less available for uptake as they are aged in soil, estimations of risk of
polluted sites are typically based on the total amount of compound present in
(i.e., extractable from) soil and not biological availability. Consequently, the
risk associated with a particular contaminant in soil is frequently
overestimated. This incorrect calculation of risk could lead to the misdirection
of resources in an attempt to meet unrealistic and possibly unnecessary clean-up
goals. In addition, sites with the highest levels of contamination may not be
the sites of highest risk to human and ecological receptors. Exposure
assessments that rank environmental and human health risks in a way that
appropriately reflects bioavailability will lead to more accurate risk
assessments and, ultimately, to more efficient allocation of limited financial
and natural resources. Information about species differences will improve
predictions of the risk of pollutants in soils as well as further our
understanding of the factors that influence bioavailability.