* 0116401
* Acquisition of Controlled-Environment Chambers for Plant Biological Research at Michigan State University
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* James Kells, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 08/31/2005
* USD 600,000.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Wayne Loescher and colleagues at Michigan State
University to acquire controlled environment chambers for plant biological
research. Such chambers are necessary for three major reasons: (1) the potential
to achieve consistent, standard, or optimum environmental conditions not found
in greenhouses or fields; (2) containment and sanitation to avoid contamination;
and (3) the opportunities to improve experimental designs and thus the
efficiency of the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work to be done and the
methods to be used are the result of recent advances in plant genomics and
proteomics, and also in plant development, biochemistry, breeding, genetics,
molecular biology, and plant-environment and plant-pathogen/pest interactions.
Contemporary work in plant biology and particularly that in genomics often
utilizes Arabidopsis thaliana as a model. Although this plant's size and short
reproductive cycle make it well suited for growth in controlled-environments, it
is nonetheless quite sensitive to environmental cues. Moreover, successfully
using large populations for mutant selection and evaluation often depends on
abundant, highly-consistent and/or well-regulated environmental conditions.
Beyond Arabidopsis, many Michigan State University plant researchers also
utilize crop species, and attempting to grow these under defined environmental
conditions can present significant challenges, e.g., high light requirements for
most crops cannot be met in older growth chambers or under conventional
glasshouse conditions in the winter. For molecular genetic work, and especially
that with transgenic plants, containment is important, and is often required in
working with such systems. Pollen and other propagules must be contained, and,
conversely, unique genetic materials must be protected from foreign pollen.
Avoiding contamination by pests and diseases is also essential for all plants,
and this is more readily achieved in growth chambers than in glasshouses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader significance and scientific importance of this
equipment is that modern controlled environments offer much more flexibility in
manipulating temperature, light, humidity, and atmospheric composition. Computer
controls and monitoring systems now allow for manipulating temperatures, light
intensity and duration so as to replicate specific seasonal and daily
environmental variations and combinations and monitor experimental conditions
for long periods. New generation growth chamber designs minimize vertical
temperature gradients, horizontal light gradients, humidity and other
atmospheric differences along the borders and walls, thus maximizing the
efficiency of chamber space. These factors, along with increased equipment
reliability, also reduce the numbers of replicates required for experimentation.
Most importantly, new generation equipment allows researchers who want specific
conditions (e.g., temperature, light quality, intensity, and duration, or
atmospheric manipulations such as CO2 enrichment) much improved capabilities.
The new facilities will provide a multi-investigator, interdepartmental resource
to support the broad spectrum of plant biology research at MSU. Progress is
expected in developing new crops and new and better varieties of traditional
crops, in understanding how plants function, how they respond to environmental
conditions and resist environmental stresses such as temperature, drought, and
salt, and how they might better resist pests and diseases. &lt;br/&gt;