* 0116281
* MRI:  Acquisition of RF/Mixed Signal Test Equipment for Ultra-High Frequency System-on-Chip Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Mani Soma, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kawthar A. Zaki
* 08/31/2003
* USD 370,000.00

The primary driver of the information revolution is advanced silicon processing.
Consequently, system design is undergoing a fundamental change, moving from
multiple chip solutions to system-on-a-chip (SOC) solutions. However, as was
noted in the National Science Foundation's recent planning workshops on advanced
VLSI systems, the testing and measurement thoery and practice related to these
heterogeneous resources integrated into a SoC solution is a major unsolved
problem that could greatly limit future advances.&lt;br/&gt;The advancements in
process technologies provide for radically new types of devices, with
commensurate design challenges and test and measurement needs. An example of
such a system currently under development at the UW is a human/machine
transducer chip-Universal Transducer Chip, a single integrated system capable of
providing a speech recognition interface to a ubiquitous wireless network. Such
a system is likely to become the standard interface modality for a wide range of
new applications, from smart homes and smart test benches to ubiquitous high-
performance computing fabrics. However, to achieve this potential, there are
multiple test and measurement issues that must be addressed:&lt;br/&gt;o Radio
frequency transceivers must be tested and characterized in the ISM (2.4GHz) and
UNfl (5.6-5.8GHz) frequency bands for a broad range of emerging wireless
standards&lt;br/&gt;o Low power, high performance wireless hardware
implementations must be tested and measurement techniques must be developed and
validated for future SoC applications in the LMDS bands at 17GHz, and
above&lt;br/&gt;o Heterogeneous single-chip integration and test and measurement
must be supported, allowing for the fabrication of RF, analog, high performance
digital, and re-configurable subsystems within a single piece of
silicon&lt;br/&gt;The infrastructure contained in this proposal enables an
investigation into the future of testing and measuring ultra-high-frequency SoC
systems, years in advance of their commercialization. We will seek to develop
and demonstrate a test and measurement methodology that can provide the benefits
of multiple different resource types for numerous design domains. As an initial
driver of these efforts, we will characterize a Human/Machine transducer chip,
seeking to guide the development of future system-on-a-chip design and test
methodologies. It is generally representative of future SoC systems that will
operate at ever higher frequencies with ever-increasing levels of complexity. To
support the design of such cutting-edge silicon systems, we will develop
innovative techniques to handle numerous test issues:&lt;br/&gt;o Validation of
techniques for integrating RF and Analog components into future ultra-low-
voltage SoC designs.&lt;br/&gt;o Validation of high-performance, power efficient
digital logic families for supporting these systems.&lt;br/&gt;o Integrated
testing methodologies for complex, heterogeneous systems that can provide
complete system test through an optimum combination of on-chip and off-chip
ultra-high-frequency test environments.&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the development
of new approaches for testing and measuring SoC chip designs, we will also
develop innovative techniques for educating future high-frequency SoC designers.
By providing an integrated curriculum including high-frequency test and
measurement, along with a just-in-time learning environment, we will help create
system architects capable of harnessing these radically new design techniques
and opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;