* 0116515
* MRI/ RUI:  Acquisition of Manufacturing Systems for Quality Assurance in Precision Machining Processes using Data Mining
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2004
* Howard Leeper, Western Kentucky University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 07/31/2004
* USD 268,426.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award will enable the purchase of two
computer numerical control machine tools specifically a vertical machining
center and a turning center. The award will also enable the purchase of a
cutting force dynamometer, vibration and acoustic emission sensors as well as
laser and ballbar calibration systems. This equipment will be used to conduct
research in measuring and modeling machine tool errors for error compensation
and collect process data via multiple sensors to identify the correlation
between cutting conditions, material properties and part quality for
optimization of manufacturing processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This equipment
will enable development of an intelligent manufacturing system, which will fully
integrate quality assurance into precision machining processes and result in
full manufacturing automation, yielding no defects coupled with a significant
improvement in productivity, part quality and reduced manufacturing costs. The
real-time process control will enable reduction in scrap, rework, lead-time, and
conventional non value-added inspection activities, and thereby will increase
competitiveness of part manufacturers. In addition, the equipment will provide
opportunities for hands-on undergraduate research and education for the
manufacturing specialist. Seven courses will be impacted by the equipment in the
manufacturing curriculum and will benefit over four hundred students at Western
Kentucky University during the award period. The precision machining laboratory
to be developed under this grant will be used during technology competition for
regional high school and middle school technology education students. The scope
of the impact is broad in that the proposed research encompasses milling,
turning, and drilling processes. The results will benefit not only machine tool
industry but also automotive and aerospace industries and other discrete part
manufacturers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;