* 0116468
* Acquisition of Electron Microscope at the University of Michigan-Dearborn
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2004
* Pankaj Mallick, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2004
* USD 78,000.00

The University of Michigan-Dearborn is a non-PhD granting institution. This
award from the Major Research Instrumentation program will allow the University
of Michigan-Dearborn to acquire a variable pressure scanning electron microscope
(VP-SEM) and with a energy dispersive x-ray (EDX) to support ongoing research
and education in engineering and science. The long-term objective of the college
is to establish a world-class manufacturing education base. Significant amounts
of experimental data are being generated in currently existing centers at the
University. However researchers are seriously limited in their ability to
examine the microscopic phenomena dictating physical behavior. A scanning
electron microscope with an energy dispersive x-ray analytic tool will help
overcoming some of the most troublesome bottlenecks in understanding the
microscopic phenomena and their impact on physical behavior. This new equipment
will benefit a broad range of research involving polymers, metals, composites,
electronic materials, geological sciences as well as biology. The university has
committed in matching funds to make this facility. A user-fee system will be set
up to cover expenses for expendable supplies and maintenance. This equipment
will be located within the engineering laboratory building of the University of
Michigan-Dearborn. The instrument will be integrated into several courses for
education and training of students. Local industry will indirectly benefit.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Michigan-Dearborn is a non-PhD granting
institution. This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program will
allow the University of Michigan-Dearborn to acquire a variable pressure
scanning electron microscope (VP-SEM) and with a energy dispersive x-ray (EDX)
to support ongoing research and education in engineering and science. The long-
term objective of the college is to establish a world-class manufacturing
education base. Significant amounts of experimental data are being generated in
currently existing centers at the University. However researchers are seriously
limited in their ability to examine the microscopic phenomena dictating physical
behavior. A scanning electron microscope with an energy dispersive x-ray
analytic tool will help overcoming some of the most troublesome bottlenecks in
understanding the microscopic phenomena and their impact on physical behavior.
This new equipment will benefit a broad range of research involving polymers,
metals, composites, electronic materials, geological sciences as well as
biology. The university has committed in matching funds to make this facility. A
user-fee system will be set up to cover expenses for expendable supplies and
maintenance. This equipment will be located within the engineering laboratory
building of the University of Michigan-Dearborn. The instrument will be
integrated into several courses for education and training of students. Local
industry will indirectly benefit.&lt;br/&gt;