* 0116590
* Acquisition of High-Performance Scientific Computing Cluster for Theoretical Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Glennys Farrar, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Richard  N. Boyd
* 08/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This award will allow the Department of Physics at New York University to set up
a cluster of advanced workstations (48 nodes of dual 866 MHz Pentium III
processors) to support computationally intensive research in a number of areas
of theoretical physics and astrophysics. The proposed research projects include:
1) properties of atmospheric particle showers induced by ultra-high-energy
cosmic rays [Farrar]; 2) simulation of astrophysical magnetic fields [Farrar in
collaboration with Goodman and others]; 3) magnetically controlled electrical
transport in layered structures [Levy]; 4) statistical mechanics of simple and
complex fluids [Percus]; 5) structure formation in the early universe
[Scoccimarro and Zaldarriaga]; 6) asymptotic freedom in two-dimensional
$\sigma$-models, and the critical behavior of Potts antiferromagnets and of
self-avoiding random walk [Sokal];and 7) confinement mechanisms in lattice
quantum chromodynamics [Zwanziger].

The proposed research making use of this cluster will also provide training in
high-performance scientific computing for the Department's graduate and
undergraduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and visiting faculty from other
institutions, using a variety of programming languages (Fortran, C, C++,
Mathematica) and advanced scientific software. This training in advanced
computational techniques will be of benefit by providing broadly applicable
skills, not only to those graduate students who pursue subsequent careers in
academic research, but also to those who go on to careers in industrial R+D and
elsewhere in society.