* 0116315
* MRI:  Acquisition of a High-Performance Computer for Hybrid Materials Initiative
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Luke Burke, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2005
* USD 176,143.00

With this award from the instrumentation for Materials Research program, Rutgers
University at Camden will acquire a fast, parallel computer SPCES/667312-MYR
with 3 nodes, each with four processors and 4GB shared-memory, for hybrid
materials research. Chalcogenide hybrid materials, synthesized recently by
experimentalists at Rutgers Camden, were found to be unexpectedly stable and
have a novel structure that cannot be understood within the thermodynamic
theory. These materials exhibit surprisingly large blue shifts in absorption
edges compared to their parent bulk semiconductors. The proposed computer will
be used to calculate the structural, electronic, and optical properties of these
complex materials using density-functional theory. The new computer will also
immediately enable the following exciting projects: (i) quantum dots, (ii)
conducting polymers, (iii) ferroelectric materials, (iv) local correlation. The
acquisition will greatly strengthen the research capability of Camden campus in
materials science, and will also be employed in the undergraduate curriculum to
perform large-scale electronic-structure calculations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
this award from the Major Research Instrumentation program Rutgers University at
Camden will be able to acquire a fast, parallel, shared-memory computer for
hybrid materials research, a major research initiative at Rutgers Camden.
Semiconductor hybrid materials, formed by coherently bonding inorganic
semiconductors to organic species, are a new type of material that combines all
the advantages of semiconductors and polymers, both of great interest to
industry. The new computer will be used to simulate the electronic, optical, and
structural properties of II-VI hybrid materials. The computer will also be
heavily used in the following exciting new research projects: (i) nanomaterials,
(ii) conducting polymers, (iii) ferroelectric materials, (iv) novel
computational techniques. The acquisition will greatly strengthen the research
capability of the Camden campus in materials science, and it will significantly
enhance inter-departmental collaborations between Chemistry and Physics. The
computer will also be used by undergraduates participating in these projects,
and will be employed in the undergraduate curriculum to perform electronic-
structure calculations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;