* 0116034
* MRI:  Development of an Ultrafast Time-Resolved Microscope for Imaging of Charge Carrier Dynamics in Complex Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Eric Borguet, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2004
* USD 412,832.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program, the University
of Pittsburgh will be able to develop a unique instrument for studying both
momentum and spatially resolved charge carrier dynamics in solid state
materials. The combination of photoemission electron microscopy and ultrafast
laser excitation of two-photon photoemission will be used for the spatiotemporal
imaging of electrons in solid-state materials with less than twenty nanometer
spatial resolution and less than one femtosecond temporal resolution. The
proposed time-resolved photoemission electron microscope will offer several
orders-of-magnitude better resolution over the currently available technology,
which is necessary to obtain dynamical images quantum mechanical phenomena in
solid state materials. The expected outcome of the research is a better
understanding of charge carrier dynamics in the quantum regime, discovery of new
physical phenomena, improved understanding of optical and electronic devices,
and education of students in instrument science and nano-
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Major Research
Instrumentation Program, the University of Pittsburgh will be able to develop a
unique instrument for studying both momentum and spatially resolved charge
carrier dynamics in solid state materials. As the size of optical and electronic
devices shrinks to the nanometer scale, the physics describing their properties
changes from the classical to the quantum regime. This presents a need for
instrumentation for imaging of the dynamical electronic properties on nanometer
scale. A unique instrument for time-resolved microscopy to be developed will
provide an unprecedented ability to create movies with less than one femtosecond
temporal and less than twenty nanometers spatial resolution of how electrons in
a solid state material evolve in energy, space, and time. The development
project will educate students in techniques of lasers, vacuum, and microscopy at
the forefront of nanotechnology and device physics. The time-resolved microscope
will provide an indispensable and strategic tool for understanding novel
physical phenomena and for developing advanced optical and electronic
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;