* 0116544
* Acquistion of Digital Imaging Instrumentation for Light Microscopy and Scanning Electron Microscopy
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Jon Gelhaus, Academy of Natural Sciences Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Farmer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 65,883.00

ABSTRACT: Didier&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to Drs. Dominique A. Didier
and Jon K. Gelhaus at The Academy of Natural Sciences in Philadelphia to obtain
a digital imaging system for the scanning electron microscope (SEM) and a 3-D
imaging system for light microscopy. This new equipment will become part the
Academy's Albert M. Greenfield Digital Imaging Center, a multi-user facility
that is shared by all units of the Academy's Biodiversity Research Group,
including the Library and the Molecular Systematics and Evolution Group. These
new acquisitions will enhance ongoing collections-based research and facilitate
the collection and distribution of data from our natural history
collections.&lt;br/&gt;Together the digital imaging system and the 3-D imaging
system will enable the study of samples and specimens ranging in size from
several microns in diameter to at least 30 cm in diameter. This technology is
especially important for ongoing collaborative research in four of our most
important collections: rotifers, insects, mollusks, and diatoms. Many of these
invertebrate taxa have never been studied and may be globally rare or
endangered, and may also be bio-indicators of environmental health, thus
important to both taxonomists and environmental biologists. Using the combined
imaging capabilities of the new systems both internal and external morphology of
microscopic specimens can be visualized in perfect focus in a single image and
will facilitate taxonomic research on the revision and identification of these
important biological specimens. Digital images will be used in the production of
publications, field guides, taxonomic keys, and Internet products. Additionally,
digital images are easily shared among colleagues worldwide and will greatly
facilitate international collaborations, and will be especially useful in
enhancing ongoing research with colleagues in developing countries such as
Mongolia.&lt;br/&gt;The enhanced digital imaging facilities at the Academy of
Natural Sciences will significantly improve current educational opportunities at
the Academy. In particular, undergraduate interns funded through an NSF Research
Experiences for Undergraduates Site Grant will be intimately involved in
independent research that utilizes this new digital imaging technology. The
Academy also offers several Fellowships including the Gallagher Postdoctoral
Fellowship for research on the Academy's world-ranked collection of rotifers as
well as Jessup and Mchenry Fellowships for graduate students to conduct research
in our collections. These prestigious Fellowships support use of all Academy
facilities, including the Digital Imaging Center. In addition, through
collaborations with local colleges and Universities researchers at the Academy
have colleagues as well as undergraduate, masters' and doctoral students working
in their laboratories, most of whom utilize digital imaging technology in their
research. Most importantly, this new digital imaging technology will make it
possible to bring specimen images and data to a global audience of scientists,
students, hobbyists and the general public. &lt;br/&gt;