* 0116722
* Acquisition of a Real-Time Quantitative PCR System for Research and Education
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Robert Dores, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Farmer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 100,446.00

Award Abstract&lt;br/&gt; A grant has been awarded to Dr. Phillip Danielson at
the University of&lt;br/&gt;Denver to fund the purchase of a real-time
quantitative PCR System. Based on well-established laser fluorescence and DNA
amplification technology, this system will significantly increase the
productivity and cost effectiveness of undergraduate/graduate research and
education in molecular biology. Specific research programs that will benefit
immediately include National Science Foundation-funded studies on: (1) endocrine
hormones in the brain that are responsible for pain and stress responses in
living organisms; (2) cytochrome P450 toxin-metabolizing enzymes - an
understanding of which is critical to the control of agricultural pests and many
disease-carrying organisms and; (3) the genetic diversity of endangered and
threatened species which the University of Denver conducts in collaboration with
the Denver Zoological Gardens and the Denver Museum of Science and Nature.
&lt;br/&gt;Until recently, the measurement of gene expression using traditional
assays has meant numerous rounds of laborious optimization, test template
dilutions and post assay manipulations. Even then, the estimated concentration
of a genetic message was often inaccurate owing to the unpredictable variability
of traditional endpoint-based measurements. This is because small biases in
amplification efficiency over the course of an assay would produce large
differences in the amount of final product being measured. A solution to these
problems was found in the new generation of real-time quantitative PCR Systems.
The system monitors reaction kinetics in real-time making it possible to
quantitate DNA and RNA concentrations in the smallest of tissue samples with
unparalleled accuracy, precision and speed. An added benefit is that the PCR
instrument can also be used for high-speed genotyping. The automated liquid
handling capabilities already in place at the University of Denver will handle
sample preparation to ensure run-to-run consistency by minimizing pipetting
errors and crossover contamination. &lt;br/&gt; Beyond the benefit to the
research activities of faculty at the University of Denver, a broad range of
laboratory and classroom-oriented educational goals will be advanced at both the
undergraduate and graduate levels. Benefits will be particularly evident in the
molecular-oriented laboratory courses that are at the heart of the new Bachelor
of Science and Bachelor of Arts degrees in Molecular Biology offered by the
Department of Biological Sciences. On a broader level, department-sponsored
biotechnology classes offered to high school students and teacher-training
workshops that promote hands-on science education at the secondary school level
will also be greatly enhanced. The benefit to high school outreach efforts is
immeasurable given that these programs target students in urban and low-income
school districts who have traditionally been underrepresented in the natural
sciences. In short, acquisition of the PCR System will provide significant and
immediate benefits to education at the secondary, undergraduate and graduate
levels, while providing a cost-efficient means of satisfying the growing DNA
analysis needs of life-science researchers funded by the National Science
Foundation. &lt;br/&gt;