* 0116639
* MRI:  Acquisition of Automated DNA Sequencing Equipment to Enhance Undergraduate Research and Teaching at Otterbein College
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Simon Lawrance, Otterbein College
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Farmer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 72,000.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Lawrance at Otterbein College to acquire
automated DNA sequencing equpiment. Otterbein College is a comprehensive liberal
arts college of approximately 3,000 students founded in 1847 and located in
Westerville, Ohio. The DNA sequencing equipment will be used in a variety of
contexts (including faculty/undergraduate student research projects, course
associated laboratory experiences, middle school teacher preparation, general
undergraduate education and in collaborations with scientists at academic
research institutions and the private sector) to make the technologies
associated with the completion of the human genome project available to more
than 250 undergraduate students annually.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
applications that will be supported by the grant include student/faculty
research projects focusing on the genes responsible for transplant rejection,
autoimmune diseases, and sugar transport; the genetic structure of populations
of endangered species; and in the analysis of antibodies produced against
tumors. Teaching applications will include lecture and laboratory experiences
associated with disciplinary courses including Introductory Biology, Immunology,
Human Genetics, Molecular Phylogenetics, Microbial Physiology, Human
Microbiology, Cell Biology, Advanced Biochemistry and Developmental Biology.
Interdisciplinary teaching applications will include the Integrative Studies
(general education program) course Biological Sciences: Being in Nature and an
education course, Introduction to Life Science, to be team taught by members of
the Biology and Education Departments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The automated DNA
sequencing equipment will be utilized in activities that are aligned with
Otterbein's new strategic plan to modernize its science facility, enhance
interdisciplinarity and research based instruction, attract more science
students, increase diversity and enhance support for student research. The
equipment will also be used in a variety of outreach programs, including
programs for underrepresented minority youth. The equipment will serve as a
catalyst for further infusion of the research oriented biology of the 21st
century into introductory and advanced level courses in Life Sciences, as well
as courses in Chemistry, Education, Nursing and Otterbein's general education
program. Ultimately, the project will contribute to greater scientific literacy
and encourage more students to pursue careers in science and science
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;