* 0116225
* Acquisition Of A Philips Technai 12 TEM, a Philips XL30-TMP ESEM-Oxford E400 EDS, and a Leica Ultramicrotome To Enhance Research and Training In The Life and Physical Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* John Beneski, West Chester University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 08/31/2004
* USD 331,057.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. John T. Beneski at West Chester University to
purchase a Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM) and an Ultramicrotome. The
addition of this equipment to the University's Center for Advanced Scientific
Imaging (CASI) will (1) significantly increase the research opportunities for
their faculty and students, particularly in the sciences; (2) enhance their
ability attract new students from the widest diversity of backgrounds (3)
enhance their ability to train students in state-of-the-art marketable skills;
and (4) provide new opportunities for faculty and students to collaborate with
scientists from the local high-tech corridor of pharmaceutical, biotechnology,
and environmental industries.&lt;br/&gt;Research opportunities will be enhanced
by providing faculty and students with new tools that can be used to compliment
or extend their current research program or to initiate new investigations. The
new electron microscope will be used extensively by faculty and students in the
Departments of Biology, Geology &amp; Astronomy, and Chemistry to investigate a
wide variety of problems including: (1) a taxonomic investigation of bryophytes;
(2) nuclear localization of the retinol metabolizing enzyme 9-cis retinol
dehydrogenase within cancerous and normal mammary tissue; and (3) visualization
of the early events that occur at the gap junctions of insect ovarian follicle
cells following viral infection. Each of these projects will involve significant
participation by both undergraduate and graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;Dr.
Beneski will provide opportunities for students to work in the CASI by actively
promoting independent student research projects and establishing a credit-
bearing internship program. In addition to research and training, the new
electron microscope will be used as a recruitment tool for attracting new
science majors from both traditional and non-traditional backgrounds. To
accomplish this, Dr. Beneski will initiate a series of hands-on demonstrations
and tours that showcase the advanced imaging technologies of CASI to potential
students that regularly visit the University as part of existing programs
targeting area high schools, transfer students, and underserved
groups.&lt;br/&gt;West Chester University's continued growth in providing state-
of-the-art imaging technologies and resources not only serves the immediate and
future needs of our faculty and students in the sciences, it also mirrors a
growing emphasis on the sciences and technology by the State of Pennsylvania and
PA State System of Higher Education. The acquisition of the requested equipment
is a critical step in the continued development of Center for Advanced
Scientific Imaging as a key resource for research and research training at West
Chester University. &lt;br/&gt;