* 0116095
* Acquisition of Instrumentation to Establish an Optical and Electrical Materials Characterization Facility for Undergraduate Research
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Toni Sauncy, Angelo State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 08/31/2002
* USD 112,656.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program, Angelo State
University will be able to acquire research instruments required to establish an
advanced, modern facility capable of supporting professional research activity
for faculty collaborators and essential research training for undergraduate
students. The facility will enable the study of material properties under the
variations of temperature, optical excitation, and magnetic and electric fields.
Students, along with faculty mentors, will perform advanced electrical and
optical measurements, such as photoluminescence spectroscopy, photoluminescence
excitation spectroscopy, optical absorption, Raman scattering spectroscopy,
photoconductivity, and Hall-effect measurements in the examination of standard
and novel semiconductor materials and heterostructures and novel superconductor
materials. The new instrumentation will establish a new realm of possibilities
for advanced research, offering undergraduate students appropriately
challenging, exciting and educational research training while conducting
relevant and interesting scientific investigations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program, Angelo State
University will acquire research instruments required to establish an advanced,
modern facility capable of supporting professional research activity for faculty
collaborators and essential research training for undergraduate students. The
facility, aimed at the study of material properties, will support opportunities
for faculty-sponsored undergraduate research projects, fulfilling an integral
part of the university mission of integrating meaningful advanced research into
the educational experience of physics, applied physics, and pre-engineering
majors. The new instrumentation will establish a new realm of possibilities for
advanced research, offering undergraduate students appropriately challenging,
exciting and educational research training while conducting relevant and
interesting scientific investigations. &lt;br/&gt;