* 0116813
* Acquisition of Instrumentation for Ion Channel Research and Research Training
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Paulo Kofuji, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Farmer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 133,987.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to Dr. Feddersen at the University
of Minnesota-Twin Cities to acquire&lt;br/&gt;scientific instrumentation that
will enhance training and research opportunities concerning the
influence&lt;br/&gt;of ions (potassium, sodium, calcium, chloride, etc.) on cell
function. Changes in ionic gradients&lt;br/&gt;mediate diverse processes
including cellular communication, chemical transportation,
information&lt;br/&gt;storage/retrieval and energy production/use. Regulation of
ion concentration is the job of selective&lt;br/&gt;channels traversing the
membranes of all cells. While ion channel diversity and conservation
among&lt;br/&gt;species have been revealed through the recent findings of genome
projects, much remains to be learned&lt;br/&gt;about the basic function of ion
channel proteins. Seminal advances in ion channel research have
been&lt;br/&gt;the focus of both the Nobel prize and Lasker Award in the past
year serving to draw the attention of&lt;br/&gt;young investigators. The goal of
this proposal is to improve integration of research and
research&lt;br/&gt;training in the field of ion channel biology which is well-
represented at the University of Minnesota.&lt;br/&gt;Cutting-edge
instrumentation will be utilized in multiple laboratory courses and time-shared
with&lt;br/&gt;research laboratories where it will enhance 'on-the-job' research
training. The award will facilitate three&lt;br/&gt;objectives: 1) improving the
teaching capabilities of several laboratory courses, 2) expanding
ion&lt;br/&gt;channel research opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students, and 3) providing critical&lt;br/&gt;infrastructure for the research
training of non-university students. To meet these objectives seven state-
of-&lt;br/&gt;the-art experimental workstations will be assembled and
distributed to four courses and at least six&lt;br/&gt;different research labs
during the year.&lt;br/&gt;A common method to study ion gradients and the
channels that affect them requires the use of&lt;br/&gt;sensitive physiological
approaches whereby miniature sensors(electrodes) are delicately placed in
a&lt;br/&gt;living specimen. Individual ion channels are most conveniently
studied in a simple system utilizing&lt;br/&gt;frog eggs. This approach involves
genetic engineering and synthesis of information molecules&lt;br/&gt;(mRNAs)
coding for ion channels followed by injection of the mRNA into large, viable egg
cells. The&lt;br/&gt;cell's translation machinery converts the mRNA into ion
channel proteins that are inserted into the cell&lt;br/&gt;membrane. Electrodes
placed in the cell collect minute signals that report ion channel function.
Using&lt;br/&gt;this approach researchers will measure, and instructors will
teach students how to measure, the&lt;br/&gt;response of channels to various
stimuli or blockers in the presence or absence of accessory
molecules.&lt;br/&gt;The power of genetic engineering allows the introduction of
precise mutations to pinpoint the functional&lt;br/&gt;importance of each part
of a channel. Protein expression and functional analysis in frog eggs
has&lt;br/&gt;become a standard approach of ion channel and cell surface
receptor researchers. The instrumentation&lt;br/&gt;allowed by this award is
well matched to that application. The equipment includes microscopes, micro-
manipulators, mRNA injectors, computers, analog/digital converters, amplifiers
and signal conditioning software that make ion channel recording efficient and
informative. The equipment will also be used in basic electrophysiology training
and research in more complex specimens such as cells in a variety
of&lt;br/&gt;tissues, including neurons in brain slices isolated from the mature
nervous system.&lt;br/&gt;Teaching laboratories expose students to the critical
observations and techniques that provide the&lt;br/&gt;foundation of advanced
life sciences research. The instrumentation awarded will directly
support&lt;br/&gt;objective #1 because it will be used to present ion channel
training exercises in several undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;and graduate level
laboratory courses. Fundamentals taught in laboratory courses require an
appropriate&lt;br/&gt;setting to advance research to the frontier of discovery.
Therefore, when not needed for course work,&lt;br/&gt;the equipment will become
a 'core utility' supplied to Principal Investigator labs for undergraduate
and&lt;br/&gt;graduate student research projects. The contemporary, fully
compatible equipment will best serve the&lt;br/&gt;diversity of research efforts
ongoing at the University of Minnesota and satisfy objective #2.
As&lt;br/&gt;University courses become more available and convenient for a
greater diversity of students the&lt;br/&gt;equipment will be accessed by non-
university researchers and small college educators meeting
objective&lt;br/&gt;#3. The research instrumentation will become a distributed
and unifying feature across courses and&lt;br/&gt;contemporary research
endeavors, as well as, among individual labs within departments and
research&lt;br/&gt;sectors. Because overall research training and research will
be integrated through this award, cost-sharing&lt;br/&gt;funds were pledged from
three separate colleges at the University of Minnesota. The funded proposal will
enhance the presentation of laboratory-based education, promote student
participation in the achievement of independent research goals and enrich the
interaction among non-traditional students and university personnel.