* 0116107
* Collaborative Proposal: A Multilayer Capital Budgeting Model for Comparative Analyses of Infrastructure Networks
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2001,11/30/2003
* Terry Friesz, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Heller
* 11/30/2003
* USD 180,000.00

ABSTRACT

Proposal: CMS-0116107 PI: Terry Friesz Institution: George Mason University
Date: July 25, 2001

Abstract: A Multilayer Capital Budgeting Model for Comparative analyses of
Infrastructure Networks

This project addresses the dynamic capital budgeting problem for large scale,
multi-layer infrastructure networks, comprised of transportation networks, water
networks, energy networks, telecommunications networks, financial networks, and
genera data flow networks.

Specifically, the objective of this project is to develop a multi-layer dynamic
network capital budgeting model that can be used to quantify the cost savings
and efficiency enhancements that might accrue from the coordinated planning and
design of infrastructure networks. In the past, infrastructure networks have
only been considered in isolation. As such this project is the first step toward
developing both a comprehensive theory of infrastructure network design and a
new generation of infrastructure decision support systems capable of identifying
and promoting synergies among individual network layers.

Constraints reflecting physical, financial, economic, and information
interdependencies are used to couple network layers. Network activities are
further constrained by flow conservation, resource and non-negativity
constraints. The state dynamics recognize the alternative gaming behaviors of
individual agents active on the various network layers, so that different
assumptions regarding the nature of perfect and imperfect economic competition
over networks can be considered. The objective is to maximize the present value
of net economic benefits. This objective is combined with the aforementioned
constraints and state dynamics to create a family of differential games that are
formulated as optimal control models. These models can be used to determine the
most efficient allocation of infrastructure capital investments over both time
and space.

The research approach used in this project combines qualitative analysis and
nontranditional solution techniques. That is, both classical numerical methods
and combined optimization/agent-based simulation (ABS) models are considered. In
particular, the differential game model is used to validate the ABS model. A key
task in this regard is the investigation of the sensitivity of the model
dynamics to parameter values. Although a case study of an actual metropolitan
infrastructure system is beyond the scope of this initial research, we will also
develop an experimental design for validation of the optimization/ABS model. We
will also describe how the model may be used to develop an optimal capacity
expansion plan for the infrastructure systems of a medium size city.