* 0117405
* US-Bangladesh Cooperative Research Basin-Wide Stratigraphy of Cenozoic Sequences in the Bengal Basin
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/2001,10/31/2006
* Ashraf Uddin, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 10/31/2006
* USD 23,400.00

0117405&lt;br/&gt;Uddin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project is to
support a cooperative research project by Dr. Ashraf Uddin, Department of
Geology, Auburn University, Auburn, Alabama and Dr. M. Mustafa Alam, Department
of Geology, University of Dhaka, Dhaka, Bangladesh. These scientists plan to
conduct field research and to collect representative sediment samples in order
to investigate Eocene through Quaternary sequences of the Bengal basin for
mineralogical and geochronological evidence for basin-wide correlation and of
the tectonic history of the adjacent mountain belts. They will identify
techniques with the best potential for constraining basin-wide correlation. The
techniques will include fission-track analysis of materials,
magentostratigraphic study on several sections, and heavy-mineral studies. The
resulting stratigraphic framework will be used to evaluate the Bengal basin
history, with implications for both petroleum potential and a valuable record of
the ongoing continental collision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: Dr. Ashraf Uddin
is a recent Ph.D. graduate who has made significant research on the
sedimentology of the Himalayan-Bengal basin evolutionary history. In this
project he will be collaborating with several senior scholars with extensive
experience in some of the techniques to be used. One is Neil Opdyke, who will be
working on the magnetostratigraphy, and who has also used this worked on the
western Himalayas study. Another is John Garver, who will supervise the fission-
track analysis, has extensive, recent experience in the rather complicated area
of fission-track analysis that relates detrital grain ages to source terranes.
One US graduate student from the University of Alabama and at least one from the
University of Dhaka will also participate in this research and will gain
experience in international scientific collaboration. The Department of Geology
at the U. of Dhaka will provide facilities and support for the project. The
project will benefit from the complementary expertise and facilities available
to the two sides. This project meets INT criteria for supporting meritorious
collaborative research of mutual benefit to the US and the foreign country. This
project is funded by the Division of International Programs and the Division of
Earth Sciences.