* 0117208
* Sources of Enrichment of Dissolved Free and Combined Amino Acids in the Sea Surface Microlayer
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Cindy Lee, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 09/30/2005
* USD 306,692.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0117208&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study,
researchers at the State University of New York at Stony Brook will attempt to
identify and describe the various processes that lead to the enrichment of
dissolved organic matter in the sea-surface microlayer. The sea-surface
microlayer plays a major role in the exchange of matter and energy in the ocean-
atmosphere system. Organic matter enriches the surface microlayer and influences
its chemical, biological, and physical characteristics. Different constituents
concentrate in the microlayer non-uniformly; consequently, the ratios of many
dissolved elements and organic compounds therein differ from those in bulk
water. These studies will focus on the transfer of dissolved free and combined
amino acids between particulate and dissolved pools under the unique conditions
of the interfacial laminar layer. A number of factors will be considered:
increased physical stress on the biological community at the sea surface (e.g.,
by UV-radiation, evaporation, entrapment in spray), which causes leaching of
organic matter from the resulting dead or injured organisms; dissolved organic
matter decomposition by metabolically active neuston (hydrolysis, oxidation, and
uptake); adsorption of dissolved matter onto particles which in the microlayer;
and bubble scavenging from bulk water to the surface microlayer of proteinaceous
matter that is dissolved or weakly associated with particles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;