* 0117341
* Control of Cellular Excitability by KCNQ-Like Potassium Channels in C. Elegans
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Aguan Wei, Washington University School of Medicine
* Continuing grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 08/31/2005
* USD 330,002.00

"Control of Cellular Excitability by KCNQ-like Potassium Channels in C.
elegans."

Potassium channels are selectively permeable membrane proteins critical for
shaping the normal electrical properties of neurons, muscles and epithelial
cells. The availability of whole genomic sequences from a range of organisms has
revealed a complete set of evolutionarily conserved genes underlying most
potassium channel diversity. The in vivo functions of one particular conserved
class of potassium channel genes, forming the KCNQ gene family, will be studied
in the model organism Caenorhabditis elegans through a combination of genetic,
electrophysiological and behavioral techniques. This gene family is important
because members of this family likely form M-type potassium channels. These
channels are active at subthreshold voltages and modulated by activation of
neurohormonal receptors, and thus may act as long-term determinants of basal
excitability. In addition, human members of this gene family are responsible for
diverse hereditary diseases. Three KCNQ-like genes are found in the C. elegans
genome (kqt-1, kqt -2, and kqt-3). The tissue expression and cellular
distribution patterns of these genes will be examined using transgenic reporter
constructs fusing regulatory sequences of each gene with green fluorescent
protein (GFP) and by developing gene-specific antibodies. The functional
properties of channels encoded by these genes will be characterized by voltage-
clamp recordings from Xenopus oocytes expressing each gene, and by in situ
recordings from selected C. elegans cells. Genetic strains will be created that
reduce or eliminate the function of each kqt gene. Resulting mutant phenotypes
will be characterized by electrophysiological and behavioral assays. Preliminary
results suggest specific roles for these channels in regulating the rhythmicity
of pharyngeal muscle contractions and the dynamics of intracellular calcium
release in intestinal cells. These studies may reveal conserved in vivo
functions for KCNQ potassium channels, and form the basis for forward genetic
screens to identify novel genes that regulate these channels.