* 0117772
* PEET:  Taxonomic and Monographic Studies in Neotropical Trichoptera (Insecta)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2007
* Roger Blahnik, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 08/31/2007
* USD 749,149.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PEET: Taxonomic and Monographic Studies in Noetropical Tri
choptera&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF-0117772&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;R.W.
Holzenthal, P.I., University of Minnesota&lt;br/&gt;R.J. Blahnik, Co-P.I.,
University of Minnesota&lt;br/&gt;S.C. Harris, Co-P.I., University of
Minnesota&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Trichoptera, commonly known as caddisflies,
constitute the largest order of exclusively aquatic insects. They are well known
and studied because of the interesting net-spinning and case-making behavior of
the larvae. Most species live in rivers and streams, where they are important
elements of the ecosystem. They consume and recycle leaves and other organic
matter and in turn are fed on by other aquatic species, including fish. A
primary goal of this PEET project is to study the taxonomy and biodiversity of
several important genera of caddisflies from the Neotropics of Central and South
America. Many species in this region are undescribed (up to 75% in some places)
or poorly known. Augmenting the technical taxonomic revisions and monographs
will be the construction of identification keys to genera of both larval and
adult caddisflies to be made available over the World Wide Web (WWW). Much of
the material for these revisions already exists in collections in Minnesota and
at the Smithsonian, and other material will be collected by field work in
Venezuela. Collectively, as many as 44 genera and 400 described species will be
revised, and up to 300 new species may be described. In addition, all museum and
collection records of the caddisflies treated during the project will be bar-
coded, databased, and the information made accessible over the WWW. &lt;br/&gt;
Caddisflies are important biological monitors of water quality because most
species are intolerant of most forms of pollution. Biomonitoring is widely used
in water quality assessment in North America and Europe because the caddisflies
there can be easily identified. In the Neotropics, caddisflies are very poorly
known, making it difficult to use them as biological monitors. An important
aspect of this PEET project will be to make the Neotropical caddisfly fauna
better known and information accessible to Latin American workers. This will lay
a foundation for the use of caddisflies in biomonitoring programs in the
Neotropics. Two doctoral students trained at the University of Minnesota, two
masters students trained at Clarion University, and a full-time research
associate will be funded off the project. At least one of the doctoral students
will be recruited from Latin America where there are very few Trichoptera
experts. It is expected that this project will stimulate and facilitate the
study of Trichoptera in Latin America and contribute to the protection and
preservation of the aquatic ecosystems of the region.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;