* 0117863
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Measuring the Environmental Context of Social Vulnerability to Urban Earthquake Hazards: An Integrative Remote Sensing and GIS Approach
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* John Weeks, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Thomas J. Baerwald
* 07/31/2003
* USD 6,125.00

Although many catastrophic events like earthquakes, floods, hurricanes, and
tornadoes may be characterized as natural disasters, the amount of devastation
associated with such events often is as much a product of the people and human
landscapes where they occur as the natural forces themselves. This is especially
true if one tries to consider the risks associated with natural hazards. This
doctoral dissertation research project will develop an integrative methodology
for the analysis of the ecology of urban earthquake risks based on the
techniques of remote sensing, geographic information systems (GIS) and spatial
analysis. The research is guided by a conceptual framework that takes a human
ecological perspective and suggests the use of the built and natural
environments as contextual filters to understand social processes associated
with urban earthquake disasters. The major thrust of the research is oriented
toward the exploration of the utility of remote sensing and GIS techniques in
identifying urban land-cover attributes that are strongly associated with high
and low levels of social vulnerability to earthquake hazards. The research will
test the hypothesis that social vulnerability is reflected in the
characteristics of the spatial structure of the urban neighborhoods that various
population groups occupy, such as geographic conditions, the form and
development of settlements, and structure of open spaces. Many of these
characteristics are physically represented by certain urban land-cover
attributes, such as constructions materials and soil types, thus providing a
means of measuring the relative importance of such characteristics through the
use of remote sensing and GIS. The basic hypothesis of this research will be
tested in the Los Angeles metropolitan area, a dynamic, data-rich urban region
which was affected in 1994 by a major earthquake disaster. The research plan
consists of three interrelated tasks. First, a GIS prototype will be developed
using a set of measures for assessing vulnerability in the contemporary urban
realm of American cities without the inclusion of remotely sensed variables.
Second, the utility of remote sensing imagery will be demonstrated using data
collected before the earthquake event. These data will provide spatially
explicit variables regarding land-cover attributes associated with variations of
social vulnerability in the study sites. The third task will consist of a test
of the validity of the remotely sensed variables by re-assessing vulnerability
in the study sites based exclusively on such variables. The results of the first
and third tasks will be compared and validated against reported damage figures
from the 1994 earthquake disaster.

The motivation for this project comes from the desire to develop an empirical
base for a flexible approach to vulnerability analysis that can balance two
competing demands. The first need is to improve the understanding of the linkage
among various contextual and social factors that produce vulnerability patterns.
The second is the need for offering a practical way for planners and decision
makers undertaking local mitigation efforts to generate concrete profiles of
vulnerable communities and to monitor changes in these profiles. The broader
contributions of this project therefore are both theoretical and empirical. From
a theoretical perspective, the research will contribute to hazard research by
answering questions regarding the ecology of earthquake risk and how
differential social vulnerability is connected to variations in the physical
settings of urban areas. From an empirical viewpoint, the product of this
project will contribute to hazard mitigation efforts by providing decision
makers with tools for exploring patterns of vulnerability and hence for
implementing policies in a manner that fulfills the needs of sustainable hazard
mitigation. The methods employed offer a model of how to translate the
technology for assessing vulnerability into procedures for easy use by local
governments, which can increase the effectiveness of locally applied measures
that could prevent earthquake hazards from becoming major human disasters. The
techniques in question are relatively low-cost and therefore the approach could
suitably be modified to save lives in other developed and developing countries.
As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will
provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent
research career.