* 0117840
* An Adaptive Protocol Suite for The Next Generation Wireless Internet
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Ian Akyildiz, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Gurudatta M. Parulkar
* 08/31/2005
* USD 1,355,070.00

The technology and business of wireless communications systems have
madespectacular progress since the&lt;br/&gt;first systems were introduced
fifteen years ago. Currently proposed third generation (3G) systems offer
roaming, higher capacity, and increased exibility for low bandwidth services,
such as voice calls and messaging. While future wireless systems (fourth
generation (4G) and higher) are envisioned to provide higher capacity, they are
also expected to support heterogeneity in the following aspects: (i) physical
environments (ranging from high-bandwidth low error-rate pico-cells to low-
bandwidth high error-rate macro-cells); (ii) network architectures (cellular,
peer-to-peer, or other hybrid network models); and (iii) applications (ranging
from low-data rate non-real-time applications to high-data rate real-time
applications). In this project, we will investigate several key elements that
are necessary to realize a protocol stack for a mobile station in 4G wireless
systems. The ultimate objective is to develop an adaptive protocol suite that
would adapt itself to the different aspects of heterogeneity exhibited by the
next generation wireless systems. In particular we willinvestigate the following
problems:&lt;br/&gt;1. Application Layer&lt;br/&gt;Error-rate scalability: We
propose an adaptive multiple description algorithm for error-rate
scalability.&lt;br/&gt;Data-rate scalability: We introduce an optimal dynamic
rate shaping technique to be utilized in the case of&lt;br/&gt;congestion or
bandwidth variations.&lt;br/&gt;Jointly optimal real-time video streaming
system: We propose a real-time video streaming system integrates the proposed
unequal error protection mechanism, the multiple description coding technique,
and the error-concealment method.&lt;br/&gt;2. Security&lt;br/&gt;An adaptive
and scalable security protocols: We propose to employ finite-field wavelets to
develop novel and&lt;br/&gt;innovative public key security techniques that
address ubiquity, scalability, mobility, and usability.&lt;br/&gt;We propose
efficient security protocols for mobile devices with limited processing
power.&lt;br/&gt;3. Transport Layer&lt;br/&gt;Heterogeneous Packet Flows: We
proposetoinvestigate transport protocols that can support a much
richer&lt;br/&gt;set of semantics, adapting to the reliability semantics chosen
by applications on a per-frame basis.&lt;br/&gt;Heterogeneous Network
Characteristics: We propose to build a single transport protocol that will adapt
itself&lt;br/&gt;to the characteristics of a variety of wireless network
environments.&lt;br/&gt;Heterogeneous Network Architectures: We propose to
explore transport layer adaptivity to the underlying&lt;br/&gt;network model
(cellular, peer-to-peer, or hybrid).&lt;br/&gt;4. Network
Layer&lt;br/&gt;Application Requirements: We will explore network layer
constructs that enable heterogeneous applications&lt;br/&gt;to implement custom
network layer policies.&lt;br/&gt;Heterogeneous Network Architectures: We will
explore the use of novel state propagation schemes and
virtual&lt;br/&gt;backbone approaches to enhance transport layer performance and
help in adapting to heterogeneous network&lt;br/&gt;models.&lt;br/&gt;5. Data
Link Layer&lt;br/&gt;Rate-compatible error control coding: We develop new types
of rate-compatible convolutional codes using&lt;br/&gt;finite-field wavelet
transforms.&lt;br/&gt; The protocol suite requires a new Protocol Suite
Integration Plan. The project will consist of four phases. During the first
phase we will design the details of all the proposed
components/protocols/methods of the protocol suite. During the second phase we
will assess their performance in a simulation testbed. During the third phase we
will integrate the individual modules into the suite and finally in the fourth
phase we willprototype the proposed protocol suite and we will assess its
performance on a physical testbed.