* 0117867
* The Factory and the Child Labor Question: A Study in Technology and Change
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2007
* Lindy Biggs, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2007
* USD 100,795.00

Proposal Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Lindy Biggs, Auburn University&lt;br/&gt;The Factory
and the Child Labor Question in Early Industrial Britain: A Study
in&lt;br/&gt;Technology and Change&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines a
debate in late 18th and early 19th century England concerning, apparently, the
labor of children in the nation's cotton textile factories. In fact, the aim of
this project is to show that, at a deeper level, the debate was about the
shifting social and moral economy that resulted from industrialization. It is a
story of men seeking profit through new technology and the conflicts they
encountered. It is at the same time about fundamental social and cultural
change. The project grows from an interest in the way technology participates in
peoples' lives; how it shapes the way we live and think and view the world. The
project describes the needs of a new technological system and the way they
reshaped life in British society. The intensity of the conflict over the factory
and its technology was possible because technology could be questioned at this
time, before new technology came to be viewed as a panacea and equivalent to
progress. This story provides a unique look into a society debating its
technological future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a book-length study of the
early British textile factory and its impact on political and social ideologies.
It sees the transition to an industrial society as social, cultural, and
political history rather than economic. It seeks to develop a social geography
of the factory, describing the factory building, its machines and their
operations, the work force and the work culture, and its impact on local
culture. And it explores the wide-ranging discourse all levels of British
society about the nature of the factory and the morality of child factory
workers. The discourse has to be examined in the context of broad changes in
British social and political ideology, particularly the laws regarding the
treatment of the poor. A cry arose at the end of the eighteenth century in
England to regulate the employment of children in cotton textile mills.
Manchester physicians had traced epidemic disease to the cotton spinning mill of
Robert Peel, where children, who had been purchased as isparish apprentices from
London orphanages, worked under unhealthful conditions. These physicians began
the child labor reform movement when they wrote letters to Parliament requesting
government attention. The concern over child labor grew over the next decades
until it became a prominent and highly emotional reform debate. Many groups had
an interest in shaping the laws regulating child labor because those laws also
regulated the factory and manufacturing. The stakes were high indeed, for
whoever controlled the use and regulation of the factory would have a major role
in shaping the future moral and economic order of the country. The intensity of
debate suggests that the stakeholders were aware of the potential consequences
of the outcome.&lt;br/&gt;