* 0117318
* Toward an Understanding of Stone Tool Variability: An Ethnoarchaeological Study of the Konso Hide Workers of Southern Ethiopia
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* Steven Brandt, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2003
* USD 182,295.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Kathryn Weedman and her colleagues
will conduct two field seasons of ethnographic and archaeological research in
southern Ethiopia among the Konso, who are one of the few people in the world to
continue to make and use stone tools. Their goal is to investigate the meaning
behind stone tool variation, which has been a source of great archaeological
interest for over 100 years, and as a result there are multiple explanations for
this diversity based on inferential methods, ethnohistoric documents, and
experimental archaeology. The Konso make and use stone tools on a daily basis to
process hides into everyday items such as bedding, clothing, and bags.
Furthermore, the Konso are unique because they represent the only known culture,
where women primarily make and use stone tools. The team will focus on
interviewing the hide workers, other artisans, and farmers for information
concerning the social-economic-political position of hide workers and their
activities within Konso society. The manufacture, use, and discard of the stone
tools will be observed and stone production waste, resharpening flakes, and
scrapers from each individual will be collected. They will conduct macro- and
microscopic morphological analysis and DNA residue studies of the stone tools
and waste products. By combining ethnographic and material studies, they will be
able to provide a context for interpreting stone tool diversity. Lastly, they
will excavate abandoned hide worker households to assess how the morphology,
residues (DNA), and the spatial distributions of stone tools are affected by
cultural and environmental factors through time.

This research is important for several reasons. For most of our prehistory,
stone tools were the most commonly left object by our ancestors, and in many
instances they represent the only objects archaeologists have for deciphering
our ancestors' lifeways. The Konso, as one of the few peoples to continue to
make and use stone tools, may provide archaeologists with useful insights for
understanding stone tool diversity. Unique because of the use and manufacture of
stone tools by women, they are especially important for enhancing our knowledge
of gender roles and how they may be reflected in stone tool technology. With the
influx of western clothing and other products, hide working with stone tools is
a dying craft. Thus, it is imperative that they document this rare occurrence of
female hide workers through both written descriptions and documentary films.

