* 0117868
* Designing Next-generation Mobile Interfaces for Dynamic Conversational Speech
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Philip Cohen, Oregon Health & Science University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2005
* USD 814,142.00

&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interactive Multimodal Interfaces: Designing
for Human Performance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a creativity
extension to the PI's continuing award. The PI plans to conduct a study
involving mobile testing of her multimodal system. Subjects will be a mixture of
adults and 7-to-9-year-old children. The goals include: (1) establishing the
full research infrastructure needed to support extensive mobile testing and
semi-automated data analysis; (2) documenting mutual disambiguation during
mobile testing of a multimodal system, and studying the factors associated with
its enhancement; (3) examining the relation between system recognition
performance in a mobile environment and users' signal characteristics, ambient
noise levels, and signal-to-noise ratio information; and (4) exploring mobile
speech signal patterns and system recognition performance in diverse user
groups. The study will provide critical information about multimodal interface
designs appropriate for supporting robust mobile use in real-world contexts and
by varied users, and in particular for creating adaptive multimodal
architectures that are capable of monitoring the environment on a command-by-
command basis and adapting mode weights intelligently to avoid recognition
failure and stabilize system performance. The data collected during the use of
the PI's mobile system will assist in identifying a variety of new research
issues and interface design challenges that have neither been recognized nor
probed by the broader research community&lt;br/&gt;