* 0117104
* Collaborative Research:  Studies of Antifreeze Proteins in Arctic and Nearctic Insects.
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2001,03/31/2005
* Brian Barnes, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 03/31/2005
* USD 187,644.00

Antifreeze Proteins (AFPs), which lower the freezing point of water by an
unusual non-colligative mechanism, have been identified in marine fish, insects
and other terrestrial arthropods, plants, fungi and bacteria. There is
tremendous variation in the structures of AFPs both between and within these
groups of organisms. The most active known AFPs are found in insects, where they
typically assist freeze-susceptible insects to avoid freezing by inhibiting
inoculative freezing initiated by external ice across the cuticle, and by
promoting supercooling by inhibiting potential internal ice nucleators. A few
AFP-producing insects are freeze-tolerant, able to survive freezing, and in
these the AFPs apparently function as a cryoprotectant to protect from freeze
damage, however the mechanism is unknown. Two types of insect AFPs have been
characterized. One is found in the beetles Dendroides and Tenebrio. The other is
from the spruce budworm caterpillar. Interestingly, although AFPs have been
found in many insects, they have not previously been described in Alaskan or
Arctic insects until recently when AFPs were found in 7 of 12 insects screened
from near Fairbanks, Alaska. This presents an opportunity to study AFPs in
insects that are exposed to extremely cold winter
temperatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; There are four aspects to the proposed
study. One of these will concentrate on the role of AFPs in the cold tolerance
of overwintering larvae of the beetle Cucujus clavipes. Previous studies on
populations of this species from Indiana showed the presence of AFPs in these
larvae which have a lower lethal temperature of -20 to -25 C. In the late 1970's
this species from near Fairbanks, Alaska was shown to have a lower lethal
temperature of "-55 C or less". Both the Indiana and Alaskan populations produce
the Dendroides/Tenebrio-type AFPs. In this study, comparisons of the role of
AFPs in populations from Indiana and Alaska (from near Fairbanks, just south of
the Arctic Circle, and from near Wiseman, above the Arctic Circle and near the
limit of treeline). Thus, one can study this species over a tremendous
latitudinal range, from a temperate climate to the interior of Alaska, one of
the coldest climates in North America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A second component
of the study aims to purify and characterize a new type of AFP. The stinkbug
Elasmostethus interstinctus is an AFP-producing insect common in interior
Alaska. Molecular probes have demonstrated that the bug's AFP is different from
either the Dendroides/Tenebrio-type or the spruce budworm-type AEPs. The
abundance, ease of collection, large size and exposure to very cold temperatures
in this insect make it an excellent system in which to identify a new insect
AFP.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The third aspect of this study is to screen the
hemolymph of insects for thermal hysteresis activity characteristic of AFPs.
This will identify which species have AFPs. Insects will be collected from two
sites in the taiga of interior Alaska, near Fairbanks and near Wiseman, and
especially from a true tundra site in the vicinity of the Institute of Arctic
Biology, University of Alaska, Fairbanks, Toolik Field Station. These sites
provide a wide diversity of insects. AFPs have not been previously investigated
in insects from these regions, and no aspect of the cold tolerance of insects
from Toolik has previously been studied. This screen should identify new species
of AFP-producing insects from very cold environments, some of which may provide
excellent model systems for future study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; In addition,
microhabitat temperatures and overwintering survival of selected insect species
will be determined. These are important to collaborate laboratory determinations
of various physiological parameters. Thus this study will integrate classical
physiological ecology with biochemistry and molecular studies of antifreeze
proteins in insects from these severe arctic and subarctic
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Since their initial discovery in Antarctic
fish the study of AFPs in both animals and plants has burgeoned, and today
scores of laboratories study these proteins. In particular insect AFPs have
tremendous potential for both basic and applied work since they are the most
active AFPs known. Numerous possible uses of AFPs exist, especially in
cryopreservation of biomedical materials, food preservation and agriculture.
Therefore, the study of AFPs from such highly cold adapted insects may yield
information of great value.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;