* 0117358
* US-South Africa Planning Visit:   The Cape of Good Hope Region as a Model to Understand Marine Speciation
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2001,04/30/2002
* Giacomo Bernardi, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Jones Tsuchitani
* 04/30/2002
* USD 5,900.00

0117358&lt;br/&gt;Bernardi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a planning
visit to South Africa by Professor Giacomo Bernardi, Department of Biology,
University of California, Santa Cruz in June 2001. Professor Bernardi will work
with Professor Paulette Bloomer, Department of Genetics, University of Pretoria
to evaluate the possibility of doing a study on fish species whose populations
are found across the Cape of Good Hope region. They will determine whether
matching biogeographic and phylogeographic breaks would be found there.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mechanisms involved in the formation of species
(speciation) in the marine environment are poorly known. Several models have
been proposed to explain the processes of marine speciation. One well-studied
system, in the southeastern United States, emphasized the role of genetic
partitioning of populations across a defined geographic region (phylogeographic
break). This phylogeographic break also matched a region of species
discontinuity (biogeographic boundary). This system is now well documented, but
so far has not been generalized to other systems. During the planning visit to
South Africa, Bernardi and Bloomer will try to collect fishes whose populations
are found on both Atlantic and Indian Ocean sides of the Cape Region and that
are endemic to Southern Africa. If successful, they will formulate proposals for
cooperative research proposals to US and South African funding
agencies.&lt;br/&gt;