* 0117261
* Tribal Colleges and Universities: Technical Assistance Support to the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2001,04/30/2006
* Carrie Billy, American Indian Higher Education Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 04/30/2006
* USD 1,108,666.00

&lt;br/&gt;The American Indian Higher Education Consortium (AIHEC) is an
organization based in &lt;br/&gt;Alexandria, Virginia, which has as its members
32 Tribally Controlled Colleges and &lt;br/&gt;Universities (TCUs) from
throughout the United States. AIHEC has a history of &lt;br/&gt;administering
programs and providing technical assistance on a variety of
matters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A Board of Directors composed of the presidents of
all member colleges governs AIHEC.&lt;br/&gt;A full-time staff is located at the
AIHEC Central Office in Alexandria, Virginia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AIHEC has a
long-term commitment to improving technology and the use of technology
at&lt;br/&gt;TCUs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This application is for a special
project award to provide technical assistance to TCUs, &lt;br/&gt;Alaska Native
and Native-Hawaiian-serving institutions to be funded under NSF's Tribal
&lt;br/&gt;Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under
the two-year TCUP technical assistance proposal described below, AIHEC proposes
&lt;br/&gt;to assist eligible applicants in developing high-quality proposals to
the TCUP Program &lt;br/&gt;through a two-day workshop and a web-based
technology collaborative and to provide&lt;br/&gt; on-going technical support to
ensure achievement of TCUP goals and objectives.&lt;br/&gt;