* 0117260
* Arabidopsis 2010: Phenylpropanoid Pathway Networks:  An Integrated Approach to Establishing Protein/Enzyme Function in Arabidopsis and their Associated Networks
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Norman Lewis, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 08/31/2005
* USD 1,708,514.00





The goal of this Arabidopsis 2010 Project is to establish the physiological
function of 248 Arabidopsis enzymes and proteins presumed to be involved in
various networks of phenylpropanoid-acetate metabolism. There are two main
objectives: identifying networks associated with phenylpropanoid
coupling/polymerization (e.g. leading to lignins, lignans, suberins,
sporopollenins, etc.), including how these enzymes/proteins function. The second
objective is to precisely identify the different networks that exist in
Arabidopsis that are involved in the conversion of phenylalanine through to the
monolignols. In both objectives, functions will be demonstrated in vitro, and we
will also establish that this is the true physiological function by
demonstrating temporal and spatial correlation with the segments of the
metabolic pathway networks involved. This work will thus define the organization
of the various phenylpropanoid radical-radical coupling and related metabolic
processes in Arabidopsis through its entire life cycle. The benefits to the
scientific community will include rapid dissemination of results (prior to
publication) through a website linked to the Arabidopsis sites, and the
provision of research materials (genes, constructs, recombinant proteins,
transgenic and mutant plants) as needed. Another important benefit will be the
new knowledge gained on these hitherto difficult systems (e.g.
coupling/polymerization) involving macromolecular assemblies, and the new
insights that will be gained. For enzymes/genes chosen that are ultimately not
involved in these pathways, it is considered that metabolite profiling will
provide a clue as to function, and this will then be examined also. Further, in
addition to lignification, this study will shed important light on other highly
regulated radical-radical phenolic coupling systems in vivo including: the
construction of seed coats and metabolites therein; in generating the
(strengthened) matrix of trichomes; in forming suberized tissue and in
strengthening flower stalks; in biosynthesizing sporopollenin (a remarkably
stable component of pollen grains); in reinforcing cutinized tissue; in cross-
linking cell wall carbohydrates through hydroxycinnamic acid (phenolic)
coupling, in producing a plethora of defense compounds and presumably for other
purposes awaiting discovery. In addition to peerreviewed journals, our research
findings, information and materials generated by this research will be made
available to public databases, updated periodically on a (monthly) basis, by
posting data/information on a dedicated website
(http://ibc.wsu.edu/lewislab/nsf/index.html) that will be linked up to the
Arabidopsis network sites relevant to the project. This information will
include: recombinant protein expression vectors constructed by our laboratory;
gene identification and gene function analysis; kinetic data results; gene
expression profiles; metabolite and lignin analysis; in situ hybridization data;
and light microscopy documentation.

