* 0117822
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Opening Humanitarian Space in Sri Lanka
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2001,01/31/2003
* Susan Roberts, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2003
* USD 9,915.00

Although not widely publicized in the United States, children have been used in
a variety of ways by protagonists in a broad range of armed conflicts around the
world. In some cases, they have been trained to carry arms and engage in
fighting. In other settings, they have been used to help supply and support
armed troops, or they have been used as buffers to provide protection for
military units. Furthermore, even if not directly involved in the fighting,
children have been adversely affected by conflicts, as schools often cease to
function and health risks increase dramatically. To address these problems, the
United Nations and many other organizations have tried to implement policies and
take actions that will reduce the risks of armed conflict to children. The
doctoral dissertation research improvement project will investigate
relationships between the category of childhood and the production of
humanitarian space during the Sri Lankan civil war. Six humanitarian cease-fires
established between 1995 and 2000 and an anticipated seventh cease-fire
scheduled for September and October 2001 will be analyzed. This study will
examine the specific qualities associated with children and childhood in the
production of humanitarian space as well as the role of children in opening and
stabilizing space in the violently contested territory of Sri Lanka. Using a
variety of ethnographic techniques, such as participant observation, semi-
structured interview, and document compilation, an archive will be constructed
that includes a chronicle of events and sites related to the cease-fires, the
identification of key actors, organizational interrelationships and decision-
making structures, and an inventory of relevant policy texts. Analyses of this
archive will include the identification and comparison of "geographs"
(geopolitical descriptions involving children, policy strategies and events
affecting the cease-fires) and consideration of how cease-fire policy is related
to the specific case of contested territory in Sri
Lanka.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute to the growing
literature on state sovereignty and the continued interrogation of state-centric
concepts found within political geographic and international relations
discourses. By examining the political significance of conceptions of children
in modern life and a spatial analysis of the child's role in geopolitical
events, this project will contribute to scholarship on children and geography,
and it will enhance understandings of children in cross-cultural perspective.
The project will provide original material on the initial aspects of the
construction of humanitarian space, particularly as a space of diverse
organizational interrelations and the goals set by individual actors and in
combination. The database established through this project will provide a basis
from which to theorize about humanitarian space and address debates involving
sovereignty and humanitarian actions, transnational relations, and complex
emergencies from both a geographic and an international relations perspective.
As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will
provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent
research career.&lt;br/&gt;