* 0117531
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Paleo-Environmental History of San Francisco Bay Estuary Using Stable Carbon Isotopes and Pollen
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2001,01/31/2003
* Bonnye Ingram, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2003
* USD 9,850.00

Growing interest in understanding the processes of environmental change have
highlighted the need for deeper understanding of complex interactions among
different natural and human systems in critical regions and localities. This
doctoral dissertation research project aims to produce a history of
environmental change in the San Francisco Bay Estuary using stable carbon
isotopes, fossil pollen, sediment analysis and carbon-14 dating spanning the
last 2,000 to 3,000 years. This research has two distinct but interrelated
primary objectives: (1) to elucidate the history of environmental change in the
Bay Estuary; and (2) to test and elaborate models of vegetation responses to
environmental change which are based on modern distributions. The spatial
distribution of marsh plant species in the San Francisco Estuary is primarily
determined by salinity, with other physical and biological factors of lesser
importance. A series of sediment cores have been recovered from four marsh sites
selected along a salinity gradient extending from the western edge of San Pablo
Bay (highest salinity) to the eastern edge of Suisun Bay (near fresh water
conditions). The carbon isotopic composition (13C/12C) of organic carbon in
marsh sediments is a direct reflection of the source plants, with only slight
changes over time due to decomposition. The two salt marsh grasses, Distichlis
spicata and Spartina foliosa, operate with the C4-type photosynthetic pathway,
with distinct carbon isotope signatures. The ability to distinguish these C4
grass species in the sediment record is an important complement to pollen
analysis, as grass pollen is indistinguishable below the family level. Records
produced in this research will be compared with other published records of
paleosalinity in the estuary, which have revealed alternating periods of
increased and decreased water salinity (relative to the present) during the late
Holocene. This comparison will ascertain the degree to which temporal
distributions of plant species at specific sites are analogous to modern spatial
distributions. The record of vegetation change from marshes can then be used to
expand the record of environmental change. Preliminary results from two marsh
sites in this research indicate that the plant assemblages have responded
consistently to past changes in estuarine salinity. An important part of this
research will be to determine what natural process (including tectonic activity,
sea level rise or climate variation) was dominant in causing changes detected in
the sediment records. A strategy that establishes high-resolution chronologies
from several sites will be used. The sites must be carefully selected relative
to tectonic faults and compared not only for timing of vegetation changes, but
also for sedimentation rates. Integral to this approach will be comprehensive
dating of the sediment cores, employing both radiocarbon dating and lead-210
dating.

This project will result in records that are important and relevant because
present knowledge about rates of long-term fresh water inflow, salinity
variability, and vegetation responses in the San Francisco Bay Estuary is
limited. Earlier published studies of Estuarine paleosalinity are
chronologically incomplete and do not include vegetation responses. Successful
application of combining these methods in the San Francisco Estuary can be
transferred to other estuarine settings. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
student to establish a strong independent research career.