* 0117645
* Measurement and Modelling of the Variability of Lake Ice Growth and Decay in Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Kim Morris, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 08/31/2005
* USD 322,213.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;Jefferies&lt;br/&gt;OPP-01-17645&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since
1846, the duration of the ice cover on Northern Hemisphere lakes and rivers has
decreased by almost 20 days. A three week reduction in ice duration on lakes in
Ontario, Canada since 1969 has caused major limnological and ecological changes.
Since the late 1980s/early 1990s, there has been significant environmental
change in the ocean, atmosphere, and cryosphere of the Arctic. The recently
released third assessment of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2001
indicates that the sensitive and already changing northern high latitude
cryosphere faces further change as winter temperatures and precipitation
increase at high northern latitudes. Lake ice in Alaska may be responding to
late twentieth century environmental changes and may respond to further climatic
perturbations. However, the observational record is neither sufficiently long
and continuous, nor covers the appropriate period to allow for a proper
assessment of past lake ice variability and the likely magnitude of future
change. The objective of this study is to use numerical modeling to simulate the
variability of lake ice growth and decay at the present time and during the
period of meteorological record in the different climate zones of Alaska, and to
understand the factors responsible for that variability in order to predict the
response of the ice to future climate change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lake ice
growth and decay variables include freezing, ice thickness, modes of thickening
[congelation ice, snow ice], and break-up. This is a larger and more
comprehensive set of variables than has been considered previously and they
integrate the effects of both temperature and precipitation variability.
Successful completion of this study will yield well-validated lake ice growth
and decay model that will enable us to identify the key factors responsible for
the variability of lake ice growth and decay. This will fill a major gap in the
knowledge and understanding of the response of the Arctic and sub-Arctic
cryosphere to past climate variability and change, and the prediction of future
response. This will benefit physical, chemical, and biological limnologists, and
ecological and&lt;br/&gt;water resource managers. Teacher and student
participation will give them a better appreciation for teaching and learning in
the local context, an understanding of the scientific process, and interesting
and relevant examples of the impact of climate variability and change on Alaska
physical processes and interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;