* 0117824
* Biomarker and Isotope Studies of Organic Matter Cycling in the Black Sea: A Focus on Bacteria and Archaea
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2006
* Stuart Wakeham, Skidaway Institute of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 07/31/2006
* USD 415,460.00

ABSTRACT

OCE-0117824

The study, a collaboration between Skidaway researchers and a group at Texel
(NIOZ -Netherlands) will carry out molecular biomarker studies of particulate
organic matter (POM) and surface sediments of the Black Sea in order to
delineate the distributions of archaeal and bacterial biomarkers, and putatively
their source microorganisms. The Black Sea environment is chosen to provide a
strongly stratified, yet readily sampled, bioreactor system that is
characteristic of anoxic marine basins, past and present. Anaerobic methane
oxidation, a globally important but poorly understood process in such systems is
of considerable interest, given recent suggestions that archael species may be
much more common in oxic and euphotic oceanic environments than previously
thought. Membrane lipids, derived from the isoprenoid skeletons of di- and
tetraethers, are a diverse group of compounds whose presence provides a useful
diagnostic for the presence of thermophilic, psychrophilic and other groups
amongst the Archaea. The identification of which archael groups inhabit what
microhabitat (oxic, anoxic, hypoxic etc) zones within the water column and
underlying sediments is likely to be an important key to the interpretation of
other synoptic assessments of their microbial ecology, community structure and
function. Lipid measurements, readily made by modern GC, GC-MS and LC-MS
techniques, may enhance and extend proposed detailed and exacting genomic
probing of these complex microbial systems. Additional insight into carbon
cycling and preservation in the Black Sea system will be gained from
investigation of the 13C stable isotopic composition of these molecular
biological indicators. Such measurements are increasingly made possible by
compound specific isotopic analysis (csia) methods. Broader impacts into the
study of organic matter cycling in the Black Sea relate to continued definition
of the impact of archaeal prokaryotes on the earth's biogeochemical cycles,
their role in consuming sedimentary and water column CH4 (which may otherwise be
a very important greenhouse gas), use of their lipid biomarkers in
reconstructing past climate change, and clues to further specification of their
exotic cellular and enzymic biochemistries.