* 0117811
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Miskitu Governance and Forestry in Alamikamba, Nicaragua
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,02/29/2004
* Gregory Knapp, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/29/2004
* USD 9,985.00

In many parts of the world, changes in economic activity associated with the
continued growth and interconnection of global markets have had profound impacts
on local residents. For some groups of people, globally oriented economic
activity has created new opportunities; for others, the forces of change have
been adverse. In nearly every case, changing economic systems have been
accompanied by changes in the social, cultural, and political milieu within
which the groups have operated. This doctoral dissertation research project will
examine the resiliency and change in a Miskitu logging village in the North
Atlantic Autonomous Region (RAAN) of Nicaragua as it engages in increasing rates
of harvesting for the global lumber market. While Nicaragua has some of the most
advanced indigenous self-determination legislation in the Americas, violations
of cultural and land rights remain commonplace due to the institutional,
economic, ecological, and political landscape. As in numerous other locations,
increasing multinational extraction and processes of political decentralization
have resulted in extensive shifts in socially and politically constructed
identities at multiple scales. This research will investigate the structure and
function of municipal, regional, national, and global institutions that
influence lumber extraction from the village of Alamikamba. At the core of this
investigation will be the village Elder Council, a traditional but dynamic
institution for resource management. Some local actors recently became conduits
through which multinational companies expand forest extraction from communal
indigenous land, while other community members opposed these same forces. While
sensitive to heterogeneity within Alamikamba, this study questions prevailing
academic assumptions that decentralized decision making inherently fosters
empowerment and local control. To achieve this goal, this project will combine
archival, survey, interview, ethnographic (field walks, oral histories,
participant observation), and community mapping
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Documentation of the Elder Council and wider
village decision-making processes will amplify understanding of indigenous self-
governance and community-based forest management, including the administration
of common property land and resources. The comparison of Nicaragua with other
decentralizing, multiethnic countries in the hemisphere, such as Brazil, Canada,
Colombia, Mexico, and Panama, will provide valuable contributions to development
and resource management theory. Through the examination of a village on the
forest extraction frontier, which is similar to many other internal colonization
fronts in Latin America, the research will demonstrate processes of transition
in decision-making, power, and governance that broadly influence the local
ecology and indigenous cultures. By analyzing the devolution of environmental
management authority, this project will further strengthen networks between
geography and related fields such as political science, policy studies,
development studies, and rural sociology. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
student to establish a strong independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;