* 0117616
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:   Exploratory Study of Sediment Deposition and Sand Dune Encroachment in the Lake Nasser Reservoir Using Remote Sensing Techniques
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Kirk Hatfield, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 06/30/2005
* USD 30,000.00

0117616&lt;br/&gt;Smith&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a collaborative project between a US team headed by Dr. Scot E. Smith,
Department of Civil and Coastal Engineering, University of Florida, Gainesville,
Florida and a team headed by Dr. Hesham E. Monsef, Department of Geology, Suez
Canal University, Ismailia, Egypt. They plan to address the question of sediment
deposition and filling by sand dune encroachment in the Lake Nasser Reservoir
(LNR) which was formed by the Aswan High Dam in southern Egypt. Specifically,
they will examine available satellite images and actual data taken on the ground
and in the lake, conduct preliminary field work on the phenomena of sediment
transport and sediment deposition within the LNR, examine the usefulness of
satellite remote sensing data in monitoring sediment deposition patterns in the
LNR, and plan a study of sand dune migration in the vicinity of the LNR and sand
dune encroachment into the reservoir. They expect to describe a plan of research
for developing models to utilize satellite data for predicting sand migration
and deposition in the reservoir.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The project
supports collaboration between two experienced teams, with the appropriate
instruments, and with access to the necessary data and facilities. The project
addresses an important topic for Egypt and for other countries with similar
reservoir conditions. The large surface area of the lake and the hostile weather
conditions most of the year, in that area of Egypt, impede the taking of ground
measurements, and makes the use of remote sensing a very desirable approach. In
addition to the University of Florida and the Suez Canal University, the project
will involve investigators from the Ministry of Water Resources and Irrigation
and from the Ministry of Agriculture in Egypt. One US graduate student will
participate in the research. This project meets the INT objective of supporting
collaborative research in areas of mutual interest. &lt;br/&gt;