* 0117520
* Conference: 12th International Conference on Arabidopsis Research,  University of Wisconsin, June 23 - 27, 2001
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2002
* Charles Gasser, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Schumaker
* 05/31/2002
* USD 15,000.00

The 12th International Conference on Arabidopsis Research will be held at the
University of Wisconsin, Madison WI, June 23 - 27, 2001. The aim of this
conference is to provide an opportunity for the exchange of ideas among
researchers of the international Arabidopsis research community. The conference
will include sessions on genomics, metabolism and metabolic regulation, cell
biology, inductive processes, genetic mechanisms, evolution, responses to the
biotic environment, responses to the abiotic environment, pattern formation and
cell fate, and sex and reproductive development. An important component of the
conference is that approximately 40 speakers will be chosen by the session
chairs from submitted abstracts for short talks. The majority of these talks
will be given by graduate students, postdoctoral researchers, or PIs at early
stages of their careers. This will ensure presentation of the latest results and
provide important career development for the selected speakers. The conference
will also include workshops on topics put forward by the Arabidopsis community.
A workshop to foster international collaboration on Arabidopsis functional
genomics and the NSF-supported Arabidopsis 2010 initiative is already planned.
Last year's Arabidopsis Conference at this same site attracted approximately 900
participants. At least this many participants are expected this year due to the
accelerated pace of Arabidopsis research resulting in part from the completion
of the genome sequence for this organism, and due to the small number of plant-
related conferences scheduled for summer 2001. Facilities are available to
accommodate up to 1000 participants.