* 0117963
* Eukaryotic DNA Replication Conference will be held September 5-9, 2001, at the Cold Spring Harbor Lab, Cold Spring Harbor, New York
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2002
* Bruce Stillman, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Tornow
* 06/30/2002
* USD 4,000.00

The 2001 meeting of the "Eukaryotic DNA Replication" biennial conference will be
held September 5 - 9, 2001, at the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory. The meeting
will be devoted to fundamental research topics related to chromosome duplication
and structure and function, and will include important topics of biological
research in the areas of cell cycle and growth control, DNA replication,
replication-associated gene regulation, and genome amplification. The need for
this meeting is evidenced by the rapid advances made in this field over recent
years. The meeting will ensure that recent results will be communicated and
discussed in an atmosphere conducive to the open, lively, and productive
exchange of ideas. The participation of younger investigators and women
scientists will be encouraged. The areas to be covered by the 2001 meeting will
include studies on the following:

(1) The replication of virus chromosomes, including SV40, polyomavirus,
cytomegalovirus, herpesvirus, papillomaviruses, and Epstein-Barr virus (2)
Chromosomal replication and gene amplification in organisms as diverse as yeast,
Drosophila, Xenopus and mammalian cells (3) Control of DNA replication in the
cell cycle (4) Structure and function of chromosomal elements such as origins of
replication and telomeres (5) Control of cell cycle progression and S phase
specific gene expression (6) DNA replication checkpoints and DNA repair.

DNA replication is an essential process in all organisms. This meeting will help
disseminate current research findings on this vital topic and will stimulate and
facilitate further advances. The financial support provided by the National
Science Foundation will enable students, postdoctoral fellows, and young
investigators to attend this important meeting.



