* 0117160
* Holocene Fire-Climate-Vegetation Linkages in the Western Mid-latitude Forests of North and South America
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2006
* Cathy Whitlock, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2006
* USD 418,634.00

This award will help researchers understand the interplay of climate,
vegetation, and fire dynamics in the mid-latitude forests of western North and
South America. The two regions offer important comparisons in terms of their
present climate, vegetation, and fire regime and their environmental history.
Both regions feature different vegetation types but broadly similar climate
histories. The varying climate histories arise from distinct responses to large-
scale climate forcing mechanisms in the Holocene (i.e., variations in summer
insolation). This research will play each region's similarities and differences
against each other to provide a set of natural experiments not possible in a
single region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is important because climate, fire,
and vegetation are closely related components of forest ecosystems in western
North and South America. The strength and nature of the linkages among these
components vary depending on the time scale of interest. On intra-annual time
scales, weather conditions determine the likelihood of fire events by
influencing fuel moisture and ignition sources within a given season. On inter-
annual to decadal time scales, climate variability is important because the
sequence of wet and dry periods indirectly promotes fire occurrence. Vegetation
changes on inter-annual and decadal scales also affect fire activity by
determining the character and distribution of fuels. Fire events, in turn, shape
forest succession and create landscape patterns that set the stage for
subsequent disturbance events. On centennial-to-millennial time scales, climate
governs the long-term variations in fire frequency, size, and severity as well
as vegetation composition and species distributions. Vegetation characteristics
on long time scales also exert a positive feedback to fire regimes by
determining the nature of the fuel biomass.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will develop a high-resolution fire-history network in western North America and
Patagonia comparable to existing vegetation-history networks, discern the
hierarchy of climate controls that either promote or suppress fire, and examine
modern climate data to determine the large-scale climate anomalies that
influence fire regimes in the study areas. This approach of developing a fire-
history database and analyzing climate anomalies associated with fire at present
and in the past, will allow the researchers to understand climate-fire-
vegetation linkages on multiple scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers
will share their data with the larger scientific community through shared
databases (including the National Geophysical Data Center) and publications. In
addition, the researchers will forge strong collaboration with South American
colleagues to enable technology transfer between North and South American
researchers. This will be accomplished, in part, through the support of foreign
scientist's travel to the United States to share data and analytical
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;