* 0117709
* US-Egypt Workshop:  Research and Development in Telecommunication Technology, Cairo, Egypt, December 2001- January 2002
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2001,03/31/2002
* Magdy Iskander, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 03/31/2002
* USD 37,000.00

0117709 &lt;br/&gt;Iskander&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project
supports a US-Egypt Workshop on Research and Development in Telecommunication
Technology to be held in Cairo, Egypt, December 2001- January 2002. The
organizers are Dr. Magdy Iskander, Professor, Department of Electrical
Engineering, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, and Dr. Ayman El-Dessouki,
President, Electronics Research Institute (ERI), Cairo, Egypt. Dr. Fatma El-
Hefnawi, ERI, will also help plan the meeting. Discussions will focus on
advances in telecommunication technologies and R&amp;D needs for next-generation
telecommunication systems. Example of topics to be discussed include:
multidisciplinary research, MEMS technology, low-cost phased area antennas,
innovative device designs based on photonic band gap structures, and advanced
propagation models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: This award encourages discussion
among US and Egyptian scientists on an area of great importance to both
countries. Potential collaborative research areas will be identified. Dr.
Iskander has successfully managed an NSF program to promote wireless
communications research in the United States. Dr. El-Dessouki is the head of the
largest research organization in this field in Egypt and will invite persons
from academia, industry, and government labs to the workshop. Several junior
scientists will be among the US workshop participants. This workshop is also
funded the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and
engineers in both countries to carry out collaborative activities, by funds from
the Division of International Programs and from the Division of Electrical and
Communication Systems.&lt;br/&gt;