* 0117381
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social-Environmental Dynamics of Malaria Eradication in Northwest Argentina Since 1900
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Karl Zimmerer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2003
* USD 10,000.00

Vector-borne infectious disease continues to be a major obstacle to social and
economic development in less developed countries. Malaria was once thought to be
eradicated from areas outside the tropics but it is making a major resurgence,
possibly due to the impacts of global climate change. This doctoral dissertation
research project will quantify changing spatial patterns of the incidence of
malaria in Northwest Argentina during the 20th century, and it will analyze the
relationship of these changes to environmental, socioeconomic, and land-use
variables as well as improve understandings of the role of malaria control
efforts in the Argentine state's broader political and ideological projects.
Although the direct causes of malaria are well understood, the relative roles of
larger associated causes are uncertain and are the subject of scientific and
policy debate. Using statistical and spatial analysis, including geographic
information systems (GIS), this research will determine which factors best
explain variation in malaria incidence as well as variation in rates of malaria
reduction. Research methods will integrate field work, archival sources, and
GIS-based spatial and statistical analyses. Historical research will be both
quantitative and qualitative in nature. Historical rates of malaria incidence
and mortality will be documented through the use of publications of public
health agencies of the Argentine government. Socioeconomic, environmental, and
land-use data will be derived from various sources, including decennial census
data, remote-sensing images and data, aerial photographs, agricultural censuses,
property deed registers, cadastral maps, topographic maps, land division
proceedings, and probate records. Once baseline data has been collected,
univariate and multivariate regression analysis will be used to assess the
relative weight of different variables and to analyze the regional and local
differences in rates of malaria incidence. A GIS will be used to correlate
socioeconomic, environmental, land use, and malaria-incidence coverages. GIS-
based spatial statistical analysis and mapping output will be used to identify
specific land-use practices that intensify or ameliorate malaria incidence.
Qualitative archival research will focus on interpreting the rhetoric and claims
of physicians, public health officials, politicians, and bureaucrats involved in
the anti-malaria campaigns, especially as they pertain to issues of
environmental perceptions, economic development, and national identity.

This research will advance knowledge of the human-environmental interactions of
malaria in the subtropics of developing countries in general and in Argentina
and southern South America in specific. The related issues of disease ecology
and human health and human-environment interaction in southern South America has
received scant attention from geographers and other social scientists. This
research will advance interdisciplinary research by developing methodological
approaches that combine spatial analytical tools involving GIS with historical
archival sources, to explore the interrelated nature of disease, land-use
change, socioeconomic development, and national identity formation. This
research will advance understanding in the broad themes of the geography of
development and global environmental change, and it will draw on historical and
contemporary experiences in Argentina to to determine the importance of land-use
change, especially through deforestation and expansion of irrigation, in
contributing to malaria incidence. Human-environmental and historical geographic
studies such as this promise to contribute an important perspective on the
relationship between global environmental change and disease, and to provide
lessons for present-day control of vector-borne disease. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research career.