* 0117613
* Doctoral Dissertaton Research: Public Discourse and Public Opinion, Perspectives on Single-Parent Families, Working Wives and Mothers and Family Size
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2001,01/31/2003
* Sara McLanahan, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Joane Nagel
* 01/31/2003
* USD 7,500.00

This project explores public discourse regarding three developments that
transformed the American family during the twentieth century. They are the rise
in single-parent families, the increase in wives and mothers working outside the
home, and the decline in family size. Public discourse on these topics may
differ in popular magazines and scholarly journals, and may change with
demographic developments and public opinion. The project therefore addresses
these central questions: 1) What causes the quantity of media and scholarly
discourse on these topics to change over time? 2) How important are demographic
trends, conditions within journalism and academia, competition from other social
problems, and interaction between scholars and journalists in explaining the
changing quantity of this discourse? 3) How does the content of media and
scholarly discourse on these topics compare and relate over time? 4) How do
changes in the content of media and scholarly discourse relate to changes in
public opinion on these topics? Using time-series data to answer the first two
questions, and content analysis to answer the second two, the study examines
both the quantity and content of public discourse over an entire century.