* 0117458
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Assessing and Modeling Forest Edge Effects and Habitat in Tropical  Dry Forest of Upland Oaxaca, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2001,02/28/2003
* Vicky Meretsky, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2003
* USD 10,000.00

Forest edges are areas of vulnerability and diversity that are distinct from
interior forest in structure and function. The unique characteristics of forest-
edge vegetation arise due to edge effects such as additional light, greater
dryness, and increased risk of wind and fire damage. At broader scales, edge
effects vary across ecosystems and are frequently associated with forest
fragmentation, losses in biodiversity, and reduced spatial distribution of
forest species. Edge effects in forest ecosystems have been studied primarily in
tropical wet and temperate forests, but differential distances of edge effects
are expected to exist for different forest types. This doctoral dissertation
research project will develop empirical evidence to test the hypothesis that
edge effects in tropical dry forest are different from edge effects documented
in tropical wet forest. Edge effects in tropical dry forest are examined by
synthesizing field, remote sensing, and geographic information system-based
methods to determine the distance of edge influence for vegetation surrounding
timber harvest clearings, develop methods to identify low-contrast edges
associated with adjacent forest-management zones with different cutting
schedules, and link vegetative edge response to bird distributions in a habitat
model. The study area is in Oaxaca, Mexico. The Mexican tropical dry forest has
a very high level of biodiversity and endemism, but little is known about edge
influence on the system or the extent of edge influence. The Mexican tropical
dry forest is important economically for timber production and other natural
resources extraction, impacts that are also important from a forest management
perspective. The study combines the remote sensing technique of spectral mixture
analysis with geostatistics to identify and determine the distance of edge
influence from a clearing to surrounding interior forest and to locate low-
contrast edges. Multivariable statistics are used to determine relationships
between vegetation structure and bird community composition in a spatial
context. It is expected that edge effects in a tropical dry forest will be more
subtle than in other forest types, particularly in the distance of edge
influence and the actual responses to edge in vegetation and bird
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this project should improve bird
habitat inventories based on remote sensing, extend current applications of the
remote sensing technique of spectral mixture analysis, improve understanding of
tropical dry forest response to disturbance, and contribute to conservation and
management of tropical dry forest ecosystems. Overall the project will improve
methods that quantify land-use change effects on biodiversity by converting maps
of forest cover to assessments of habitat. This research will contribute to
scientific knowledge and reflect societal concerns by increasing the sparse
understanding of how edges change tropical dry forests, addressing issues of
forest and habitat loss, and improving the methods used to study forests. The
results will be applicable to local management activities because they will
describe the response of local forest bird populations to edge-affected habitat
and provide information that is relevant to sustainable forest use and
management in the study area. The methods developed for this project to
determine the extent of edge effects are also expected to be useful to land
managers in other parts of the world, where inexpensive forest and habitat
assessments are needed. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award,
this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish
a strong independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;