* 0117295
* SGER: Climate Change in the Middle Miocene and the Distribution of Marine Mammals - An Example from Eastern Virginia
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2001,04/30/2002
* Nicholas Fraser, Virginia Museum of Natural History Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 04/30/2002
* USD 46,532.00

This award supports the field excavation and laboratory preparation of a rare
whole specimen of a Miocene (i.e., 15 million years old) fossil whale preserved
in a rock quarry in Virginia. Fossil specimens of once living organisms,
especially those of whales, are relatively scarce and offer a unique window on
environmental conditions prevailing at a particular site at a particular
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although it is well known that whale diversity has
changed over time, the reasons for such changes are unknown but the scientific
evidence hints at a climatic cause. At their height, whales were represented by
over twenty different genera. Today there are just six genera. It has been
suggested that shifting ocean currents and sea surface temperatures in the past
resulted in the radiation of modem whales and that such faunal changes might be
correlated with worldwide environmental change and physical changes in the
Atlantic Ocean. For example, establishment of a West Antarctic ice sheet and
closure of the western opening of the Mediterranean Sea (with a consequent
decrease in warm water influx) contributed to cooling, steeper temperature
gradients, and more complex ocean current patterns. These changes in turn may
have resulted in the development of a variety of ocean habitats and increased
partitioning of food resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The excavation of the whale
will be accomplished with a crew of local volunteers serving as field
assistants. The quarry excavation will provide an outstanding public educational
experience for the volunteers by affording them hands-on science experience. In
addition, once excavated, the specimen will be publicly displayed at the state-
supported Virginia Museum of Natural History. This research presents an
excellent opportunity to cost-effectively share federal and state resources for
research and outreach.&lt;br/&gt;