* 0117667
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  A High Performance, Energy Efficient, Adaptive Parallel Architecture
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* David Albonesi, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2003
* USD 26,400.00

0117667&lt;br/&gt;Albonesi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a collaborative project by Dr. David Albonesi, Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, University of Rochester, Rochester, New York and Dr.
Salwa Nassar, Computer and Systems Department, Electronics Research Institute,
Cairo, Egypt. They plan to investigate novel computing systems, which can be
configured into one of several different parallel system organizations in order
to meet the diverse requirements of software programs. A simulation-based model
of the hardware will be developed and used to evaluate how diverse multimedia,
scientific, commercial database, and business programs can be accelerated with
this architecture. Key to this effort will be the development of compilers that
can analyze application software characteristics so as to select the optimal
hardware configuration for each phase of program
execution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The proposed research will leverage the
expertise of the US team in developing high performance adaptive architecture,
and the Egyptian team in designing parallel software and compilers. This
collaboration is expected to significantly benefit research in the information
technology area in each country. The project will involve a US graduate student
who will gain an experience in international scientific collaboration. The
proposal meets the INT objective of supporting collaborative research in areas
of mutual interest. This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint
Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both
countries to carry out these cooperative activities.