* 0117806
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Human Dimensions of Conservation Corridors:  Cordillera Blanca in Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,02/29/2004
* Gregory Knapp, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/29/2004
* USD 4,000.00

Groups interested in preserving natural environments have developed a suite of
approaches toward achieving this goal. One of those strategies has been the
development of conservation corridor. This environmental conservation plan that
is based on principles of connectivity and networks between landscape patches.
The design aims to connect isolated, managed landscapes, such as national parks
and nature reserves, by preserving, restoring, or conserving the surrounding
landscape. This doctoral dissertation research project will examine the
viability of the conservation corridor approach in the Cordillera Blanca and the
Cordillera Huayhuash of Peru. A conservation corridor has been proposed to
connect the protected Huascaran National Park, which contains the Cordillera
Blanca, and the unprotected Cordillera Huayhuash to the south. National and
International environmental organizations in the region advocate the
establishment of a corridor to protect the mountain ecosystem and to develop a
connected network of protected areas. While ecological data support conservation
plans for a corridor, the social context and consequences of a conservation
corridor have not been studies. This project will address the human dimensions
of this conservation agenda by investigating the various actions and
articulations of people involved in a corridor initiative and by examining the
spatial attributes and the land use and land cover of the proposed corridor. The
research will use qualitative and spatially quantitative data to assess and
analyze the social and spatial dynamics of the conservation corridor. Formal and
informal interviews as well as participant observation will elucidate how local
people are becoming engaged in the corridor and becoming socially networked
within the boundary of the corridor. Integrated conservation and development
projects throughout the corridor will be visited and cataloged. Satellite
imagery and a geographic information system (GIS) will facilitate a spatially
explicit analysis for data about the land use and land cover of the corridor and
areas where conservation and development projects are targeted. Fieldwork in
Peru will reveal the land-use decisions and conservation concerns of informants
and will be combined with land-cover data from training samples. These data will
be compiled into an attribute database to analyze the location and the type of
conservation activities taking place within the corridor boundary. Spatial and
statistical analysis will be conducted in order to assess the role of social and
spatial networks involved in conservation corridors and to test the hypothesis
that social linkages formed in the corridor are creating new opportunities and
building social capital for local people.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conservation
corridors are being widely accepted as a means of landscape management. This
research will address the potential social benefits of conservation and
community development planning by focusing on the social linkages and networks
that are formed as a result of conservation initiatives. The results of this
project should help strengthen or challenge existing conservation and park
agendas. The project will provide socioeconomic, land-use, and land-cover data
for this region of Peru, and it will contribute to broader understandings of the
human dimensions of global change. The project will also provide insights into
social aspects of regional conservation plans and the linkages that are involved
at different political and geographic scales. As a Doctoral Dissertation
Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a
promising student to establish a strong independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;