* 0117357
* Collaborative Research: Determinants of Male Reproductive Success in Natural Spawns
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2004
* John Stewart-Savage, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 12/31/2004
* USD 59,716.00

Proposal OCE 0117623 0117357 PI - Paul Rawson, University of Maine John Stewart-
Savage, Univ. of New Orleans

Title: Collaborative Research: Determinants of male reproductive success in
natural spawns.

Summary: This proposal is an extension of previous work aimed at understanding
the effects of reproductive biology on patterns of life history evolution in a
colonial marine tunicate, Botryllus schlosseri. The project will test five
hypotheses about factors that may determine male reproductive success in natural
spawns of this colonial invertebrate. The five hypotheses specifically aim to
explore the effects of timing of sperm release, relatedness of mates, population
density, and allocation to male function on fertilization success in field and
experimental populations of Botryllus.

Previous work has shown that there is a narrow temporal window in which
fertilization can result in a viable embryo, and there may be a gametic
incompatibility system. Furthermore, fertilizing sperm are generally the product
of nearby colonies; colonies exhibit variation in sperm production, and high
levels of sperm production only increase local reproductive success when sperm
competition occurs.

This preliminary information suggests that male reproductive success in natural
populations is a complex function of timing relative to the reproductive cycles
of other colonies, gametic compatibility, sperm production, and population
density.

The proposed research will consist of field and laboratory studies, with
preliminary work focused to maximize the information yield of a suite of nine
polymorphic microsatellite loci. These genetic markers will then be used to
assay paternity in natural spawns and test the series of five hypotheses about
the determinants of male reproductive success.