* 0117097
* Biological and Cultural Influences on Menopause (Koonenki) in Japan
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2007
* Patricia Whitten, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna E. Lambert
* 07/31/2007
* USD 369,183.00

Margaret Lock's pioneering research on konenki (menopause) in Japan showed that
menopausal symptoms (i.e., hot flushes, night sweats) may not be universal. Lock
and others have proposed that phytoestrogens (estrogenic plant chemicals) in
soy, consumed in great quantities by Japanese, ameliorate midlife symptoms. This
study aims to identify whether and how soy consumption affects the menopausal
transition. The project will test the following
hypotheses:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1A. The menopausal transition will be
characterized by highly variable levels of estradiol (E2) and the pituitary
gonadotropins follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH),
reflecting dysfunction in the neural regulation of gonadal
hormones.&lt;br/&gt;1B. Women with higher phytoestrogen exposure will have less
variation in FSH and LH.&lt;br/&gt;2A. Women with more variable E2, FSH, and LH
will have more frequent or severe midlife symptoms.&lt;br/&gt;2B. Women with
higher phytoestrogen exposure will have less frequent or severe midlife
symptoms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These hypotheses will be tested in two
populations of Japanese women, aged 45-55, from Tohoku and Kinki, regions of
Japan with the highest and lowest soy consumption. In Year 1, women will be
sampled longitudinally for E2, FSH, LH, and the phytoestrogens genistein and
daidzein using finger prick blood spot methods. Dietary frequency
questionnaires, symptom checklists, surveys, and interviews will be
administered. Years 2-3 will be devoted to analysis and write-up of blood
samples, surveys, and ethnographic data. These data will contribute to our
understanding of cross-cultural variation in aging by enabling modeling of
environmental influences on endocrinology and experience of the menopausal
transition. &lt;br/&gt;