* 0117993
* "Pilgrims of the Vertical":  Climbing Technology, Consumerism, and Nature
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2001,11/30/2002
* Joseph Taylor, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Keith R. Benson
* 11/30/2002
* USD 18,000.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;SES 01-17993&lt;br/&gt;Joseph E. Taylor III, Department of
History, Iowa State University &lt;br/&gt;"Pilgrims of the Vertical:"
Recreational Technology, Consumerism, and
Nature&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines the innovation,
production, and uses of recreational technology through a history of modern rock
climbing in Yosemite National Park. Yosemite Valley has been a principal site
for developing climbing technology and techniques during the 20th century, and
locals became leading innovators in the sport in order to solve challenges
presented by the local environment. Climbers placed a premium on avoiding
permanent anchors, reducing weight, and minimizing erosion, but these were not
necessarily mutually compatible demands. Gear designers (ranging from highly
educated individuals such as Sierra Club President Dick Leonard and Cal-Tech
engineer Charles Wilts to vagabond blacksmiths such as John Salathea nd Yvon
Chouinard) used a wide array of materials from found objects such as
construction anchors, cast iron stove legs, and car axles, to the newest
breakthroughs in nylon, metal alloys, and space-age materials such as Kevlar.
Some products became standard climbing tools, others were soon forgotten, but
all contained social, cultural, and environmental consequences that were neither
expected nor desired. A history of rock climbing in Yosemite will reveal
critical lessons about recreation, consumerism, and environmentalism in modern
society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research strategy for this portion of a
larger project on the environmental history of Yosemite Valley rock climbing
focuses on inspecting public archives and private collections in California,
Oregon, Washington, and Colorado. The PI has already identified many important
innovators, including: Leonard, Raffi Bedayan, Salathe, Wilts, Frank Tarver,
Chouinard, Tom Frost, William Feuerer, Edward Leeper, Steve Komito, Jim
Bridwell, Jeffrey Lowe, and Raymond Jardine. Relevant archival records for these
people exist at the University of California, Berkeley; Stanford University;
California Institute of Technology; the University of Oregon; the University of
Washington, Seattle; and the University of Colorado, Boulder. Important business
and correspondence records for merchants and climbers are located around the
western states, and owners of some documents will allow access. The research is
to be conducted during the summer 2002 break.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;