* 0117582
* RUI Collaborative Research: Mechanisms of Induced Pathogen Resistance in Seagrasses
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Christopher Tanner, St Mary's College of Maryland
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 09/30/2005
* USD 95,811.00

Seagrasses are susceptible to attack by net-forming protists within the
genus&lt;br/&gt;Labyrinthula (Phylum Labyrinthulomycota). These ubiquitous,
largely saprophytic or&lt;br/&gt;weakly parasitic organisms can periodically
become virulent pathogens, causing the&lt;br/&gt;seagrass wasting disease and
contributing to sudden population declines. These scientists suggest that
differences in susceptibility of seagrass populations to Labyrinthula attack
arise as changing environmental conditions alter the ability of seagrasses to
maintain or develop disease resistance by the production of phenolic compounds
via the shikimic acid /phenylpropenoid (SA/PP) pathway. The concentrations of
phenolic compounds in seagrass leaves and shoots are the only characteristics
that have been linked with resistance to the wasting disease. Previous studies
indicate that, for certain species, disease resistance is correlated with the
content&lt;br/&gt;of phenolic acids and other polymeric phenolics, that phenolic
production can be induced by Labyrinthula attack and/or wounding, and that
seagrass phenolics inhibit the growth of this pathogen in culture. While the
evidence for a link between seagrass phenolics and disease resistance is
correlative and comes from relatively few studies on a limited number of
species, it indicates that seagrasses, like all terrestrial plants examined to
date, exhibit induced defenses against pathogen attack. The evidence also
suggests that seagrass responses involve activation of the SA/PP pathway leading
to the production of plant phenolics. However, the regulation of the SA/PP
pathway has not yet been examined in seagrasses, and we do not fully understand
how environmental factors may affect disease resistance in
seagrasses.&lt;br/&gt; Drs. Arnold, Boettcher and Tanner will investigate the
regulation of the SA/PP&lt;br/&gt;pathway and the resistance of seagrasses to
infection by Labyrinthula. Specifically, the&lt;br/&gt;goals of the research
are: (1) to test the hypothesis that key SA/PP pathway&lt;br/&gt;enzymes are
induced by Labyrinthula attack, (2) to determine which
phenolics&lt;br/&gt;accumulate in response to SA/PP pathway induction, (3) to
test, in vivo, the link between phenolic acid / condensed tannin levels and
seagrass resistance, (4) to determine whether SA/PP pathway induction and the
accumulation of phenolic compounds are affected by specific environmental
conditions, and (5) to test the proposed link between these conditions, altered
SA/PP metabolism and changes in seagrass resistance to Labyrinthula attack.
These questions will be addressed in mesocosm populations of two species, the
tropical/subtropical seagrass Thalassia testudinum and the temperate seagrass
Zostera marina, both of which are subject to periodic wasting disease outbreaks
and exhibit induced production of phenolic compounds in response to pathogen
attack and/or wounding. Activities of SA/PP pathway enzymes, concentrations of
phenolic acids and polymeric phenols, and indicators of physiological health
(growth, photosynthesis, concentrations of carbohydrates and proteins) will be
examined in infected and pathogen-free plants. &lt;br/&gt; They will also
compare the responses of these seagrasses to infection under&lt;br/&gt;different
environmental conditions. Finally, artificial inhibitors of specific
SA/PP&lt;br/&gt;pathway enzymes will be used to determine the ability of plants
to resist Labyrinthula&lt;br/&gt;attack when they are unable to produce SA/PP
phenolics. &lt;br/&gt;