* 0117132
* Sterol Limitation of Zooplankton Growth: Roles in Nutrition and Membrane Biology
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2006
* R. Patrick Hassett, Ohio University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 12/31/2006
* USD 336,358.00

This study will provide a first look at cholesterol as a limiting nutrient and
plasma membrane constituent for zooplankton. Physical and biotic conditions for
which dietary sterols become limiting will be identified, and the coupling
between dietary and membrane-specific requirements for sterol will be defined.
The central hypotheses to be tested include: 1) Exogenous sterols are limiting
factors for copepod growth. 2) Cholesterol supplementation of the diet affects
growth rates but not cholesterol contents in plasma membranes (i.e., an optimal
level of cholesterol is maintained despite variability in diet). 3) Cholesterol
contents of membranes and dietary limitation of cholesterol are affected by
growth temperature. The foci of the proposed research will encompass a range of
levels of biological organization from organismal. to biochemical processes.
Zooplankton (including eurythermal and other, ecologically important, species)
will be raised on diets using different a) algal species and b) levels of
supplemented cholesterol. Egg production rates, egg hatch rates, and/or growth
rates will be determined under different biotic and physical conditions.
Cholesterol will be delivered in gelatin-acacia microcapsules and ingestion
rates monitored by particle counter. Plasma membranes will be prepared using
density-gradient centrifugation and cholesterol contents analyzed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of the research proposed is especially well-suited
for undergraduate student involvement. Students will gain conceptual and
specific knowledge of zooplankton and temperature biology as well as fundamental
mechanisms in physiology/biochemistry. In addition, students will learn valuable
laboratory techniques from hands-on experience with a variety of methodologies.
These experiences will be further enriched by interactions with researchers at a
marine laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;