* 0117820
* Bacteria-Phytoplankton Interactions:  The Influence of Marine Bacteria on Alexandrium spp. Blooms in the Gulf of Maine
* GEO,OCE
* 10/15/2001,09/30/2006
* Juliette Rooney-Varga, University of Massachusetts Lowell Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 09/30/2006
* USD 317,883.00

Blooms of the toxic dinoflagellates of the genus Alexandrium have become a
chronic problem affecting large areas of the Gulf of Maine (GOM) on a near-
annual basis. These algae are the causative agents of paralytic shellfish
poisoning, a potentially fatal neurological disorder. Concerns for public health
have resulted in frequent shellfish quarantines, permanent closure of some
shellfish beds, and the implementation of costly PSP toxin monitoring programs
in the GOM. Although considerable effort has been made to determine the
environmental factors that influence Alexandrium spp. population dynamics in the
GOM, the factors that control in situ growth and decline of Alexandrium
populations remain poorly understood.

Interactions between the marine bacteria and toxic phytoplankton are thought to
play a major role in controlling toxic algal blooms, but their potentially
important role in the GOM has received little attention. It is well known that
bacteria and phytoplankton dynamics are tightly linked in coastal marine
environments, with strong associations frequently observed between bacterial and
phytoplankton biomass. In addition, both positive and negative influences of
bacteria on specific harmful algal bloom (HAB) organisms have been documented.
Initial research results have indicated GOM bacteria capable of dramatically
stimulating Alexandrium under laboratory conditions and that these interactions
may vary seasonally. This project will elucidate the role of bacteria in
Alexandrium spp. population dynamics in the GOM. Several aspects of bacteria-
Alexandrium interactions will be investigated, including: the seasonal and
spatial distribution of bacteria that inhibit or promote Alexandrium growth; the
specificity of bacteria-Alexandrium interactions; and the biotic and abiotic
factors that influence bacterial community dynamics. Field research will be
conducted in the southwestern Bay of Fundy with Canadian collaborators. In
addition, archived bacterial community samples that were collected from the
eastern and southwestern GOM in collaboration with the ECOHAB-GOM sampling
program in 1998 and 2000 will be analyzed to determine the geographic
distribution of specific bacteria found to interact with Alexandrium. Close
collaboration with the ECOHAB-GOM team and the DFO HAB program will provide an
extensive array of data and access to research vessels. Experimental methods to
analyze bacteria-Alexandrium interactions will include: (1) molecular
phylogenetic (PCR-DGGE and MPN-PCR) and cultivation-based analysis of the
seasonal and geographic distribution of bacterial assemblages that inhibit or
promote Alexandrium; (2) enrichment and isolation of novel bacterial strains
that interact closely with Alexandrium; (3) analysis of the influence of
Alexandrium- promoting or Alexandrium-inhibiting bacteria on other algal species
present in the GOM; and (4) analysis of the isolates' influence on Alexandrium
growth in mixed cultures. The study will provide insight into interactions
between Alexandrium and bacteria in the GOM and may ultimately improve our
ability to simulate and predict Alexandrium dynamics within a given body of
water. This research will determine whether certain bacterial assemblages are
associated with Alexandrium spp. in the GOM and will also explore Alexandrium
-bacteria interactions that may promote or inhibit Alexandrium growth.