* 0117567
* Atlantic Ocean Tropical/subtropical Processes from the Seasonal to the Decadal Time Scales: Models/Data, Model/Model Comparisons and Model/Data Synthesis through Assim
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2006
* Antonio Busalacchi, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 09/30/2006
* USD 251,968.00

This project builds on previous studies and extend them to the more relevant
time scales for climate studies, i.e. the interannual to decadal variability of
tropical/subtropical interaction in the Atlantic ocean. New research avenues
will be pursued: the degree to which decadal-scale changes in the circulation
may result from the role of nonlinearities and eddies in determining multiple
equilibria states versus more slowly evolving surface forced decadal
oscillations. Two hypotheses will be tested. The first one is that The oceanic
component of the tropical/subtropical connections in the Atlantic ocean as
represented by the STCs significantly affects the interannual to decadal low-
latitude SST variability and hence plays a significant role in climate
variability. The second one poses that Low-frequency variability in the multi-
annual and decadal time scales exist in the tropical.subtropical wind-driven
circulation that are associated with nonlinear eddy processes and lead to
multiple states characterized by different energetics which produce lo-frequency
variability in the meridional heat transport. Most studies of the variability of
tropical/subtropical interactions have focused on the deterministic response to
surface forcings in the same spectral range. The PI's will explore a venue of
low-frequency variability to our knowledge never investigated before in the
tropical ocean, i.e. to assess the possible role of internal modes of
variability linked to multiple states of the wind-driven circulation produced by
eddy-mean flow interactions, modes possibly connected to the analogous modes of
decadal variability already found for the subtropical circulation. The approach
will use models/data comparisons, model/model comparisons, model/data synthesis
through data assimilation, coarse resolution experiments aimed to address
hypothesis I and eddy-resolving experiments aimed to address both hypothesis I
and II.&lt;br/&gt;