* 0117371
* The Mechanisms of Deformation of Pure and Debris-Laden Ice
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Ian Baker, Department of Army Cold Regions Research & Engineering Lab
* Interagency Agreement
* Cynthia Suchman
* 09/30/2005
* USD 450,000.00

Abstract OPP-0117371 Cole

This is a collaborative proposal by the Cold Regions Engineering and
Environmental Laboratory and Dartmouth College. Despite considerable progress in
understanding the mechanisms of glacier flow, uncertainties still remain in
understanding the relationship between stress and the resulting flow rate, and
the effect of low concentrations of debris or particulate inclusions on the flow
rate of ice. There are indications that power law behavior (n =3 to 4) is not
universally observed at low stress levels. Laboratory experiments indicate that
at low stresses, n1, and a linear stress dependence is often required to produce
sensible results from calculations in ice sheet models. However, the underlying
causes for the stress dependency of flow are not known and a physically based
quantitative model of the process is not currently available. In fact, there is
evidence that ice with small quantities of debris actually deforms faster than
either pure ice or sediment-rich ice. Given the importance of the debris-laden
layers to overall ice sheet movement, there is great interest in understanding
the reason for this effect and developing a suitable constitutive relationship.
Recent indications show that both the stress dependence of the flow rate and the
influence of sediments can be addressed with a dislocation-based constitutive
model. The application of dislocation-based models to ice has been hampered by
an inability to quantify dislocation processes in specimens of a meaningful
size. However, an approach has been developed that overcomes this obstacle, and
a specimen's effective dislocation density (length of dislocation lines per unit
volume of material)can now be determined as a function of its physical
properties. Moreover, a combination of cyclic loading and creep experiments
provides a way to track the dislocation density as a function of the specimen's
stress/strain path and thermal history. Such experiments will be used to
establish the dislocation density-stress/strain-temperature relationships for
granular freshwater ice and debris-laden granular ice. Attention will be paid to
the influence of debris concentration and thermal history on the grown-in (pre-
deformation)dislocation density and on the dislocation density that evolves as a
result of deformation. This approach has been successfully applied to ice having
a variety of microstructures, but most extensively to sea ice, and a
quantitative dislocation-based model has been developed. This study will verify
critical aspects of the model for the case of laboratory-prepared granular
freshwater ice, extend it to the case of ice with low sediment concentrations,
and provide direct observations of the dislocation-particle interactions through
the use of synchrotron x-ray topography on static and deforming specimens.
Subsequent work will examine field cores for verification.

