* 0117234
* Mechanisms for Terminating a Neonatal Learning Sensitive Period.
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2005
* Regina Sullivan, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 07/31/2005
* USD 176,319.00

Altricial species, such as humans and rats, have a difficult task at birth: they
must be able to identify, remember and prefer their caretaker. This attachment
is greatly dependent upon perinatal experiences, especially learning. For
example, human infants learn their mother's voices, faces and odors; rat pups
learn their mother's odor, and avian species learn to identify the mother
visually and/or aurally. Generally, infants that require perinatal learning for
attachment exhibit unique learning abilities that have been referred to as
imprinting, or sensitive period or critical period learning. &lt;br/&gt;One
consistent aspect of early attachment is that the organism appears to have a
&lt;br/&gt;very broad basis for learning an attachment which involves increased
ability to &lt;br/&gt;acquire approach responses and a decreased ability to
acquire aversions (Bowlby, 1965). These unique infant learning capabilities,
which facilitate attachment, appear throughout the animal kingdom and may have
evolved to ensure that altricial animals easily form a repertoire of proximity-
seeking behaviors, regardless of the specific qualities of the treatment they
receive from the primary caretaker. However, the sensitive periods for
attachment must end as animals matures and must learn about the environment away
from the nest. &lt;br/&gt;They must now be able to learn to acquire approach
responses only to special &lt;br/&gt;stimuli and learn to avoid other stimuli.
The research proposed in this grant &lt;br/&gt;will explore the neural
mechanisms which help an organism make the transition &lt;br/&gt;from one stage
of development to the next. While there is some understanding of &lt;br/&gt;the
neural mechanisms that underlie the sensitive period, there is very little
&lt;br/&gt;known about what neural mechanisms cause the sensitive period to end
and begin the next stage of the animal's life. The results of the experiments
proposed &lt;br/&gt;here will begin to characterize those physiological events
that are involved in &lt;br/&gt;the termination of a sensitive period and the
emergence of neural structures for &lt;br/&gt;the next stage of
development.&lt;br/&gt;Recent work from this laboratory suggests that
corticosterone (a neurohormone &lt;br/&gt;involved in stress and other
behaviors) plays a critical role in the termination &lt;br/&gt;of the infant's
unique learning abilities. Experiments have been proposed that further
characterize the role of corticosterone in the termination of the sensitive
period and assess the actions of corticosterone on brain areas important in
&lt;br/&gt;learning: the amygdala, hippocampus and locus coeruleus.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;