* 0117891
* Algebraic and Geometric Constructions of Shannon Limit Approaching Codes and Turbo Decoding of Reed-Solomon Codes
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2006
* Shu Lin, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Sirin Tekinay
* 09/30/2006
* USD 510,000.00

As the demand for error-free data transmission and data storage increases,
&lt;br/&gt;error control becomes increasingly important in data communication
and data&lt;br/&gt;storage systems. It has become an integral part in almost
every data &lt;br/&gt;communication or storage system design. Today very
sophisticated error &lt;br/&gt;control schemes are being used in a broad range
of communication and data&lt;br/&gt;storage systems to achieve reliable data
transmission and storage, such as&lt;br/&gt;wireless communication, satellite
communication, optical communication, &lt;br/&gt;hard disc drives, compact disks
and many others. The objective of this &lt;br/&gt;research is to devise methods
for constructing good error control codes and &lt;br/&gt;to develop efficient
error control schemes which have great potential to &lt;br/&gt;achieve error-
free communication and data storage for the future generation&lt;br/&gt;of data
communication and storage systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, there have
been dramatic developments in error control codes and&lt;br/&gt;decoding
algorithms. Two families of powerful codes, known as turbo and&lt;br/&gt;low
density parity check (lDPC) codes, have been discovered and
rediscovered.&lt;br/&gt;These two families of codes with iterative decoding have
been shown to &lt;br/&gt;perform close to Shannon's theoretical limits with
reasonable implementation&lt;br/&gt;complexity. As a result of their amazing
error performance and practical&lt;br/&gt;implementation, it is anticipated that
these two classes of codes will have&lt;br/&gt;an enormous impact on virtually
all applications of error control coding over&lt;br/&gt;the next 10 years or so.
This research involves in two important aspects&lt;br/&gt;of these two classes
of Shannon limit approaching codes: construction of LDPC &lt;br/&gt;codes and
turbo decoding of Reed-Solomon (RS) codes. The construction of &lt;br/&gt;LDPC
codes is based on combinatoric appraches, such as finite geometries
over&lt;br/&gt;finite fields, statistical experimental designs, permutation
groups and&lt;br/&gt;graphs. In these approaches, points, lines, hyperplanes in
finite geometries, &lt;br/&gt;balanced incomplete block designs, affine
permutation groups, and paths&lt;br/&gt;and independent sets of graphs are used
for constructing LDPC codes whose&lt;br/&gt;Tanner graphs do not contain short
cycles. All the construction methods&lt;br/&gt;are systematic and codes
constructed have good structural properties which&lt;br/&gt;simplify encoding
and decoding implementations. Turbo decoding of a RS code &lt;br/&gt;is based on
binary decomposition of the code into a set of simple binary
&lt;br/&gt;component codes and formulating the code as a self concatenated code
with the &lt;br/&gt;RS code itself as the outer code and the component codes as
inner codes in a &lt;br/&gt;turbo coding arrangement. The decoding is carried
out in two stages, turbo &lt;br/&gt;inner decoding and outer algebraic soft-
decision decoding.