* 0117853
* NEESgrid:       A Distributed Virtual Laboratory for Advanced Earthquake Experimentation and Simulation
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Carl Kesselman, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2005
* USD 11,242,050.00

The George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) is
a project funded under the National Science Foundation (NSF) Major Research
Equipment appropriation. The goal of NEES is to provide a national, networked
simulation resource of geographically-distributed, shared use next-generation
experimental research equipment sites, with teleobservation and teleoperation
capabilities, which will transform the environment for earthquake engineering
research and education through collaborative and integrated experimentation,
computation, theory, databases, and model-based simulation to improve the
seismic design and performance of U.S. civil and mechanical infrastructure
systems. NEES will be constructed through September 30, 2004, and then enter its
operational period from October 1, 2004 through September 30, 2014, during which
time it will be operated by a NEES Consortium (to be established). This
39-month, $10,000,000 cooperative agreement with The Board of Trustees of the
University of Illinois, Champaign, Illinois, for the project entitled "NEESgrid:
A Distributed Virtual Laboratory for Advanced Earthquake Experimentation and
Simulation" is the outcome of the peer review of proposals submitted to program
solicitation NSF 00-7, "NEES: System Integration." The NEESgrid project will be
led by the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC), Champaign,
Illinois, in partnership with the University of Chicago, Chicago, llinois;
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan; University of Southern California,
Los Angeles, California; and TeraScale, LLC, Cedar Crest, New Mexico. This
multi-organizational team will design, develop, implement, test, and make
operational the Internet-based, national-scale high performance network system
for NEES, called "NEESgrid" in accordance with the NEESgrid Project Execution
Plan. NEESgrid will build on proven, existing Grid technology. Its design will
integrate existing best practice tools from the commercial and research sectors.
NEESgrid will be a layered, modular architecture that is flexible and highly
extensible and will enable rapid development of new end-user applications, the
introduction of new services, and the integration of new simulation software and
experimental facilities as they are developed. NEESgrid will connect, through a
high performance Internet network, distributed major earthquake engineering
research equipment that includes shake tables, geotechnical centrifuges, a
tsunami wave basin, large-scale laboratory experimentation systems, and field
experimentation and monitoring installations funded through separate NEES
equipment awards made by the NSF NEES program. A dedicated computer system at
each experimental facility, called a NEES Point-of-Presence (NEESpop), will
enable teleobservation, teleoperation, and network monitoring. Collaborative
technologies will enable planning for and teleobservation of experiments as they
occur. In addition to providing access for telepresence at the NEES equipment
sites, NEESgrid will use cutting-edge tools to link leading edge computational
resources and data storage facilities, including a curated repository that will
archive experimental and analytical earthquake engineering and related data.
NEESgrid also will provide distributed physical and numerical simulation
capabilities and resources for visualization of experimental and computed data.
NEESgrid support nodes will maintain online knowledge bases that contain
tutorials and operate help desks for using NEESgrid. UIUC and its partners will
work closely with NEES equipment sites, NEES Consortium Development awardee,
NEES Consortium, and the earthquake engineering community to develop the user
requirements and performance specifications for NEESgrid design. NEESgrid must
be operational by September 30, 2004. During 2004, UIUC will transition
operation of NEESgrid to the NEES Consortium for operation by the Consortium
starting on October 1, 2004.









