* 0117202
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Biotic and Abiotic Variability Across Forest-Field Edges in Southern Sweden:  Effects of Management and Acidic Deposition
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Susan Beatty, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2004
* USD 10,000.00

The boundaries between community types, which are rich sources of spatial
heterogeneity, are related to a wide variety of biotic and abiotic edge effects.
The prevalence of boundaries in modern landscapes emphasizes the need to
understand their ecological function. In order to understand boundary function,
improved knowledge is needed regarding how environmental factors and vegetation
vary under human influence and across multiple scales. Measuring and
understanding multi-scale influences is a significant challenge in many fields.
This doctoral dissertation research project focuses on evaluating the relative
influence of aspect (local scale), management regime (landscape scale), and
atmospheric deposition (regional scale) on the character of forest-field edges
in southern Sweden. More intensive management, especially increased fertilizer
application, and greater atmospheric deposition have increased soil acidity and
nitrogen availability in northern Europe's forest and grassland communities,
which generally are quite nutrient-poor. These trends have led to marked changes
in species composition and declines in plant diversity. Such interactions have
likely been intensified across forest-field edges because of their ecological
function as 'sinks' (areas where matter has accumulated). This project study
will evaluate the general hypothesis that the biotic edge is directly related to
abiotic controls and conditions that vary with respect to location and
management regime. Specific objectives of this study are to determine abiotic
and biotic variation across forest-field edges, to assess relationships between
abiotic and biotic variables, and to identify edge characteristics and functions
that differ with respect to location at the local, landscape, and regional
scale. The study will be conducted in the southwest and east-central regions of
Sweden. Locations of sampling sites reflect the regional gradient from high to
low deposition. In each region, replicate sites will be located under each of
two management regimes: traditional (non-fertilized) and intensively managed
(fertilized) meadows. For each management regime, replicate sites will be
sampled across a southwest-facing and a northeast-facing edge. Field research
will consist of sampling vegetation and environmental characteristics (such as
air and soil temperature, relative humidity, soil pH, and soil moisture tension)
along forest-field edge gradients. Soil samples will be collected at a sub-set
of sites for laboratory analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this
project will have both theoretical and management implications. Despite its
often-cited importance, multi-scale complexity across edges is not well
understood. The project will explore a method for measuring and quantitatively
examining the relative influence of processes operating at different scales
across landscape boundaries. Results therefore will provide scientists and
resource managers with important insights regarding the relationship between
regional- and local-scale processes in a culturally fragmented landscape. In
addition, by examining change in microclimate, soil conditions, and vegetation
across forest-field edges under varying rates of acidic deposition and
fertilization, a better understanding can be gained of how boundaries function
under human-induced environmental change. Such environmental changes may have a
direct effect on forestry, agriculture, water quality, and biodiversity.
Findings from this study therefore can be used in land-use planning and
environmental policy formation. The project should provide empirical support for
the nature of forest-field boundaries in northern Europe as well as provide
information about anthropogenic effects at multiple scales. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;