* 0117611
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Impacts of Religious Organizations on the Livelihood of Rural People in Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Anthony Bebbington, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2004
* USD 10,000.00

In many parts of the world, religious organizations provide an important set of
support and services for local residents. This doctoral dissertation research
project will examine the impact of religious organizations on livelihoods in
predominantly Quechua communities of the central and southern Andes of Peru. The
project will evaluate how religious organizations, such as churches, missionary
groups, and humanitarian organizations, influence the ways that rural Peruvians
have secured beneficial livelihoods in the wake of the struggle between the
Peruvian state and the Shining Path revolutionary movement. The theoretical
underpinnings of this project suggest that social organizations play an
important role in determining how "development" will occur. Further, the
outcomes of development interventions will vary according to the compositions,
beliefs, and experiences embodied by different forms of social organization.
Existing research has explored how state-run development agencies, non-
governmental organizations (NGOs), and social movements impact the livelihoods
of specific populations in distinct ways. This project seeks to contribute to
these discussions by examining another influential form of organization, that of
religion, and its impacts on livelihood. To do so, the project focuses on three
central questions: (1) How do the religious organizations in these communities
impact access to social, material and political resources? (2) How does
religious affiliation shape the ways that individuals identify themselves and
their neighbors, and with what consequences? (3) How do contemporary religious
organizations interact with and intervene in other governing structures, such as
local government or informal community groups? Data will be collected through
archival research, interviews, and participant observation in two Quechua
communities that were directly affected by the violence that occurred throughout
the southern and central Andes through the 1980s and early 1990s. These data
will be analyzed and compared through textual and narrative analysis to
construct a local history of livelihood intervention by religious organizations,
to determine how the most recent forms of intervention have affected local
households and individuals, and to decipher the different avenues contemporary
religious organizations have used to shape how individuals secure a livelihood.
Comparison of the two communities, one which has seen high levels of development
intervention by religious organizations and one which has not, will provide an
opportunity to understand how religious-sponsored intervention differs from
secular intervention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will address the need
to conduct analytically and theoretically rigorous inquiry into the
relationships between religion and livelihoods in regions that have experienced
violent conflict. The centralized position of NGOs in development, combined with
the rise of liberation theology throughout the 1970s, created space for a new
phase of indirect and direct intervention by religious organizations in the
livelihood of the world's poor. This space was extended throughout the1980s and
1990s when religious-sponsored organizations and their members often were the
only groups able to intervene on behalf of humanitarian needs during violent
conflict. Through increased intervention, the flow of capital between religious
groups in developed and developing nations has increased as missionary
activities incorporate livelihood concerns. The project is especially timely
given the increasing conversion of Latin Americans from Catholic to Protestant
faiths, a trend that some researchers argue alters social networks in
significant and varied ways. The outcomes of this project will suggest different
models for examining the role of religion in development and situations of
conflict. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also
will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;