* 0117612
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Landscape Response to Holocene Environmental Change: The Evolution of the Muskegon River, Michigan
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2001,01/31/2005
* Alan Arbogast, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2005
* USD 10,000.00

Understanding the history of Holocene landscape evolution is critical because
the range of climate change during this time interval is generally considered to
be within the realm of foreseeable environmental fluctuations. Reconstructing
post-glacial geomorphic events therefore demonstrates the potential range of
landscape change that may occur in the future. This doctoral dissertation
research project will reconstruct the post-glacial geomorphic history of the
upper Muskegon River system in Michigan in order to test the links between
fluvial systems and climate fluctuations that apparently occurred during the
Holocene. The size and number of preserved paleochannels and terraces in the
upper Muskegon indicate that substantial changes occurred in channel geometry
through post-glacial time. Paleochannels will be measured to determine the
cross-sectional form and bankfull dimensions. Several cores of sediment from
paleochannels and adjacent alluvial deposits will be extracted to determine
types and amounts of sediment moving through these streams as well as to
identify discontinuities in the stratigraphic sequence. A chronology based on
radiocarbon dating of organic material from alluvial deposits and paleochannel
peats will determine the sequence of geomorphic events. Results of these
analyses are expected to show that significant geomorphic events correlate with
known climatic fluctuations or are linked to autogenic controls. The research
also will attempt to determine the impact of 19th century logging on the system.
The General Land Office pre-settlement survey records of Michigan will be
examined for data on the position, size, and streambed sediment of the Muskegon
River prior to logging. This will be compared to current conditions to determine
historic changes in the Muskegon River.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is
part of an ongoing research program that is focusing on post-glacial landscape
development in Michigan, which lies in the core of the Great Lakes basin. In
contrast to the glacial history of the region, very little is known about
Holocene landscape evolution and associated forcing variables. The results from
this study will contribute to understanding landscape sensitivity to climate
change and human impact in the Great Lakes region during the Holocene. This
study will improve understanding of the response of streams to climate change
and logging as well as to other kinds of adjustments. In addition, it will
provide important data that can be used to test prehistoric climate models.
Rivers are especially important because they are a critical part of the
ecosystem and heavily utilized. This study is of particular interest to society
considering the economic costs of flooding, stream erosion, and increased
sediment load, all of which are affected by climate change and/or logging.
Proper management should consider future responses to climate change and human
impact, which can be predicted more accurately when the past record is known. In
most cases, management decisions are based on very short records (less than 100
years) without considering the longer geomorphic history of the stream system.
This is especially true in the Great Lakes basin, because very little is known
about prehistoric stream response. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
student to establish a strong independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;