* 0117135
* Coordination and Modulation of Motor Programs in Manduca Sexta
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Barry Trimmer, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 06/30/2005
* USD 291,690.00

The majority of our knowledge about how animals move is based on creatures that
walk, fly or swim using rigid articulated bones and exoskeletons. However,
animals without backbones invertebrates are the most numerous animals on the
planet and nearly all are soft-bodied with hydrostatic skeletons for at least
part of their life. These crawling creatures do not escape predators by running
but instead use camouflage, chemical defenses and cryptic behavior. As a
consequence, crawling has evolved into a highly specialized form of locomotion
that allows soft bodied animals to move in complex and confined three
dimensional structures such as tubes and branches. With a soft body, joints do
not restrict movements. Such animals can crumple, compress and rotate body parts
with virtually unlimited freedom. Such complex movements are very interesting
from a neural control perspective because movement coordination by the nervous
system has co evolved with these biomechanical features. The proposed study uses
a caterpillar, the tobacco hornworm, Manduca sexta, as a model system to help
understand the neural control of hydrostatic movements. Two specific aspects
will be examined in detail: first we will determine how crawling is controlled
by the central nervous system and how it interacts with peripheral structures
such as muscles and cuticle; secondly, we will examine a unique aspect of
caterpillar crawling, the ability to climb using curved hooks at the tips of the
abdominal prolegs. This gripping is passive but very strong like Velcro hooks
and can be actively released. We will determine how this gripping is controlled
and how it is integrated into normal crawling.&lt;br/&gt;Although focused on
understanding animal locomotion, these studies have potential applications in
the design and control of a new type of flexible robot. Such robots could be
used to navigate through pipelines or intricate structures such as blood vessels
and air tubes. Finally, in examining the mechanism of proleg gripping it is
possible that new adhesive materials could be developed that attach passively
but can be released actively to avoid the tearing forces in conventional hook
and loop fastenings. &lt;br/&gt;