* 0117255
* CISE MII:  Research Experience for Minority Students in High-Performance Computing and Communications
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2010
* Robert Hiromoto, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Baker
* 08/31/2010
* USD 1,499,877.00

EIA-0117255&lt;br/&gt;Robert E. Hiromoto&lt;br/&gt;University of Texas - San
Antonio&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research Experiences in High-Performance Computing
and Communications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, our goals are to (1)
strengthen our ability to attract and retain undergraduate and graduate minority
students, (2) increase the numbers of talented undergraduate minority students
pursuing graduate education and high-tech industrial careers, (3) enhance the
research productivity of the faculty and students, and (4) provide valuable
industry experience to these students through industrial
internships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose to create a dual-mentor partnership
program with local industry to enhance the linkage of research and high-tech
opportunities for our students. Students selected for this program will
participate as NSF student scholars and will be provided financial support in
the form of scholarships and research assistantships. Students will be expected
to collaborate with a faculty mentor and regional industry research
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Faculty from the Computer Science Department and
the College of Engineering, will provide undergraduate student mentoring, work
to develop student skills in problem solving activities, and create student
research collaborations with faculty and industry. The research strengths in CS
alone include: 1) parallel and distributed computing; 2) compiler technology for
internet and parallel computing; 3) computer network protocols; 4) network
security; 5) high-speed switching architectures; 6) data mining; and 7)
biocomputing.&lt;br/&gt;