* 0117619
* Documentation of Akawaio (Cariban)
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2001,12/31/2006
* Spike Gildea, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 12/31/2006
* USD 94,467.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Spike Gildea and his colleague
Desrey Fox will conduct three years of linguistic research on Akawaio, an
indigenous language in Guyana that is a member of the Cariban language family.
One goal of their research is to create the first comprehensive reference
grammar of Akawaio. Another is to publish on the web the collection of
transcribed, translated, and annotated Akawaio texts that Ms. Fox will prepare
as part of her doctoral dissertation. Preliminary research indicates that
certain aspects of Akawaio grammar are unlike anything ever documented before,
so a careful grammatical description supplemented and illustrated by annotated
texts will benefit linguistic theory. The grammatical description will expand
Dr. Gildea's reconstruction of the grammar of Proto-Carib, the ancestor language
for all modern Cariban languages. It is already clear that Akawaio forms a group
with its closest neighbors (the Pemong Group), but relationships between this
group and other languages and/or groups in the Cariban family are unclear, in
large part because there is so little reliable information about many of the
languages (including Akawaio). The grammar and associated wordlist will provide
additional bases for connecting the Pemong Group to other Cariban
languages/groups. The collection of texts will also be of great interest to
anthropologists, as they address traditional ways of life, oral history, Akawaio
cosmology, and shamanistic practices. They will be especially valuable because
they were recorded by Ms. Fox, a native Akawaio with anthropological
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two important scientific debates motivate the
documentation of little-known languages. First, each new language tests theories
about the human capacity for language. Second, each comparative reconstruction
provides information that can inform hypotheses about early connections among
peoples, including their migration patterns. The indigenous languages of Guyana
are virtually unknown, and thus have not contributed significantly to either
debate until now. Such documentation is urgent because so many languages are in
danger of disappearing in the near future. In addition, documentation of
endangered languages like Akawaio is a prerequisite to the creation of
educational materials that may help prevent language loss.&lt;br/&gt;