* 0117366
* Fire and Landscape Change in Northern Patagonia, Argentina: Integrating Landscape Heterogeneity, Land Use, and Climatic Variability
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2001,03/31/2005
* Thomas Veblen, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 03/31/2005
* USD 291,924.00

In the context of global climate change and increased impacts of humans on
natural landscapes, increased fire occurrence is likely to be a major cause of
widespread change in forested ecosystems. Although much is known about how
short-term weather conditions affect the probability of fire occurrence and its
intensity, much less is known about how the history of land use and the
heterogeneity of the landscape affect the ways that fires spread and ecosystem
responses to fire. Through a multi-scale study in northern Patagonia, Argentina,
this project will address the following key questions: (1) How does landscape
heterogeneity resulting from fires and other forms of disturbance over the last
two centuries affect the spread of fire and subsequent post-fire vegetation and
fuel changes? (2) What are the effects of climatic conditions on post-fire
vegetation recovery, especially tree regeneration? (3) What are the effects of
livestock and other forms of land use on the critical, early phases of post-fire
vegetation and fuels recovery? These three questions will be examined by an
integrated multi-scale approach to vegetation dynamics and landscape ecology
across a range of ecosystem types from dry shrublands to wet forests. The
researchers will integrate broad-scale spatial analyses of vegetation and fire
patterns derived from historical aerial photographs and satellite images with
detailed field studies of disturbance history based on tree-ring samples. These
methods will be combined with experimental manipulation of moisture availability
and herbivory by livestock to simulate the effects of climatic variation and
land use on vegetation recovery after fire.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will advance a long-term research program initiated in 1985 focusing on
the processes through which natural disturbance, climatic variability, and human
activities have and continue to alter Northern Patagonian landscapes. The
expected results will quantify relationships of fire behavior and effects to
landscape heterogeneity at spatial and temporal scales useful for resource
managers. The results will also provide a strong empirical basis for realistic
application of spatial landscape-models to predicting fire behavior and fire
effects in this landscape. The patterns and causal mechanisms identified in this
study will guide similar approaches to understanding and predicting the
ecological effects of fire, livestock, and climatic variability in other
landscapes.&lt;br/&gt;