* 0117622
* US-India Cooperative Research:  Modeling Flocculation-Dispersion of Colloidal Suspensions in a Particle Population Balance Framework
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2004
* Ponisseril Somasundaran, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 07/31/2004
* USD 44,639.00

0117622&lt;br/&gt;Somasundaran &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award
supports US-India cooperative research entitled "Modeling Flocculation-
Dispersion of Colloidal Suspensions in a Particle Population Balance Framework."
Flocculation and dispersion of colloidal suspensions are important unit
operations in many industrial activities such as pulp and papermaking, mineral
and ceramics processing, and water treatment. The investigators will undertake a
detailed study of the nine enumerated steps in the flocculation/dispersion
process. They will develop a comprehensive mathematical model that includes a
variety of phenomena such as aggregation, interparticle forces, hydrodynamics
and polymer adsorption. Although flocculation processes have been extensively
modeled, the proposed work will be the first attempt to integrate the various
subprocesses. The new model will be validated by comparison with existing
experimental data. Predictions from the model will then be tested by performing
new experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The collaborators for this
research are P. Somasundaran, Columbia University and P. Pradip and P.C. Kapur,
Tata Research Design and Development Centre, Pune, India. The PIs are a team of
world class scientists that have an excellent chance of achieving their research
objectives. Development of a comprehensive model to predict the kinetics of
flocculation will be very useful for water purification, waste treatment,
product formulation, mineral beneficiation schemes, and environmental
remediation. &lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Division of
International Programs and the Government of India's Department of Science &amp;
Technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;