* 0117113
* High-Resolution Reconstruction of the South Asian Monsoon from the Puruogangri Ice Cores (Tibet)
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Lonnie Thompson, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 07/31/2005
* USD 537,665.00

This research will yield the first climatic and environmental records ever
recovered from the center of the Tibetan Plateau by analyzing two ice cores
measuring 118.6 and 214 meters that were recovered from the Puruogangri ice cap
during a joint United States-China expedition between September 10 and November
10, 2000 funded by the National Science Foundation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These
unique ice cores join other archives of changes in climate on the Tibetan
Plateau that document an unprecedented warming of the atmosphere in the 20th
century. Preliminary analyses indicate that both cores contain visible dry-
season dust layers and may allow annual dating back to ~80 BC and the
reconstruction of a history of precipitation fluctuations that are likely to
reflect variations in the intensity of the monsoon system that is affected by El
Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) events. These cores will be analyzed for stable
isotopes of oxygen and deuterium and aerosol chemistry to aid in the
reconstruction of the history of Asian aridity and provide a record of the past
temperatures and atmospheric circulation patterns for the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ice of the Puruogangri contains information
that is an essential component in linking long, high-resolution records from
pole to pole to allow an assessment of the global nature of abrupt climate
variations. This is important because the Tibetan Plateau and surrounding
mountain ranges contain the largest volume of ice outside the Polar Regions. The
meltwater from the climatically sensitive glaciers form the headwaters of such
important rivers as the Indus, Yangtze, Huang (Yellow) and the Ganges.