* 0117958
* Workshop:  Skeletal Biology, Health, and Economic Development, Ohio State University
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2002
* Richard Steckel, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 05/31/2002
* USD 21,000.00

This project organizes efforts to study patterns of human health in Europe over
the past several millennia using skeletal remains, which are the most complete
and useful source of information about the distant past, containing information
on nutrition and physical growth during childhood as well as processes of
degeneration associated with aging, including dental decay and degenerative
joint disease. Health and nutrition were driving forces in social, political and
economic change that ultimately contributed to the rise and fall of
civilizations. Research on prehistoric and historic skeletons also advances
understanding of various modern medical problems because numerous modern
diseases evolved with humans, adapting to people living in proximity to one
another and to animals in a wide variety of ecological environments.

The workshop will bring 20 to 25 scholars to Ohio State University, including
physical anthropologists, archaeologists, economists, climate historians and
historians. They will plan a research agenda by first discussing details of
preparing a large database that documents the long-term evolution of health in
Europe. They will also formulate a plan for integrating and skeletal information
with climatic, ecological, archaeological and historical data in the study of
health patterns and their determinants. Europe is chosen as a starting point as
it has the richest source of other historical information.

These efforts will lead to submission of a large grant proposal that will
provide funding to actually conduct the research. The research results will be
distributed to the public through books, journal publications, conferences, and
via the Internet.