* 0117536
* Muscle Fiber Recruitment in Relation to Growth and Swimming Speed in Spadefoot Tadpoles
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2008
* David Reznick, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 08/31/2008
* USD 320,022.00

The proposed research will examine how patterns of muscle growth and development
translate into growth and swimming ability in tadpoles of three toad species.
Although much is known about the cellular mechanisms of muscle development,
remarkably little is known about how this translates into performance of the
individual in the real world. Recent work in fish and pilot work for this
proposal already suggest one obvious consequence, namely that fast growing
individuals are slower swimmers than their slow growing counterparts. This
research examines the consequences of a trade-off between growth rate and
swimming speed at several levels including: a mechanistic level (how recruitment
and growth of muscle cells influences growth and swimming ability), a genetic
level (comparing across species), an environmental level (by manipulating
temperature and food levels), and an ecological level (in terms of predator
avoidance and escaping pond drying). One species being studied breeds in rain
pools which dry within weeks. Rapid muscle development in this situation
accelerates metamorphosis allowing toadlets to escape the pond before it dries.
Another species breeds in permanent ponds where predators are abundant. Rapid
growth allows these tadpoles to outgrow potential predators. The third species
breeds in ponds of intermediate duration with intermediate predator levels, and
is expected to fall mid-way between the other two in terms of both growth rate
and swimming speed. Tadpoles are being used because muscle structure is
relatively simple and because skeletal development does not interfere with
muscle development (unlike other vertebrates, including people, frogs and toads
do not begin to form mineralized bones until metamorphosis). This research will
forge bridges among developmental biology, physiology, and ecology and has
potential applications in agriculture where selection for rapid growth is
common, often without considering potential costs of rapid growth. This relates
most directly to the proposed research where meat quality (muscle composition)
may be compromised to by selection for rapid growth.