* 0117072
* WORKSHOP:  Solid Freeform Fabrication (SFF) Symposium; Austin, Texas, August 6-8, 2001
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2002
* Kristin Wood, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 05/31/2002
* USD 5,500.00

The field of Solid Freeform Fabrication (SFF) has developed significantly over
the fast 15 years. The ability to make a part quickly with minimal imitations on
geometric shape has spawned applications in the fields of transportation,
medicine, the military, microelectronics, and others. With this growth has
developed the need for researchers to meet to discuss fundamental and
developmental issues of SFF. The annual SFF Symposium was first held in 1990 to
provide a forum for technical exchange of all aspects of SFF: materials, process
development, physical and computational modeling, and applications. It is the
oldest continuous meeting in the area and is reputed to be one of the top
research meetings in the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From the beginning, the
philosophy of the SFF Symposium Organizing Committee of student involvement has
been crucial to the success of the meeting and the field. Student involvement is
encouraged by offering a student registration rate that is approximately one-
third of the regular rate and which for the last several years has in fact been
below the per capita break-even cost. This subsidy has been effective in
attracting students. In 2000, approximately 31% of the entire meeting were
students. Participants represented 27 universities (10 international
universities). The interaction with the scientific leaders of the field is
beneficial to these young scientists and represents an investment in the future
of the US scientific infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;