* 0117300
* Ito-Volterra Integral Approach to Optimal Filtering and Control of Processes with Continuous, Discrete and Delayed Measurements
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Mikhail Skliar, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 12/31/2006
* USD 245,476.00

This research is mostly concerned with the problem of the optimal state
estimation of continuous systems based on continuous and discrete measurements,
subject to arbitrary, time-varying and a priori unknown time delays. The
sampling rate of discrete measurements is allowed to vary in time in a priori
unknown way. The optimal filter equation in this case must be continuous to
reflect the continuous nature of the process, and to account for continuous
measurements. This optimal filter will be subject to discontinuous inputs at the
moment when discrete measurements become available.&lt;br/&gt; The innovation of
the research is that (1) the problem is approached directly as a continuous
problem with discontinuities without simplifying assumptions, and (2) the most
general case of time-varying and a priori unknown delays in discrete and
continuous measurements is studies. The aims of the proposed research are
to:&lt;br/&gt;1. Develop the theory of optimal state estimation for continuous
systems with discrete and continuous measurements;&lt;br/&gt;2. Extend the
developed theory for the case when sampling rates of the discrete measurements
are unknown and time varying;&lt;br/&gt;3. Extend the developed theory to
include the case when both discrete and continuous measurements are subject to
arbitrary, time varying and a priori unknown time delays;&lt;br/&gt;4. Reduce
the general theoretical results of an integral approach to practically important
cases of state space systems and systems with plant and measurement
memory;&lt;br/&gt;5. Develop the software that implements the developed methods,
and&lt;br/&gt;6. Test and compare the developed methods using simulation and
experimental studies.&lt;br/&gt;Additional objectives are to lay the foundation
for extending the proposed integral approach for the &lt;br/&gt;case of
discontinuities of plant structure and parameters, constraints and inputs; to
extend the results on nonlinear systems; and to study the application of the
developed filtering methods to dual control problems.&lt;br/&gt;The research
will include international and industrial
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The estimation, based on available
measurements, of variables characterizing processes and systems during their
dynamic operation, is the fundamental problem in the variety of engineering and
science areas. A special case of the estimation problem when it is desirable to
estimate variables that are not directly measurable requires that we use the
model of the process in the estimation procedure. A particular important case of
the model-based estimation methods for the case of discrete and continuous
measurements with time varying and generally unknown delays is the subject of
the proposed approach. The method developed during this project will be
applicable in such areas as state and parameter estimation for processes with
manual sampling, human-triggered data acquisition and state estimation of remote
processes with time delays in measurements and actuation introduced by non-
deterministic properties of the information transport through the data network.
The theoretical foundation developed in the course of this research will be
relevant to practically relevant cases of linear dynamic systems with any
combination of discrete and continuous measurements subject to arbitrary and
time-varying time delays. The extension on the case of non-linear systems is
also proposed. &lt;br/&gt;