* 0117850
* Collaborative Research in Chemistry (CRC): Laboratory for Molecular Sciences (LMS): Caltech's Multi-Disciplinary Activities
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2007
* Ahmed Zewail, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 11/30/2007
* USD 6,000,000.00

This award from the Division of Chemistry supports the research of Professor
Ahmed Zewail and colleagues at the California Institute of Technology for
continuation of a program of research at the Laboratory for Molecular Science
(LMS). The LMS is a multidisciplinary research laboratory for studying
fundamental processes in complex molecular systems with atomic scale resolution
in both structure and dynamics. The development of time-resolved diffraction and
imaging methods represents a major focus for examining structures and their
changes with time, both experimentally and theoretically. The research program
at the LMS involves several members of the Cal Tech faculty who will collaborate
to examine chemical and biological systems exhibiting a wide range of
complexity. These faculty come from several disciplinary departments, such as
chemistry, physics, biology, and engineering. The Laboratory is equipped with
state-of-the-art ultrafast lasers, high-speed computers, biochemical and
electrochemical instrumentation, and mass spectrometry. Research topics to be
examined include molecular recognition, macromolecular transient structural
changes, electrochemical catalysis, nanostructures, and imaging by optical
tweezers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the last two decades great strides have been
made in attaining both spatial and temporal resolution of chemical systems down
to the atomic scale. This capability has provided new opportunities for studying
molecular structure and dynamics in many disciplines. From the elementary
dynamics of reactions and protein folding to the dynamics of molecular
assemblies and condensed phases, theory and experiment at the fundamental scale
of atomic resolution provides the key to understanding molecular function and
materials properties. The field of molecular sciences is in the midst of a
revolution, especially at the interface between chemistry and biology, where new
experimental tools, such as those being developed and used at the LMS, are used
to elucidate the structure and dynamics of complex molecular systems.&lt;br/&gt;