* 0117911
* Making Dysarthric Speech Intelligible
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* John-Paul Hosom, Oregon Health & Science University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2005
* USD 999,620.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Making Dysarthric Speech
Intelligible&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is the first year
funding of a three year continuing award. Of the 2.5 million or more adult
Americans with significant disability due to chronic neurologic impairment, a
large percentage present with dysarthria, or speech impairment, as one of their
disabling conditions, and there are no known cures. Dysarthric individuals
report loss of employment, educational opportunities, social integration, and
quality of life. Despite some strategies for compensating, the isolation caused
by communication impairment is pervasive. In this project, the PI will develop
new algorithms that, when implemented in wearable devices, will enable
dysarthric individuals to be more easily understood. Currently available devices
are essentially (digital or analog) spectral filters and amplifiers that enhance
certain parts of the spectrum. While these can help certain types of dysarthria,
many dysarthric persons suffer from speech problems that require forms of speech
modification that are much more profound and complex such as: irregular sub-
glottal pressure, resulting in loudness bursts that can be difficult to adjust
to; absence, or poor control, of voicing; systematic mispronunciation of certain
phoneme groups, resulting in certain sounds becoming indistinguishable or
unrecognizable; variable mispronunciation; and poor prosody (pitch control,
timing, and loudness). For these difficult problems, new approaches are needed
that do not merely filter the speech signal but analyze it at acoustic,
articulatory, phonetic, and linguistic levels. These approaches can be combined
to generate an output speech signal that, while preserving certain features of
the input speech, modifies the input speech along as many dimensions as is
needed to achieve intelligibility. The past decade has seen a revolution in
speech technology that can be applied to these problems; while little of the
currently developed technologies are in their present form applicable to
dysarthria, the underlying algorithms can form a basis for the creation of
innovative techniques that are specifically targeted to address these more
difficult speech problems. The PI will create these technologies in a diagnostic
framework, so that the appropriate technology is used for a given type of
dysarthria. The results will be of great value for dysarthric individuals; the
scientific challenges are formidable, and meeting them will produce insights
that will be broadly useful for other speech technologies as well.&lt;br/&gt;