* 0117655
* Collaborative Research: Biogeochemistry of Trace Elements in the Western Pacific: Atmospheric Input and Upper Ocean Cycling
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* William Landing, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2005
* USD 258,268.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0117917&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0117655&lt;br/&gt;OCE-
0117648&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While previous studies in the Atlantic Ocean and
Arabian Sea have documented a direct relationship between atmospheric dust
deposition and reactive trace element additions to surface waters, little is
known about the effect that the Asian dust plume has on the distribution of
reactive trace elements in surface waters of the western North Pacific. For this
reason, PIs from the University of Hawaii, Old Dominion University and Florida
State University will participate in a cruise to the central and western North
Pacific during April/May 2002, a time period coincident with maximum Asian dust
over that region. During this cruise the following four research objectives will
be addressed: (1) quantify the areal extent and concentration of atmospheric
dust in this region using dissolved Al concentrations in surface water samples
and compare results with estimates obtained during field studies carried out as
part of the ACE-ASIA program in 2001, as well as historical deposition models;
(2) compare the solubility of bioactive trace metals in aerosols and rainwater
along with their concentration and distribution in surface water samples versus
Al values to assess the role that atmospheric deposition has in
controlling/altering the upper ocean biogeochemical cycles of these elements;
(3) ascertain the magnitude and pathways via which atmospheric inputs get
incorporated into the thermocline and central waters of the North Pacific; and
(4) provide baseline concentrations for trace metals. The PIs will collect
surface samples while underway by pumping water onto the ship through a Teflon-
lined, polyethylene tube mounted on a modified bathythermograph and vertical
profiles at 8 stations that will encompass the key hydrographic regimes of the
area. Samples (total, particulate, dissolved, colloidal) will be analyzed for
the metals Ag, Al, Cd, Cu, Co, Fe, Mn, Ni, Pb, Zn and the metalloids As, Sb, Se.
Aerosols and rainfall samples also will be collected and analyzed for
metals/major ions and metals/metalloids, respectively. In addition, selected
samples also will be analyzed for nutrients, salinity, oxygen, chlorophyll a,
particulate organic carbon, particulate organic nitrogen, particulate organic
sulfur, dissolved organic carbon and dissolved organic
nitrogen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;