* 0117792
* Nanoscience and Engineering Center (NSEC) for Directed Assembly of Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2007
* Richard Siegel, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Cooperative Agreement
* David Nelson
* 08/31/2007
* USD 10,527,291.00

The goal of this NSF Nanoscale Science and Engineering Center (NSEC) for
Directed Assembly of Nanostructures at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI)
and the University of Illinois at Urbana- Champaign (UIUC) is to address
fundamental scientific issues underlying the design and synthesis of new
materials, structures, and devices with dramatically improved capabilities for
many industrial and biomedical applications. The work will focus on discovering
and developing the means to assemble nanoscale building blocks with unique
properties into functional structures under well-controlled, intentionally
directed conditions. Directed assembly is the fundamental gateway to the
eventual success of nanotechnology. The Center will integrate research,
education, and technology dissemination, and will serve as a national resource
for fundamental knowledge and applications of nanoscale science and technology.
Partnering with major industry, with quality undergraduate colleges with diverse
student populations, and with innovative K-1 2 educational outreach programs
will ensure that the fruits of the Center's research, education, and outreach
efforts will have a significant impact on society. The integrated research
program combines computational design with experimentation to focus on the
discovery of novel pathways to assemble functional multiscale nanostructures
with junctions and interfaces between structurally, dimensionally, and
compositionally different building blocks. A partnership with Los Alamos
National Laboratory (LANL) will enhance significantly the theoretical effort.
The Center's core research program consists of two interdisciplinary thrusts:
Nanoparticle Gels and Polymer Nanocomposites and Nanostructured Biomolecule
Composite Architectures. It will be supported by crosscutting theory and
characterization efforts and complemented by a new research effort on
socioeconomic impacts of nanotechnology in areas of radical innovation
pertaining to core competency, knowledge management, and globalization. Thus,
the overall vision for the Center encompasses research, education, and outreach
through interactions with students of all ages and members of industry. The
results of this ambitious program will lead to new methodologies for assembling
novel functional materials and devices from nanoscale building blocks, to an
interdisciplinary cadre of students and researchers trained in nanoscale science
and engineering, and to novel applications of nanotechnology to spur industry
into the 21" century. The Center includes participation of 21 senior
investigators at RPI, UIUC, and LANL, 6 postdoctoral associates, 18 graduate
students, a similar number of undergraduates, and administrative and technical
support personnel.