* 0117087
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Territorialization of Identity and Repatriation Decisions of Mongolian Kazakhs
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,02/28/2003
* Robert Kaiser, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2003
* USD 9,989.00

The relationship between identity and territory has been largely ignored, yet is
of profound and growing significance in the globalizing world. With
international boundaries becoming more porous and an increasing number of people
residing in locations away from their traditional homelands, a fundamental
question arises as to the importance of the 'tether' between identity and
territory. This question is most readily addressed by examining the de- and re-
territorialization of identity within a group living in diaspora during a period
of repatriation. The Mongolian-Kazakhs represent such a group, with a series of
additionally salient characteristics. First, the Kazakhs of Mongolia have lived
outside of their native homeland for more than 70 years, following their
ancestors' flight from the collectivization campaigns of the Stalinist era.
Second, the Kazakh ethnic group has only recently begun to nationalize within
the Soviet-constructed homeland of what has become the Republic of Kazakhstan.
Third, the sudden independence of Kazakhstan and the government's active
repatriation campaign provide an historical opportunity to investigate the loss
and reacquisition of territorial identity through the formation of homeland
conceptions and their often-controversial consideration by Kazakhs within and
outside of Kazakhstan. This doctoral dissertation research project will examine
those Mongolian-Kazakhs opting for repatriation to Kazakhstan, those opting to
remain in Mongolia, and those opting to return to Mongolia after an attempted
repatriation. This project will combine surveys, in-depth interviews, and
archival research methods to triangulate data on this complex and highly
subjective topic. Fieldwork will be carried out in Mongolia and Kazakhstan using
local sociological institutes for assistance with surveys and in-depth
interviews. This comparative structure will provide a clear picture of the ways
in which identity and territory are constructed and mutually constituted.

The terms "de-territorialization" and "re-territorialization" of identity are
employed to extend scholarly understanding of the multifaceted relationships
between diverse concepts such as territoriality, identity formation, place
attachment, and homeland psychology. Literature from a wide array of disciplines
will be employed in the theoretical exploration of the topic. This exploration
of place making as integral to identity formation will help advance geographic
theory and social theory in general. The fundamental questions addressed in this
research of how people develop and sustain their attachments to place, and the
degree to which our conception of 'where we belong' informs our sense of 'who we
are' is a critical topic that has long been ignored. By advancing the
theoretical literature pertaining to the relationship between territory and
identity, this research will provide a framework with application beyond the
specific case. The contemporary international system offers many examples of
contested notions of homeland and people defined objectively as living 'out of
place' but potentially holding self-conceptions of 'rootedness' in their current
places of residence. In addition, the case study for this project is significant
because the ethno-demographic landscape of Central Asia, especially Kazakhstan,
is replete with ethnic diasporas attempting to reassess their 'place in the
world'. By elucidating the dynamics of de- and re-territorialization of
identity, this project will provide insights that can inform policy formation
among the nationalizing states throughout the world. As a Doctoral Dissertation
Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a
promising student to establish a strong independent research career.