* 0117213
* Infanticide and Male-Female 'Friendships' in Savanna Baboons
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2007
* Ryne Palombit, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Joanna E. Lambert
* 06/30/2007
* USD 306,455.00

This project addresses two fundamental questions about primate biology. First,
why do adult males and females share enduring bonds? In the majority of
mammalian species, the sexes interact affiliatively around the period of female
estrus or fertility; after that, males and females typically pursue largely
separate lives. In primates, however, permanent association between males and
nonfertile (anestrous) females is not only more common than in mammals
generally, it is the rule in virtually all monkeys and apes. The evolutionary
reasons for the ubiquity and variability of female-male relations in primates
remain unknown, however. Second, why is infanticide a reproductive strategy of
some males, but not others? Infanticide, the killing of dependent infants
(usually by males), is widespread but variably expressed in mammals. These two
apparently unrelated questions are united in a new theory that proposes that
males and females form social relationships with one another in order to protect
young against infanticide.&lt;br/&gt; The researchers will test this hypothesis
in a study of two closely related savanna baboons that share similarities as
well as important differences. The olive baboons (Papio cynocephalus anubis) of
Kenya and the chacma baboons (P. cynocephalus ursinus) of Botswana both live in
large, multi-male, multi-female groups in which lactating females maintain close
bonds with particular males--popularly known as "friendships". Infanticide by
males, however, is common in chacma baboons, but rare in olives baboons. By
comparatively studying both populations, the researchers will answer the
following questions: (1) how do males benefit from friendship behavior: are
males the genetic fathers of their friends' infants, or, as argued for olive
baboons, do they care for unrelated infants because mothers will then choose
them as sires of future offspring?; (2) how do females benefit from friendships
with males: do they obtain male anti-infanticide protection in chacma baboons,
and some other benefit (such as protection from male harassment directed at
females) in the less infanticidal olive baboon?; (3) do bonds between males and
females vary in light of the male's paternity of the female's infant and due to
the different benefits females may derive from friendships in the two
populations? (4) does infanticide increase the reproductive success of male
chacma baboons?; (5) why do some (but not all) male chacma baboons become
infanticidal when reaching alpha status in the dominance hierarchy, whereas few
male olive baboons ever do? Ultimately, the study of a nonhuman primate may
improve our understanding of social relationships between the sexes within our
own species. &lt;br/&gt;