* 0117050
* A Coupled Modeling and Empirical Approach to the Study of the Life History and Physiological Ecology of Cold Seep Vestimentiferans and Communities
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2006
* Katriona Shea, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 09/30/2006
* USD 529,999.00

A coupled modeling and empirical approach to the study of the life history
and&lt;br/&gt;physiological ecology of cold seep vestimentiferans and
communities.&lt;br/&gt;Seep vestimentiferans and their symbionts are primary
producers that provide complex&lt;br/&gt;habitat structure in a non-toxic
setting for a diverse assortment of seep-endemic and non-
endemic&lt;br/&gt;heterotrophic species. As such, they are arguably the most
important keystone species&lt;br/&gt;in widespread areas of seepage on the
continental slope. Recent work has demonstrated that one&lt;br/&gt;species (at
least) of seep vestimentiferan is extremely long-lived and can support its
autotrophic&lt;br/&gt;life style with the uptake of dissolved gasses across
buried portions of its body. Thus, in many&lt;br/&gt;ways, the seep
vestimentiferans are analogous to long-lived, ecosystem-structuring, woody
plant&lt;br/&gt;species in a terrestrial environment.&lt;br/&gt;We will develop
models to address resource acquisition and allocation, life histories,
and&lt;br/&gt;community productivity of cold seep vestimentiferans that will
guide and focus field and&lt;br/&gt;laboratory studies of cold seep
vestimentiferan communities. We propose to work on the upper&lt;br/&gt;Louisiana
Slope of the Gulf of Mexico at a depth range of 540 to 1,000m and will
include&lt;br/&gt;communities on both hard substrata and sediment that are
exposed to a range of sulfide&lt;br/&gt;concentrations. We will use empirical
studies and comparative methods to develop, test the&lt;br/&gt;predictions of,
and refine, Dynamic Energy Budget models, while at the same time
addressing&lt;br/&gt;specific hypotheses concerning vestimentiferan aggregation
physiology and ecology.&lt;br/&gt;Our in situ work will be guided by these
mathematical models and interfaced with very&lt;br/&gt;efficient and
quantitative collection methods that will maximize the information gleaned
from&lt;br/&gt;each collection and provide material for future studies, thereby
minimizing our short and long-term&lt;br/&gt;impact on the communities. Growth
rates of thousands of individuals will be measured and&lt;br/&gt;these data used
to estimate the longevity and to calculate the resources allocated to growth
by&lt;br/&gt;each vestimentiferan species. We will determine whether "roots"
(posterior extensions that can&lt;br/&gt;be used to mine sulfide from within
sediments) are a general feature of seep vestimentiferans and&lt;br/&gt;whether
they are environmentally induced. The models will be used to explore the
relative&lt;br/&gt;importance of root sulfide uptake to the sustenance of
aggregations in different situations and the&lt;br/&gt;implications of
vestimentiferan sulfide demand on biogeochemical models of sulfide
production.&lt;br/&gt;To facilitate this, environmental concentrations of
sulfide and diffusion distances across root&lt;br/&gt;tubes and tissues will be
measured, and concentrations and sulfide binding properties of
the&lt;br/&gt;hemoglobins in the different species will be determined. The
biomass, size frequency,&lt;br/&gt;distribution, and reproductive state of the
vestimentiferans will be determined for intact&lt;br/&gt;aggregations and
collections processed so that the species richness and biomass of all
associated&lt;br/&gt;fauna in each collection can also be determined. This will
allow us to formulate life history&lt;br/&gt;models, to scale up the models of
individuals to the levels of aggregations, and to model
excess&lt;br/&gt;production and its use by associated fauna.&lt;br/&gt;Fisher
has extensive experience with the Gulf of Mexico seep communities and has
visited&lt;br/&gt;the sites. Shea is a theoretical ecologist with experience in
life-history modeling of terrestrial&lt;br/&gt;and aquatic autotrophic systems.
The proposed approach will significantly increase our&lt;br/&gt;understanding of
these widespread and productive deep-sea communities and their impact on
the&lt;br/&gt;surrounding deep sea, and will provide a modeling framework to
focus related and future&lt;br/&gt;investigations. The proposed studies will
yield basic insights on the ecology, physiology and&lt;br/&gt;reproductive
biology of deep-sea systems in general and chemoautotrophic systems in
particular.&lt;br/&gt;They will also provide new theory, and tests for existing
theory on the evolution of life history&lt;br/&gt;strategies.&lt;br/&gt;