* 0117922
* Particle Flux and Remineralization at Hawaii Ocean Time-Series Station ALOHA: Development of a New Estimation Method Based on 230Th and 231Pa
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Michael Bacon, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2003
* USD 389,089.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0117922&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
researchers at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution will develop a technique
independent of sediment traps for determining particle flux throughout the
oceanic water column. It is based on the known rate of production of 230Th and
231Pa from decay of U isotopes dissolved in seawater and is similar in concept
to the use of 234Th to determine export flux from the euphotic zone. Particles
of various size ranges will be sampled by large- volume (1000-2000 liters), in-
situ filtration and analyzed for the two radionuclides and for their major
components (organic matter, carbonate, opal, aluminosilicate). The whole water
column will be sampled, but a major emphasis will be on remineralization of
organic matter in the mesopelagic zone (~150 - 1500m), where there is a large
decrease of the flux with depth but where direct measurement of the flux with
sediment traps is difficult and subject to large errors. The Hawaii Ocean Time-
series (HOT) Station ALOHA is the site chosen for this initial study because it
is remote from the complicating effects of ocean margins and because of the
logistical ease and the supporting data provided by the ongoing time-series
program. The proposed method is made feasible by the recent development of high-
sensitivity analytical methods for measurement of 230Th and 231Pa in small
samples by inductively-coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS). If the concept
proves in this project to be successful, the method could be applied to other
oceanic areas and could be extended to a variety of specific elements and
compounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;