* 0117107
* Collaborative Research: Centennial-to-Millennial-Scale Climatic Fluctuations in Northeast Siberia during the Last Glacial Cycle
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2001,02/28/2007
* Glenn Berger, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 02/28/2007
* USD 25,800.00

Studies of Earth's history show that climate is capable of changing rapidly
(within a few years or decades) and dramatically (from glacial to interglacial
conditions). The response of the Earth's ecosystems to such global-scale changes
can be spatially complex. Paleoclimatic fluctuations are evident during the last
glacial cycle (~12,000 and 110,000 years ago) when temperatures were generally
cooler than present and were interrupted by 24 warm events during which
temperature ranged from 15-20 degrees C.

Understanding the mechanisms and timing of such environmental change is
particularly important for the Arctic, a region particularly sensitive to
climate variability. Historically, data from the Greenland ice sheet has been
the foundation for paleoclimatic reconstruction for the region. Still lacking,
however, is an understanding of how northern ecosystems have responded to
changes in climate.

This research will address this knowledge gap by providing the first continuous,
high-resolution, multi-proxy record of paleovegetational and paleoclimatic
change from the Arctic for the period ~22,000 to 50,000 years ago. A sediment
core from Elikchan Lake in northeast Siberia will be recovered and analyzed for
pollen and diatom remains as well as sediment geochemistry with sufficient
temporal control to be compared to climate trends found in ice cores.

These new data will be used to define the number, magnitude, and timing of
climatic fluctuations to assess the similarities and differences in the climate
histories between the eastern (North Atlantic) and western (northeast Siberia)
Arctic. Specifically, the research will: 1) evaluate computer simulations of
past temperature in northern Asia as related to climatic and oceanic changes in
the North Atlantic region; 2) explore the role of Siberia in transmitting
climatic fluctuations originating in the North Atlantic to the North Pacific;
and 3) examine the range of ecosystem responses to various climatic conditions
and the potential importance of biofeedback to the climate system (e.g., whether
changes in the distribution of boreal forests, a major methane source, can
affect levels of methane in the atmosphere).