* 0117545
* Americas Program:  Student Sponsorship at the Fourth Latin American Symposium on Nuclear Physics, Mexico City, Mexico, September 24-28, 2001
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Philip Cole, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 08/31/2002
* USD 23,369.00

0117545&lt;br/&gt;Cole&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Americas Program award will
support the participation of U.S. and Latin American students in the Fourth
Latin American Symposium on Nuclear Physics (IV LASNP) that will take place in
Mexico City, Mexico, September 24-28, 2001. The award will support a workshop
organized by Dr. Phillip Cole of the University of Texas at El Paso, Dr. David
Ernst of Vanderbilt University, and Dr. Efrain Chavez of the Instituto de Fisica
at the Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico. This award is partially
supported by the Physics Division of NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will
cover a wide range of timely and important issues in nuclear physics such as
heavy ion reactions in the low to medium-energy range, exotic nuclei, as well as
photo- and electron-nuclear physics. The meeting seeks to promote dialog between
faculty members of North American and Latin-American institutions by finding
common interests in research and through this effort strengthen existing links
and forge new ones within the broad scope of the international nuclear physics
community. Strengthening this link between the United States and Latin America
will foster the recruitment of high-caliber graduate-level students to pursue
research at U.S. institutions and
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;