* 0117801
* Effects of Demography and Genetics on Extinction in Small Populations:  Experiments with an Exploited Kelp
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/2001,10/31/2006
* John Wootton, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 10/31/2006
* USD 755,656.00

The process of species extinction represents both a basic ecological and
societal concern. Despite interest in extinction processes, there is little
empirical information on mechanisms leading to extinction, particularly in
marine systems, because extinction events involve small population sizes and are
infrequent. Small population size is thought to increase the risk of extinction
through several different mechanisms. Ecological mechanisms include increased
variation in population growth rates due to chance events (demographic
stochasticity), and positive density dependence (i.e., reduced population growth
at low density). Genetic mechanisms include loss of favorable alleles due to
chance events (genetic drift) and inbreeding depression.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will experimentally disentangle the effects
of different mechanisms associated with small population size in a commercially-
harvested marine kelp, the sea palm Postelsia palmaeformis. To test effects of
genetic variation, experimental populations will be established from either a
single founder, multiple founders from the same population, or multiple founders
from different source populations. The genetic treatment will be combined with a
density manipulation (large and small populations) to test for ecological
effects of population size. Experimental populations will be monitored for times
to extinction, and the underlying processes will be studied in detail by marking
individual plants and measuring survival, fecundity, and growth rates. These
data will be incorporated into a population model to determine the relative
sensitivity of population growth to different effects of small population size
and to different life stages. Concurrent monitoring of genetic structure of the
experimental populations using AFLP fingerprinting techniques will provide an
independent measurement of genetic dynamics and effects on population
performance, and will validate basic assumptions of the study. The study will
increase our understanding of the effects of small population size on extinction
risk, help to characterize the life cycle of marine kelps, and provide important
information for developing effective conservation and remediation strategies for
exploited marine species.&lt;br/&gt;