* 0117994
* 'Modern Wonders:' Technology In British and German Public Culture, 1890-1945.
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Bernhard Rieger, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Keith R. Benson
* 08/31/2002
* USD 59,640.00

This project investigates the ways in which public culture promoted
technological change in Britain and Germany from the late nineteenth century to
the end of World War II. While a Visiting Fellow at Churchill College,
University of Cambridge, Dr. Rieger is gathering archival material for a
comparative monograph detailing similarities and differences between British and
German debates about processes of innovation. This project identifies
similarities alongside national differences evident in the ways in which public
discussions about technology worked to create cultural climates conducive to
innovation in Britain and Germany between the 1890s and the end of World War II.
In his treatment of how enthusiasm for, and unease about, innovative
technologies interacted during this period, the principal investigator studies
the intersecting debates about the following five technologies: aviation,
passenger shipping, the motor car, photography, and film. Drawing on pictorial
and textual evidence, this inquiry approaches public debates about technological
change as productions of knowledge which ascribed meaning to artifacts whose
workings most contemporaries were unable to understand. Public debates about the
new "modern wonders" that continually appeared on the scene were torn between
fears of novel risks and cultural decay on the one side, and passionate support
generated by&lt;br/&gt;nationalism and social fantasies on the other. While
investigating the links between public technophobia and euphoria, the impact of
liberal and illiberal ideologies in Britain and Germany requires particular
attention in order to uncover the cultural and political mechanisms behind the
political appropriation of technological innovations. Thus, this comparative
study takes the cultural history of British and German technology beyond the
currently dominant inquiries into productivism or into contemporary
philosophical debates about "the question of technology" (Friedrich Dessauer).
Instead, Rieger advances a comprehensive explanation for the&lt;br/&gt;varying
reasons why British and German public culture promoted technological innovation
between 1890 and 1945.&lt;br/&gt;