* 0117658
* Making it Easier to Interact with Technology Through Handheld Personal Universal Controllers
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2004
* Brad Myers, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2004
* USD 511,867.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Making it Easier to Interact with Technology
through Handheld Personal&lt;br/&gt;Universal
Controllers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a standard award.
In this project the PI will investigate how a hand-held computer exploiting
wireless communications technologies can be used as a Personal Universal
Controller (PUC) to control all kinds of home, office and factory equipment.
When users point their PUC at a light switch, at a photocopier in an office, at
a machine tool in a factory, at a VCR at home, at a piece of test equipment in
the field, or at almost any other kind of device, the device will send to the
hand-held a description of its control parameters. The PUC will use this
information to create an appropriate control panel, taking into account the
properties of the controls that are needed, the properties of the hand-held (the
display type and input techniques available), and the properties of the user
(what language is preferred, whether left or right handed, how big the buttons
should be based on whether the user prefers using a finger or a stylus). The
user can then control the device using the PUC. The device will not need to
dedicate much processing power, hardware, or cost to the user interface, since
it will only need to contain a description of its capabilities and storage for
the current settings, along with hardware for wireless communication. PUC
programs will use intelligent "model-based" techniques to create useful and
appropriate interfaces that are customized for each user. The PI's preliminary
research suggests that an interface on a hand-held can be significantly better
than the interface supplied by the manufacturer, so the PUC should enable people
to make more effective use of their equipment, as well as making it practical to
add intelligence to a broader range of appliances. The PUC can also facilitate
access for people with disabilities, since the interfaces will be customized to
the individual's preferences and needs. But this research will have benefits
beyond just remote control devices for appliances, in that it will help further
the cause of separating the user interface from the application code, which has
been a basic goal of user interface software research from the
beginning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;