* 0117079
* Resolution and Reconstitution of Photosystem I in Cyanobacteria and Higher Plants:  Molecular Biological and Physicochemical Studies
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2007
* John Golbeck, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2007
* USD 746,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This research program aims at understanding the structure,function
and organization of the Photosystem I reaction center in cyanobacteria and green
plants.The advances made so far include a biological method to introduce
alternative quinones into the A1&lt;br/&gt;site,an experimental approach to
determine whether electron transfer is uni-or bi-directional among the
symmetrically-located electron transfer cofactors,and a determination of the
3-dimensional NMR solution structure of unbound PsaC.This,combined with newly-
available structural information about the 3-dimensional spatial arrangement of
atoms from X-ray crystallography and the electron spin density distribution in
cofactors from magnetic resonance spectroscopy,has opened new avenues for
research in PS I. One is the effect of biological incorporation of alternative
quinones into the A1 site for studies of the effect of Gibbs free energy changes
on rates of forward and backward electron transfer, and for studies of the
electron density distribution within the A1 - acceptor. Another is the protein-
protein interactions at the molecular level between the PsaA,PsaB, PsaC,and PsaD
subunits,and focuses especially on the changes in secondary structure that take
place when PsaC docks with its protein partners in PS I.The goal is to determine
the dynamic interactions that occur among these to produce a functional PS I
complex.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These studies promise to have an impact on the
understanding of protein factors responsible for conferring redox properties to
organic cofactors and on the understanding of protein-protein interactions in
the assembly of multi-component,membrane-bound complexes.Hence,this work should
have relevance well beyond the realm of oxygenic
photosynthesis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;