* 0117738
* The Columbia Hot Spot Rescue Service
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2006
* Edward Coffman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Wu
* 08/31/2006
* USD 1,414,999.00

Although Internet traffic is routinely quite heavy, there has usually been more
than enough storage,&lt;br/&gt;processing and bandwidth capacity to provide
acceptable performance. However, it is well known that, more&lt;br/&gt;and more
frequently, demands for network resources are mushrooming locally into hotspots
or data storms,&lt;br/&gt;and in such cases the affected web sites and
subnetworks founder almost completely, creating revenue&lt;br/&gt;losses and
client dissatisfaction on a large scale. We propose a novel collaborative
technology to alleviate&lt;br/&gt;the effects of these hotspots, a technology
that we will apply by designing and prototyping a Hotspot
Rescue&lt;br/&gt;Service (HRS). This work will build on the past research of the
PI's in networking, operating systems, and&lt;br/&gt;distributed
caching.&lt;br/&gt; A key premise on which the technology is founded lies in the
observation that existing Internet band-width&lt;br/&gt;resources are sufficient
to deal effectively with hotspots. In other words, rescues of heavily-
overloaded&lt;br/&gt;sites can be assembled from underutilized resources lying
elsewhere. It follows that there is no inherent need&lt;br/&gt;for resources
held in reserve uniquely for this purpose, i.e., there is no need for over-
provisioned, under-utilized resources such as distributed caches to protect
against hotspots. We propose instead a paradigm shift in which efficient
mechanisms that we provide will enable communities of participating sites to
share their resources to suppress hotspots. The service in action will be
transparent, in part self-regulating and will take the form of automated traffic
redirection to sites with available bandwidth.&lt;br/&gt; The proposed Columbia
HRS will be proactive as well as reactive. We will amass hotspot data
that&lt;br/&gt;will be modeled and analyzed with the aim of designing hotspot
daemons or plugins, software devices for&lt;br/&gt;monitoring traffic behavior
and signalling incipient hotspots via hotspot watches and advisories, along
with&lt;br/&gt;relevant statistics. We will implement two complementary
approaches to the technology, a server-based&lt;br/&gt;approach and a client-
based, peer-to-peer (P2P) approach.&lt;br/&gt; In the server-based approach,
servers monitor their own loads, the loads of a small set of servers
that&lt;br/&gt;they would service in the event that the other server overloads,
and, via probes between servers, network&lt;br/&gt;conditions. When a server or
network component is identified as going into possible overload, the
system&lt;br/&gt;activates a replication mechanism to duplicate the hot content.
Clients can then retrieve the content from&lt;br/&gt;the server sites acting as
replicas, alleviating the load on the original overloaded resource.&lt;br/&gt;
In the P2P approach, clients install a plugin into their browser that
communicates with similar plugins&lt;br/&gt;installed on other clients'
browsers, as well as with a distributed directory service. Clients cache their
recent downloads, and, through the plugin, inform the directory service of the
objects that are cached. The directory service can then identify the most
popular content, as well as cached locations and notify additional clients of
these alternative locations for download. By using client machines to store and
deliver the hot content and if requests for the given content can be redirected
to the client machines, the hotspot at the server can be eliminated. In this
way, hotspot response becomes self-organizing and self-regulatory.&lt;br/&gt;
There are several issues that need to be addressed as we develop this rescue
service. First, we will use&lt;br/&gt;experimentation and analysis of collected
data (including data sets obtained via a company partnerships)&lt;br/&gt;to
develop models of causes and effects of network hotspot activity. Next, we will
analytically evaluate&lt;br/&gt;the effect on server and network load that
techniques such as caching, redirecting, and migrating have&lt;br/&gt;upon
hotspots within the network. Last, we will implement and evaluate prototype
systems to validate&lt;br/&gt;their effectiveness, either upon simulated hotspot
activity within a testbed, or if possible, on actual hotspots&lt;br/&gt;through
agreements with content providers.&lt;br/&gt; Development of the HRS will
provide research opportunities to multiple students at Columbia,
and&lt;br/&gt;its deployment will improve web performance of objects served from
academic institutions and non-profit&lt;br/&gt;companies whose content is to
date not hosted by commerical third-party content delivery companies.