* 0117207
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Patterns of Species Composition and Stand Age:  The Importance of Dispersal, Species Interactions, and Habitat Preference
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2001,01/31/2003
* Susan Beatty, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2003
* USD 9,933.00

The plant species composition of deciduous forest communities varies
considerably from place to place. It is not fully understood what determines
whether or not a given plant will be located in a given area. Plants are
sometimes limited to specific areas because of their inability to tolerate
certain environmental conditions, which may be the result of differences in the
soil where they grow or the result of changes brought about by other plants or
trees already growing at a site. Elsewhere, plants may be limited by their
ability to get seeds or other reproductive material to a new site. This doctoral
dissertation research project will examine the role that plant dispersal and
forest age have in determining spatial pattern in the herbaceous vegetation
located underneath the canopy trees in the hardwood-hemlock forest of the Edmund
Niles Huyck Preserve in central New York State. The Huyck Preserve provides the
opportunity to study forest change over the last 150 years, because most of the
area of the preserve was logged sometime during that time period, thereby
providing a mosaic of forest types of varying age. The goals of this project are
to determine if the type of dispersal a plant uses is related to whether or not
it is present in a forest stand of a certain age and to determine if the
likelihood of a species being contained in an area is dependent on that species
being present in a nearby area. These relationships will be determined by
examining the vegetation and the age of 30 to 40 forest stands of the Huyck
Preserve. The locations of these stands will be specificed along with their
distances from each other. The plant species located in these areas will be
grouped by the type of dispersal they use to propogate themselves (wind, animal,
gravity, etc.) as well as patterns associated with the age of forest stands.
Among the hypotheses that will be explored is whether species using rapid, long-
distance dispersal will appear in younger areas before species using slower,
more geographically restricted modes of dispersal. Species composition in each
area will be compared with species composition in adjacent areas. A hypothesis
to be tested in this facet of the project is whether the species composition of
an area is dependent on the species composition of other areas. This dependency
may also be influenced by physical factors like wind or slope direction, as
there may be greater concentration of species in areas located immediately
downwind or downslope from established species. These results should help to
clarify role that dispersal plays in determination of species composition
patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will help advance understanding of
the role plant dispersal plays in determining which species live where. This
will complement what already is known about other factors that influence where
plants live, such as how plants interact with the environment and how they
interact with other plant species. This type of knowledge is necessary in a
conservation context, because knowing the processes that maintain species
diversity will help design plans for preservation of species, communities, and
ecosystems. Land managers must know which processes increase or decrease species
diversity on their lands before they can make informed decisions about the types
of actions that should be taken to best preserve them or restore habitat.
Understanding which processes are necessary to preserve maximum diversity can
lead to more informed decisions about assigning protection priorities to various
areas in scenarios involving limited monetary resources. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;