* 0117000
* New Directions in the Earth Sciences and the Humanities:  Implementing Wide Interdisciplinarity
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2003
* Robert Frodeman, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 12/31/2003
* USD 94,185.00

The PI will convene, in February and again in August of 2002, a paired workshop-
conference devoted to developing wide interdisciplinary approaches to
environmental issues of broad public concern. This "New Directions" research
conference will have a two-part invitational workshop and public conference
structure. This structure will enable (1) transcending disciplinary limitations
in addressing environmental issues, and (2) stimulating long-term
interdisciplinary research partnerships for tackling such issues. Together, the
two meetings will break new ground in both the theoretical and practical aspects
of interdisciplinary environmental research and education. The goals of this
workshop and conference are: (a) to devise ways to more effectively situate
scientific knowledge within society; (b) to bring the powerful resources of the
humanities better to bear on societal questions; and (c) to create enduring
partnerships across the disciplines, and between the broadest array of
researchers and educators of all types and the public and private realms, in
order to more successfully address environmental challenges. The February 2002
workshop will consist of 20-25 invited participants representing a wide range of
perspectives: the Earth sciences, the humanities, humanistic-oriented social
sciences, the corporate sector, and community groups. The August 2002 public
conference will consist of the workshop participants, plus a larger group (of
similarly wide background) who have responded to a call for papers on the theme
of developing interdisciplinary, topical approaches to environmental challenges.
The February workshop will launch a six-month period of collaboration across the
disciplines and between knowledge producers and representatives of the public
and private sector, helping to ensure that the August conference has the maximum
possible effect. The overall goal of the paired meetings is to improve society's
ability at bringing the insights of academic research to bear upon societal
(especially environmental) problems, to devise ways to redirect the work of
knowledge producers so that their research and scholarship is more pertinent to
society.

