* 0117935
* Assessment/Completion of the NEES Experimental Infrastructure
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2001,02/28/2002
* Frieder Seible, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 02/28/2002
* USD 60,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CMS 0117935&lt;br/&gt;Seible&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
provides funding to the University of California, San Diego to conduct a
national earthquake engineering research equipment workshop for the George E.
Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES). NEES is a
project funded under the National Science Foundation (NSF) Major Research
Equipment program and has been authorized by Congress for $81.9 million during
FY 2000-FY 2004. In February 2001, NSF announced the NEES Earthquake Engineering
Research Equipment Portfolio, Phase 1, consisting of eleven awards to ten
institutions for $45 million. These eleven awards include new and upgraded shake
tables, upgraded centrifuges, an upgraded wave basin for tsunami research,
large-scale laboratory experimentation systems, and geotechnical and structural
earthquake engineering field equipment. These equipment sites will be part of
the NEES collaboratory and serve as national, shared-use earthquake engineering
experimental research equipment installations, with teleobservation and
teleoperation capabilities, networked together through the high performance
Internet. In addition to providing access for telepresence at the NEES equipment
sites, the network will use cutting-edge tools to link high performance
computational and data storage facilities, including a curated repository for
experimental and analytical earthquake engineering and related data. The network
will also provide distributed physical and numerical simulation capabilities and
resources for visualization of experimental and computed data. Through NEES, the
earthquake engineering community will use these advanced experimental
capabilities to test and validate more complex and comprehensive analytical and
computer numerical models that will improve the seismic design and performance
of our Nation's civil and mechanical systems. NSF intends to issue a Phase 2
program solicitation during 2001 to complete the NEES Equipment Portfolio. The
purpose of this workshop is to bring the earthquake engineering community
together to (a) summarize the NEES Equipment Portfolio, Phase 1, (b) assess
other existing earthquake engineering facilities/equipment available in the
United States, (c) identify possible missing components of the NEES Equipment
Portfolio, Phase 1, and (d) recommend strategies to complete the NEES Equipment
Portfolio during Phase 2. The earthquake engineering community can participate
in this workshop via input on the web prior to the workshop and/or through
attendance at the workshop. A report summarizing the recommendations from this
workshop will be posted on the web for broad dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;