* 0117338
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Pollen Dispersal and Deposition on Tropical Andean Ice Caps: Quelccaya, Peru, and Nevada Sajama, Bolivia
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2001,12/31/2002
* Kam-biu Liu, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard J. Aspinall
* 12/31/2002
* USD 13,905.00

Recent developments in the new science of tropical ice-core palynology have
demonstrated that the fossil pollen found in ice cores drawn from alpine
glaciers and polar ice caps can provide sensitive records of past vegetational
and climatic changes. To date, however, this science has been done in tropical
alpine environments without the full understanding of pollen dispersal and
depositional characteristics; a key factor for a reliable and accurate
interpretation of ice-core palynological records. This doctoral dissertation
research project will study the patterns and processes of pollen dispersal and
deposition on the tropical Andean ice caps of Quelccaya in Peru and Nevada
Sajama in Bolivia. This project will analyze the modern pollen found on the ice
caps themselves and in the surrounding vegetation zones. Aside from the ice
caps, pollen surface samples will be collected from the major vegetation zones
in the central Andes as well as from the subalpine and lowland zones to the west
(extending to the Pacific Ocean) and east (into the Amazon lowlands). A
biogeographical surface pollen study will help address questions of dispersal
patterns, pollen provenance, regional pollen-rain signatures, sensitivity of the
ice-core pollen records, and how each of these factors are reflected in the
distribution and assemblages of pollen found on the ice
caps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance fundamental understandings
in the rapidly growing field of ice-core palynology. It will provide new
insights into vegetation change in and near the central Andes, thereby
complementing data from other sources that is examining environmental change in
the region. The project will further the effectiveness of future pollen studies
in the central Andes by broadening knowledge about modern relationships among
pollen, vegetation, and climate in the region, thus laying the groundwork for
the derivation of pollen-climate transfer functions and response surfaces. As a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;