* 0117895
* Studies of 26Al and 10Be as Potential Constraints on Paleoproductivity and Extraterrestrial Influx
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2001,03/31/2005
* Teh-Lung Ku, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 03/31/2005
* USD 450,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0117895&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The source
functions and geochemical pathways of 26Al (half-life 0.72 My) and 10Be (1.5 My)
in the sea are closely linked. These radioisotopes, produced mainly by the
interaction of cosmic rays with the atmospheric constituents, enter the ocean
via wet and dry fallout with a nearly constant ratio and deposit to the seafloor
through particle scavenging. The scavenging time of 10Be is comparable to the
ocean mixing time of ~103 years,but that of 26Al is about 30 times shorter. As a
consequence, 10Be is more readily transported to areas of high particle flux or
high productivity such as ocean margins, where the deposition ratio of 10Be/26Al
becomes much higher than their production ratio. These features -relatively
stable source function, constant production ratio,and high particle reactivity
with differential removal -render the two nuclides as a pair suitable for
tracing geochemical and geophysical processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, researchers at the University of Southern California will evaluate the
utility of the 10Be/26Al ratio in sediments as a proxy for paleo-particle flux
or paleoproductivity, and the use of the 3He/26Al ratio in sediment cores to
probe the factors affecting the flux of earth-bound interplanetary dust
particles (IDP) and its variation with time. Measurements of 10Be and 26Al will
be carried out on samples of seawater, sediment-trap material, and sediment, and
of 3He in sediment cores. Measurements of U-Th isotopes, 27Al, 9Be, opal,
carbonates and other chemical components will also be made on sediment trap and
sediment samples. Data so obtained will be used to study the spatial and
temporal variations in the distribution and flux of 10Be and 26Al and the
mechanisms causing the variations. The influence of particle composition and
remineralization on the sedimentary 10Be/26Al signals will be investigated to
constrain better the 10Be/26Al proxy which will be applied to sediment cores
from the equatorial Pacific and the Antarctic to provide an understanding of the
productivity changes in areas characterized by high-nutrients and low-
chlorophyll of the surface water. Past variations in IDP will be examined by the
coupled measurements of 3He/26Al and 3He/230Th in sediment cores.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;