* 0117752
* Nanoscience and Engineering Center:  Columbia Center for Electronic Transport in Molecular Nanostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2008
* James Yardley, Columbia University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2008
* USD 11,170,000.00

This Nanoscale Science and Engineering Center award to Columbia University is
co-funded by Divisions of Chemistry (MPS), Materials Research (MPS) and
International Programs (IN). Columbia University Nanocenter will conduct
research to establish the foundation for new paradigms for information
processing through the development of fundamental understanding of charge
transport phenomena unique to nanoscale molecular structures with special
emphasis on crystalline organic conductors and carbon nanotube materials.
Single-molecule structures will be fabricated by the Center through a fusion of
advanced semiconductor technology and tailored molecular synthesis. The research
will elucidate the control of charge transport through single molecules in terms
of the chemical structure and also will examine underlying mechanistic
questions. The research program will place strong emphasis on the modulation of
charge transport through molecules, with the goal of developing a molecular
transistor. Scientists from Canada, Germany, Japan and Switzerland will
collaborate with the Center in solid state surface analysis, single crystal
growth, and the determination of electron transport properties of crystalline
nanomaterials. Nanoscale structures and devices will be fabricated and
characterized in collaboration with Lucent and IBM research facilities. In
addition to electronics, these studies of molecular transport in nanomaterials
will have potential impact to other disciplines such as photonics, biology,
neuroscience, and medicine. Through partnership with Barnard College, City
College of New York, and Rowan University, the Center will incorporate an
innovative educational program directed toward a wide variety of students at
graduate, undergraduate, and high school levels. Educational and outreach
programs will be designed to attract students to nanotechnology, with particular
attention to groups, which have been historically underrepresented in science.

Columbia University Nanocenter will conduct research to develop knowledge of
charge transport phenomena unique to nanoscale molecular structures such as
crystalline organic conductors and carbon nanotube materials. Single-molecule
structures will be fabricated by the Center to elucidate the control of charge
transport through single molecules in terms of the chemical structure and to
examine underlying mechanisms, with the goal of developing a molecular
transistor. Industrial collaborations with Lucent and IBM will be carried out to
fabricate and characterize nanoscale structures and devices. In addition to
electronics, these studies of molecular transport in nanomaterials will have
potential impact to other disciplines, such as photonics, biology, neuroscience,
and medicine. In collaboration with Barnard College, City College of New York,
and Rowan University, the Center will incorporate an innovative educational
program directed toward a wide variety of students at graduate, undergraduate
and high school levels. Educational and outreach programs will be tailored to
attract students to nanotechnology, with particular attention to groups, which
have been historically underrepresented in science.