* 0117744
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Spatial Cognition and Spatial Language in Williams Syndrome
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Barbara Landau, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher T. Kello
* 08/31/2005
* USD 439,701.00

This research will explore spatial cognition and spatial language in children
and adults, using evidence from a rare genetic deficit, Williams syndrome, to
shed light on the nature of normal spatial cognition. Individuals with Williams
syndrome typically have a cognitive profile of profoundly impaired spatial
cognition together with relatively spared language. This syndrome therefore
provides a unique opportunity to understand the nature of spatial cognition and
spatial language, their development, and their interaction. The goal of this
research is to determine (a) whether spatial breakdown is selective, occurring
for only certain spatial capacities but not others, and (b) whether spatial
language can be acquired and used normally in the absence of interaction with
normal spatial cognition. The question of "selectivity" will be addressed by
experiments in four spatial domains, object representation, perception of space
vs. visual-manual action in space, navigation, and spatial language. If some
aspects of spatial cognition are spared, but others are not, this would be
consistent with the idea that spatial cognition is specialized, and that
different kinds of spatial capacities develop from different origins. In
contrast, if all aspects of spatial cognition are impaired, this would be
consistent with the idea that there are general principles of development that
affect all kinds of spatial cognition equally. The question of "interaction"
between spatial language and non-linguistic spatial cognition will be addressed
by experiments on the relationship between the two kinds of spatial knowledge.
If both are equally impaired, this would suggest a highly interactive
organization of the brain in which spatial cognition and spatial language are
tightly coupled. In contrast, if spatial language is selectively spared, this
would be consistent with a high degree of selectivity, and would mean that
language development need not be affected by certain kinds of cognitive
impairment. As a whole, these studies should elucidate the nature of normal
spatial cognition by determining whether development and its breakdown occur
along the lines of normal cognitive architecture, which would suggest cognitive
specialization. They should elucidate the nature of spatial language by
determining whether it can develop normally in the absence of normal non-
linguistic spatial cognition, which would suggest a high degree of independence
between the two systems. And they should shed light on developmental processes,
by determining whether breakdown in one system inevitably forces changes in
other systems, or whether developmental breakdown can apply selectively across
sub-systems of cognition.