* 0117627
* US-India Cooperative Research:  Microbe-Mineral Interaction Mechanisms Relevant To Precious Metal  Extraction with Environmental Control
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* K. Natarajan, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 08/31/2004
* USD 35,929.00

0117627&lt;br/&gt;Somasundaran &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award
supports US-India cooperative research entitled "Microbe-Mineral Interaction
Mechanisms Relevant to Precious Metal Extraction with Environmental Control."
The PIs will investigate bioprocessing for the enhanced recovery of precious
metals such as gold, silver and platinum and will focus on the mechanisms by
which certain microbes adhere to different mineral surfaces and alter
interfacial properties. These mechanisms are as yet not very clear. During
leaching, metal ions accumulate; some of which may confer toxicity to bacteria.
There is need to understand the toxic metal tolerance of selected bacteria and
develop more efficient metal tolerant strains. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The
collaborators for this research, P. Somasundaran, Columbia University and K.
Natarajan, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, have worked successfully in
the past and have published in major international journals. Due to growing
environmental awareness during the past decade, the use of biotechnology has
become attractive as an environmentally benign, cost and energy efficient means
for mineral beneficiation and environmental control. This project is jointly
supported by the Division of International Programs and the Government of
India's Department of Science &amp; Technology. &lt;br/&gt;