* 0117480
* Collaborative Research: The Influence of the Mendeleev Ridge and Chukchi Borderland on the Large-scale Circulation of the Arctic Ocean
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Knut Aagaard, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 12/31/2006
* USD 431,899.00

The most important subsurface Arctic Ocean transport system, a cyclonic (here
anticlockwise) boundary current, organized along the continental slopes and
major trans-Arctic ridges, distributes waters, tracers and contaminants from the
Atlantic (via Fram Strait and the Barents Sea) and the Pacific (via Bering
Strait) around and into the deep Arctic basins. On its circum-Arctic pathway,
parts of the topographically steered current are diverted away from the
continental margin, generally along topographic ridges. The most complex
obstacle the boundary current encounters is the Mendeleev Ridge/Chukchi
Borderland complex, north of the Pacific entrance to the Arctic. This region is
the cross- roads for Pacific-origin waters from the south and Atlantic waters
carried from the west with the boundary current. The tortuous bathymetry offers
many routes for a topographically steered current, and the spatial variability
of the sparse data that exist clearly indicates the complexity of the region.
These data also show significant interannual variability, in line with the major
changes seen in the last decade throughout the Arctic, and they further suggest
that the region diverts significant amounts of water into the deep basins,
indicating this region's importance to shelf-basin exchange, deep basin
ventilation, and circum- and trans-Arctic circulation (with feedback
implications to the World Ocean circulation). Yet, the pathways and exchanges in
this area are still unclear, both qualitatively and quantitatively, due to the
lack of sufficiently concentrated observations. This research will conduct a
high spatial resolution hydrographic and tracer survey, supported by short-term
moored current and CTD measurements, in the region of the Chukchi Borderland and
the southern end of the Mendeleev Ridge during August/September
2002.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives are to:&lt;br/&gt;- delineate the
pathways of the boundary current carrying the Atlantic water past the Mendeleev
Ridge and through the Chukchi Borderland;&lt;br/&gt;- ascertain the input from
the boundary current and the shelves to the deep Arctic Ocean in the vicinity of
the Mendeleev Ridge and the Chukchi Borderland;&lt;br/&gt;- understand and
quantify the pathways and transformations of the Pacific waters through this
region;&lt;br/&gt;- describe the horizontal and vertical structure of the
boundary current, and estimate its transport; and&lt;br/&gt;- quantify recent
temporal changes in this region by combining the spatially sparse data extending
through most of the past decade with new detailed synoptic
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On a 35-day expedition on an ice-breaking
research vessel, measurements will be made of temperature, salinity, dissolved
oxygen, nutrients, CFCs, Ba, and 18-O on 12 sections that cross both the
boundary flow and the Pacific inputs to the region before and after topographic
junctions and hypothesized regions of flow diversion. This tracer suite will
enable identification of the pathways of the boundary current and the Pacific-
origin waters, and quantification of the different Atlantic and Pacific
influences, as well as freshwater input from ice melt and different rivers. In
addition, three moorings will be deployed, spanning the boundary current for the
duration of the cruise. Current meters and moored conductivity and temperature
sensors will quantify the vertical and horizontal extent of the boundary
current, its structure and variability, and will yield an estimate of the
transport and a description of eddies carried with or across the boundary
current. To give a comprehensive picture of the system, the entire data set will
be analyzed collectively and in tandem with hydrographic, tracer, and moored
time series data from the last decade. Since the transit time of signals through
this region is 2-4 years, the older data provide a temporal background for the
new high spatial resolution data, whilst the newer data will supply an essential
spatial&lt;br/&gt;framework for understanding the variability of the older
surveys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will yield a substantially increased
understanding of the role of this region in the Arctic circulation, including a
determination of pathways, a quantification of exchanges, and an assessment of
temporal change. Its timing in 2002 will fill a pending hiatus in hydrographic
surveys in the Canadian Basin at a time when the most dramatic changes ever
observed in the Arctic are propagating through this region. The project will
provide necessary background and mechanistic information to the potential SEARCH
and Arctic-Subarctic Ocean Flux programs, and essential far-field information to
the SBI Phase II field program in the Chukchi and Beaufort seas. In addition,
the results will be pivotal to validating and improving high resolution computer
and conceptual models of the Arctic, and will offer insights to physical
mechanistic problems, such as the driving mechanism of the boundary current and
the interaction of an equivalent barotropic current with steep and sharp
topography.&lt;br/&gt;