* 0117400
* Megafaunal Mammal Genetics and Extinction Dynamics in the Late Pleistocene:   Testing the Hyperdisease Hypothesis
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2007
* Alex Greenwood, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 08/31/2007
* USD 473,067.00

Infectious diseases can influence evolutionary mechanisms in a variety of ways,
including extinction of host populations. While disease is rarely considered as
a forcing agent in extinction, whether alone or in combination with co factors
(e.g., climate change), it is nevertheless obvious from modern examples that
disease can have extraordinary effects on the fitness of natural populations.

In this proposal it is contended that: (1) extinctions due to disease have
occurred in the recent past (late Pleistocene); (2) these losses were prompted
by genetically naive populations of animals encountering infectious diseases
brought from elsewhere by migrating humans, their commensals, or synanthropics),
which quickly emerged thereafter in these new hosts, causing catastrophic
mortality; and (2) empirical evidence of pathogens is recoverable from late
Pleistocene material, utilizing molecular ("ancient" DNA) and immunological
approaches (thereby permitting realistic tests of the hypothesis).

The target extinction event for this work is the major series of losses that
occurred in North America and northern Asia ca. 11,000 years ago. The principal
target taxon is Mammuthus primigenius, the woolly mammoth, chosen because it is
represented by abundant, high-quality fossils (including soft tissues). This
taxon is also being heavily investigated by molecular methods for systematic and
phylogenetic purposes in a number of labs, providing a good database for quality
control of results. Other late Pleistocene taxa will also be utilized where
feasible, as will remains other than bones (especially feces). The intent is to
search for evidence of pathogenic entities (in particular, viruses) in well-
preserved fossils collected by team members in the Taimyr Peninsula, Siberia, as
well as other locales.

Hypotheses to be tested by relevant experiments are logically linked in a series
of steps. Experiments may be grouped as follows:

Group 1 experiments are linked to the hypothesis that exogenous virus capsid
proteins or host antibodies raised against virus infection can be detected
immunochemically in tissues and feces of extinct species. Purpose of experiments
is to use radioimmunoassay (RIA), enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), and
immuno-PCR to detect DNA and RNA viruses.

Group 2 experiments are linked to the hypothesis that exogenous DNA viruses in
fossil samples can be detected using ancient DNA techniques developed for
single-copy nuclear DNA analysis. Purpose of experiments is to obtain sequence
information on DNA viruses identified by RIA.

Group 3 experiments are linked to the hypothesis that mammoth populations may
have suffered from reduced fitness (and therefore increased susceptibility to
disease) as the result of genetic uniformity. Experiments are designed to
analyze population genetics of geographically and temporally discrete mammoth
samples, to look for evidence of genetic bottlenecking.

Any success in detecting and characterizing viral elements in fossil material
will be groundbreaking, leading to the possibility of being able to empirically
track evolutionary change in viruses at the gene level over periods of tends of
thousands of years. Further, if the expected correlations between taxa,
pathogens, and extinction times can be shown to be meaningful, this will have
substantial impact on evolutionary biology, conservation biology, and virology.
Dissemination of results through publications, symposia, and Web products is
planned.