* 0117859
* Collaborative Research: Mass Transfer Due to Oscillatory Flow Over Coral Reefs
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Jeffrey Koseff, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 09/30/2005
* USD 290,110.00

The relationship between new production, organic carbon cycling, and
nutrient&lt;br/&gt;uptake into coral reef systems is not well understood.
Nutrient uptake into experimental&lt;br/&gt;coral reef communities has been
shown to be mass-transfer limited, or limited by the rate at which nutrients can
be physically delivered to the active surfaces of reef autotrophs. A set of
simple, mass transfer relationships have been developed to predict uptake of
dissolved inorganic nutrients. These relationships were derived from experiments
which were conducted in 10-20 m long flumes and under steady, non-oscillatory
flow conditions. Drs. Atkinson and Monismith reason that these mass transfer
equations are inappropriate for understanding nutrient uptake by shallow-water
reef communities in natural reef environments, where wave-drive water motion
dominates the surrounding flow field. They have argued with both theoretical and
empirical evidence that there should be some enhancement of mass transfer due to
oscillatory flow. They emphasize that there are no mass transfer studies with
both waves and naturally rough surfaces and that this is a problem unique to the
study of benthic ecosystems. &lt;br/&gt; The project has three general
goals:&lt;br/&gt; 1) To understand how waves influence rates of mass transfer to
naturally rough&lt;br/&gt;surfaces;&lt;br/&gt; 2) To determine how waves
influence nutrient uptake into reef communities&lt;br/&gt;adapted to wave-driven
flow environments;&lt;br/&gt; 3) To actually demonstrate that waves enhance in
situ rates of nutrient uptake&lt;br/&gt;by natural reef
communities.&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these goals, these scientists propose an
interlocking set of two lab studies and one field study. The first of these, a
laboratory experiment on nutrient uptake by a coral community under both steady
and oscillating flow conditions, will be conducted at the HIMB lab on Coconut
Island. The second, a detailed study of the fluid mechanics of&lt;br/&gt;stress
and mass transfer over corals will be carried out at the Environmental
Fluid&lt;br/&gt;Mechanics Laboratory at Stanford. Finally, to test the
application of the lab results, a&lt;br/&gt;series of field experiments will be
carried out to determine whether rates of nutrient&lt;br/&gt;uptake by natural
reef communities under wave-driven flow conditions are
positively&lt;br/&gt;correlated with incident wave energy, and, to determine
whether these rates scale with&lt;br/&gt;estimates of bottom shear stress
according to mass transfer correlations derived from&lt;br/&gt;laboratory
experiments.&lt;br/&gt; Results of these experiments will give us the
quantitative basis to determine the&lt;br/&gt;spatial variability in rates of
nutrient uptake into reef communities, and to promote an&lt;br/&gt;understanding
of how the dynamic physical environment typical of reef
communities&lt;br/&gt;may be defining their metabolism.&lt;br/&gt;