* 0117471
* SDEST: Software Engineering Code of Ethics
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2001,02/28/2006
* Vivian Weil, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 02/28/2006
* USD 225,000.00

Especially at this time of rapidly changing institutions, the normative claims
of professions raise interesting and important questions to explore. In 1993,
the world's two largest associations of those who design, develop, test, and
maintain software (the IEEE Computer Society and the Association of Computing
Machinery) formed a joint committee to organize "software engineering" as a
profession. A product of that effort is a "Code of Ethics and Professional
Practice" adopted by both IEEE-CS and ACM late in 1998. The writing of the code,
carried out in substantial part by e-mail, has produced a record of the writing
of a professional code that is far fuller than that of any other, though much of
that record is now in danger of being lost. Using interviews as well as
retrieving electronic information, the project will create a publicly
acccessible electronic archive of all e-mail, memos, and interviews it can
obtain relating to the writing of the code. That record, together with
additional materials, including the interviews with participants, will form the
basis for a a book length study of the drafting, debate, and ultimate adoption
of the code. This research can help to engender a more sophisticated conception
of profession with respect to normative and ethical issues. The project involves
a team of researchers including several graduate students at two institutions,
the Center for the Study of Ethics in the Professions (CSEP), of Illinois
Institute of Technology, with the Software Engineering Ethics Research Institute
(SEERI), of East Tennessee State University. An advisory board provides
additional expertise to the project.