* 0117450
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Changing Urban Spatial Structure and the Growth of the Temporary Help Services Industry
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2003
* Susan Hanson, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 06/30/2003
* USD 7,076.00

Over the last few decades, the temporary help service industry (THSI) in the
United States has grown significantly. Prevailing explanations for this growth
focus on increases in demand for flexible labor to reduce costs to companies
using temporary workers and changes in labor supply owing to workers' increasing
preferences for flexible work schedules. Because forms of work other than
temporary agencies can also fulfill these supply and demand requirements,
however, neither explanation is sufficient to explain why the THSI has emerged.
This doctoral dissertation research project hypothesizes that the growth of the
THSI is in part a result of the increasing decentralization of companies to
suburban areas. This relocation provides relatively little social access to low-
wage workers, who continue to face few opportunities to move to suburban areas.
The project explores whether firms use the labor services provided by the THSI
to access and mobilize labor under conditions they would not otherwise be able
to achieve. Empirical work conducted as part of this study is a multi-faceted
exploration of low-wage clerical and light industrial temporary work in
Worcester, Massachusetts. Data will be collected through in-depth interviews
with 30 temporary agencies and 60 firms who use THSI services. In-depth
interviews will allow a more complex explanation of the specific reasons that
firms use temporary workers and will shed light on the process of matching and
mobilizing labor that temporary agencies perform. The firms and agencies to be
interviewed are chosen randomly from a geographically stratified sample that
will allow an assessment of the relationship between a company's ease of access
to low-wage labor and the firm's use of THSI workers. A mailed survey to 1800
companies will test the results of the trends observed in the interview phase.
Analysis of the data collected from both the interviews and mail survey will
focus on why and how firms use temporary agencies to substitute for their own
recruiting efforts. This research will provide data on the likelihood,
intensity, and variety of temporary worker use by firms with greater or lesser
access to their desired labor pools. Analyses also will be made of the location,
recruiting strategies, and labor services provided by temporary agencies.

This project will provide new insights into the processes that have resulted in
the rapid growth of THSI, and it will shed light on the potential for continued
growth of the industry. The project's results also will enhance understandings
of the conditions that underlie growth in the THSI, and it will provide
practical information regarding access to employment information, which can
improve the job opportunities of low-income workers. As a Doctoral Dissertation
Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a
promising student to establish a strong independent research career.