* 0117376
* Highly Detailed Reconstructions of New England Weather over the Past Few Centuries and Their Climatic Implications
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2005
* Kirk Maasch, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 07/31/2005
* USD 367,951.00

This award will enable researchers to reconstruct daily weather conditions for
New England over the past 300 years by compiling and analyzing written archives
such as diaries, journals, agricultural records, and marine logs. These archives
will be used to reconstruct daily weather maps that will be compared with recent
climatic conditions. New England has a large number of lengthy weather archives
and is a region sensitive to changing climatic conditions. The region is
influenced by storm tracks and upper-air disturbances that impact the Canadian
High, Icelandic Low and the Bermuda-Azores High from year-to-
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Obtaining highly detailed and lengthy records of past
climatic variability at the regional scale is important to better inform society
about the range of climatic change in the lives of individuals. It is also
important to develop records of past climatic conditions with daily resolution
to evaluate how the number and magnitude of extreme climatic events (i.e.,
nor'Easters, hurricanes, tornadoes, and ice storms) have changed with time. It
is these extreme events that can greatly affect individuals and
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of the 300-year record from New
England and the reconstruction of synoptic conditions helps to infer differences
in seasonality between cold years, warm years, and more common (i.e., normal)
years during the Little Ice Age. Instrumental records over approximately the
last 100 years provide time series for the evaluation of recent changes that may
be representative of anthropogenically-induced conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Daily weather conditions will be compiled in electronic
format and placed on the World Wide Web. These data will be available to the
general public, including schools, to use when evaluating changes in
climate.&lt;br/&gt;