* 0117291
* Testing the 'Clathrate Gun Hypothesis' with Atmospheric Methane from the Greenland Ice Sheet Project Two (GISP II) Ice Core
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Todd Sowers, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 07/31/2004
* USD 160,057.00

This research will develop a record of the isotopic composition of atmospheric
methane from the Greenland Ice Sheet Project Two (GISP II) ice core for time
intervals implicated in the "clathrate gun hypothesis" over the past 40,000
years spanning the deglaciation sequence, the Bolling warm period, and the
Younger Dryas cool phase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The "clathrate gun hypothesis"
suggests that the primary factor governing abrupt methane increases in the
atmosphere is the destabilization of marine clathrate in ocean sediments as
opposed to increased methane emissions from terrestrial wetlands. Evidence from
the geologic records suggest that slight ocean temperature increases or oceanic
slumping events (caused by instabilities in the continental shelf) may have
caused catastrophic destabilization of clathrate deposits in the past and a
consequent release of methane into the atmosphere. For example, throughout the
last 40,000 years, a record of clathrate destabilization events in the Santa
Barbara basin off the California coast closely resembles the record of abrupt
increases in atmospheric methane recorded in ice cores.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The strong similarity between these two records has
prompted scientists to consider the origin of the abrupt methane increases in
terms of their impact on climate. Because methane is a potent greenhouse gas,
clathrate destabilization events may have contributed to abrupt global
temperature increases in the past. This is an important idea because it
identifies a previously unknown mechanism for abrupt warming of the atmosphere
over geologic time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Along many continental margins and deep
below the Arctic permafrost, methanogenic bacteria produce large quantities of
methane as a metabolic byproduct. The liberated methane diffuses up towards the
surface until it reaches a critical temperature and pressure where the gas is
concentrated into an icy substance know as a clathrate or gas hydrate. Clathrate
deposits are very susceptible to small changes in environmental pressure and
temperature in that higher temperatures and lower pressures tend to melt the
clathrate deposits leading to the release of methane.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fortuitously, marine clathrate methane is isotopically
distinct from terrestrially derived methane from wetlands, so it should be
possible to determine whether or not the cause of rapid methane concentration in
the atmosphere was due to degassing from marine clathrates.&lt;br/&gt;