* 0117693
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Human and Climate Influences on Yew (Taxus baccata L.) Population Dynamics in County Cork, Ireland, from 4,000 B.C. to the Present
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2001,12/31/2002
* Michael Binford, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 12/31/2002
* USD 10,000.00

A critical facet of research on global change has been paleoenvironmental
studies aimed at discerning past forms of global climatic and environmental
change, especially in time periods since the last continental glaciation. This
doctoral dissertation research project will identify factors that influenced yew
tree (Taxus baccata L.) populations in the Irish parish of Youghal over the last
6,000 years, when human activity increased in Ireland. The Celts revered the yew
tree as 'noble' and considered it a symbol of life and death. The Normans used
it as raw material for the longbow. All species in the genus contain taxol,
which has cured ovarian cancer. Yew is the longest-lived tree species in Europe.
Scotland's Fortinghall yew is reputed to be 3,000 years old. Palynological
analyses in Ireland are extensive, but the yew's former distribution and
abundance is largely unknown, because its pollen has only recently been
recognized. These qualities make it a worthy subject for cultural and
paleoecological research. Regrettably, the yew now is not commonly found in
Ireland. Youghal (Eo-chaill in Celtic, meaning 'yew forest') has only a few
living yews remaining. This study hypothesizes that yew once was abundant in
Ireland, as archival mentions of yew forests are common and toponymic analysis
has revealed 124 Irish locations named after the tree. Youghal is home to
freshwater peatlands (excellent for microfossil analysis), macrofossils (a
forest of yew stumps adequate for dendrochronological analysis), and a well-
documented history. Paleoecological and historical methods will be applied to
identify climatological (temperature and precipitation) and sociological
(cultural, economic, and political) factors that caused population fluctuations,
and an eventual rarity, of yews in Youghal. These data should help determine
whether human interference has been a more significant factor than climate
change in the depletion of the yew, with levels of decline directly related to
the scale and needs of human enterprise.

This paleoecological project will contribute to knowledge of Holocene species
declines and multidecadal scale climate reconstructions. Early paleoecological
investigators assumed vegetational assemblages were primarily controlled by
climate change. It has been realized that human activity may tremendously
influence these assemblages. Humans have introduced exotic flora and fauna to
compete with indigenous forms and executed further change by exhausting
resources via deforestation and overkill. Paul Martin's Blitzkrieg Model
suggests that fauna can become extinct as a result of human interference within
a few hundred years. This research should help determine whether yew populations
were depleted over a similar timespan, thereby providing a test as to whether
flora are subject to human-induced rapid extinction. Every case of species
decline is unique. In this case it is not believed that the arrival of humans
lead to the immediate decline of this species but the arrival of a new cultural
group (the Normans) with a different resource perception. The research will also
contribute to Holocene climate reconstruction. Concerns about global warming
have necessitated Holocene climate research in order to use the data to model
future climates. Palynological data will reveal increases/decreases of yew
pollen thus indicating changes in climate or human activity. These changes will
be cross referenced with global Holocene climate data, analyzed in terms of
other arboreal pollen changes, and compared to archival data.
Dendrochronological data retrieved from the macrofossils will reveal climate
conditions via tree ring anomalies. It will also complement the microfossil data
in terms of dating events seen in the pollen profile. As a Doctoral Dissertation
Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a
promising student to establish a strong independent research career.