* 0117084
* US-Africa Workshop: Environmental Chemistry and Water Quality:  Exploring Collaborative Opportunities for Research, Applications, and Education, Dakar, Senegal
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* John Malin, American Chemical Society (ACS)
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 08/31/2004
* USD 78,700.00

0117084&lt;br/&gt;Malin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides support for 12
US and 13 African chemists to participate in a three-day US-Africa workshop on
Environmental Chemistry and Water Quality: Exploring Collaborative Opportunities
for Research, Applications, and Education, to be held in Dakar, Senegal, July
26-28, 2001. The workshop is being jointly co-organized by Drs. John Malin and
Bradley Miller, of the Office of International Activities at the American
Chemical Society, and Dr. T. M. Letcher, with the Department of Chemistry at
Natal University, Durban, South Africa. The workshop will precede the 8th Annual
International Conference on Chemistry in Africa and the 2nd Congress of the
African Association for Pure and Applied Chemistry. There will be a total of
approximately 30 participants, with expertise in chemical research and
remediation methods, analytical techniques, and higher level chemical education.
US presenters include investigators from academia, and governmental and
industrial institutions. The majority of African participants will be chemists
in the early stages of their careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Having adequate
quantities of high-quality water is a critical component for Africa's social and
economic development. Within the workshop's overarching theme of environmental
chemistry, the main focus will be on the specific advances in the chemical
sciences that can be applied to problems of water quality in Africa. Attendees
will share information on their current activities and identify mutual areas of
research interest for future collaborative projects. They will also explore ways
to build partnerships across chemically related sectors associated with
pollution prevention and control. This workshop will serve as a catalyst to
provide fresh knowledge of environmental chemistry's strengths and weaknesses in
the region. The project supports the participation of two junior US faculty
members. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop is jointly supported by the
Division of International Programs and the Division of Chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;