* 0117560
* Workshop on Current Theoretical Models and Future High Resolution Solar Observations: Preparing for ATST; Sacramento Peak, NM; September 17-21, 2001
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2002
* Alexei Pevtsov, Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Thomas J.  Bogdan
* 05/31/2002
* USD 5,000.00

The investigators will organize a workshop to review the current state of
theoretical and numerical modeling and high resolution observations of several
important processes in the solar atmosphere, and to develop recommendations for
future observations. The workshop will focus on physics of small-scale processes
including those that take place before and during initiation of the coronal mass
ejections, which are crucial for understanding CME phenomena and space weather.
The last few years have seen exciting development of numerical simulations and
theory of small-scale solar processes. However, these numerical simulations and
theory alone cannot solve the puzzling aspects of many solar phenomena - high-
resolution observations are crucial. On the other hand, observers need "clues"
from theorists and modelers on what they shall try to observe. This workshop
will foster a discussion between theorists and modelers on one side and
observers on the other and will help to refine the requirements for the Advanced
Technology Solar Telescope (ATST). Sacramento Peak Summer Workshops are topical
meetings sponsored by the National Solar Observatory and have a tradition of
bringing together an international group of observers and theoreticians for
productive interactions that are not normally available through the format of
larger meetings. The intimate setting of the observatory in the Lincoln National
Forest, combined with the proximity to telescopes and observing hardware
provides a unique environment for these events. Travel grants will be made on a
competitive and need basis.