* 0117839
* The Role of Light, Predation and Flow in Structuring Marine Subtidal Communities
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2004
* Ron Etter, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 09/30/2004
* USD 132,276.00

Marine invertebrate communities on vertical or undercut rock walls often differ
dramatically from those on horizontal surfaces. Vertical walls typically harbor
high-diversity assemblages of sessile suspension-feeding invertebrates, while
horizontal surfaces tend to be dominated by macroalgae. Commonly invoked
explanations for this pattern include: 1) Shading, which may slow algal growth
and therefore favor invertebrate dominance. 2) Lack of disturbance, particularly
predation, on vertical surfaces. 3) Lack of sedimentation on walls, thus freeing
suspension feeders from clogged filtration systems. 4) Increased water flow on
walls, which may enhance larval recruitment and food supply to suspension
feeders. However, the actual roles of these different processes in shaping this
ubiquitous pattern have yet to be tested experimentally.

This project will investigate the relative importance of shading, predation, and
flow in creating differences in community structure and composition between
vertical and horizontal surfaces. The main predictions to be tested are: 1) Rich
invertebrate animal communities develop on walls due to reduced light levels.
This hypothesis will be tested by using neutral-density tinted acrylic to shade
horizontal rock surfaces and using mirrors to augment light on vertical
surfaces. 2) Predation limits the development of invertebrate communities on
horizontal surfaces. This hypothesis will be tested via two separate treatments:
removal of sea urchins (major invertebrate predators) from experimental plots,
and caging to exclude all predators. 3) Increased water flow facilitates
development of invertebrate communities. Flow over horizontal surfaces will be
augmented via acrylic baffles mounted above the substratum. Experimental
treatments will be executed in all possible combinations to detect the relative
importance of each of the processes examined, as well as interactions among
processes. All work will be conducted at a field site in Nahant, Massachusetts,
in the southern Gulf of Maine.

Sessile suspension feeding invertebrates can be very long-lived, and may be
keystone habitat modifiers for a diverse marine community. The forces
maintaining subtidal rock wall communities have yet to be rigorously examined.
This study will provide important insight into the processes that regulate
subtidal community structure, and enable prediction of the impact of
anthropogenic changes on these processes. The generality of the pattern to be
investigated suggests that results may apply to subtidal habitats globally.