* 0118685
* Fostering Peripheral Information Awareness through Personalized, Expressive Art
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* John Stasko, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2005
* USD 431,930.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fostering Peripheral Information Awareness
through Personalized Expressive Art&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a
standard award. In today's information-rich society, people who are busy and
deeply engaged in work or other activities often are unable to maintain
awareness of peripheral, but useful, information such as weather, traffic, and
financial news. In this project the PI will explore the concept of Information
Art, the process of promoting awareness of peripheral information through
personalized, expressive art. This new form of information access and
presentation system combines elements of both ambient displays and information
visualizations. Information Art allows people to identify information of
interest and then to design a customized, aesthetically-pleasing representation
of that information. The primary goal of the project is to explore techniques
for calmly communicating information without interrupting a person's
concentration and without robbing space from his/her desktop displays. As people
gain access to more and more information, it is crucial to develop techniques
and tools that aid them in managing and utilizing that information. Many
computer technologies only seem to exacerbate the situation, however, by
contributing more (often unwanted) information. This project will create
techniques and tools that will empower people to choose information of interest
to them, and to represent and communicate this information in a manner that is
personally meaningful and pleasing. An even broader impact of the project will
be to explore the space of new, pervasive information displays and understand
their place in future work and home environments.&lt;br/&gt;