* 0118926
* ME:  Combinatorial, in vitro Manipulation of a Polyketide Synthase Pathway on a Microscale
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2001,04/30/2004
* David Sherman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 04/30/2004
* USD 369,816.00

The objective of the proposed research is to use in vitro metabolic engineering
combined with combinatorial biology and microscale processing to evaluate the
functional diversity of a complex metabolic network, namely, polyketide
synthesis. The investigators will develop a microscale, microfluidic device for
the in vitro combinatorial biosynthesis of complex polyketides. Also, because of
the microscale component and the modularity of the polyketide synthesis, the
investigators expect to use the principles of multi-step enzymatic networks
(e.g., a metabolic pathway) to alter the progress of the pathway and generate
unique compounds. The class of polyketides used in this research consists of a
small number of polypeptides each containing multiple modules. Each module is
responsible for one round of chain extension and post-condensation
modifications. The modules will be immobilized into the channels of the
microfabricated device, a mutant thioesterase domain will be engineered into
each module (necessary for release and transport to the next module), and the
products will be transported from one module to the next. This research could
enable the synthesis of molecules with new and unusual functions. Also, this
research could add to the fundamental understanding of metabolic pathways and
microfluidics. &lt;br/&gt;