* 0118842
* Reduced-Dimension Decision Feedback Equalizers for High-Speed Wireless Digital Communications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2001,06/30/2006
* Michael Zoltowski, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Sirin Tekinay
* 06/30/2006
* USD 303,154.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary problem addressed is the deleterious
effect of dynamic&lt;br/&gt;multipath propagation on high-speed wireless digital
communications &lt;br/&gt;supporting real-time video and multimedia
applications. Digital TV (DTV) &lt;br/&gt;is a target application along with
Fourth Generation Cellular Communication &lt;br/&gt;Systems. Reflections off
buildings and other structures cause ghosts &lt;br/&gt;and other artifacts in
the reconstructed video stream. These multipath &lt;br/&gt;effects can wreak
havoc on all functions of the receiver causing&lt;br/&gt;loss of synchronization
and loss of carrier/timing recovery as well&lt;br/&gt;as inter-symbol
interference. Discrete ghosts are often associated with &lt;br/&gt;multipath
conditions of large, flat surfaces, such as tall steel buildings.
&lt;br/&gt;However, multipath conditions can occur in areas with hills and dense
foliage&lt;br/&gt;where a signal can travel through many paths to the receiver.
When the signal&lt;br/&gt;is bounced back from a moving object, complex ghosts
can arise with a &lt;br/&gt;time-varying nature that is very challenging for the
equalizer to overcome.&lt;br/&gt;To accommodate delay spreads of up to 40
microseconds, current generation &lt;br/&gt;Digital TV receiver chips employ a
Decision Feedback Equalizer (DFE) with &lt;br/&gt;more than 100 Feed-Forward
taps and more than 400 Feed-Back taps. This &lt;br/&gt;constitutes a large
number of taps to adapt implying slow convergence and &lt;br/&gt;high
computational complexity. Future high-speed wireless multimedia
&lt;br/&gt;applications will place even more stressful demands on equalizer
performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will develop fundamental
advances in the area of&lt;br/&gt;reduced-dimension Decision Feedback Equalizers
(DFE's).&lt;br/&gt;These include methods for dimensionality reduction based on
a&lt;br/&gt;powerful reduced-rank adaptive filtering algorithm referred to
&lt;br/&gt;as the Multi-Stage Nested Wiener Filter (MSNWF). The MSNWF
provides&lt;br/&gt;convergence speeds better than the Recursive Least Squares
(RLS) algorithm,&lt;br/&gt;but at a much reduced computational complexity due to
the fact that &lt;br/&gt;that the MSNWF constrains the overall weight vector to
lie &lt;br/&gt;in a data-adaptive, low-dimensional subspace.&lt;br/&gt;The MSNWF
has been successfully employed to effect a reduced-rank, &lt;br/&gt;linear
equalizer for applications in Third Generation Cellular
Communications&lt;br/&gt;based on both CDMA Technology and the European GSM EDGE
System. The&lt;br/&gt;investigator will also develop other means for
dimensionality&lt;br/&gt;reduction including the use of the channel shortening
concept employed in &lt;br/&gt;OFDM systems to reduce the length of the cyclic
prefix, and symbol waveform &lt;br/&gt;compression achieved through simple
linear filtering at the receiver.&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the investigator will
study the use of reduced-dimension DFE's&lt;br/&gt;for equalization when block
space-time coding is employed under frequency &lt;br/&gt;selective multipath
conditions.