* 0118760
* VISUALIZATION:Manipulating Volumes: A New Paradigm for Advanced Volume Visualization
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2006
* Deborah Silver, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2006
* USD 339,232.00

As 3D volume data becomes more prevalent from simulations and sensing equipment,
and as volume rendering APIs are becoming available in software and hardware
implementations, the need to manipulate volume models arises. However, the work
on manipulating volume models for analysis and computer graphics applications is
sparse. The few methods that are available are computationally expensive and
non-intuitive. This project avoids these problems by using volumetric skeletons
to control manipulation. The skeleton acts as a ubiquitous data structure for
volumes and allows manipulation in a much more intuitive and general manner. The
skeleton is computed from the actual volume with a reversible thinning procedure
based upon the distance transform. The skeletal points are connected and
arranged in a skeleton-tree structure. The key to this process is the
reconstruction phase that maps the sampled voxels around the skeleton-tree. The
skeleton is an intuitive mechanism for manipulation. For example, a user can
deform the skeleton to create the corresponding deformations in the volume. The
skeleton-tree allows the user to reshape volumes and create new visualizations.
Among other things, this allows culling sections of a volume logically, morphing
volumes to simulate changes in a 3D feature over time, detecting collisions for
interactive volume-based virtual reality applications, and volume animation and
volume graphics (mimicking the standard graphics pipeline with volumes). Because
skeletons can be generated hierarchically, they can be used to perform a variety
of tasks including volume smoothing and level-of-detail
representation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to extend and
fundamentally enhance previous research in volume skeletonization. It will
develop a full range of robust skeletal algorithms and interactive tools. The
researchers will investigate the exciting new visualization applications of the
parameter-based volume skeleton. This should have a wide impact in the
visualization and computer graphics communities.&lt;br/&gt;