* 0118465
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant-The Archaeology of Swahili Social Differentiation:  Earth-and-Thatch Neighborhoods at Gede, Kenya, 11th-16th Centuries AD
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2002
* Adria LaViolette, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2002
* USD 11,960.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Adria LaViolette, Lynn Koplin will direct
archaeological&lt;br/&gt;excavations at Gede on the Kenyan coast, where she is
conducting research&lt;br/&gt;for her doctoral dissertation. The project
examines social&lt;br/&gt;differentiation in areas of earth-and-thatch domestic
architecture at the&lt;br/&gt;major 11th-16th-century Swahili stonetown site.
Because archaeologists have&lt;br/&gt;primarily concentrated on the stone
components of these large,&lt;br/&gt;architecturally-mixed sites, currently
little is known about activities,&lt;br/&gt;diet and material culture among the
majority, the inhabitants of earthen&lt;br/&gt;dwellings, often assumed to have
been undifferentiated non-elites. The&lt;br/&gt;proposed research will compare
frequency and spatial organization of craft&lt;br/&gt;production, diet and
wealth between stone and earth-and-thatch components of&lt;br/&gt;the same town,
with a view to elucidating social differentiation within&lt;br/&gt;earth-and-
thatch areas. When the distribution of activities and goods in&lt;br/&gt;non-
stone neighborhoods are better understood, spatial variation
in&lt;br/&gt;production and consumption may suggest axes of social
differentiation, with&lt;br/&gt;which to trace social reorganization through
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The need to focus on intrasite variation, expressed
in&lt;br/&gt;archaeologically-recoverable forms of production and consumption,
is&lt;br/&gt;important as archaeologists attempt to elucidate indigenous forms
of social&lt;br/&gt;complexity in sub-Saharan Africa. This is especially
important as it&lt;br/&gt;relates to Swahili society, which until recently was
attributed to external&lt;br/&gt;factors. This research is part of a new impetus
on a larger level to search&lt;br/&gt;within Africa for the constitutive
dynamics of African societies, and on&lt;br/&gt;Swahili sites in general this
requires dismantling monolithic conceptions of&lt;br/&gt;the society by
examining the overlooked majority, those in non-stone&lt;br/&gt;dwellings.
Beyond the level of Swahili archaeology, this research draws on&lt;br/&gt;and
will contribute to archaeological literature on the East African
Iron&lt;br/&gt;Age, rise of complex societies, spatial organization and activity
areas. &lt;br/&gt;The changes that accompanied the foundation, growth,
contraction and&lt;br/&gt;abandonment of Gede fit into the larger history of the
Iron Age&lt;br/&gt;efflorescence on the continent, and Africanist archaeologists
are attempting&lt;br/&gt;to fill out the magnitude of activities such as pottery
making, increased&lt;br/&gt;trade, specialized production, farming and other
foodways that accompanied&lt;br/&gt;social expansion. Additionally, preliminary
insights into the principles&lt;br/&gt;organizing neighborhoods of earthen
architecture will engage the&lt;br/&gt;anthropological debates on spatial
organization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;