* 0118012
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Modeling the Effect of Climate on Erosion and Deposition Events in the Loess Canyons of The Breaks, Cheyenne County, Kansas
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2003
* William Johnson, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2003
* USD 10,000.00

The deeply dissected terrain of extreme northwestern Kansas and adjacent parts
of Colorado and Nebraska is known regionally as "The Breaks." This rugged
terrain has developed as the North Fork Republican River and its tributaries
have eroded their way into loess, which is wind-deposited silt. Although The
Breaks of Cheyenne County, Kansas provides a striking example of this process,
with gullies extending as much as 100 meters below the upland surface and
sufficient stratigraphic expression for detailed investigation, this dissection
is by no means unique. The rapid but episodic change evident in gully systems
throughout the Great Plains necessitates a study of their history and factors
that control their growth. This doctoral dissertation research project aims to
ascertain the role of climate in the development of The Breaks. The first task
will be to decipher the spatial distribution and temporal patterns of canyon
development. From this, a model using a geographic information system (GIS) and
containing the information about the morphology of current gullies and the
primary and reworked loess stratigraphy will be used to reconstruct gully cut
and fill events. The second task will then be to correlate and compare the
temporal record of gully development and canyon growth to local and regional
records of paleoclimatic proxies. Preliminary radiocarbon data suggest that the
region experienced widespread stability from the late Pleistocene to about 9,000
years ago, after which gully activity accelerated. Paleoenvironmental data
derived from the rock magnetic, stable carbon isotopic, and trace element
signatures of the loess stratigraphy will be applied to support and enhance
existing knowledge of the environmental history of the central Great Plains,
while radiocarbon and optically-stimulated luminescence dating will provide
absolute time control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Grasslands have a greater capacity
than other biomes to respond to changes in rainfall regime associated with
climate change. Since northwest Kansas has remained grassland throughout the
climatic changes of the late Pleistocene and Holocene, and loess accumulation
during that time has recorded those changes, the region is ideal for a
paleoclimatic study. In light of global circulation model predictions of
greenhouse warming and increasing aridity in the central Great Plains, better
understanding of the role of climate in landscape evolution is necessary to aid
in the planning and response of agricultural activity. Better understanding of
the relationships between climatic change and gully erosion also has significant
practical implications, because loess-based soils currently produce at least 20
percent of the world's wheat supply and significant contributions of other grain
crops. Within the study region, the undissected uplands are used for dryland
winter wheat production and cattle feed grains, whereas cattle grazing is the
dominant activity in the gullied canyon terrain. As a Doctoral Dissertation
Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a
promising student to establish a strong independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;