* 0118665
* ANDRILL U.S. -  Planning Workshop and Science Management:  McMurdo Sound Portfolio
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/2001,03/31/2004
* Ross Powell, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 03/31/2004
* USD 98,255.00

0118665 &lt;br/&gt;Harwood&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award, provided by the
Office of Polar Programs of the National Science Foundation, provides support
for US participation in workshop and planning activities of the international
Antarctic Drilling Consortium (ANDRILL). Cenozoic stratigraphic records
recovered through drilling from continental shelf and deep-sea areas around
Antarctica have provided an interesting yet incomplete history of paleoclimate,
ice sheet and tectonic evolution of this region. The paucity of exposures of
Cenozoic strata, due to the present ice cover, requires the collection of
geological data from drillcores. Much has been learned over the last 20 years of
drilling by the DSDP, ODP and via the fast-ice drilling of the MSSTS, CIROS and
Cape Roberts projects. A new drilling initiative, ANDRILL, is in an early stage
of development, with an initial focus in the McMurdo Sound area, using the Cape
Roberts Project technology. A workshop at Oxford University will bring together
key scientists with the goal of establishing the scientific objectives and a
structure of international collaboration to launch this major initiative in the
Earth sciences. The development of the Cape Roberts Project followed a similar
course of workshops and planning meetings in the late 1980's and 1990's. ANDRILL
will continue to build on the success and approach of the Cape Roberts Project,
but will be of broader temporal, spatial, and thematic scale. Major aims of
ANDRILL are: 1) to obtain high-resolution (1 to 100 thousand-year), seismically
linked, chronologically well-constrained, stratigraphic records from the
Antarctic continental margin; 2) to determine the fundamental behavior of
ancient ice sheets, and to understand better the factors driving ice sheet
growth and decay on decadal to million year time scales; 3) to investigate the
role of Antarctic ice sheets on long- and short-order Cenozoic-Recent global
climate sea-level elevation and ocean circulation; and 4) to document the
evolution and timing of major Antarctic rift and tectonic systems and the
stratigraphic development of associated sedimentary basins, uplift of the
adjacent rift shoulders, volcanic history, stress regimes and tectonic forcing
of climate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the development and
initial management of the U.S. involvement in the ANDRILL Program through the
travel of U.S. scientists to the workshop in Oxford and to cover the cost of the
U.S. subscription into ANDRILL for the first three years. Results of the
workshop will be circulated to the wider geological community, within and beyond
the Antarctic sphere, through the production and dissemination of a workshop
report, a glossy summary document, and the construction of an ANDRILL web site.
In addition to the support for the ANDRILL Workshop, funds are requested to
support the management of U.S. efforts in ANDRILL, including the communication
and interaction with ODP, ANTOSTRAT, and the SHALDRIL initiative. International
collaboration established through the Cape Roberts Project will be nurtured and
expanded under ANDRILL. Initial drilling targets are in the Western Ross Sea,
where eight drilling objectives have been proposed (the McMurdo Sound
Portfolio). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;