* 0118612
* ME:  Interagency Announcement of Opportunities in Metabolic Engineering: Metabolic Engineering of Plant Vitamin C Biosynthesis for Improved Nutrition and Health
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Pedro Mendes, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Gavin Thompson
* 08/31/2005
* USD 200,000.00

Humans, unlike most animals, cannot synthesize vitamin C and thus have an
absolute dietary requirement for this nutrient. Plants are the primary source of
dietary vitamin C, which is key to several metabolic functions including
collagen synthesis. Because vitamin C is a good anti-oxidant it can also be used
as a natural preservative. Fresh produce with higher levels of vitamin C should
therefore have improved shelf-life and consumer appeal. Additionally, increasing
vitamin C in plants would result in higher intake per portion of fresh fruit or
vegetables that would have a positive impact on human health. Toward this goal
we will engineer the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana for higher steady state
levels of vitamin C. Arabidopsis, while not part of human diet, is an essential
model because it is the only plant with a fully sequenced genome. Unlike
animals, the vitamin C biosynthetic metabolic network in plants is at present
still not completely known. A pathway for plant systems has been proposed
however, a parallel pathway, possibly similar to the animal pathway, may also
operate in plants. Evidence for this pathway comes from experiments in which a
cDNA encoding L-gulono-g-lactone oxidase (GLOase), the terminal enzyme in the
animal pathway was expressed in tobacco and lettuce, which resulted in a 5-7
fold increase in vitamin C levels. Specific aims of the project include
metabolically engineering normal and vitamin C-deficient Arabidopsis mutants to
express GLOase to determine if any of the plant pathway intermediates directly
supply GLOase or its precursors. Genes encoding vitamin C pathway(s) enzymes
will be identified in activation tagged Arabidopsis lines by ozone screening and
vitamin C analysis to fill in remaining gaps in the pathway(s). The outcomes of
this project are anticipated to result in (a) Arabidopsis transformants with
larger pools of vitamin C than the wild type, (b) identification of plant genes
related to metabolic steps of vitamin C synthesis, and (c) further knowledge of
which steps of the animal pathway also operate in plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;