* 0118915
* VISUALIZATION: Integrated Compression and Out-of-Core Techniques for Large Time-Varying Data Visualization
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2006
* Nasir Memon, Polytechnic University of New York
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2006
* USD 381,992.00

Scientific Visualization is fast becoming a key technology that provides
scientists with insights that enable them to steer their numerical simulations
towards solving previously unsolvable problems. However, the size of scientific
datasets has witnessed exponential growth in the past few years. This sheer size
often makes interactive exploration impossible, as only a small portion of data
can fit into main memory at a time and the computation cost is often too high to
run in real-time. Despite the importance of time-varying datasets, most previous
research has focused on the visualization of steady-state data (i.e., data with
only a single time step). This project will attack the challenges of large input
sizes posed by time-varying data visualization. There are two important and
promising research directions towards handling large-scale problems: data
compression techniques and out-of-core techniques. This project will develop
integrated lossless compression and out-of-core techniques for large time-
varying data visualization, including isosurface extraction and direct volume
rendering. It will mainly consider the class of irregular-grid volume datasets
represented as tetrahedral meshes, which often arises in computational fluid
dynamics, partial differential equation solvers, and other fields.

Specifically, the project will develop new lossless compression techniques for
vertex coordinates and scalar values for tetrahedral time-varying volume data.
It will also develop new out-of-core isosurface extraction and direct volume
rendering techniques for tetrahedral time-varying volume data, and integrate the
compression and out-of-core visualization techniques together under a unified
infrastructure. The expected results would be a collection of new techniques and
a unified, proof-of-the-concept visualization system that will minimize the disk
space requirement and the visualization rendering time cost. If successful, the
system will efficiently support full visualization functionalities (isosurface
extraction and volume rendering) for time-varying datasets much larger than can
fit in main memory, with performance expected to be independent of the main
memory size available.