* 0118956
* US-Turkey Workshop:  Geotechnical Engineering Research, Istanbul, Turkey, September 2001
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2002
* Mehmet Tumay, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 05/31/2002
* USD 37,000.00

0118956&lt;br/&gt;Tumay&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is for
support of a US-Turkey Workshop on Geothechnical Engineering Research to be held
in conjunction with the International Conference on Soil Mechanics and
Geotechnical Engineering (ICSMGE) in Istanbul, Turkey. The ICSMGE is planned for
August 27-31, 2001 and the workshop will to follow on September 1, 2001. The US
organizer is Dr. Mehmet Tumay, Professor of Civil Engineering, Louisiana State
University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. The Turkish co-organizer is Dr. Ergun
Togrol, Faculty of Civil Engineering, Istanbul Technical University, Istanbul,
Turkey. The purpose of the workshop is to discuss the emerging issues and
technologies in geotechnical engineering that will result from the ICSMGE, and
to identify selected research areas for mutually beneficial collaboration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: This award will support a US-Turkey workshop in an
area that is increasingly gaining importance in both countries and in countries
of west Asia and the Caucasus. The study of soil behavior is important for
assessing the safety of structures in unusual or severe loading conditions, such
as during liquifaction due to increased water content (floods) or due to strong
ground motion (earthquakes). The development of guidelines for design and use of
structures in these conditions will benefit all countries involved in this
research. Most of the supported US participants are junior scientists who will
have a unique opportunity to meet with colleagues from Turkey and several
countries in the region during the ICSMGE Conference and the US-Turkey Workshop.
They will also visit Turkish laboratories to discuss possible joint research.
Both the US and Turkish organizers have excellent experiences and capabilities
in the field, and they will have the backing of important organizations such as
the American Society of Civil Engineers and Istanbul Technical University.
Funding for this project is provided by the Division of International Programs
and the Division of Civil and Mechanical Systems.