* 0118394
* Collaborative Research: Evolution Of Environments Within Black Smoker Chimney Walls: Microbial Colonization As Functions Of Temperature, Chemistry, And Time
* GEO,OCE
* 10/15/2001,09/30/2005
* Albert Bradley, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Rodey Batiza
* 09/30/2005
* USD 353,308.00

The porous walls of hydrothermal chimneys are ideal habitats for microorganisms
because of the steep chemical and thermal gradients present there. In this
proposed study, the PI team will study the physical and chemical conditions in
growing chimneys over time scales of minutes to months and then determine the
distribution of microorganisms in this framework. In addition, there will be a
modeling component of the study that will try to determine what subsurface
geochemical processes are occurring in the deep reaction zones that bring
nutrients and other chemicals to the surface. This is a collaboration with
Stakes, Wheat, and Koski, and will use the R/V Western Flyer (MBARI ship) and
the ROV Tiburon to stud growing chimneys. Thermocouple arrays will be placed on
growing chimnes and then will be enveloped as the chimney grows. Later, the
chimneys will be recovered and the microbiota studied in wide variety of ways
including culturing and molecular phylogenetic methods. At the same time, the
sulfide minerals of the chimneys and associated vent fluids will also be studied
in detail to yield mineralogic, chemical and isotopic data that constrain the
chemical conditions of microbial growth, succession, and diversity.
Thermodynamic and advective-diffusive modeling will be carried out to constrain
the amounts and sources of chemical energy available for metabolic activity.
This study will provide a multidisciplinary study of the interaction between
growing sulfide chimneys and microbes.&lt;br/&gt;