* 0118036
* Collaborative Research: Oxidant Isotopic Fractionation during Early Diagenesis in Marine Sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2001,02/28/2006
* Allan Devol, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 02/28/2006
* USD 332,312.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0118036&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to use
either O2 or nitrogen for current or paleo isotopic studies of their respective
marine cycles, it is imperative that we know their fractionation during
sedimentary consumption and if possible determine the mechanisms. A few
estimates of O2 and NO3- isotope fractionation during sedimentary consumption
have been made which showed that fractionation was much less (approaching zero)
than the theoretical ones. Because these observations were made only in the
eastern North Pacific where productivity is high and mid-water oxygen levels are
low, two research investigators from the University of Washington and the
University of Texas Marine Science Institute plan to carry out a laboratory
methods development and field experimentation exercise to address two questions.
Question number one asks whether the near absence of isotopic fractionation
observed for both oxygen consumption and denitrification in highly respiring
sediments of the Pacific Northwest continental margin a ubiquitous
characteristic of shelf and upper slope sediments. The second question asks to
what extent N2 production and the lack of N and O isotopic fractionation is
related to abiotic or microbially mediated reoxidation of reduced products of
metabolism. The PIs will conduct a field program in the Gulf of Mexico to (1)
measure oxidant isotopic fractionation of O2 and NO3-, as well as related
species such as N2 and NH4+ in incubated sediments, both on deck and in-situ;
(2) conduct on-deck core manipulation experiments with added substrates (NO3-,
15NO3-, HN4+, 15HN4+, organic material and reducing substances) and inhibitors
to elucidate possible mechanisms of isotopic fractionation and (3) make
porewater and benthic chamber measurements of diagenesis rates to help elucidate
the processes responsible for fractionation or lack thereof.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;