* 0118387
* Role of C3 Diversity in Innate Immune Reactions of Teleost Fish
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Oriol Sunyer, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Jermelina Tupas
* 08/31/2004
* USD 449,808.00

The complement system consists of a complex group of more than 30 soluble
proteins and receptors that play an important role in innate and adaptive
immunity. The key component of the complement system is the protein C3. Upon
activation, the C3 molecule is cleaved into C3b and C3a fragments, enabling C3b
to covalently bind to foreign particles such as viruses, bacteria, fungi, and
protozoans. The targeted particles can be recognized and destroyed by phagocytic
cells bearing complement receptors on their surfaces, or they can be further
lysed. With the exception of teleost fish, each of the animal species studied to
date contains only a single form of functionally active C3 that is the product
of a single gene. In contrast, teleost fish demonstrate a unique diversity of
functionally active C3 proteins, which are the products of different genes. This
C3 diversity may have important biological consequences for the wide array of
immune mechanisms involving the C3 molecule. It is hypothesized that the
functional relevance behind this C3 diversity may be reflected in a
diversification and/or fine tuning of the C3 functions, which in turn may both
broaden and strengthen the innate immune response of fish. Therefore, in this
project the functional relevance of C3 diversity in innate immunity in teleost
fish will be analyzed. The C3 protein is involved in two major innate immune
mechanisms: phagocytosis and respiratory burst. These functions are exerted
through two main C3 activation fragments, C3b and iC3b. The specific Aims of
this project are: AIM 1: To purify and biochemically characterize the C3b and
iC3b fragments from each of the three trout C3 isoforms, along with generating
the corresponding IgM/C3b/iC3b-coated particles. Although these components are
not commercially available for trout, protocols developed from previous work
with trout complement has enabled Dr. Synyer to purify the various C3 isoforms,
along with the other proteins required for the generation of C3b and iC3b. AIM
2: To analyze the interaction of the various C3b and iC3b fragments with
putative C3 receptors present on trout phagocytes. The action exerted by C3b and
iC3b is intimately related to the receptors to which these C3 derivatives bind.
Dr. Sunyer plans to test two alternative hypotheses; that the diversification of
the C3 molecules has also resulted in a diversification of the C3-receptors and
their biological roles, or the various C3 proteins share the same receptors to
which they may bind with similar or different affinities. To address these
hypotheses, the binding and internalization of the various C3b and iC3b
molecules to trout phagocytes will be analyzed. In addition, the investigator
will also assess possible post-receptor events (changes in intracellular calcium
concentration and analysis of intracellular signalling events using the patch-
clamp recording technique) resulting from the interaction of the C3b/iC3b
fragments with their receptors. This analysis of the interaction of the C3b and
iC3b molecules with their putative receptors will be useful in interpreting the
functional data obtained in Aim 3 concerning the function of the various trout
C3 isoforms in innate immunity. AIM 3: To examine the role of the various C3
isoforms in two major innate immune processes, phagocytosis and respiratory
burst. It is hypothesized that the diversity generated in the C3 molecule of
teleost fish may have also resulted in a diversification and/or fine tuning and
specialization of some of the C3-mediated functions. Thus, the most critical
question to assess here is whether the various C3b and iC3b fragments from the
various C3 isoforms have different effects on phagocytosis and respiratory burst
and whether such differences relate to the binding, internalization and post-
receptor events observed upon interaction of the C3b and iC3b molecules with the
trout leukocytes (Aim 2). Here, a two-color flow cytometric method (FACS) will
be used for simultaneous measurement of phagocytosis and respiratory burst. In
these studies, the rainbow trout will be used as the teleost fish model, since
the investigator has already generated many of the specific reagents that are
required for these studies, including purified trout complement molecules and
antibodies recognizing all of these molecules. These studies should shed new
light on the biological significance of the fascinating diversity in C3 that
makes the teleost fish complement system such a unique immune mechanism. These
studies are also expected to provide new insights into the role of the
complement system in the innate immune reactions of teleost fish. Many of these
studies involve both the use of homologous components (purified trout molecules)
and innovative techniques that are not commonly used in the field of comparative
immunology. Therefore these studies will establish new directions for the study
of the fish immune system and are expected to expand understanding of the
evolution of immune reactions.