* 0118038
* Taxon-specific contributions to export production - Development of biomarker approaches
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Ralf Goericke, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 09/30/2005
* USD 355,556.00

Photoautotrophic picoplankton contribute significantly to phytoplankton biomass
and primary production in the ocean. The smallest known photoautotroph is
Prochlorococcus sp. It is unusual because its primary photosynthetic pigment is
divinyl-chlorophyll a (Chl a2), a unique biomarker for this organism. The
traditional view of the marine food web suggests that carbon assimilated by
Prochlorococcus, and other picoautotrophs, is primarily recycled within the
microbial web. High concentrations of Chl a2-degradation products found in
surficial sediments and sediment trap material from the Eastern Tropical North
Pacific suggest that Prochlorococcus may nonetheless contribute significantly to
export production in that environment. This inference depends on the assumptions
that 1) water column concentrations of Chl a2 and Chl a1 are equally good
proxies for the biomass of Prochlorococcus and other phytoplankters,
respectively, 2) the chlorin-conversion efficiencies of Chl a1 and Chl a2, when
ingested by herbivores, are similar and 3) the diagenesis of chlorins in
sediments does not alter the ratio of Chl a1 and Chl a2-derived chlorins. The
first objective of this proposal is to test these assumptions to place
inferences based Chl a1/ a2-ratios on a firm basis. Knowing the relative
contributions of Prochlorococcus to export production would allow one to
calculate the contributions of picoplankton in general. These fluxes are likely
mediated by pelagic tunicates, assuming that chlorins entering the microbial
loop are quickly degraded and that pelagic tunicates, or at least some of these,
are the only macrozooplankters capable of grazing on Prochlorococcus. Testing
these two assumptions in the field is the second objective of this proposal. The
proposed work constitutes a biomarker approach that will enable us to measure
the contribution of Prochlorococcus and picoplankters to export production.
These tools will help us understand the sources and controls of export
production in the open ocean. This added understanding will contribute to our
ability to predict the effects of environmental change on open ocean ecosystem.