* 0118022
* US-Nepal Cooperative Research:  Theoretical and Experimental Investigations on Some Current Electronic Structure Related Topics in Condensed Matter Systems and Ozone-UV Interaction
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2001,01/31/2006
* Tara Das, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 01/31/2006
* USD 50,000.00

0118022&lt;br/&gt;Das &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award supports US-
Nepal cooperative research entitled "Theoretical and Experimental Investigations
on Some Current Electronic Structure Related Topics in Condensed Matter Systems
and Ozone-UV Interaction." This is an initiating activity among the Theoretical
Electronic Structure and Properties Research Group, University at Albany, State
University of New York, the Condensed Matter and Atmospheric Physics Research
Group, Tribhuvan University (TU), and the Condensed Matter and Materials Physics
Experimental Research Group, University of Central Florida (UCF). This project
covers five diverse areas of research that include glasses, quantum computation
dealing with solar radiation and upper atmosphere chemistry, studies of
hyperfine interactions of electron distributions in materials, ozone depletion
and environmental impacts in Nepal, and a solar cell fabrication capability at
TU. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: This award launches joint activities between
two US universities and the Tribhuvan University, Nepal. Topics were selected
according to common interests at these institutions between theory and
experimental groups in a way that complement their expertise and enhance the
potential for future interactions among the three groups. Faculty and students
at TU will gain expertise in experimental aspects of Moessbauer spectroscopy and
characterization of electronic structures of materials. In the long-term,
research on solar cell thin films and nanocrystalline particles corresponds to
Nepalese national development interests. This is the first cooperative research
project in physics supported under the US-Nepal Cooperative Science Program. It
is jointly supported by the Division of International Programs and the Division
of Materials Research, Condensed Matter Physics Program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;