* 0118025
* Nanoscale Science &amp; Engineering Center for Integrated Nanopatterning and Detection Technologies
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2007
* Chad Mirkin, Northwestern University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Clark Cooper
* 08/31/2007
* USD 12,702,550.00

This award establishes a Nanoscience and Engineering Center (NSEC) for
Integrated Nanopatterning and Detection Technologiesat the Northwestern
University. The Center will develop state-of-the-art nanopattering capabilities
that are compatible with soft materials and can be used for the development of
powerful new detection systems. Several emerging patterning tools and synthetic
methods will be developed to fabricate nanostructured materials and devices. The
Center's research strategy focuses on (1) the science and technology of surface
template-driven assemblies that rely on chemical and biochemical recognition
events, and (b) the experimental and theoretical study of signal transduction in
soft matter nanostructures. The research program is organized under three
themes: (1) Chemical and Biological recognition; (2) Nanostructured Assembly;
(3) Transport and Transduction in Nanostructures Formed via Surface-Directed
Assembly. As the research progresses, focus will be placed upon the development
of biological (nuicleic acids and proteins) and chemical (small molecule)
sensors. The research outreach will include University of Chicago, University of
Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, Harold Washington University, and Argonne National
Laboratory. The Center will establish formal programs with international
comp[anies, universities, and laboratories in the area of nanoscale research.
The Center will take a lead to establish the first global network of centers and
institutes in the area of nanoscience and engineering. In the area of
undergraduate education, the Center will establish Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) and the Minority Internships in Nanotechnology (MIN)
programs. The MIN program will be promoted through the minority institutions in
the area. Middle and high school teachers will be provided research experience
through Research Experience for Teachers (RET) program. A web-based highly
flexible "Functional Nanostructure" module will be developed and distributed.
New courses in nanotechnology will be developed for undergraduate and graduate
levels. Industry participates in the Center activities by providing company
personnel as student mentors, and by supplying source codes for software
development. The Center has a program to advice on formation of startup
companies.