* 0118669
* PEET: Monography And Phylogeny Of New World Scarabaeoid Beetles
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2008
* Brett Ratcliffe, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 08/31/2008
* USD 755,300.00

Scarab beetles are prominent members of the insect fauna and are important
biocontrol agents, pollinators, agricultural pests, and habitat indicators.
Despite their economic importance, diversity, and ecological significance, less
than 50% of the New World genera of scarabs can be identified with reliability.
The New World tropics contains the greatest diversity of scarab species, yet it
is the poorest known taxonomically. Scarab groups from this region were selected
for training in monography, phylogeny, and bioinformatics. The proposed research
will create comprehensive catalogs and electronic databases of specimen-level
information, including character data, geographic and temporal distributions,
host plant associations, and images. It will produce monographs, an
identification guide to genera of New World scarabs, and a database of New World
genera of scarabs that are retrievable electronically. Phylogenetic research
will stabilize the higher-level classification of the Scarabaeoidea by targeting
enigmatic and poorly known groups. The research will contribute to the
development of computer infrastructure for organizing and accessing knowledge
about scarab beetles, and it will provide the foundation for future work in
scarab systematics.&lt;br/&gt; This research extends the goals of our previous
NSF-PEET support by creating keys and databases to all genera of New World
scarab beetles (approximately 600), and it builds on our existing foundation in
scarab systematics to monograph poorly known groups of New World scarab beetles
and train students in scarab systematics. These activities will contribute
directly to the training of a new generation of systematists as well as advance
our knowledge of a prominent (but poorly known) superfamily of insects.
Monographic works, electronic databases, interactive keys, and newly trained
systematists are needed in order to meet the global needs for knowledge of
biodiversity and to strengthen the foundation for all fields of biology. One of
the most important benefits of monographic research is a predictive system of
classification. Results of the phylogenetic analyses will be used to stabilize
the current classification of scarabs in this study. A natural classification of
scarab groups can be used to address other questions that include: evolution of
parental care, evolution of horns, biogeography, evolution of myrmecophily, and
others. The on-line key and bioinformatics resources for all New World scarab
genera will create the bench-mark for Scarabaeoidea systematics. It will be
useful to people engaged in agriculture, research, education, and natural
resource management. The guide will form the foundation for keys to all world
Scarabaeoidea, a future project that would involve participants from around the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;