* 0118882
* PEET: Enhancing Taxonomy In The Cestoda: Monography Of Selected Tetraphyllidean Groups
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2009
* Janine Caira, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 08/31/2009
* USD 815,360.00

0118882&lt;br/&gt;Caira and Ruhnke&lt;br/&gt;This is a collaboration between the
University of Connecticut and West Virginia State College. The research efforts
of this project will focus on the generation of taxonomic monographs for four of
the largest groups in the most diverse order of tapeworms that parasitize sharks
and rays, the Tetraphyllidea. The monographic research will involve examination
of museum specimens throughout the world. Collections of new tapeworms will be
made from geographic regions previously unexplored for tetraphyllideans
including Senegal, Madagascar and Western Australia. In addition to
morphological data from light and scanning electron microscopy, the monographs
will include complete illustrations and information on geographic distributions
and evolutionary relationships of each group. This work will be complemented by
evolutionary trees generated using molecular sequence information in
collaboration with Dr. Tim Littlewood at the British Museum of Natural History,
London. The tapeworm database developed as a result of an initial PEET award
will be expanded to include complete data on all species in the four target
groups of Tetraphyllidea. This database will also be expanded to treat
representatives of other tapeworm groups in cooperation with individuals from
around the world expert on the taxonomy of the non-tetraphyllidean tapeworm
groups. These experts will be familiarized with the database at a workshop to be
held at the University of Connecticut in the first year of the project and will
be assisted by participants in this project with data entry on their respective
groups. The training components of this project will involve a minimum of two
Ph.D students, one of which has already been identified, as well as a number of
masters-level and undergraduate students. These students will be involved with
all aspects of the project including taxonomy and systematics of tetraphyllidean
tapeworms, museum work, field collections, light and scanning electron
microscopy and databasing. The PI, Co-PI and two Ph.D. students will each have
responsibility for one of the monographs.&lt;br/&gt;The tetraphyllidean
tapeworms remain among the most poorly known, but most host specific and
morphologically spectacular of the tapeworm orders. Their enormous potential as
indicators of shark and ray biology remains under-explored.
This&lt;br/&gt;project will train the next generation of tetraphyllidean
tapeworm taxonomic experts. Taxonomic information on all tapeworm groups will be
made easily accessible through the internet. Finally, this project will serve to
centralize taxonomic information on tapeworms in general, making it available
globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;