* 0118372
* Is Hemoglobin Gelation an Adaptation to the Cold in Boreal Fishes?
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/2001,10/31/2002
* Robert Cashon, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 10/31/2002
* USD 44,012.00

Abstract

Recent studies of fish red blood cells found that a regular paracrystalline
array of hemoglobin (Hb) tetamers formed under low oxygen conditions in 2
species of boreal fishes, Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua) and toadfish, (Opsanus
tau). This phenomenon is termed hemoglobin gelation and its physiological
characteristics and importance to survival of boreal fishes is unknown. The
study outlined in this proposal will obtain preliminary data on the frequency
and physiological nature of the phenomenon of hemoglobin (Hb) gelation in red
blood cells of fishes that inhabit cold-water temperate and Arctic environments.
The present study will test the hypothesis that hemoglobin gelation within fish
red blood cells may be a feature of normal fish respiratory physiology and might
be adaptive in extreme cold-water environments. Twelve fish species have been
examined to date, and only the cold-water boreal marine fishes exhibited Hb
gelation. In one species, Atlantic cod, gelation was relatively mild and did not
result in changes in the gross morphology of the blood cells. In a second
species, toadfish, gelation resulted in large crystalline structures that
disrupted the red cell membranes and ruptured blood cells. The differences in
type and severity of Hb gelation among fish species may directly affect their
physiology and ultimately play an important part in their capacity for survival.
However, too few species have been assayed to determine the extent of hemoglobin
gelation in boreal fishes and no data exists on the physiological conditions
that facilitate gelation. Few experimental links have been established between
gelation and fish hemoglobin structure or between the variation in hemoglobin
type and physiology.

In this study blood will be sampled from a large number of boreal and Arctic
fishes and tested for Hb gelation and the presence of the Hb paracrystalline
matrix. These data will provide an accurate assessment of the distribution of
the gelation phenomenon within boreal fishes and any correlation with genetic
variation within species. Some species of fishes, such as Atlantic cod, have
polymorphic hemoglobin in which multiple hemoglobin allotypes are expressed
within the red blood cells of the same species. To determine if gelation is
associated with hematocrit or with the physiological characteristics of the
isoHb components of a species, blood from a representative boreal fish species,
Atlantic cod, will be separated into its Hb components and each component will
be characterized for oxygen binding functionality and its gelation capacity. The
scientific relevance of this is to determine if there are common morphological
and physiological traits among hemoglobins of boreal fishes that exhibit
gelation and whether these traits are adaptive in extreme environments
characteristic of polar regions.