* 0118151
* JSPS Short-term Postdoctoral Fellowship:  Trends in Information Infrastructure
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2002
* Bruce Schatz, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 07/31/2002
* USD 8,768.00

0118151&lt;br/&gt;Schatz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a one-year
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) postdoctoral Fellowship for
Bruce R. Schatz of the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign. He will be
undertaking his research with Professor Toru Ishida in the Department of Social
Informatics at Kyoto University in Japan. Dr. Schatz will be researching trends
in the information infrastructure. He hopes to determine if there are Laws of
the Net which predict the behavior of effective algorithms for future
technologies of information retrieval. He will be researching the evolution of
information infrastructure placing the past, present and future technology in
its proper historical context. He will explore the 30-year period from syntactic
to structure to semantics. In addition, he will be studying the mass
infrastructure for network information systems, such as the 300-year period from
19th century Networks to 20th century Spaces to 21st century Models. He will
further explore the philosophical foundations of new technologies for
information retrieval in the Net.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research should
result in new paradigms for information technology, with broad impact on the
field especially in the area of digital libraries. The exposure of the awardee
to a new research setting will be intellectually stimulating. The collaboration
should also facilitate further international cooperation in science and
technology, and help to facilitate the number of excellent students from the
Asian region to the &lt;br/&gt;