* 0118602
* WORKSHOP: Composite Sheet Forming; September 12, 2001,  Boston, Massachusetts
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2001,11/30/2001
* Jian Cao, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 11/30/2001
* USD 24,926.00

The aim of this Workshop on Composite Sheet Forming is to address key issues
related to improving the viability of the composite sheet forming process in
manufacturing. To accomplish this, the workshop will provide a forum for
experimentalists, modeling specialists, statisticians, material suppliers and
end users with the goal of formulating a feasible and representative benchmark
and organizing for its execution. The benchmark will be used to standardize
materials testing procedures for this new class of materials and to examine the
current state-of-the-art in simulation. It is expected that the workshop will
have significant international representation and will stimulate this kind of
research in the U.S., which is unfortunately less active than our counterparts
in Europe and Asia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Composite sheet forming has
demonstrated great potential as a valuable alternative to provide high-strength
and low-weight products at a much-reduced manufacturing cost. This cost
reduction is due primarily to significantly shorter cycle times and parts
consolidation. Over the past several years, an international group of academic
and industry researchers has conducted studies of the material behavior and the
forming process, in conjunction with fabrication of prototype parts. The outcome
of this work is a substantial body of experimental and modeling data. However,
as the research in this area is still relatively new, as compared to the longer
history of sheet metal forming, much of these results have lead to more
questions than answers, which was well echoed at recent technical conferences.
The state of the research efforts in composite sheet forming are at a critical
point where benchmarking will lead to major advances in our understanding of the
strengths and limitations of existing experimental and modeling approaches.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;