* 0118430
* Workshop on: Evolutionary Immunobiology: New Approaches, New Paradigms to be held on February 21-22, 2002 in Charleston, South Carolina
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2002
* Gregory Warr, Medical University of South Carolina
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 09/30/2002
* USD 26,038.00

The central question of Comparative Immunology is how immune mechanisms have
evolved. How do they change and adapt in response to the diverse microbial
challenges present in the many and different environments that are occupied by
animals? The tremendous diversity of animal life poses, in itself, a great
challenge to such studies. Although it is clearly impossible (indeed
counterproductive) to investigate the immune system of all animals, are we
seriously restricting our knowledge by studying relatively few species? Are we
missing important aspects of the diverse immune systems that function so
effectively in animals? This workshop will discuss the current status and
potential future developments of evolutionary immunobiology while coming to
grips with the following two issues. First, are there model species that, while
offering ease of experimental manipulation and/or potential economic importance,
occupy key phylogenetic positions? Second, can the chosen model species be used
to establish paradigms (the equivalent of the Rosetta Stone) through which
evolutionary and immunological processes in other species can be interpreted? In
addition, the final session of the proposed Workshop will deal with the
application of concepts from evolutionary immunobiology to understanding and
managing problems of infectious diseases that affect and alter ecosystems.
Biology is going through a revolution resulting from the application of genome-
wide approaches to understanding organisms. Results from those projects which
have been, or are about to be, accomplished (including human, mouse, Drosophila,
C. elegans, pufferfish, zebrafish) have demonstrated the extraordinary power of
genomics to contribute to the solution of problems in genetics, and molecular
cell biology. Genomic approaches yield detailed information about a species,
answering questions and generating new hypotheses at a remarkable rate. Yet the
advances to be gained from genomic approaches can go far beyond simple analyses
of the genes present in any given species, and an understanding of the control
of expression of those genes. For example, we now have opportunities to study
evolutionary processes through comparisons between complete genomes. In
addition, as patterns of organization become apparent at the level of the whole
genome, we will be able to extrapolate efficiently and effectively from the
findings in favored key species, to make novel and testable predictions about
other species that have been studied less intensively. This workshop has, as a
major theme, the actual and potential impact of genomics on the field of
evolutionary immunobiology.