* 0118366
* Laser-effected Ultra-large Grain Growth and Device Fabrication in Silicon Thin Films
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Costas Grigoropoulos, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 07/31/2004
* USD 225,000.00

0118366&lt;br/&gt;Grigoropoulos&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is focused on
laser-driven crystal growth in thin semiconductor films for fabricating thin
film transistors (TFTs) utilized in large area electronics including high-
definition flat panel displays. The goal is to achieve production of device-
quality polycrystalline material through one-step manufacturing process with
superior control of the single crystal growth location, orientation and size.
The temporal and spatial distribution of the rapidly changing temperature field
and solid/liquid interface propagation will be investigated at the microscale
level. The following tasks will be carried out:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) One-step
production of single crystal regions that are sufficiently large for fabricating
TFTs via the novel double laser recrystallization technique. A new laser-based
processing tool will be developed and instrumented for advanced process control
and enhanced throughput. Schemes involving processing of patterned regions in
conjunction with spatially modified beam profiles will be
tested.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) Fabrication and characterization of TFTs on the
produced poly-Si films in order to examine the quality of the poly-Si and hence
evaluate the effectiveness of the controlled laser recrystallization and lateral
crystal growth process. The results will be utilized to identify optimal
combinations of the laser beam parameters and pattern
configurations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) Design and implementation of a new
temporally and spatially resolved microscale temperature measurement technique
based on thermal emission. The measured temperature distribution in conjunction
with direct in-situ imaging will provide information on the microstructural
evolution including the quenching rate, the degree of supercooling, the
nucleation temperature and the solid/liquid interface velocity. The experimental
findings will enable construction of validated and accurate computational models
of the complex phase transformation process. These models will be then used for
improving the process sequence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;