* 0118883
* PEET: Training New Diatom Systematists for New Priorities
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2007
* Robert Jansen, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 08/31/2007
* USD 737,543.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. Theriot and Jansen at the University of Texas
at Austin to train scientists in the identification and ecology of
microorganisms known as diatoms. Diatoms are single-celled organisms that can
dominate the microscopical life in lakes, oceans, and rivers. They are of
interest to basic science because they are diverse (thousands of species), are
easily manipulated in cell cultures for experiments, and have many unusual cell
properties (e.g., their cell wall is literally made out of glass!). The latter
fact also makes them abundant in the fossil record, which makes them important
more practical uses such as the study of natural cycles of climate change, the
impact of human activities on lake ecology, and the discovery of oil. The
practical uses of diatoms have drawn so much attention to diatom studies, in
fact, that few people are actually devoted to basic diatom studies. On the other
hand, new technologies have attracted many students to fields such as molecular
biology and away from traditional fields of study. This is the problem addressed
by this project and is highlighted by the fact that Dr. Theriot is the only
person in North America with a university faculty appointment who also has
formal training in the most basic element of diatom studies, their
classification. His colleague, Dr. Jansen, is a leader in the field of using DNA
and molecular biology to classify higher plants. Their labs have conducted
important collaborations essential to the success of this project. This proposal
is designed to ensure that there will be a new generation of diatom scientists
with a background in both the classical elements of classification and the tools
to further our understanding of diatoms in the 21st century.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drs. Theriot and Jansen will train, at a minimum, two
postdoctoral associates, three graduate students, and two undergraduates in the
science of diatom identification and classification (= taxonomy, or
systematics). The training program is centered on three studies of the
classification, physiology, ecology, geological distribution and molecular
biology of different groups of diatoms. The basic research component of each
study is centered on reconstructing evolutionary relationships by comparing the
DNA (the genetic makeup of the cells), the morphology (shape and form of the
cell and its components) with the known fossil record of these species. The
evolutionary relationships will then be studied in relationship to environmental
conditions in which the diatoms originally evolved and in which they are found
today. The students will create computerized catalogues of the Texas Memorial
Museum of Science and History diatom collections, as well as computerize all
related data including illustrations of the species. This information will be
available on the World Wide Web. The students thus will receive the field and
laboratory skills necessary to become competent modern biologists capable of
independent investigations into further aspects of diatom biology and/or to
apply their knowledge of diatom biology to problems of societal and economic
importance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All studies, basic and applied, using diatoms
require expert identification of diatoms. This project will ensure a new
generation of diatom taxonomists with the combination of old and new skills
necessary to be successful in the next century. They will be able to compete for
academic positions, to train other experts, to be a resource for those needing
to know about practical application of knowledge about diatoms, and to
contribute directly to the growth of our basic understanding of these important
links in the food web and indicators of the health of the natural environment.
&lt;br/&gt;