* 0118978
* Conference: 2001 IEEE CDC.  To Be Held in Orlando Florida, December 4-7, 2001.
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Theodore Djaferis, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2002
* USD 10,000.00

The 40th IEEE Decision and Control Conference (CD01) is the premiere, annual
international conference on systems and automatic control research. It is
sponsored by the IEEE Control Systems Society and conducted in cooperation with
the Society of Industrial and Applied Mathematics, and the Institute For
Operations Research and the Management Sciences. This year it will be held at
the Hyatt Regency Grand Cypress in Orlando Florida, December 4-7, 2001. Pre-
conference workshops will be held on Monday December 3, 2001. The Conference
provides an excellent opportunity for researchers to present the latest
developments in the field, promote new ideas, and discuss and evaluate past
accomplishments. The technical content of the Conference has traditionally been
of the highest quality drawing leading scientific researches from all over the
world. The Conference typically draws some one thousand participants each year.
Such a venue is of special importance for the training of new researchers and
graduate students in systems and control. The National Science Foundation has
consistently supported these activities over the years by providing partial
travel support for graduate students participating in the Conference. In this
proposal we are asking that NFS continue this long-standing tradition and
provide travel support for graduate students who will be participating in the
2001 IEEE CDC.

