* 0118350
* Workshop on Universal Accessibility of Ubiquitous Computing: Providing for the Elderly; May 22-25, 2001; Alcacer do Sal, Portugal
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2001,04/30/2002
* Rachelle Heller, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2002
* USD 45,950.00

This is funding for a jointly sponsored NSF/EU workshop to be held May 22-25,
2001, at the "Pousada D. Afonso II" situated in Alcacer do Sal outside of
Lisbon, Portugal. This relatively secluded site has been chosen by the
organizers so that attendees can participate without distraction in the
workshop, which will bring together 35-45 leaders in the fields of universal
access research, business, academics and policy to review the current state-of-
the-art and produce a set of research agenda items for near and long term
activities whose goal is to assure universal accessibility of ubiquitous
computing by the elderly. Particular emphasis will be placed on articulating an
integrated approach to addressing the problems in the context of technology and
human rights and values, paying attention to challenges due not only to physical
limitations but also to differences in perception, culture and background. Prior
to arrival, all attendees will provide background papers highlighting their
individual perspectives. The workshop will begin with a plenary session setting
the framework for what is to follow; subsequent sessions will each include a
short formal presentation followed by a facilitator-led discussion. The
tentative list of session topics includes: pervasive mobile computing and the
aging population; exploratory user centered design for all citizens;
accessibility and the elderly; accessibility for people with cognitive
impairments; user-centered design with senior citizens; sociological integration
facilitated by technology; and profile of the senior citizen's varied needs.
Approximately half a dozen graduate students will be included among the
invitees; they will have a unique opportunity to share the direction of their
thesis work and receive mentoring from senior members of the field. The revised,
peer-reviewed workshop proceedings will be published as a book by a respected
publisher (negotiations are currently under way by the organizers with ACM Press
and North-Holland). Additionally, a report and research agenda will be submitted
to the two major funding bodies (NSF and the EU), and workshop contributions,
summaries and discussions will be made available online through a Web site to
ensure timely dissemination to the community at large. The organizers have
received expressions of support from IFIP TC13 (HCI) and WG13.3 (People with
Disabilities), and from ACM SIGCHI, SIGCAPH, and SIGGRAPH. NSF funds will be
used primarily to support American attendees, as well as some general expenses.