* 0118659
* U.S.-Mexico Dissertation Enhancement Research:   Migration Patterns, Work Sites, and HIV Risk Among Female Workers in Tijuana, Mexico
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2001,02/28/2002
* Linda-Anne Rebhun, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 02/28/2002
* USD 22,850.00

0118659&lt;br/&gt;Rebhun&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Americas Program thesis
enhancement will support thesis dissertation research by &lt;br/&gt;Ms. Yasmina
Katsulis under the supervision of Dr. Linda-Anne Rebhun of Yale University. Dr.
Gudelia Rangel of El Colegio de la Frontera Norte has agreed to act as field
supervisor for the fieldwork in Mexico. The aim of this project is to examine
career trajectories among 300 female commercial sex workers (FCSW's) in Tijuana,
Mexico, and more specifically, the relationship between migration patterns, work
sites and HIV risk. In particular, the project will: (1) examine the
relationship between migration and the various career trajectories of 300 FCSW's
in Tijuana, Mexico; (2) measure their knowledge, attitudes, and practices for
risk management in a variety of work sites; (3) examine how risk management is
either complicated or facilitated by structural factors, most importantly female
urban migration; (4) generate an epidemiological profile of HIV infection for
the population in question.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using integrated qualitative
and quantitative methods, this research will help to provide a more
comprehensive portrait of those aspects of human experience critical in
determining health outcomes. The findings will contribute to the literature on
health beliefs in Latin America, the political economy of health, and the use of
qualitative methods to address public health issues. &lt;br/&gt;