* 0118793
* Conspicuousness and Concealment:  The Visual Ecology of Signaling and Camouflage
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Thomas Cronin, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey F. Birchard
* 08/31/2003
* USD 149,014.00

&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary: Conspicuousness and Concealment: The Visual Ecology
of&lt;br/&gt;Signaling and Camouflage&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All visual tasks that
animals perform take place in natural scenes.&lt;br/&gt;Consequently, the visual
systems of animals are adapted for efficient&lt;br/&gt;(often nearly optimal)
analysis of the scenes they view in natural&lt;br/&gt;circumstances. Animals are
rarely concerned with general scene&lt;br/&gt;properties, however. Rather, most
objects of visual interest are other&lt;br/&gt;animals or plant food items such
as fruits or flowers. Sometimes the&lt;br/&gt;visual object is decorated to
become a strong signal. Other times, it&lt;br/&gt;may conceal itself using
patterns that are confused with its natural&lt;br/&gt;background - it is
camouflaged. Systems of signaling and camouflage&lt;br/&gt;must contend with
both vision of other animals and properties of the&lt;br/&gt;background.
Furthermore, neither the background nor the organism has a&lt;br/&gt;constant
appearance because of continuous variations in the patterns
of&lt;br/&gt;illumination falling upon them. These changing conditions
strongly&lt;br/&gt;influence the visual appearances of scenes and
signals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project considers the interrelationships
among illuminants, scenes,&lt;br/&gt;signals, and animal vision. Research will
concentrate on marine systems&lt;br/&gt;that offer excellent preliminary
understanding of vision, color, and&lt;br/&gt;behavioral context: coral reef
fishes, mantis shrimps, and cuttlefish.&lt;br/&gt;The primary goals are to learn
how colors (i.e. spectral reflectances)&lt;br/&gt;and patterns of animals are
adapted for enhanced conspicuousness or&lt;br/&gt;concealment, and how visual
systems of animals are specialized to detect&lt;br/&gt;signals and to break
camouflage. The power of this approach is that it&lt;br/&gt;compares a diverse
selection of animals, all of which must form and&lt;br/&gt;recognize biological
signals in shallow, clear marine waters. The&lt;br/&gt;research will be a
pioneering effort to learn how systems of vision,&lt;br/&gt;signaling, and
camouflage operate in extremely colorful (or well&lt;br/&gt;camouflaged) marine
species in the specific contexts of their natural&lt;br/&gt;illuminants and
backgrounds. The proposed research will contribute&lt;br/&gt;significantly to
the fields of sensory biology, visual ecology, and&lt;br/&gt;animal behavior. It
will similarly be of special interest to engineers&lt;br/&gt;and scientists
working in remote sensing, machine vision, and artificial&lt;br/&gt;systems of
object detection (including camouflaged objects). It will&lt;br/&gt;contribute
to the training of graduate students and enhance the
research&lt;br/&gt;experiences of undergraduates working in the P.I.s
laboratory, including&lt;br/&gt;women and minority students. (who are already
involved with similar&lt;br/&gt;research in this laboratory). Last - and far
from least - the project&lt;br/&gt;holds promise for stimulating scientific
interest in the general public&lt;br/&gt;and all those interested in animal
vision, color, and crypsis.&lt;br/&gt;