* 0118445
* Magnetic and Structural Study of Sub-Volcanic Oceanic Lithosphere Exposed in Kane Megamullion, Mid-Atlantic Ridge, 23deg30min N
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Henry Dick, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Rodey Batiza
* 09/30/2005
* USD 640,715.00

Abstract of Tivey 0118445&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will study
the Kane megamullion, which is interpreted to be the exhumed footwall of a long-
lived normal detachment fault near the Kane Fracture Zone on the Mid-Atlantic
Ridge. The faulting appears to have exposed a deep-crustal and possibly upper
mantle, section of lithosphere, making it accessible to survey, sampling and
eventual drilling. The proposed field program will use the autonomous underwater
vehicle (ABE), ROV Jason and dredging, together with laboratory analyses to
address the questions of 1) how are magnetization and polarity -reversal history
of Earth's magnetic field recorded at mid-crustal and deeper levels?, 2) what
conditions of magmatism at the rift axis attend formation of megamullions,and
what are the resulting composition and intrusive relations at mid-crustal and
deeper levels? and 3) what are the nature of strain accomodation and evolution
of strain localization in the shear zone of a major normal fault in ocean crust?
This is a uniquely accessible section where survey and sampling will allow
significant new insights into the processes of accretion and dissection of slow-
spreading crust. The survey data will provide data to extend and constrain
interpretations from drilling into megamullions, into three
dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;