* 0118933
* Advanced Technological Education - ATE: Bio-Link:  A National Advanced Technological Education Center for Biotechnology
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2006
* Elaine Johnson, City College of San Francisco
* Continuing Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/2006
* USD 2,115,500.00

Bio-Link's mission is to strengthen and expand biotechnology technician
education at community and technical colleges throughout the nation in order to
1) increase the number and diversity of well-trained technicians in the
workforce; 2) meet the needs of industry for appropriately trained technicians;
and 3) institutionalize community college educational practices that make
modern, high-quality education in the concepts, skills, and ethics of
biotechnology available to all students.&lt;br/&gt;Bio-Link's National Center at
City College of San Francisco provides leadership to seven Regional Centers
using a coordinated national strategy that is implemented through the Regional
Centers. The Regional Centers are located at community colleges throughout the
United States: Northeast-New Hampshire Community and Technical College;
Southeast-Alamance Community College; North Central-Madison Area Technical
College; South Central-Austin Community College; Northwest-Seattle Central
Community College; Northern California Biotechnology Center-City College of San
Francisco; and Southwest-San Diego City College. Regional Centers pursue a
number of specific substantive activities that help Bio-Link achieve its
objectives. Each region also develops relations with local industry and
educational institutions in order to understand and meet regional needs and to
distribute information locally.&lt;br/&gt;The goals Bio-Link established are key
to fulfilling its mission: 1) Provide support for students and technicians, 2)
improve instruction &amp; learning, 3) share information and resources, and 4)
foster collaborations and partnerships. Some of the key accomplishments under
these goals that continue to be supported include a survey of all biotechnology
technician programs at community and technical colleges across the United
States; an annual Summer Fellows Forum for community college and high school
instructors from around the country to share best practices and learn new
techniques; and the Bio-Link Website that contains information on a myriad of
topics from job and workshop announcements to a virtual laboratory, equipment
lists, and instructional materials.&lt;br/&gt;In addition, Bio-Link solicits,
tests, and reviews instructional materials; assists in program development;
devises means for attracting students, especially underrepresented minorities,
into biotechnology; and works with high schools and baccalaureate institutions
to improve articulation.&lt;br/&gt;In general Bio-Link helps educators keep up
with an industry that is not only increasing in size, but expanding from
research and development to manufacturing and computer analysis. In doing so,
Bio-Link best prepares students to meet the evolving needs of the biotechnology
industry.&lt;br/&gt;