* 0118989
* Repression and  Mobilization: What We Know and Where We Should Go From Here
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2001,10/31/2001
* Christian Davenport, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 10/31/2001
* USD 4,000.00

In the past, social movement and collective action research in sociology has
concentrated largely on mobilization in democratic states. In contrast, studies
of the mobilization-repression nexus in political science focus on protest in
principally authoritarian contexts. Both areas have neglected important insights
provided by the other. Recently, as new data from repressive as well as
democratic regimes have become available, and as new theoretical perspectives on
state building, political control, and culture have found their way into social
movement studies as well as research on repression/human rights, there is
growing interest among scholars to reexamine and reconceptualize this
relationship. This research involves a workshop designed to bring together
twenty junior and senior researchers who are working in diverse settings. The
primary goal is to address the hiatus in theory concerning how the range of
repressive tactics in democratic and authoritarian states shapes repertoires of
contention, mobilizing structures, and the framing of opportunities and
collective identities as various points in cycles of resistance, protest, and
rebellion. The workshop output will be a book edited by the organizers. The
activity is to contribute to the creation of a network of scholars who come to
these issues embracing both single-state as well as global/comparative
approaches.