* 0118085
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Leadership Strategies in the Halaf Period, Southeastern Turkey, 5300-4500 BC
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2003
* Gil Stein, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2003
* USD 10,640.00

As part of her doctoral dissertation research under the direction of Dr. Gil J.
Stein, Rana Ozbal will co-direct excavations at Tell Kurdu, a Halaf Period site,
in southeastern Turkey. Traditionally Halaf society of the fifth millennium BC
is believed to consist of small-scale farming communities with no clear evidence
for hierarchical social organization. Public buildings such as temples or
palaces, as well as large villages or towns are conspicuously absent from all
Halaf excavations in the Halaf "heartland" of northern Iraq.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently however, archaeologists, prompted by a newfound
academic interest to investigate the Halaf "hinterlands", have begun to conduct
research in southeastern Anatolia, modern day Turkey. They have discovered that
Turkey harbors several Halaf sites of previously unheard-of sizes. These sites,
substantially larger (10-20 hectares) than contemporaneous sites in Iraq (rarely
more than 2-3 hectares) are most probably regional centers. Domuztepe, the most
intensively investigated of these large sites, yielded evidence for substantial
architectural complexes and complex ideological manifestations. In other words,
the existing notion that Anatolia was inhabited during the Halaf Period by small
farming communities needs to be reexamined. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At 15
hectares, Tell Kurdu is an ideal site to investigate new questions on the socio-
political organization in Anatolia in the fifth millennium BC. As a co-field
director of the Kurdu excavations, Rana Ozbal will be researching the intra-site
organization of the site to provide a firsthand look at the functioning of this
Anatolian Halaf center. Excavations in 2001 will focus on the expansion of a
1999 trench that yielded the remains of a large monumental building. The size
and construction style of this 20 x 20 meter structure, with walls over one
meter in thickness, suggest that it may be something other than a domestic
residence, possibly having public and/or ritual
significance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to understand what the building may
have been used for, Rana Ozbal will rely on two sources of data. The first will
consist of the 'traditional' archaeological materials that the building yields,
such as pottery, tools and other artifacts. The second source of information
will be gathered from methodologically innovative micro-analyses, which involve
chemical testing of the building's floors and recovery and identification of
embedded micro-artifacts (artifacts that are less than 1 cm2). This combined
research methodology will provide a finer level of resolution for inferring the
function of this unusual building and hence for understanding the organizational
complexity of Halaf society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;