* 0118458
* Collaborative Research: Magnetic Characterization of Dust in Greenland Ice
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2004
* Pierre Biscaye, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 07/31/2004
* USD 35,804.00

Abstract Kent OPP-01-18470 Biscaye OPP-01-18458

This is a collaborative proposal between Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory and
Rutgers University. The magnetic properties of Greenland ice were tested in
samples of Holocene (interglacial) and Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) age. The
dominant diamagnetism of ice prevented useful measurements of magnetic
susceptibility, but the samples contain a sufficient concentration of iron oxide
magnetic minerals that can be estimated using isothermal remanent magnetization
(IRM) intensity. Some unusual problems had to be solved in order to obtain
reliable measurements. Coercivity spectra in the Greenland ice samples are
consistent with a dominant magnetite carrier. An unusual aspect of the
preliminary magnetic data is that the LGM ice samples tend to have lower IRM
values than interglacial ice samples, although LGM ice generally contains much
higher concentrations of eolian dust than interglacial ice. The magnetic
minerals constitute only a small fraction of the wind transported dust, but may
reflect variations in pedogenesis and other environmental conditions in the
source area(s), as well as differences in the possible source areas and/or
atmospheric circulation and transport. The source area is presumed to be eastern
Asia, and is presently the Takla Makan and other Inner Mongolian and Mongolian
deserts, which were also the source areas for the sediments of the Chinese Loess
Plateau. The objectives of this research are to validate a methodology of ice
magnetic measurements by calibrating the ice magnetic data with direct
measurements of dust extracts, and to compare the magnetic properties of polar
dust in Greenland ice with those of possible source area(s), such as Chinese
loess and desert sediments. These data will allow us to assess the feasibility
of using magnetic properties as an independent provenance tracer of Greenland
dust and to increase our understanding of the processes responsible for the
profound paleoclimatically-dependent variations in magnetic properties of ice
and loess deposits.



