* 0118349
* Collaborative Research: Particulate Organic Carbon Fluxes and Sediment Accumulation in the Cariaco Basin
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2004
* Miguel Goni, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 09/30/2004
* USD 294,809.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0118349&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Cariaco Basin
is a 1,400-m deep depression on the continental shelf off Venezuela in which
anoxic waters cover laminated sediments with high organic matter content (1-5
wt%). These laminae, which result from seasonal variations in primary
productivity and terrigenous sediment input along the southern the Caribbean
Sea, contain a high-resolution record of past climate change in the tropical
Atlantic Ocean. In this collaborative effort, researchers at the University of
South Florida (USF), the University of South Carolina (USC), and the State
University of New York (SUNY) seek to integrate hydrographic, primary
productivity, water column microbial activity, vertical particulate flux, and
sediment accumulation rate measurements in the Cariaco Basin into a synthesis to
understand how contemporary sedimentation patterns reflect this climatic and
oceanographic variability. The central objective is to understand the factors
that control the relationship between primary production and the vertical flux
of particles in the Cariaco Basin. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
continue the current time series of monthly observations at 10'30' N, 64'40' W
that began in November, 1995, under the CARIACO (CArbon Retention In A Colored
Ocean) Program. This includes continuing deployment of a mooring with four
sediment traps (275, 350, 450, and 1,200 m) to provide bi-weekly sample
collections at each depth. Complementing the traps will be a mooring with two
Acoustic Doppler Current Profilers (ADCP), one looking up and the other looking
down from a depth of about 250 m, to measure currents from below the sill depth
to the surface for a three-year period. Each year, one transect will be
conducted between the CARIACO station and 11'40' N, 64'40' W outside the basin,
to help understand the characteristics of source water involved in intrusions
and upwelling. Regional wind and sea level will be examined using both local and
remotely-sensed data to establish whether forcing for upwelling occurs primarily
through local or gyre-scale processes. Sediments from the Cariaco basin will be
collected and analyzed to reconstruct the oceanographic condition in the Cariaco
Basin over the past century and provide a window for longer-scale
paleoceanographic studies. The program is significant because it provides
groundtruthing needed for proper interpretation of past climate changes recorded
in the Cariaco sediments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;