* 0118422
* Collaborative Research: Long Term Continuous Monitoring of Pressure, Fluid Chemistry and Hydrology in Instrumented Boreholes at the Costa Rica Subduction Zone
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2007
* Hans Jannasch, Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Rodey Batiza
* 09/30/2007
* USD 355,432.00

This project will continuously monitor the pressure, fluid chemistry, and
hydrology in two instrumented boreholes at the Costa Rica subduction zone, using
long-term observatories (CORK and ACORK) installed during ODP Leg 203. The field
program will 1) deploy pressure gauges and data loggers, OsmoSamplers, and
osmotic flow meters in 3 CORKed boreholes along a transect across the
deformation front of the subduction zone and 2) retrieve the OsmoSamplers, data
stored in the data loggers and deploying new OsmoSamplers and pressure gauges,
with the submersible Alvin. The fluid stored in the OsmoSamplers will provide a
continuous 1.3 year record of fluid conditions collected at in situ conditions
at weekly resolution, in three distinct hydrogeologic systems. The first flow
system is the upper oceanic crust of the incoming Cocos Plate, the second is the
return of a deeply sourced fluid along the decollement and the third is in the
underthrust sediment section driven by compaction dewatering. By documenting the
nature of these hydrogeologic systems it will be possible to better understand
the effects of fluid flow at convergent margins on the shallow thermal structure
and fluid content of the downgoing plate, the physical properties of the
subduction zone interface, deformation style and transport of elements to the
oceans.