* 0118984
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Fetal Origins Hypothesis, Modernization, and the Hmong Diaspora
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2001,01/31/2003
* Michael Little, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 01/31/2003
* USD 9,900.00

There is good evidence that poor nutrition in the earliest stages of life
(including the fetal stage) can affect health profoundly in individuals at much
later ages. This is known as the "Fetal Origins Hypothesis." Another major
factor affecting peoples' lives and their health is the process of
"modernization," or the cultural transition that people undergo during the
process of being incorporated into a Western style of life. These two processes
(poor early nutrition and modernization) will be studied in Hmong refugees who
left Laos during the "Secret War" (1961-1980) and who are between the ages of 19
and 40 years. Two populations will be studied: Hmong who have resettled in
rural, isolated farming villages in French Guiana, and Hmong living in the urban
setting of Providence, Rhode Island. Information gathered will include life
histories by questionnaire and interview and demographic data related to early
environment, and anthropometric, body composition, and physiological measures
for estimating outcome. Sorting out the effects of early environment and later
modernization will be possible by statistical comparisons of the Hmong of French
Guiana and of Providence. This study will contribute to our knowledge of: (1)
the influence of poor early nutrition on chronic diseases in adulthood, (2)
environmental effects on body fat distribution, (3) Hmong ethnography during the
war in Southeast Asia, and (4) the health effects of modernization on the
resettled Hmong people.