* 0118069
* SGER:  Monitoring the Effects of the January 17, 2001 Oil Spill on Galapagos Marine Iguanas
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2003
* Martin Wikelski, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 05/31/2003
* USD 32,774.00

On January 17, 2001, a medium size oil spill hit the Galapagos islands, Ecuador,
a Natural World Heritage site. Although few animals were killed immediately,
there is strong concern about the long-term impacts on the endemic wildlife.
Long-lived species, like the marine iguana (Amblyrhynchus cristatus) in
particular, offer ideal model systems to study potential chronic effects of
environmental pollution. Marine iguanas forage on intertidal algae and are
therefore highly exposed to water-borne pollutants. I have 14 years of
physiological and demographic data for the marine iguana population most
strongly affected, on Santa Fe island. Furthermore, as part of my most recent
field project, I collected baseline data on environmental stress (plasma
corticosterone levels), algae quality and digestive endosymbionts up to two days
before the oil spill (Jan 17, 2001). Ample pre-oil spill data are also available
for El Nino, La Nina and 'regular' seasons. To quantify the impacts of oiling I
propose to measure the following parameters immediately, 3 months, 6 months and
9 months after the spill: i) baseline and stress-induced corticosterone levels,
ii) blood cell counts, iii) activity of hindgut endosymbiontic microbes, iv)
standing algae crop, and v) survival rates of individually marked animals.
Furthermore, an Ecuadorian assistant will conduct an experiment simulating an
oil spill on captive marine iguanas at the Charles Darwin Research Station. This
experiment will also allow us to test the feasibility of re-inoculating the
hindgut of oiled marine iguanas with microbes from unaffected conspecifics. My
detailed pre-spill data will allow me to quantify behavioral and physiological
consequences of a severe environmental perturbation. These data will be
immensely important for conservation and policy measures in Galapagos but will
also be scientifically useful for global conservation issues.