* 0118867
* Sources of New Production and the Degredation of Organic Matter in a Tropical Margin Influenced by Seasonal Upwelling
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2004
* Raymond Sambrotto, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 09/30/2004
* USD 389,995.00

ABSTRACT

OCE-0118867

New production is that component of total phytoplankton production fueled by
nitrate uptake and the fixation of N2. In a nitrogen-limited model of ocean
plankton growth, new production can be used to define an upper limit for the
export of organic material from the surface to deeper layers. Thus, new
production is an important starting point to determine the ocean's role in the
vertical flux of bio-active materials such as carbon dioxide. A second critical
factor is the amount of new production that is exported to depth. Both export
and new production can vary independently and both need to be understood to
predict how efficiently material will be removed from surface waters. Previous
time series measurements in the Cariaco Basin off northeast Venezuela recorded
prodigious productivity associated with the winter upwelling period and lower
(although still moderate) production in summer as well as the possible
contribution of chemosynthesis at depth to the total organic export. Thus, the
region is a useful example of a low-latitude eutrophic-ocean margin region in
which much of the production reaches deep water.

In this project, researchers from the Lamont-Dougherty Earth Observatory of
Columbia University will study the relative contribution of nitrate uptake and
N2 fixation to total particulate export and how these sources vary seasonally in
the Cariaco Basin. The proposed work is a companion effort with the ongoing
CARIACO Time-Series Project. While the latter core effort will provide the basic
logistics, physical and chemical and productivity measurements, the work
undertaken in this project will focus on the source, amount and export
efficiency of new production. Direct incubation methods will be used to measure
the seasonal changes in nitrate uptake and N2 fixation in surface waters using
both 15 N tracer techniques for nitrate and di-nitrogen gas as well as the
acetylene reduction for N2 fixation. Seasonal sampling of these rates over two
years will provide a basis for estimating the relative importance of N2
fixation, a potentially important input of combined nitrogen to the ocean. In
addition to sediment trap comparisons, the overall efficiency of export also
will be measured with a recently developed 13C dilution method for estimating
sub-surface carbon respiration. Finally, these rate measurements will be used to
calibrate a model of new production and export in the region based on remotely
sensed information. The model will explicitly estimate N2 fixation. This work
will help to constrain the cumulative role of tropical margins in the supply of
combined nitrogen to the ocean as well as in total-ocean carbon uptake.

