* 0118992
* Genetic Analysis of the nifM
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2001,10/31/2005
* Nara Gavini, Bowling Green State University
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 10/31/2005
* USD 330,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Genetics of biological nitrogen fixation is very complex and requires
a coordinated expression of about 20 nif genes. The enzyme nitrogenase is
composed of two separate proteins designated the Fe-protein, a homodimer coded
by the nifH gene and the MoFe-protein, a heterotetramer coded by the nifDK
genes. Apart from these structural genes (nifHDK), a number of nif accessory
genes whose products are essential for the maturation and assembly of
nitrogenase are identified. One of them is the nifM gene whose product is
necessary for the production of the functional Fe-protein in
Klebsiellapneumoniae and in Azotobacter vinelandii. Initial genetic analyses of
nifM mutants generated by chemical mutagenesis, site-directed mutagenesis, and
of a&lt;br/&gt;chimeric NifM:PpiC protein, indicate that the NifM protein
functions as a peptidyl-prolyl cis/trans isomerase (PPIase). Moreover, studies
on purified NifM protein also showed that this protein has PPIase activity.
Based on these observations and also on the high homology shared by the PPIases
and C-terminal&lt;br/&gt;region of the NifM, it is hypothesized that the
peptidyl-prolyl cis/trans isomerase activity of NifM is essential for this
protein to exert its effect on the maturation (activity and stability) of the
Fe-protein. The aim of this research is to carry out molecular and genetic
analysis on the nifM gene in order to understand&lt;br/&gt;the functions of the
nifM in nitrogen fixation. To achieve this goal, the following specific
objectives will be pursued: 1) to characterize the nifM point mutants of K.
pneumoniae that were previously isolated by chemical mutagenesis in order to
understand the molecular basis of NifM function; 2) to identify region(s) of the
A. vinelandii NifM protein that are essential for PPIase activity; 3) to
identify the&lt;br/&gt;regions of NifM protein that are essential for
interaction with the Fe-protein; and 4) to isolate and characterize nifM-
independent Nif A. vinelandii mutants. These experiments are directed toward
understanding how the Genetic organization of the nifM gene contributes to the
role of its product in the maturation of Fe-protein. Preliminary data from
mutational analysis indicate that mutations in both the N-terminal region of
NifM and the C-terminal region of NifM affect the ability of NifM to participate
in the maturation of the Fe-protein. These studies will help to assess the role
of the C-terminal region of NifM and the PPIase activity of the NifM in the NifM
ability to participate in the maturation of the Fe-protein. Moreover, these
studies will help to delineate the role of the N-terminal region of the NifM in
determining the NifM ability. Besides, the research projects outlined here make
excellent teaching tools, utilizing many techniques in modern molecular
microbiology and having easily grasped objectives. The PIs have started a series
of lecture courses that deal with biotechnology and one of major goals during
this grant period is to start a molecular biology laboratory course to conduct
active learning, experimental learning and mentoring activities with
undergraduate students at Bowling Green State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;