* 0118516
* SGER: A Study on Plasma Etching Yield Improvements through a Faculty-in-Industry Internship
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2001,11/30/2002
* Michael Nikolaou, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 11/30/2002
* USD 28,387.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Michael Nikolaou and Brian McMillan
&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Houston&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0118516&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increasing functionality and wafer sizes are
challenging integrated circuit manufacturing practices that rely on the
execution of open-loop recipes. To ensure high yields, reliable sensor-based
methods for the prevention, detection and correction (control) of abnormal
situations are gradually being used and need to be further developed. To that
end, this four-month GOALI project will serve to catalyze interaction between
the microelectronics industry and the University of Houston, providing important
input to the PI's future work in the area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will be
conducted at Lam Research Corporation's facilities and will focus on plasma
etching. Two commercial software products will be used to determine the
potential for yield improvements on the basis of prevention, detection, and
correction (control) methods that use data provided by sensors in existing
tools. The limits of software-based methods will be examined, and promising
directions will be outlined for short and long-term development of sensor,
monitoring, and control systems for plasma etching yield improvements.
Continuation of this work will be further pursued after the PI returns to his
academic position.&lt;br/&gt;