* 0118011
* Development and Testing of a Tool for Judging Excellence in Science Museum Exhibitions
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2002,12/31/2003
* Beverly Serrell, Serrell and Associates
* Standard Grant
* David A. Ucko
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,500.00

0118011 PROJECT ABSTRACT

Serrell and Associates requests an 18-month grant to conduct research that
seeks a valid and reliable way for museum professionals to judge the excellence
of science exhibitions in museums from a visitor-experience point of view. This
is a novel and untested idea for practitioners of exhibition development in
science museums. The need for this research arises from a lack of agreed-upon
standards of excellence (or even competence) for science museum exhibitions.
Museums that receive funding from the National Science Foundation are called
upon to document the effectiveness and merit of their exhibit projects, yet they
have few shared, standardized methods to help them do so. This grant would allow
Serrell and Associates to conduct a series of meetings with local (Chicago)
museum professionals and a national advisory panel to facilitate the development
and testing of an audience-based, peer-reviewed criteria for recognizing
excellence through empirical definition and exemplars.

The research question for this project is: If different museum officials used
the same set of standards to visit, review and judge the same group of
exhibitions, would their ratings agree on the degree of excellence for each of
the exhibitions? The proposed research methods will be informed by the science
education research of John R. Frederiksen (University of California at Berkeley
and the Educational Testing Service, California) who has developed techniques
and criteria for performance evaluation of science teaching. His scoring methods
incorporate direct and positive ways in which assessment can be used to improve
science teaching. There are very clear parallels between Frederiksen's
assessment techniques for science educators and the goals of this project for
science museum exhibit developers. These include, but are not limited to:
practitioner-developed and practitioner-trained criteria; criteria based upon a
combination of ground-up and top-down theories; content-free, intention-free
criteria; and criteria that benefit the process, the product and measurement of
the impacts. The long-term goal of this research is to improve the quality of
visitors' experiences in science museum exhibitions.