* 0118044
* Diatom Blooms and Planktonic Grazers: Paradigm or Paradox?
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Bruce Frost, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 09/30/2005
* USD 477,459.00

Phytoplankton blooms are major events in the pelagic environment of temperate to
subpolar coastal seas. Because blooms are large and relatively reliable seasonal
pulses of food resources, the life histories of many pelagic consumer
populations, both planktonic grazers and higher trophic level types such as
fish, appear synchronized with them. Yet there is an apparent paradox. Results
from numerous recent laboratory studies indicate that some species of diatoms,
including species that may be biomass dominants during phytoplankton blooms, can
inhibit egg production and/or embryonic and postembryonic development of several
species of planktonic suspension-feeding copepods. The specific mechanism
underlying the inhibition is currently under debate. Diatoms may be
nutritionally deficient, but they also contain toxic substances that induce
deleterious effects in copepods. However, the general relevance of these
laboratory studies for natural populations of copepods is uncertain, as field
investigations of the effects of diatom blooms have yielded contradictory
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research project is to test in
the sea the hypothesis that diatom-dominated phytoplankton blooms have
inhibitory effects on egg production rate and/or postembryonic development of
natural populations of the planktonic suspension-feeding copepods Calanus
pacificus and Pseudocalanus newmani. The study will be done in Dabob Bay
(Washington State) where intense, diatom-dominated phytoplankton blooms occur
reliably in March. During these blooms, diatom concentrations reach or exceed
levels known from laboratory studies to have deleterious effects on copepods.
Previous field studies elsewhere of effects of diatom blooms on copepods have
not met this condition. To test the hypothesis a combination of approaches is
proposed: (1) observations on the distribution and abundance of copepods,
diatoms, and other potential prey; (2) analysis of fecal pellets of adult
copepods to verify that they are ingesting diatoms in situ; (3) experiments
providing adequate control and replication to determine feeding rates of adult
copepods on diatoms and other prey; (4) incubations to estimate in situ egg
production rate and hatching success of both copepod species; (5) experiments to
test for the direct effects of diatoms on egg production rate and hatching
success and postembryonic development of the two copepod species. The
possibility that diatoms may impact metazoan grazers such as copepods is of
enormous basic and applied scientific interest. At a basic level, the problem is
central to understanding the structure and function of marine planktonic
systems. Any process by which phytoplankton inhibit reproduction or development
of grazing zooplankton could markedly affect the pelagic food web well beyond
the level of primary consumers. That is, a process affecting the population
response of grazers would ramify through the food web, directly impacting other
consumer species whose reproduction and growth depend on occurrence and
abundance of eggs and immature stages of grazers. Thus, it is crucial to know
whether diatoms are deleterious to natural populations of copepods and, if so,
the specific nature of the effect, how frequently it occurs, and what the
implications are for higher trophic levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On a practical
level, the magnitude of sustainable harvest of fish from the ocean is ultimately
dependent not just on the level of primary production, but how that production
is (or is not) transferred through the food web to higher (harvestable) trophic
levels. An unambiguous test of the effects of diatom blooms on natural
populations of planktonic grazers could therefore represent a major advance in
understanding for pelagic biological oceanography.&lt;br/&gt;