* 0118130
* Collaborative Research on Monolithic Optoelectronic Integrated Circuits for Biomedical Sensing Applications
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2004
* Clifton Fonstad, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Filbert J. Bartoli
* 08/31/2004
* USD 200,000.00

This proposal describes a three year collaborative research program by a multi-
university team of device, electronics, and biomedical investigators applying
and extending newly emerging technologies for monolithic optoelectronic
integration to address problems and needs of biomedical research and diagnosis.
Researchers at MIT have recently demonstrated unique monolithic optoelectronic
integrated circuits (OEICs) of unprecedented complexity and performance, and
their ability now to monolithically integrate light sources and detectors with
complex high density, high performance electronic circuitry opens the way to the
invention and realization of a wide variety of sensors and measurement arrays
for medical research and diagnostics. It is this area which the proposed effort
will address. The technologies for monolithic optoelectronic integration which
are under development at MIT are sufficiently advanced that they can be applied
immediately to solve a variety of problems, and one area that is ripe with
applications and needs that are addressable with the current technology is
biomedical research and practice. From the numerous possible target applications
in biomedicine, we have identified as an initial vehicle for applying this
technology a integrated source/detector array for diffuse optical tomography
(DOT). The proposed unit will permit DOT observations with a resolution
exceeding that of present techniques and will lead to the use of DOT in
procedures and situations in which it is currently unfeasible. Stated in the
most general terms, the proposed effort will be directed at developing,
applying, and making available a technology to monolithically integrate III-V
optical emitters and detectors with commercially fabricated, custom-designed
integrated circuits to produce high resolution two-dimensional arrays of
individually addressable smart excitor/sensor pixels tailored for biomedical
research applications and studies. A representative pixel might measure 250 to
500 microns on a side, and contain, for example, a diode light emitter (LED or
laser), one or more light sensors, and a significant amount of electronic signal
processing circuitry. This basic unit is a building block from which a wide
variety of biomedical optical measurement systems can be realized in a very
rugged, compact chip-size format. It promises to lead, in the future, to totally
new sensor geometries and measurement procedures. The challenges that the
program will face include continuing development of the OEIC technology and
adapting this technology for biomedical research; developing suitable signal
processing algorithms and designing compact, high performance signal processing
circuit arrays in the relevant electronics technologies to interface with the
optoelectronic devices; and suitably packaging the OEIC chips for their
biomedical utilization. The project team will be aided in this effort by its
strong links with the Northeastern University Center for Subsurface Sensing and
Imaging Systems, the Massachusetts General Hospital NMR Center, the University
of Utah NIH/NCRR Center for Bioelectric Field Modeling, Simulations and
Visualization, and the MIT Microsystems Technology Laboratory, and by integrated
circuit processing support from Vitesse Semiconductor Corporation.