* 0118444
* LAPIS:  Development of a Large Area Plankton Imaging System
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Laurence Madin, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 12/31/2005
* USD 499,821.00

This proposal requests support for the design, construction and testing of a
towed video instrument for surveying and identifying macrozooplankton and
micronekton in the water column. Called the Large Area Plankton Imaging System
(LAPIS), the device would fill a scale gap between existing optical instruments
designed for small particles and zooplankton, such as the Video Plankton
Recorder, and acoustic systems that have a greater range but currently lack the
resolution to identify different taxa of organisms. We intend to build a device
that would illuminate and image objects ranging from 0.5 to 100 cm in size,
within a field of view ranging from 2 to 4 m2. Towed at 1-2 knots, LAPIS would
survey volumes of water approaching those filtered by Midwater trawls. Power,
operational data and video signals would be transmitted between the surface and
LAPIS via standard electro-optical cable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrument
would use an array of high efficiency LEDs to create a field of intense red
light, imaged by a high resolution (4 Mpixel) digital camera operating at 8
frames s-1. Red light is invisible to most marine organisms, and together with a
hydrodynamically quiet profile, will render the instrument inconspicuous to
target organisms. We will take advantage of several technologies that are either
existent or in development by other groups at WHOI, including the control and
data telemetry electronics built for the SeaSoar, and the video processing and
Telemetry being developed for the next generation Video Plankton Recorder.
Existing winches, wire and slip rings are WHOI will be available for evaluation
and use of LAPIS. We believe this device will fill an important niche in optical
survey instruments, allowing rapid and extensive quantification of larger
organisms, including gelatinous plankton, larger crustaceans and midwater
fishes. Although proposed now as a towed instrument, the basic configuration
could be adapted for use on ROVs, packaged with acoustics instruments, or on
profiling or fixed moorings. Expected applications in the near future include
survey of salp swarms, of gelatinous predators in the Gulf of Maine, and future
midwater exploration and quantification in connection with the Census of Marine
Life.&lt;br/&gt;