* 0118849
* Dissertation Research: Tensas Paleoethnobotanical Project
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Gayle Fritz, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2005
* USD 10,276.00

Under the direction of Dr. Gayle Fritz, Katherine Roberts will complete The
Tensas Paleoethnobotanical Project. This project/dissertation will document the
emergence of aboriginal farming, in the form of both horticulture and
agriculture, in the Tensas Basin of Northeast Louisiana located in the Lower
Mississippi Valley. It will employ basic models and tenets from evolutionary
ecology as the main interpretive framework to enable examination of these
processes in sociopolitical context. Specifically, it will investigate how risk
reduction may have influenced decisions about resource utilization. Evidence
will be taken from plant remains, archaeological data, and ecological
information.. Current data suggest that although a certain level of complexity
was achieved in the Tensas based on nut and fruit management, with the advent
and subsequent intensification of maize, Tensas Basin society became noticeably
more complex. In contrast, farming of native seeds had fewer discernible social
ramifications. These patterns require further substantiation and explanation.
Plant remain analyses are an excellent means for testing hypotheses about the
dynamics of the evolution of economic and cultural systems. This study, combined
with application of predictions from particular models derived from evolutionary
ecology, will help focus interpretation on the nature and consequences of the
interaction between people and their food plants. The project/dissertation will
expand an already impressive plant remain database and critically examine
factors effecting foodways in the Tensas basin through a localized case study.
Completion of this project will augment knowledge of the patterns and processes
of food production during the time period spanning A.D. 700 - A.D. 1400,
focusing on the effect of agriculture on indigenous economic strategies.
Hypotheses concerning the local population's dependence on maize versus native
resources will be examined on the basis of empirical evidence with consideration
of the ecological and historical context in which these behavioral changes took
place. Results of this study will provide insight into the interplay among
environment, risk, and the evolution of subsistence and social structure,
ultimately shedding light on developmental processes in other regions as well.
The Tensas Paleoethnobotanical Project will provide some clarification of why
and how these fisher-hunter-collectors eventually became farmers and in so
doing, the study will fulfill the larger objective of developing explanations
for the origin of food production in the Tensas Basin. Why the hunter-collector-
fisher economy in the Tensas persisted as long as it did, and why local groups
were seemingly so reluctant to embrace maize agriculture, will be discussed.
This dissertation will provide a well studied example of sedentary and socially
complex moundbuilders who subsequently adopted maize. Ecologically based
explanations for the adoption of agriculture and the socio-political changes it
brings will confront arguments of increased complexity in Mississippian times
deriving from aggrandizing individuals striving for power. Additionally,
explanations of population pressure and climatic change need not be invoked as
exogenous variables for the shift to. Finally, data collection and hypothesis
testing involved in this project will provide an empirical case study to aid
evaluation of proposals for subsistence patterning in the region.