* 0118695
* PEET: Studies in the Lasiosphaeriaceae II:  Monograph of Podospora and Phylogeny of the Lasiosphaeria/Sordariaceae Group (Fungi, Ascomycetes, Sordariales)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2009
* Sabine Huhndorf, Field Museum of Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Skog
* 08/31/2009
* USD 744,241.00

In a continuation of productive studies of the taxonomy and phylogeny of the
Sordariales, a large and ecologically important group of ascomycete fungi, Dr.
Sabine Huhndorf of the Field Museum and her students and colleagues are focusing
on the genus Podospora, one of the largest and most complex in the group (138
species worldwide), and related taxa. The genus is key to understanding
relationships in the group, and is ecologically important as a dominant
component of the dung decomposer mycota. Previous studies have shown that the
large genera Lasiosphaeria and Cercophora form a monophyletic group together
with Podospora and the model organisms Neurospora crassa and Sordaria fimicola.
These relationships are significantly different from traditional classification
schemes. While Podospora species have had a great deal of attention from a
morphological standpoint, they have not previously been included in molecular
systematic studies; and a revision of the genus incorporating molecular
characters is essential for understanding their relationship among other taxa in
the Sordariales. This study will serve as a model system for future studies in
ascomycete systematics by using a multi-gene approach, incorporating both
protein-coding and ribosomal genes, along with morphological characters for
determining phylogenetic relationships at the specific, generic and familial
levels. Both the monographic and the family level phylogenetic studies will be
based on morphological and molecular data obtained from type and other herbarium
specimens, newly collected specimens, and cultures. With the aid of digital
image capturing systems, this study will produce detailed identification guides
for taxa in the Sordariales. Results will be available via hard copy and over
the Field Museum Mycology WWW site. The publication of the resulting monographs,
specimen databases, on-line image catalog and interactive identification system
will greatly assist further studies of ascomycetes by researchers worldwide. The
research and training enterprise involves colleague Dr. Greg Mueller at the
Field Museum as well as others in Denmark and New Zealand who will assist also
with the fieldwork in those countries. Students will also participate in ongoing
field work in Costa Rica and Ecuador. This program directly addresses several of
the major challenges currently facing ascomycete systematics including: a)
rigorously examining patterns of variation in some of the key morphological
characters currently used in ascomycete taxonomy, b) stabilizing generic,
familial and ordinal concepts using a phylogenetic approach, c) determining
taxonomic diversity in tropical countries, d) integrating these data into
monographic treatments, and e) training students to become well versed in
traditional as well as modern tools and analyses. Understanding the phylogenetic
relationships among ascomycetes is important because these fungi play an
important role in our living world as decomposers of organic matter and as
agents of plant and animal diseases, and as sources of medically and
industrially significant compounds.

