* 0118414
* Conference:  Support for Young Investigators to Attend the 17th International Conference on Plant Growth Substances, July 1-6, 2001, in Brno, Czech Republic
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2002
* Russell Jones, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Sharman D. O'Neill
* 05/31/2002
* USD 32,400.00



Support is requested for an international conference on plant growth and
development to be held in Brno, Czech Republic from July 1-6, 2001. This
conference will be the 17th in a series of conferences sponsored by the
International Plant Growth Substance Association (IPGSA). These meetings are
held every three years and the last two were convened in Minnesota (1995) and
Makuhari Messe, Tokyo (1998). Progress in understanding the perception and
action of plant hormones has advanced at a rapid pace as a result of advances in
the areas of genetics and molecular cloning. These advances have led to the
identification of genes that are involved in the perception of hormonal signals,
and plant biologists are now beginning to unravel the signal transduction
pathways that link hormone receptors to cellular response. The recent
publication of the complete Arabidopsis thaliana and rice genome sequences will
see an even more dramatic advances in our understanding of hormone action, and
genomics approaches will feature prominently in the Brno meeting. The goals of
the 17th International Conference on Plant Growth Substances are to bring
together researchers who are working in this field to report on new developments
and to share new ideas. Our goal is to introduce younger investigators to this
exciting area and the funds provided from this grant will be used to support the
travel and lodging of junior US investigators to this meeting. Topics to be
covered in plenary sessions and symposia include signal transduction, hormone
homeostasis, the roles of hormones in responses to environmental stresses, the
use and application of transgenic plants in hormone research, the identification
of new signalling molecules, the interaction of hormones with pathogens and
symbionts, and hormone perception and sensitivity. The program promises to be
exciting and to stimulate research on plant growth regulators. These compounds
have long been established as important for U.S. agriculture, and our
understanding of the cellular and molecular basis of their action is essential
for the long-term sustainability of agriculture.

