* 0118455
* Paleo Ice Flow Paths from Till Provenance in the Ross Embayment, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/2001,08/31/2004
* G. Lang Farmer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 08/31/2004
* USD 95,938.00

0118455&lt;br/&gt;Farmer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award, provided by the
Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the Office of Polar Programs,
supports a collaborative research project to study glacio-marine sediments from
the Ross Sea toward an understanding of the history of the West Antarctic Ice
Sheet (WAIS). Reliable predictions of the future response of the WAIS to
changing climate and rising sea level depend, to a large extent, on improving
our knowledge and understanding of its ice dynamics during the last glacial
maximum (~18,000 yrs ago). Sediments from the Ross Sea, Antarctica, contain a
detailed physical record that can be used to reconstruct past glacier flow
patterns. Although significant progress has been made in constraining the extent
of ice and the timing of its maximum extent, reconstructions of ice flow paths
vary substantially. Studies have predicted that ice streams (regions of fast
flowing ice) derived primarily from West Antarctica were dominant features of
the Ross Ice Sheet, whereas an ice sheet modeling reconstruction showed roughly
equal input from East and West Antarctic ice. Fundamental differences in rock
types and ages beneath these source areas should allow the provenance of tills
across the Ross Sea to be determined, facilitating the reconstruction of past
ice flow paths. Thus the Ross Embayment provides an exciting opportunity to
relate modern ice flow dynamics to past ice sheet dynamics and
deposits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A detailed provenance study of sediment collected
in cores taken from across the Ross Sea floor will be carried out by linking the
mineralogical, geochemical, and isotopic characteristics of the sediments from
these cores to reference sediments collected from the probable source areas.
From these data, the patterns of ice flow across the shelf can be constrained
for the last glacial maximum. For this study, existing samples collected from
the Ross Sea, and the source areas of East and West Antarctica will be utilized.
Composition of the till deposited during the last ice advance will be
characterized by examining the sand and pebble size fraction of the sediment,
the clay mineralogy, elemental abundance and samarium-neodymium (Sm-Nd) isotopic
composition of the silt and clay size fraction. The source of silt and clay
fraction may be problematic because of possible mixing of continental and marine
sources. This problem will be addressed by determining the composition of modern
marine samples which can then be 'subtracted' from the till
composition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Samples from the source areas will be analyzed
first to determine the compositional fingerprint of each area. Ice flow paths
will be determined based on the correspondence between the source areas and the
measured values across the Ross Sea. The goal of this project is to characterize
both lateral and vertical variations in diagnostic aspects of till mineralogy
and isotopic composition in order to make a significant contribution to the
understanding of changes in ice sheet dynamics on time scale of the past 30,000
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of this study will allow assessment of the
hypothesis that ice streams played a significant role in the most recent
disintegration of the WAIS by testing the validity of various ice sheet
reconstructions. Additionally, better characterization of the configuration of
the Ross Ice Sheet during the last glacial maximum will improve the quality and
reliability of models of the past and future characteristics of Antarctic ice
sheet behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;