* 0118916
* SGER:  Joint Optimization of Resource Allocation and Operational Decisions for Improving Random Yield
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2004
* Diwakar Gupta, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 05/31/2004
* USD 99,999.00

This Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) will focus on the manufacture
of integrated circuits (ICs) and the provision of air travel as the central
examples of such manufacturing and service industries. The goal is to develop
mathematical models that provide a basis for determining how to allocate scarce
resources among a variety of possible methods available to improve yield. Among
the key questions to be addressed are: (1) How do different yield-altering
interventions affect the parameters of the yield distribution? (2) How are
operational decisions affected by changes in yield distributions? (3) Under
which stochastic and/or parametric orders of yield distributions does a company
benefit economically? (4) How can the magnitude of this benefit be quantified?
These questions will be answered using techniques from operations research,
including Markov decision processes, stochastic/variability orderings, and
stochastic programming. The increasing complexity of production processes and
the ability to create and manage a large number of market segments in service
industries have served to elevate the importance of yield management to
manufacturers and service providers alike.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is an
extensive body of literature dealing with mathematical models necessary to make
production-inventory decisions in the manufacturing context, or analogously, to
decide how much capacity to make available in a particular fare-class, or how
much to overbook, in the service industry context. This research will provide a
bridge between two disparate bodies of literature by developing common models to
evaluate yield-altering interventions.&lt;br/&gt;