* 0118028
* Observing Wind Induced Near-Surface Currents within the Water Wave Boundary
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2007
* Xin Zhang, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2007
* USD 408,764.00

0118028 Zhang&lt;br/&gt;This study is aimed at improving the quantification of
these ocean surface parameters through advanced observational experiments. From
analysis surface images from the laboratory, the surface currents in the wave
boundary and small-scale wave breaking will be measured. A wave boundary layer
is defined as a top layer within a depth of order (kp) -1 . kp is wavenumber of
dominant wind waves. The method developed here will overcome the problem of
having sensor in the boundary layer, a difficulty of early measurements. The
surface waves and near surface turbulence will also be measured at the same
time. These will make it possible to access the interactions among surface
currents, waves, and turbulence, to quantify these quantities for
parameterization. Recent free surface turbulence studies have showed there are
fundamental differences between wall boundary layer turbulence and free surface
turbulence. At sea, wind blows over the ocean surface generating waves and shear
currents. The ocean surface layer is more complex due to the existence of these
energetic waves. Wave breaking and surface drift can enhance one another. The
surface shear currents are inherently unstable due to Craik-Leibovich span-wise
instability. The Langmuir circulations increase the vertical mixing which
reduces the surface shear. It is questionable that a simple wall turbulence
analogy would adequately represent the dynamics of a free surface boundary
layer. To assess the contributions from different ocean surface processes, it is
critical to observe key surface quantities, such as surface waves, surface
current, surface turbulence, rate of wave breaking, and vertical
transport&lt;br/&gt;