* 0118345
* Doctoral dissertation improvement grant: Archaeology and tephrostratigraphy of the southern Kapthurin Formation, Baringo, Kenya
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2003
* Sally McBrearty, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2003
* USD 6,990.00

Under the direction of Dr. Sally McBrearty, Mr. Christian Tryon will collect
data for his doctoral dissertation. His goal is to use closely dated
archaeological and paleontological occurrences in the Kapthurin stratigraphic
sequence in the Baringo region of Kenya to examine the emergence of anatomically
and behaviorally modern humans. The Kapthurin formation is crucial for
understanding this transformation because materials spanning the last ca. 2
million years are interbedded with volcanic ash which is amenable to potassium
argon dating. Different ashes - the result of individual eruptions - have
distinct trace element compositions and through their analysis, individual
ashfalls can be "fingerprinted" and their distribution mapped across the
formation. Thus they provide a relatively secure framework to track behavioral
and biological change. Careful crafted hafted stone tools from both the
Kapthurin as well as elsewhere in Africa are termed "Middle Stone Age (MSA)" and
they provide the first evidence for humans with cognitive abilities similar to
our own. The earliest date, ca. 285,000 years ago comes from the Kapthurin and
Mr. Tryon wishes to gain insight into this early phase of the process. Research
to date in the northern Kapthurin exposures has significantly changed
archaeological views of this process because it has demonstrated that three
separate stone working traditions, the MSA and two supposedly preceding ones are
in fact interbedded and do not form a chronologically coherent developmental
sequence. Researchers do not know whether this variability results from a single
culture which manufactured different types of tools in different situations, or
whether three separate and distinct cultures existed. In the Near East at a
slightly younger date, such replacement occurred with different groups ebbing
and flowing in response to changing environmental
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While much work has taken place in the northern
Kapthurin deposits, their southern counterparts are more poorly known. Mr. Tryon
is conducting a geological and archaeological survey of this area both to locate
sites and to establish a detailed chronological sequence. With NSF support he
will characterize the volcanic ashes collected and will conduct archaeological
excavation to provide additional information on cultural variation. This
research is important because it will shed light on the emergence of behavioral
modern humans. It will also assist in training a promising young
scientist.&lt;br/&gt;