* 0118794
* PEET: Systematics of Chewing Lice (Insecta: Phthiraptera): World Checklist and Monographic Revision of the Goniodidae
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2008
* Dale Clayton, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 08/31/2008
* USD 730,859.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Collaborative research and training activities at the
University of Utah's Price Institute for Phthirapteran Research and the Illinois
Natural History Survey will result in the first comprehensive world catalog of
chewing lice in half a century, a monographic revision of the family Goniodidae,
and training a new generation of scientists with expertise in the taxonomy of
chewing lice. Intensive field research will result in much new material and in
important experiences for students in the project. Morphological and molecular
data will be integrated to hypothesize a phylogeny for Goniodidae, and support
the multi-authored monograph of the family.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Chewing lice
of are great interest because of their accessibility as models for population
biology, parasitic adaptation, host selection, and co-speciation and because of
their medical and veterinary importance. There are few living experts on chewing
lice. This project will contribute directly to the training of one postdoctoral
researcher and three doctoral students who will be involved in all aspects of
the research from field work to taxonomic revisions and monography. Among the
results will be web accessibility to a world catalog of chewing lice and the
first modern, phylogenetic monograph of a large, important family of chewing
lice.&lt;br/&gt;