* 0118776
* PEET: Monographic Studies of Southeast Asian Saprotrophic Agaricales (Fungi)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2008
* Dennis Desjardin, San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 08/31/2008
* USD 745,801.00

Saprotrophic fungi play major ecological roles in litter decomposition, nutrient
recycling and retention, soil genesis, litter binding that inhibits erosion, and
as food sources for innumerable animals. Additionally, some mushroom species
cause extensive damage to economically important food crops, while others
produce biomedically important antibiotics. Understanding the diversity,
ecological roles, and phylogenetic relationships of these decomposer organisms
is essential to understanding how ecosystems function and persist, especially in
tropical ecosystems where nutrient turnover is so rapid. Dr. Dennis Desjardin at
San Francisco State University, a mycologist with a productive record of
research on the mushrooms of the Pacific Rim and especially Indonesia, will
conduct monographic studies of the saprotrophic agarics (gilled mushrooms) from
underexplored regions of Southeast Asia. Special emphasis will be given to the
genera Marasmius, Marasmiellus, and Mycena, which are the most diverse
yet&lt;br/&gt;understudied genera of decomposer mushrooms in tropical
ecosystems. Approximately 25% of all mushroom species encountered in Southeast
Asia&lt;br/&gt;belong to these three genera, and nearly one third of them
represent species new to science. Monographic studies are imperative in order to
build a taxonomic foundation to support biodiversity studies, and to provide raw
materials for phylogenetic analyses and for the screening of biomedically
important compounds. A central focus of this five-year project is on the
integration of traditional morphological and ecological studies with molecular
phylogenetic analyses. Training of undergraduate and graduate students from
Southeast Asia and the US entails coursework in systematics, laboratory and
museum studies, and extensive fieldwork in Southeast Asia. All aspects of data
documentation will be computerized and Internet-distributed, including specimen
databasing, taxonomic and phylogenetic analyses, nomenclature and bibliographic
databasing. Collaborations with colleagues and students from Southeast Asia will
build lifelong partnerships that enhance taxonomic expertise across
international&lt;br/&gt;borders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;