* 0118635
* Identification of Threshold, Regular and Submodular Monotone Systems:  Theory and Algorithms
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2005
* Endre Boros, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 11/30/2005
* USD 354,297.00

The focus of this research is the development of algorithms, theory, and
applications for the identification of all minimal representatives, for
implicitly given monotone systems. Such systems are a frequent target of
knowledge discovery as they represent important information hidden in large
databases, complex networks, etc. Problems involving the determination of
monotone systems arise naturally in a multitude of areas including: data mining
(finding all maximal frequent, minimal infrequent sets); text mining (finding
the best linear query in vector space models); machine learning (finding the
best rules or patterns); hypergraph dualization (generating all minimal
transversals); reliability theory (generating all minimal working and/or maximal
failing states); integer programming (generating all minimal feasible
solutions); stochastic programming (constructing deterministic equivalents to
certain stochastic models); etc. A coherent theory of identification problems
for monotone systems based on several recent mathematical results will be
developed. Tractable classes will be outlined, efficient algorithms for such
classes created and realized by programs. The resulting new methods will be
tested on a variety of applications, such as data mining, logical data analysis,
machine learning and text mining.