* 0118488
* Collaborative Research: Linking Subglacial Hydrology and Sliding Dynamics Through Variations Along the Glacier Length
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2002,09/30/2004
* Joel Harper, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 09/30/2004
* USD 480,389.00

ABSTRACT Harper OPP-0118488 Pfeffer OPP-0118721

Basal sliding is the principle form of movement of most temperate glaciers and
leads to glacier surging, causes glaciers to erode their beds, and often
controls the overall glacier's mass distribution. A glacier's deformational
velocity field can be modeled with some confidence, but there are no working
models that will accurately predict the sliding motion of glaciers. In fact, the
variables that would potentially go into a sliding model have not been fully
established. Theoretically, sliding is promoted by both elevated water pressure
and water storage at the bed. Previous field programs, however, have correlated
sliding rate with either pressure or storage, with the majority of associations
made with pressure. These observational programs have correlated sliding and
subglacial conditions by using only limited spatially and temporally distributed
measurements. This has made the task very difficult because the subglacial
drainage system is transient and internal ice dynamics (e.g., longitudinal
coupling) complicate the glacier's response to change at its lower boundary. The
Principal Investigators will conduct a multifaceted study focusing on time/space
variability in coupling between the subglacial hydrology and ice dynamics system
which they believe is key to a new understanding of sliding dynamics. They will
conduct a field campaign on the Bench Glacier, a temperate valley glacier in
southeast Alaska. Various types of instrumentation will be used to collect a
comprehensive data set of measurements of basal water pressure, surface motion,
internal deformation, sliding velocity, video observations of the bed, and slug,
pump, and tracer experiments on subglacial water flow. These data will include
at least three elements which have not been previously addressed, thus enabling
new explorations of the linkages between subglacial hydrology and glacier
motion: 1) data will be collected at two length scales, including measurements
spanning the entire glacier and detailed measurements focused on a small reach;
2) measurements will be made over a time period of at least a year, allowing
short to long period cycles to be investigated; and 3) an automated survey
instrument will allow for uninterrupted high-time resolution studies of glacier
motion. During the first field season, they will focus on the long length scale
(kilometers), with measurements of basal conditions and velocity made at
locations spanning the length of the glacier. Data will be used to investigate
the longitudinal coupling between the bed and ice dynamics. During the second
field season, they will address a short length scale (10-100 meters), enabling
local observations to be placed within the context of regional processes. This
will permit measurements of surface uplift to be fully compared with both ice
dynamics and hydrology to investigate the cause of the uplift. The resulting
data set and analyses will be used to test and refine conceptual and numerical
models for subglacial water flow and to establish links between hydrology and
ice dynamics.