* 0118252
* Learning About Protein Unfolded States From Heterodimeric Fragment Complementation
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2001,01/31/2005
* Maria Luisa Tasayco, CUNY City College
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/2005
* USD 330,000.00

This is a study of a family of complementary fragments from oxidized E. coli
thioredoxin (Trx) and their heterodimeric reassemblies around different
interfaces. The values of estimated buried surface from DSC studies of
intrinsically unstructured protein fragments will be correlated with NMR studies
of conformational preferences and rigidity of the backbone at the residue level.
This project combines three areas of expertise (protein fragment
complementation, calorimetry of proteins, and NMR analysis of structure and
dynamics of proteins) and centers on two main hypotheses: (1) Isolated Trx
fragments which comprise the regions of the native 2 and 4 strands have
substantial nonlocal interactions between them, while remaining intrinsically
unstructured. (2) The differences in delta G of folding/binding among the
different heterodimeric reassemblies are mainly due to differences in the degree
of folding and rigidity in the isolated fragments. In order to test these
hypotheses, the delta G of folding/binding and low-resolution structural
characterization of the initial and final states for a family of complementary
fragments will be determined. High sensitivity DSC studies of selected isolated
fragments and heterodimeric reassemblies will be undertaken, and NMR studies of
the structures of the initial and final states of selected complementary
fragments will be done to study the dynamics of such a selected pair in both
states.

The long-term objective of these studies is to characterize the conformational
space of the unfolded state of proteins and understand protein-protein
interactions covering a range of affinities and degree of folding associated
with binding through a synergistic interaction between experimenation and
theory.

