* 0118080
* GOALI:  Intelligent Leader Follower Systems for Control of Energy Services
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2005
* Ali Keyhani, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Tomsovic
* 05/31/2005
* USD 145,000.00

0118080 Keyhani

The collapse of the California electric energy market has made it imperative to
recognize that market forces motivated by profit cannot guarantee a secure and
reliable energy supply because of the inherent characteristics of electric
energy production, transmission and distribution networks. No other systems,
such as transportation, gas distribution, airline, trucking are subjected to
high prices because of an outage due to maintenance of one of its components.
Therefore, it is essential that the electricity market be designed such that the
market players' profit motives will mesh with system security and reliability.
This proposal will undertake the study of this problem and possible solutions
using the appropriate market structure.

The Ohio State University (OSU), Illinois Institute of Technology University
(lIT), ABB Energy Information Systems (ABB) and Perot Systems (PS) will
undertake fundamental research in system game theory to develop a new market
structure for planned operation of electric energy services. The PIs propose to
develop algorithms to create an efficient, reliable, and secure energy market
with the ISO as a market leader who is also a market maker armed with incentive
functions, and followers who compete to provide energy for stable operation of
the system. The approach is based on the Stackelberg market design strategy
developed in the 1970's. We will design a Virtual Market Simulator (VMS) to
evaluate the proposed market structure. The VMS simulator will be used for
evaluation of system operation yearly on monthly basis, monthly on a weekly
basis, weekly on a daily basis, daily on an hourly basis, and hourly on a minute
basis up to AGC cycle. The PIs will use the VMS test bed to demonstrate that a
market based on leader- follower algorithms can attain perfect market prices for
the energy and ancillary services markets. To achieve this goal, they will
develop a VMS simulator test bed in collaboration with their industrial
partners, ABB and PS, using ABB and PS Systems' knowledge of PJM and California
systems historical data. In their VMS simulator, they will construct neural
network based predictors to forecast energy demands and time-varying cost of the
system load centers (monthly, weekly, daily and hourly). They will formulate an
incentive function for each type of generation that the followers must satisfy
in their bid prices. The incentive functions will be determined by the leader,
taking into account the rational profit motives of the players as well as the
system security and reliability. In such market environments, all market players
will be followers. In the proposed market structure, the leader will use the
knowledge of the systems that he or she is controlling and will estimate the
production cost of each type of generation. The leader will thus have the
ability to formulate leader-follower optimization strategies and design an
appropriate incentive function for each type of generation system. At the same
time the market leader can formulate a cost function for the system operation
based on the mandated security and reliability by state power boards. In this
market structure, the state power board will determine the overall energy policy
and set up an auction market for market players to compete in the market under
leader-follower market structure. In our formulation, the market leader position
is assigned to ISO's. The significance of the proposed work is the creation of a
new market structure that will make it feasible for market forces to participate
in the development of electric energy systems and to compete in the market while
ensuring the reliability and security of systems. The proposed market structure
will allow the state government to formulate energy policy and, through proposed
incentive functions, to encourage the citizen to participate in its
implementation. The proposed market structure will also help market forces
develop energy sources, since it will remove the uncertainties of planning
plants where they may face bottlenecks in transmissions. Energy users will also
benefit by reducing the cost of energy through participation in a load response
program and being assured of reliable and secure service.