* 0118696
* Cognitive Neuroscience - Dear Colleague Letter: Genomic Changes that During Human Origins Increased the Brain's Cognitive Capacities
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Lawrence Grossman, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2003
* USD 215,001.00

Adaptive changes in the expression and structures of brain functioning proteins
may have been the crucial process responsible for humankind's unrivaled
cognitive abilities and complex mental behavior. A search for the underlying
positively selected genomic changes will be conducted by the methods of
functional genomics and molecular phylogenetics. This search will focus on the
anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), a neocortical region involved in monitoring and
modifying task-specific behaviors (executive function) that require novel
responses or overriding interfering responses and that may separate humans from
other primates. A unique population of spindle shaped projection neurons is
present in the ACC in humans and with lesser numbers of cells in common and
bonobo chimpanzees (the sister-group of humans), gorillas (next closest
relative), and orangutans but not in any other primates or other mammals.
Moreover, among the five ape species, the orangutan ACC has the least spindle
neurons and the bonobo ACC has the most. Thus, there is reason to hypothesize
that Darwinian positive selection acted during the more recent stages of
humankind's evolutionary history on the genes encoding proteins involved in the
ACC's cellular architecture and function. DNA arrays will be used to analyze
gene expression levels of thousands of genes that encode proteins that function
in the ACC. Comparing the expression levels of these thousands of genes in the
human vs. chimpanzee ACC will identify candidate genes, the subset of genes that
show marked species differences in expression levels. In situ hybridization will
be used to locate the cell populations that express the candidate genes, thereby
testing the prediction that the candidate genes will co-localize in the spindle
shaped projection neurons. As the candidate genes are likely to be involved in
functionally interacting biochemical pathways, this gene expression data in the
ACC should assist cognitive neuroscientists in elucidating the role of the ACC
in human cognition. These and other candidate genes will be analyzed in a series
of anthropoid and prosimian primates to look for changes in the cis-regulatory
elements that control expression of the genes and to determine whether the
encoded proteins underwent bursts of rapid amino acid replacements during
humankind's ancestry. This approach builds upon previous work showing a number
of proteins that are part of the mitochondrial oxidative energy metabolism
pathway have undergone such bursts of positively selected amino acid
replacements. This one-year project will show the validity of this approach and
will set the stage for a more widespread and comprehensive attack in the future
to characterize some of the important genetic changes that allowed the emergence
of the large-brained primates.&lt;br/&gt;