* 0118804
* PEET: Lower Worms Of The Meiofauna - Models for Early Metazoan Evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2001,02/29/2008
* Seth Tyler, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 02/29/2008
* USD 754,343.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the small invertebrates living between sand
grains in the marine environment, are tiny, cryptic worms that many consider to
be the most primitive of all bilaterally symmetrical animals (that is, all
animals excluding the cnidarians and sponges). These worms include two small
groups called acoel and catenulid turbellarians which are now classified in the
phylum&lt;br/&gt;Platyhelminthes (flatworms) but that, according to some
systematists, may not even be related to the more familiar flatworms such as
planarians and polyclads. Another of these primitive worm groups is the
Gnathostomulida, whose relationships to other phyla of invertebrates have been
similarly controversial; by some theories, gnathostomulids are like the
ancestors of the flatworms. S. Tyler and W. Sterrer, who have long studied these
worms, propose training new students in how to find and handle them and in how
to decipher systematic relationships. Students working in S. Tyler's laboratory
at the University of Maine will concentrate on microscopical techniques and
taxonomy of flatworm groups. New characters discerned through applying
fluorescence and electron microscopy on these animals show that the
relationships among them are not well represented by the current classification
system. Students working with Sterrer in his laboratory in Bermuda and
accompanying him on sampling trips will gauge patterns of distribution of
flatworms and gnathostomulids and gather specimens for the microscopical and
molecular studies. He will also train students in curatorial
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major focus of this project is the training
of students-to give them the tools to discover and describe the many species of
these difficult-to-find, yet remarkably abundant, enigmatic animals and to make
sense of their diversity. Without new researchers being trained to identify
these cryptic animals, we will lose the expertise needed to address important
questions of animal origins. The knowledge these students unearth will likely
provide critical clues to resolve far-reaching questions of how the major groups
of animals are related. Identifying and characterizing the many undescribed
species of lower flatworms will provide a better understanding of their
biodiversity; knowledge of the geographic distribution of both these flatworms
and gnathostomulids should provide a means for seeing where they arose and how
they diversified and spread around the Earth. The results of these students'
research will be displayed on a Web site so that anyone with a Web browser can
use that data to identify similar worms they might find or to gauge the
historical relationships of geographic sites.&lt;br/&gt;