* 0118684
* The Interplay Between Segmental Timing and Coarticulation:  Acoustic, Perceptual, and Phonological Investigations
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Patrice Beddor, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Maling
* 08/31/2006
* USD 207,841.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Beddor 0118684&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With National Science
Foundation support, Dr. Patrice Beddor will conduct three years of linguistic
research on the variability of speech sounds. This project investigates how a
particular kind of variability can eventually become a systematic property of a
language, leading to language change. The focus is the overlapping articulation
of adjacent or nearby sounds known as "coarticulation". In some sound changes,
the sound that triggered the coarticulation is lost over time, leaving behind
only its coarticulatory effects. For example, in French, Hindi, and hundreds of
other languages, coarticulatory nasality in vowels was originally triggered only
by a following nasal consonant, such as "m" or "n". But the nasal consonant
dropped out over time, leaving vowel nasality as a systematic and now required
property of the word. Dr. Beddor hypothesizes that the loss of a coarticulatory
trigger and the linking of its properties to another sound involve a stage in
which shortened duration of the trigger is offset by more extensive
coarticulatory influences (e.g., nasal consonants shorten as nearby vowels
become more nasal). She further hypothesizes that listeners facilitate these
changes by being perceptually insensitive to variation in such timing
relationships. Dr. Beddor's research mimics the stages of a language's change by
studying four languages that differ in the relevant timing patterns: English,
Thai, Greek, and Ikalanga. Acoustic analyses of these languages will be
conducted to verify the timing patterns that emerged in preliminary studies.
These analyses will be followed by perceptual testing and further phonological
investigations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multi-language research has
theoretical and practical significance across domains affected by speech
science. First, it will broaden the empirical database on which theories of
sound change, speech production, and speech perception are grounded. Second,
better understanding of speech variation and speech sound change reveals how
some dialect differences emerge. Better understanding of dialect emergence may
reduce the social stigmatization attached to some speech varieties. Third, the
perceptual tests that explore listener sensitivity to speech variation have
implications for theories of how infants extract phonetic regularities in the
languages they are learning. Finally, these results will bear on speech
technology. Computer speech recognition systems make more errors than humans do.
This is partly because computer recognizers display greater sensitivity to
coarticulatory variation. Study of the kinds of speech variability that human
listeners are sensitive to may help solve this practical challenge in speech
engineering. &lt;br/&gt;