* 0118523
* Third International Symposium on Structural Intermetallics; Jackson Hole, WY; September 23-27, 2001
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Alexander Scott, Minerals Metals & Materials Society
* Standard Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 08/31/2002
* USD 6,000.00

0118523&lt;br/&gt;Scott&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This action supports the Third
International Symposium on Structural Intermetallics (ISSI-3), a major
international conference that is held once every four years. These funds are
used to facilitate the participation of young investigators (students, post-
doctoral fellows and young faculty) and to maintain reasonable registration fees
for all participants. The symposium will be held from September 23 - 27, 2001 at
the Snow King Resort in Jackson Hole, Wyoming. The 2001 ISSI-3 symposium has a
strong emphasis on the role that affordability, reliability and design play in
developing new materials for use in aerospace applications. Invited and
contributed presentations will outline the design and business constraints
associated with the introduction of new materials, address reliability and
performance issues specific to intermetallic alloys, and highlight recent
advances in the understanding of processing-structure-property relations in
intermetallic alloys. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This meeting provides a forum in
which engineering designers interact with materials and process engineers.
ISSI-3 builds on the past success of previous ISSI conferences that were
attended by over 200 participants from approximately 19 countries and received
extremely high satisfaction ratings. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;