* 0118368
* Characterization of Ribosomal Plaque Domains in Axons
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2005
* Edward Koenig, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 07/31/2005
* USD 300,000.00

The axon serves as a long line of communication that makes up the 'hard wiring'
of the nervous system. Its long term maintenance and potential for structural
plasticity depends on a continuous supply of proteins. It was generally assumed
that all axoplasmic proteins were synthesized in the cell body and transported
at slow rates to the axon. The reasoning was based on an apparent lack of
axoplasmic ribosomes, the ultrastructural correlates of a protein synthesizing
machinery, despite metabolic and biochemical evidence to the contrary. Recently,
periodic small discrete ribosome-containing domains were documented in the
periphery of axoplasm isolated from myelinated axons. The research proposal is
concerned with testing the hypothesis that "periaxoplasmic ribosomal domains"
serve as centers of protein synthesis, which supply immediate surrounding
regions with essential proteins, such as actin. Experiments will be performed in
the Mauthner neuron, which is a large identifiable cell in the goldfish brain
stem that projects its myelinated axon along the full length of spinal cord.
They will determine (1) whether a cDNA construct that codes for a fusion
protein, comprised of actin and green fluorescent protein (GFP), in which the
latter serves as a reporter, will result in the transport of the mRNA from the
cell body to the axon, (2) localization of the mRNA in periaxoplasmic ribosomal
domains and (3) synthesis and subsequent distribution of the fusion protein
product to surrounding axoplasm. Additional experiments will test the hypothesis
in rabbit myelinated motor axons, in which sites of initial metabolic uptake of
[35S]methionine along axons will be analyzed and related to the localization of
periaxoplasmic ribosomal domains. Subsequent time-dependent distribution of
radioactive proteins to surrounding axoplasm will be mapped, and analysis of
radiolabeled proteins will also be undertaken. A complementary issue is whether
any membrane proteins are also synthesized in the axon compartment, for which
signal recognition particles (SRPs) would be required. Experiments are proposed
to analyze (1) for the occurrence of SRPs, (2) for the presence and localization
of SNAP-25 mRNA, which codes for a membrane protein involved in transmitter
release, and (3) for glycosylation, a process of cotranslationally adding sugars
to newly synthesized membrane proteins. Specifically, the experiments will
address an important question as to whether periaxoplasmic ribosomal domains are
metabolically active in synthesizing proteins for local utilization in the axon
compartment. More generally, however, the findings will add substantially to a
better fundamental understanding of the complex biology of the axon.