* 0118165
* Training Scientists, Crafting Science:  A Workshop for Putting Pedagogy on the Map for Science Studies
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2003
* David Kaiser, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Keith R. Benson
* 06/30/2003
* USD 9,103.00

Proposal Abstract David Kaiser, Program in Science, Technology, and
Society/Department of Physics, MIT Training Scientists, Crafting Science: A
Workshop for Putting Pedagogy on the Map for Science Studies

Questions of pedagogy, training, and the crafting of scientific research
practices have usually fallen between the cracks separating traditional
institutional and disciplinary studies on the one hand, and intellectual or
conceptual studies on the other. A small but growing literature within the
history, sociology, and anthropology of science, however, scrutinizes the
intersection of these domains. This project involves a two-part workshop in
order to probe the deep interrelations between scientists' training, learning,
and research efforts --and to sharpen and consolidate this nascent segment of
the science studies literature. The 19 participants in the workshop include
several distinguished leaders in the field, together with many early-career
scholars. The workshop convenes in Spring 2002 at MIT and again in Fall 2002, to
discuss and analyze original pre-circulated papers. The discussions and papers
are to be disseminated in an edited volume. The goals for the workshop and
edited volume are twofold. First, this meeting should help solidify the small
community of science-studies scholars who share interests in pedagogy, raining,
and learning, thereby building connections between otherwise isolated case
studies. Second, it is to catalyze the larger science-studies field to consider
the constitutive roles played by pedagogy in making modern science happen.