* 0118452
* U.S.-European Workshop: Engaging Scientists in Collaborative Research on Learning and Teaching in Geography/Science Education
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/2001,09/30/2004
* James Davis, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 09/30/2004
* USD 25,100.00

0118452&lt;br/&gt;Stoltman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports travel of
eight US participants to the 2001 Conference of the Social Studies Education
Consortium (SSEC) at Oxford University in the United Kingdom, June 30 -July 7,
2001 and their participation in pre- and post-conference project development
workshops. The organizers are Joseph P. Stoltman and James E. Davis of Western
Michigan University and Ashley Kent of the London Institute of Education and
Andrew Convey of the University of Sheffield. The objective of the project is to
engage "newly established" US and European scientist/researchers in
international research collaboration on instruction in and learning of geography
and science in the middle and secondary school years (grades 7 - 12).
Participants will discuss specific research foci in pre- and post-conference
workshop devoted to development of a research agenda and writing of proposals.
Established scholars and researchers will serve as mentors and reviewers of the
research proposals and designs. In addition each US participant will receive
funds to initiate an international collaborative
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the topics proposed for collaborative
research in geography/science education are: differential performance between
boys and girls; relationship between collaboration among teachers within schools
and student performance; action agendas to promote instructional opportunities;
comparison of integrated science approaches in teaching with other curricular
and instruction approaches; and effects of parental participation in learning.
The workshop will enhance understanding of European instruction in geography at
comparable grade levels and take advantage of European advances and achievements
in this area. &lt;br/&gt;