* 0118240
* Collaborative Research: Evolution Of Environments Within Black Smoker Chimney Walls: Microbial Colonization As Functions Of Temperature, Chemistry, And Time
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Anna-Louise Reysenbach, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 09/30/2005
* USD 158,124.00

The researchers will investigate the interaction of microorganisms with their
geochernical environment in chimney deposits that are actively forming in the
Guaymas Basin hydrothermal system. The specific objectives of this study are
twofold. First, they will trace the evolution of the thermal/chemical/physical
environment within newly formed chimney walls over time-scales of minutes to
months and determine the distribution of microorganisms within this
temporal/chemical/thermal/spatiaI framework. Second, they will assess subsurface
geochemical processes responsible for the delivery of organic and inorganic
metabolic energy sources and nutrients from deep-seated reaction zones to near
seafloor environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These goals will be attained by
identifying microbial populations that inhabit well-constrained temperature and
compositional domains within the walls of newly formed and existing chimneys
through a collaborative and interdisciplinary study with Drs. Debra Stakes
(MBARI), Randy Koski (USGS), and Geoff Wheat (University of Alaska Fairbanks-
MBARI campus), using the MBARI RN Western Flyer and ROV Tiburon. Temperature
within the walls of newly formed chimneys will be monitored using thermocouple
arrays that are enveloped during chimney growth. The new chimneys will
subsequently be recovered and the solid material in the immediate vicinity of
each thermocouple used for enrichment cultures, molecular phylogenetic
approaches, and fluorescent in situ hybridization with 16S rRNA-specific probes,
while splits of the same material will be fully characterized with respect to
their mineralogic, chemical, and isotopic composition. Vent fluids delivering
nutrients and chemical energy from deep-seated subsurface reaction zones to the
seafloor will be analyzed using a comprehensive analytical plan that involves
quantitative determination of the abundance of aqueous organic, inorganic, and
gaseous species. Compositional data for fluids and solids will be used to
constrain thermodynamic and diffusive-advective models that allow estimation of
fluid composition and temperature within chimney walls, information that will
facilitate calculation of the amounts and sources of chemical energy available
for metabolic activity. Mineralogical, chemical, and isotopic analyses of
chimney minerals will provide key information on conditions present as the
chimneys have evolved that can be compared to the thermal history as recorded by
the thermocouples, and to the results of model
calculations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resultant understanding of the time
dependent colonization of chimney environments in which the P-T-X conditions are
known will address important questions about how microorganisms grow in these
extreme environments, and what the geochemical constraints are on microbial
diversity and succession. The methods the investigators will use have all been
applied successfully at other vent sites. What makes this research unique is the
combination of these technologies and interdisciplinary expertise to assess
biogeochemical processes within vent environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;