* 0118318
* The Agulhas Undercurrent Experiment
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2006
* Teresa Chereskin, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* David Garrison
* 11/30/2006
* USD 343,354.00

0118318&lt;br/&gt;Beal&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent observations of a strong,
apparently persistent, Agulhas Undercurrent (AUC) raise a multitude of
provocative questions. The big questions addressed by this study are
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What are the latitudinal extent of the AUC and its role in
the thermohaline circulation?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What are the evolution and
forcing of the velocity, potential vorticity, and water mass structure along the
AUC path?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How does one quantify the mixing/entrainment with
western boundary current waters and determine the absolute fluxes of heat and
mass within the AUC?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What are the mean and temporal
variability of the transport of the AUC?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A hydrographic
cruise is proposed during which 4 conductivity-temperature-depth and lowered
acoustic Doppler current profiler sections of the AUC will be measured. A short
mooring array along 32S will be deployed, as well. Three moorings will each
contain 3 meters spaced to capture the AUC transport. They will be confined to
the lower 1000 m of the water column and be designed to monitor for up to 2
years, but may be retrieved earlier. The dominant fluctuations are expected to
have periods of 30 - 40 days. The moorings, meters, and associated technicians
will be provided at no cost to NSF by Southampton Oceanography Centre. A line of
stations at 50 km spacing will connect the offshore ends of the sections closing
boxes to allow property balance estimation to be done. A line of stations at 100
km spacing will be made along 1800 m from 26S to 37S to estimate the latitudinal
extent of the undercurrent. Each station will include conductivity-temperature-
depth, dissolved oxygen, and lowered acoustic Doppler current profiler data with
24 bottles for calibration to WOCE standards by ODF personnel. The cruise should
require about 28 days. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;