* 0118749
* PEET: Monography, Phylogeny, and Historical Biogeography of Austral Staphylinidae (Coleoptera)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2010
* Margaret Thayer, Field Museum of Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* Rafael O. de Sa
* 08/31/2010
* USD 719,831.00

Rove beetles (Staphylinidae) are a huge and abundant beetle family in most
terrestrial ecosystems, but outside Central Europe they are not well known. We
will study several subgroups, each occurring in three or four separate areas in
the southern hemisphere (Australia, New Zealand, Chile and southern Argentina,
South Africa). Using existing museum specimens and newly collected material, one
of us will study each selected subgroup to: determine how many and which species
belong to it, describe the (many) new species and map their distributions, and
analyze phylogenetic (evolutionary) relationships among the species. Each study
seeks to reconstruct the biogeographic history of its subgroup. We will combine
these, seeking repeated patterns of historical connections among the different
areas, compare the patterns with those found in other groups, and consider
whether they resulted from ancient geological changes (e.g., breakup of
Gondwana, starting 170-150 million years ago) and/or other causes (e.g., later
dispersal between separated areas or from the north). Results will include (1) a
well-illustrated revisionary study of each subgroup, (2) a more general paper
about the biogeographic histories of all (and other groups of organisms), and
(3) a web site presenting these results -- enhanced with color photos and
interactive identification tools -- with extensive supplementary information,
such as taxonomic catalogs and databases of the specimens studied. Better
knowledge of rove beetles will permit using this megadiverse group in
evolutionary and ecological studies: full understanding of nearly any land-based
natural community is incomplete without considering this very diverse, mostly
predatory, component (easily 100-200 species per site). Many wholly southern
temperate habitats have been reduced in extent even more than tropical
rainforest, and are under serious threat. This lends urgency to studying their
unique inhabitants, which include many poorly-known and evolutionarily isolated
species. Our data on several staphylinid groups can also provide valuable
insights into the overall evolutionary history of the southern temperate areas'
fauna and flora. We will train a post-doctoral fellow and a graduate student in
theory and practice of modern systematics (including field work and use of
external and internal structural features, DNA sequencing, and numerous computer
tools) and introduce them to the international network of museum- and
university-based curators and researchers. Each year an undergraduate intern
will help in the project, gaining exposure to systematic research and to the
dramatic biodiversity of arthropods, and perhaps the inspiration to pursue a
career in a related discipline. The field work in the four southern temperate
areas will include a local student or other individual as part of international
partnership-building. We will improve collections at host-country museums and
the Field Museum by depositing new specimens (from poorly known habitats) and by
sorting and identifying existing holdings. These improvements will bear fruit
far into the future for studies not just of rove beetles, but of other
arthropods as well.