* 0118975
* SGER:  Development, Recognition and Retention of Scientific Talent
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2002
* Gregory Feist, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Bruce E. Seely
* 05/31/2002
* USD 41,705.00

With this for a Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER), Dr. Feist is
investigating a paradox in math and science in the US: our high school students
are average and mediocre compared to international standards and yet our
professional scientists are the best in the world. He is also interested in the
question of whether, during the journey from adolescent talent to adult
achievement, gifted women and minorities more likely than men and majorities to
opt out of math and science careers? If this is so, Dr. Feist is examining some
of the psychological influences on these differential rates of attrition.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores these issues from the perspective of
the psychology of science. This is a pilot project that will explore and test
the basic methodology and the primary survey questions. Specifically, Dr. Feist
intends to examine issues related to scientific potential and the scientific
achievement. First, a sample of 160 (40 each from 1995, 1985, 1975, and 1965)
past winners of the prestigious Westinghouse Science Fair are assessed on
outcome measures, namely degrees obtained, career paths chosen (especially
science v. non-science) and level of eminence obtained within their careers.
Moreover, gender and ethnicity are examined in relation to such outcomes.
Second, 100 members of the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) are compared with
100 matched non-NAS scientists to determine what the early career markers of
world-class scientific achievement are. Outcome measures consist of career
eminence (titles, honors, awards) and predictor measures include gender,
productivity (publication and citation rates over the entire lifespan) data as
well as early indicators of scientific talent. Early indicators include school
performance, age of first publication, as well the age that they and others
recognized their talent for science. Regression analyses determine the relative
importance of each "predictor" variable in influencing scientific achievement
and eminence. The goal of such research is to provide answers to the question:
Who develops interest in, and talent for, science during high school and who
among those with the most talent are likely to go on to productive and eminent
careers in science? &lt;br/&gt;