* 0118003
* BioMEMS based micro instrumentation for  in-situ quantitative investigations of adhesion, structural mechanics and mechanotransduction of single living cells and Embryos
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Taher Saif, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2005
* USD 239,908.00

There is increasing experimental evidence suggesting that extracellular and
intracellular mechanical forces have a profound influence on a wide range of
cell behavior. They include growth, differentiation, apoptosis. gene expression,
adhesion and signal transduction. Thus it is important to understand how the
mechanical forces are transmitted into the cell and what corresponding molecular
changes do they initiate, and how do cells exhibit such changes. Although
advances have been made towards understanding such questions, a significant
challenge remains- quantitative evaluation of cell force response at a cellular
and subcellular level. In the engineering world, a revolution is underway
through miniaturization of mechanical components, giving rise to the field of
micro electro mechanical systems (MEMS). Our (UIUC and Harvard Medical School)
preliminary experiments with bio-MEMS sensors show that local mechanical
deformation can be applied on single cells and embryos, and their force response
can be measured quantitatively. The experiments have demonstrated the potential
of a new class of microinstruments that may lead to fundamental breakthroughs in
the understanding of cellular mechanics, mechanotransduction, tissue
engineering, drug discovery and cancer research. Professor Donald Ingber of
Harvard Medical school will serve as the consultant to this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is highly multidisciplinary. It merges
micro systems' engineering with cellular biology. The engineering students will
gain extensive experience with cell culture, cell manipulation, advanced imaging
of cytoskeletal structures using florescenece techniques, as well as micro
fabrication and micro mechanics. Interesting experimental results from the
project will be presented to undergraduate students in mechanical engineering
and biology. Videos of experiments with Bio-MEMS will also be presented to the
University High School on UIUC campus - a current project of the P1 supported by
NSF through REU program.&lt;br/&gt;