* 0119882
* Building on our Success:  A proposal to enhance and improve minority student recruitment and retention in the Geosciences at the University of New Orleans
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2001,11/30/2009
* Matthew Totten, University of New Orleans
* Continuing Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 11/30/2009
* USD 853,539.00

ABSTRACT

BUILDING ON OUR SUCCESS: A PROPOSAL TO ENHANCE AND IMPROVE MINORITY STUDENT
RECRUITMENT AND RETENTION IN THE GEOSCIENCES AT THE UNIVERISTY OF NEW ORLEANS

For the past 27 years, the Department of Geology and Geophysics at the
University of New Orleans (UNO) has managed a program for recruiting and
graduating BS and MS African-American and Hispanic geoscientists. The primary
tools for minority student recruitment have been a summer field trip for
outstanding high school juniors and seniors, and scholarship support. This
program emphasizes not only recruitment of outstanding high school students, but
also the training and certification of local teachers through a Masters in
Science Teaching (MAST) program.

This award will expand and enhance the existing program of recruitment,
retention, and graduation of minority students and teachers by taking actions
that will also help to it become self-sustaining at the end of the period.
Creating an advisory panel that consists mostly of former UNO minority-student
graduates, now employed in local industry, academia, and government agencies is
an important first step. The panel will assist in mentoring middle-high school,
undergraduate and graduate students, and serve as a resource to faculty to
better understand recruitment issues. The award will also expand a competitive,
high school level summer program in environmental science open to local students
in their freshman through senior years of high school. The outreach program will
be expanded to include local middle schools where earth science is taught. A
visiting scholars program will also be established.

