* 0119634
* Billie &amp; Miles: Planning Grant Proposal
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2002
* Edward Atkins, Window To The World Communications, Inc. WTTW 11
* Standard Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 06/30/2002
* USD 49,163.00

WTTW, the public television station in Chicago, is developing a science
education project targeted at children aged 6 to 10. The major components of the
project will be a 13-part animated television series, an interactive webpage and
multiple outreach components for individuals and families. The television series
features a pair of animal astronauts -- an eager dog named Billie and a
reluctant flea named Miles -- as they travel through space in search of science
adventure. The two work together to explore problems, solve mysteries and
survive adventures while aboard their doghouse-shaped spaceship and on the
worlds they discover throughout the universe. In each episode, using an inquiry-
based method of problem solving, Billie and Miles embark on a new adventure and
explore a single science concept in depth, approaching it from many different
ways appropriate to their respective personalities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Science content for the series is being developed by Ian
Saunders, previously Head Science Writer for Bill Nye the Science Guy; Dr.
Edward Atkins, President of Science Productions for TV who has developed science
programming for Children's Television Workshop and WNET; and Dr. Jose Rios,
Assistant Professor for Science Education at the University of Washington,
Tacoma. The series will be produced by WTTW in partnership with Nelvana Ltd.,
the animation company for The Magic School Bus. Formative evaluation during the
planning phase will be conducted by Dr. Barbara Flagg of Multimedia
Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major activities during the planning stage
include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Convening the core advisors to develop the
science content bible, finalize age-appropriate content goals, suggest ideas and
strategies for presenting the science, and organizing principles consistent with
the National Science Education Standards and the AAAS Benchmarks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) The group also will examine a range of creative issues
that bear directly on the effective delivery of science content.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) Development and formative testing for a short animation
prototype that will illustrate one of the series' science concepts. This segment
will be tested to assess the appeal of its style and its efficacy in
communicating science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4) Continuation of work with
Nelvana to develop character sketches and background, create storylines and
write a pilot script. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;5) Validate and expand on the
current outreach concept.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;