* 0119623
* Mixed Signal: Systematic Characterization and Profile Design of SiGe HBTs for Mixed Signal Wired and Wireless Telecommunications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* John Cressler, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 08/31/2005
* USD 150,000.00

Because of its high performance, low cost, and compatibility with
silicon&lt;br/&gt;CMOS, SiGe HBT technology has recently emerged as a contender
for both&lt;br/&gt;mobile and optical networking applications. Current SiGe HBTs
designs are&lt;br/&gt;focused on improving the speed of these devices, while our
recent&lt;br/&gt;experiments have shown that the optimum device structure for
wireless&lt;br/&gt;applications are considerably different. Issues important for
mobile and&lt;br/&gt;optical networking, such as 1/f noise, phase noise
(frequency domain&lt;br/&gt;sideband and time domain jitter), and linearity,
have not been researched&lt;br/&gt;as a function of the device structure, or
optimized for&lt;br/&gt;these performance
targets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is aimed at
systematically examining the impact of&lt;br/&gt;bandgap engineering and scaling
on all of the device figures-of-merit that&lt;br/&gt;are of interest to both
wireless and optical communication IC's, and use&lt;br/&gt;of these results to
optimize the SiGe profiles and geometries for next&lt;br/&gt;generation SiGe
HBTs. We expect the design tradeoffs to be much more&lt;br/&gt;complicated than
in first generation SiGe HBTs, because of aggressive&lt;br/&gt;vertical and
horizontal scaling to achieve high speed operation (as high&lt;br/&gt;as 200GHz
cutoff frequency and maximum oscillation frequency). In the&lt;br/&gt;process,
we will answer scientifically intriguing and technologically&lt;br/&gt;important
questions, such as why SiGe HBTs with a nonlinear I-V can
have&lt;br/&gt;excellent linearity. This is a brand new area of SiGe device
research, and&lt;br/&gt;has a high potential payoff given the exploding industry
interest in&lt;br/&gt;applying SiGe technology to wireless and optical
networking systems. The&lt;br/&gt;outcome will include a scientific
understanding of important open&lt;br/&gt;questions on SiGe HBTs, a modification
of the design approach and&lt;br/&gt;methodology, as well as data of the key
device figures-of-merit as a&lt;br/&gt;function of SiGe profile. Given the
enormous amount of interest in&lt;br/&gt;applying SiGe technology to both
wireless and optical networking&lt;br/&gt;applications, we will develop an
advanced course on SiGe HBTs, so that the&lt;br/&gt;outcome of the proposed
research can be remotely accessed by graduate&lt;br/&gt;students and practicing
engineers in industry.&lt;br/&gt;