* 0119915
* BIOCOMPLEXITY (IDEA):  In Situ Measurement of Marine Microbes to Investigate Mechanisms of Community Structure Regulation
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2007
* Rebecca Gast, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 09/30/2007
* USD 1,691,000.00

This project is supported by the program Biocomplexity in the Environment,
subprogram Instrumentation Development for Environmental Activities (BE-IDEA).
The objective is to develop instrumentation and software for automated in situ
monitoring of marine microbial communities. Microbes account for almost all the
primary productivity and a majority of the biomass in the ocean, and the
structure of the microbial community affects higher trophic levels, including
species consumed by humans. A fundamental understanding of the complex
interaction between physical and biological factors that regulate community
structure requires more detailed and sustained observations than are possible
with current equipment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop and
deploy in situ instrumentation to monitor individual cells of microscopic
plankton. The planned approach will combine in situ flow cytometry and imaging-
in-flow techniques to measure the abundance and properties of cells (and other
particles) ranging from the smallest phytoplankton (less than 1 um) to large
chain diatoms (&gt;100 um). An automated image analysis system will be used to
determine taxonomic affiliation of each cell for the larger size classes.
Smaller cells (which often lack distinctive morphological features) will be
evaluated by pulse-shape analysis of individual cell light scattering and
fluorescence. For more detailed investigation of particular groups or species, a
module capable of applying group-specific rRNA probes (via Peptide Nucleic Acid
in situ hybridization) will be developed. The probed samples will be analyzed in
real time by the in situ flow cytometer. The same module will also be used to
apply fluorescent probes for other properties such as DNA content and cell
viability. Software to analyze and integrate the flow cytometric and image data
in near-real time will also be developed. The instrument will be based on an in
situ flow cytometer developed at WHOI (plus hybridization technology currently
under development) and integrated with a commercially available imaging-in-flow
system. When completed, the instrument package will be field tested near the
Marthas Vineyard Coastal Observatory (MVCO).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In combination
with physical oceanographic, meteorological, and bulk fluorescence data,
individual particle data will facilitate an understanding of processes affecting
coastal ecosystems, including the mechanisms regulating phytoplankton blooms,
species succession, and trophic interactions. The planned work will form the
foundation for an unprecedented long term high resolution time series of natural
microbial populations, whose members vary in size by many orders of magnitude.
These kinds of observations are critical for evaluating and developing models of
long-term ecological change.&lt;br/&gt;