* 0119125
* Research Conference on the Advancing Frontiers of Condensed Matter Physics:  Non-conventional Systems and New Directions, ICTP, Trieste, Italy, July 2-6, 2001
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2002
* Elias Burstein, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 05/31/2002
* USD 10,000.00

This award will provide partial support for the Stig Lundquist Research
Conference: "The Advancing Frontiers of Condensed Matter Physics". The
Conference will be held in Trieste, Italy, July 2-6, 2001, under the sponsorship
of the Abdus Salam International Centre of Theoretical Physics (ICTP. The theme
of the Conference is Non-Conventional Systems and New Directions". Funds will be
used to support the travel and local expenses of advanced graduate students,
postdocs and young faculty from the United States. Core support for the
Conference will be provided by the ICTP, with additional support provided by the
Office of Naval Research. An excellent agenda and speaker list will address
major developments taking place in "hard" and "soft" condensed matter physics,
and the interface between physics and biology. %%% This award will provide
partial support for the travel and local expenses of advanced graduate students,
postdocs and young faculty from the United States to attend an international
Conference in Trieste, Italy, July 2-6, 2001. The Conference deals with the
frontiers of condensed matter physics, and will address traditional areas of
solid state physics, such as superconductivity, as well as areas of soft
condensed matter, like colloids, polymers, rheology, etc. These topics relate to
biological materials such as bone minerals (hard materials) and tissue (soft
materials). Thus the interface between physics and biology will also be
addressed during the conference. ***