* 0119778
* Research for Mixed Signal Electronic Technologies: A Joint Initiative Between NSF and SRC: CAD Tool for High-Level Design Automation of Integrated Mixed-Signal Microsystems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Karl Current, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2005
* USD 150,000.00

The process for designing an integrated circuit (IC) system-on-a-chip (SoC)
shares many similarities with the hardware design of a system on a board or on
several boards. The hardware system designer knows the characteristics of the
set of system input signals that are to be processed, and the characteristics of
the set of system output signals. There are usually several signal processing
architectures that can accomplish the goal and the designer must evaluate the
tradeoffs that are inherent in the various designs. Board-level hardware system
designers have to use available standard commercial components for the most part
to create the system of desired functionality. Sometimes requirements allow for
the creation of custom ICs, and occasionally a few transistors and discrete
components are used to provide proper interfaces among chips. Designers evaluate
the potential that various components have for meeting overall system
performance requirements based upon the components' terminal characteristics.
From the designers' skill and insight, an architecture is selected, the hardware
realization breadboarded, and evaluated. In the process of designing an SoC IC,
the terminal characteristics of the SoC inputs and outputs must be known. Often,
proven board-level hardware realizations of the function are referred to as
possible architectures for the SoC. These proven board-level architectures are
defined in terms of the interconnection of the group of commercial products that
provide various signal processing sub-functions. The SoC architecture can also
be defined in terms of these sub-function modules. Partitioning the SoC into
blocks that correspond to the sub-functions successfully used in board-level
designs is usually convenient because the characteristics of the sub-functions'
interconnecting signals are well understood. The performance required of each of
the SoC sub-functions must be inferred from the performance specifications of
the overall SoC. However, the SoC IC designers do not have available these sub-
functions as performance-characterized cells laid out in the target fabrication
technology. The SoC IC design team usually has to create each of the sub-
function blocks as a custom IC cell. The transistor-level topologies of analog
and digital functional blocks are then identified and
evaluated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing CAD tools are capable of sizing MOS
transistors of circuits with modest complexity to customize the circuit to meet
design specifications through performance function minimization. One SoC IC
design problem is to select the sub-function performance requirements in such a
way as to optimize the overall SoC performance. It is possible to find these
optimized sub-functions' performance requirements using the overall SoC
performance specifications and performance function optimization techniques. A
new CAD tool that can optimize the SoC sub-function performances based upon the
overall SoC performance requirements will be created. The resultant optimized
sub-function performance requirements can then become the inputs to other
existing design optimization CAD tools that perform subsequent more-detailed
design automation steps to create the transistor-level circuit
realizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrated micro-systems, systems-on-a-chip,
will be very complex combinations of analog, digital, mixed-signal, photonic,
and MEMS signal processing functions. The analysis, design, and design
verification of such a system is incredibly complicated, and will require the
use of many very sophisticated CAD tools. At the present time and in the near
future, it is unrealistic to expect a single integrated suite of CAD design
tools to be able to provide all of the capabilities needed to design, layout,
and verify the functionality of an SoC that includes extensive digital
functionality, and analog, mixed-signal, photonic, and MEMS signal processing
sub-systems. Research will be undertaken on an integrated micro-system design
automation tool that will optimize the performance of a complex mixed-signal
signal-processing SoC entirely at the conceptual level. Research in behavioral
modeling, high-level system performance specification, and performance
optimization by objective function minimization will be undertaken to support
this effort. To facilitate this overall goal, flexible, accurate,
computationally efficient, technology-independent, implementation-independent,
high-conceptual-level behavioral models that reflect all important limiting
effects of the function that could influence SoC performance are required that
represent the many diverse possible actions that can be taken by the various
subsystems of an SoC. Analog, digital, mixed-signal, photonic, and MEMS devices
that may be included on an SoC will considered in this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One deliverable is a fully documented design
environment that supports the capture of an SoC functional description as an
interconnection of sub-functions defined in a library of high-conceptual-level
behavioral models, and capture of the SoC performance requirements and
specifications. This design environment will also facilitate highly efficient
system simulation using the behavioral models and an analysis engine. Another
deliverable is a fully documented library of technology-independent,
implementation-independent, high-conceptual-level, behavioral models. All
results will be available for use by others on a project web site. Libraries of
behavioral models and behavioral modeling tools will be organized into a
designer "toolbox". This CAD tool will be created in standard programming
languages and will be easily disseminated.&lt;br/&gt;