* 0119329
* PEET: Monography of the Families of Hirudinea (Leeches) with On-line Databasing and Development of Electronic Keys: A Program to Train the Hirudinologists of the Future
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2008
* Eugene Burreson, American Museum Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 12/31/2008
* USD 741,576.00

0119329&lt;br/&gt;Siddall and Burreson&lt;br/&gt; Dr. Mark Siddall of the
American Museum of Natural History and his co-PI Dr. Eugene Burreson of the
Virginia Institute of Marine Science are collaborating to assess and document
the biodiversity of leech families of the world (the annelid order Hirudinea,
with an estimated 1000 species worldwide). The basis for this work involves
thorough determination and photodocumentation of leeches in natural history
museums worldwide as well as several field expeditions to regions of poorly
studied but high leech diversity globally. This work comes at a time when
leeches have experienced renewed interest from the biomedical community and
yet&lt;br/&gt;the field is in danger of losing the knowledge of those few
scientists who have devoted themselves to understanding the scope of the world's
hirudifauna. Using various data-gathering technologies (for morphological and
molecular sequence data) and data-analyzing algorithms, students will be trained
in collecting, identifying and monographing species in the principal families,
and will compile the information in a world-wide accessible database connecting
taxon descriptions with images and publications related to them. Leeches occur
in habitats that range from terrestrial to both marine and freshwater
environments and are found on all continents. The remarkable diversity in
morphology and behavior of leeches has been of interest to several fields of
biology. The last fifteen years have seen an increase in the biomedical utility
of leeches especially the promise of finding powerful anticoagulants and tumor-
inhibiting antistasins in leech saliva. Leeches are enjoying a renaissance in
their application (quite literally)&lt;br/&gt;to post-operative hematomas. Their
use routinely has led to faster healing following the reattachment of tissues
with microsurgical procedures. Leeches also are used extensively in
neurobiological and developmental studies. So far, only two or three species of
leech are exploited for these purposes, largely because the world's diversity
and family relationships are not well understood (usually Hirudo medicinalis and
Limnatis nilotica, the European and African medicinal leeches respectively).
This grant seeks to make available that knowledge and to extend its scope in a
comprehensive manner, while training a new generation of taxonomic specialists
working in annelid systematics and biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;