* 0119962
* Increasing Diversity in the Geosciences: A Bridging Program from Middle School to College
* GEO,GEO
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Tom Kovacs, Hampton University
* Continuing Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2005
* USD 899,844.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increasing diversity in the Geosciences: A
Bridging Program from Middle School to College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increasing
diversity in the geosciences requires a multi-faceted program that offers
enrichment opportunities for students throughout their educational process. The
approach used in this project develops a pathway from middle school to college
that expands the pipeline of diverse students entering advanced education and
careers in the geosciences. Hampton University, a Historically Black College and
University (HBCU), will provide minority role models, mentors, and research
opportunities. Unique to Hampton University is the collaboration between the
Center for Atmospheric Sciences (CAS) and the Interdisciplinary Science Center
(ISC). These work to increase the pipeline of underrepresented students enabling
them to access careers in science. The active partnership between CAS and the
ISC provides a connection between the scientists of CAS and the science
educators of the ISC, which extends to the K-14 education community and informal
science education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities in this project target
three primary areas of activity that will provide opportunities and
participation of underrepresented groups in the geosciences and bridge those
activities from middle school through college and into careers. These areas
include Informal K-14 Education Outreach, Formal K-14 Education Outreach, and
University Education and Outreach.&lt;br/&gt;