* 0119700
* Solar Wind Streamer Belt Morphology
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Nancy Crooker, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Bellaire
* 08/31/2005
* USD 278,300.00

The investigators will work towards an understanding of the region of the solar
atmosphere known as the streamer belt. The main effort is to apply new tools to
analyze the topology of coronal mass ejections in the solar wind and the local
structure of the principal remnant of the streamer belt in the solar wind, the
heliospheric current sheet. On a global scale the current sheet forms a tilted,
warped, heliospheric equatorial plane, but data patterns consistent with
convoluted, intertwined magnetic structures are found on the local scale. Tools
used to untangle this structure will be combined with newer tools to analyze
other streamer belt structures and their interrelationships. Primary among the
newer tools will be composition data, which give fingerprints of solar sources.
The anticipated results will advance our understanding of the sources and
structure of the most complicated part of the solar wind. Some of the open
questions are: To what extent does slow flow come from the edges of the coronal
holes, from the streamer belt proper, or in the form of multiscale transients?
To what extent can complex structures in the slow wind be ascribed to
interplanetary processes rather than to solar origins? What are the magnetic
topologies of the many types of structures identified in the slow wind? Why do
coronal mass ejections observed as intrusions in fast flow have composition
fingerprints of coronal holes if their origins are in the streamer belt? Do
coronal mass ejections gradually evolve from magnetically closed to open
structures? To what extent can answers to these questions be resolved in terms
of a recently proposed model of general circulation of the footpoints of solar
magnetic fields, which requires ubiquitous merging between open and closed field
lines in the streamer belt? In addition to basic research, a handbook will be
prepared as a public outreach project. Its primary purpose will be to provide
guidelines for communicating to the public how coronal mass ejections can cause
geomagnetic storms. In terms intelligible to the lay reader, it will point out
common misconceptions and provide material for attention-grabbing descriptions
that do not misinform. The handbook will be suitable not only for the press but
for use as supplemental educational material for introductory courses in solar-
terrestrial physics.