* 0119819
* BE/CNH: Human Ecodynamics in the Hawaiian Ecosystem, 1200 to 200 Years Before the Present
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2001,05/31/2006
* Peter Vitousek, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2006
* USD 1,399,940.00

The project will study the complex, dynamic interactions between an isolated
human population and its natural environment over the course of 1,000 years,
focusing on two sample landscapes in the Hawaiian Islands (specifically, Maui
and Hawaii Islands). Four main research themes motivate this research: (1)
determining how processes of agricultural development were linked to
geomorphological and biogeochemical mosaics and gradients; (2) assessing the
dynamic links between human population growth and agricultural development and
intensification; (3) tracking emerging sociocultural complexity in relation to
demographic growth and agricultural change; and (4) understanding how a growing
human population, with an intensive agricultural economic base, affected the
natural resource base. The project is multidisciplinary, and will involve
collaborative fieldwork by a team of scientists representing the disciplines of
archaeology, soil science, ecology, demography, and paleobotany. Fieldwork will
build upon prior intensive archaeological, ecological, and pedological research
by team members, but will emphasize new, integrative work on biogeochemical
variation across the study landscapes, and on acquiring additional paleo-
demographic and paleobotanical data necessary to address the research themes
noted above. The varied data sets will be integrated using a geographic
information systems approach, and hierarchical modeling will be used to test
hypotheses regarding human-environment interactions over
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on the Hawaiian Islands because
this archipelago offers unique opportunities to constrain the analysis of human-
environment interactions (e.g., short time scale, isolation, pronounced
biogeochemical gradients). The issues to be addressed, however, are global. The
cultural and natural evolutionary processes to be studied--such as unprecedented
population growth, widespread deforestation, soil degradation through nutrient
depletion, population migrations into marginal lands, and increased political
and economic centralization and control--are all taking place today on a global
scale. By studying these processes on a controlled time scale of approximately
1,000 years, this research will produce dynamic models of the causal links
between such key factors, models which can help us to understand the
irreversible environmental and cultural changes driven by the coupling of human
and natural systems. Such models should be of considerable relevance to on-going
attempts to develop sustainable human ecosystems. The results of this project
will therefore be of wide interest to a range of disciplines, including ecology,
demography, anthropology, economics, and biogeography. This project is an award
emanating from the FY2001 special competition in Biocomplexity in the
Environment focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;