* 0119450
* Biophotonics:  Biospecific Contrast Agents for Pre-Cancer Detection
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Rebecca Richards-Kortum, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2004
* USD 674,691.00

0119450 &lt;br/&gt;Richards-Kortum &lt;br/&gt;This proposal brings together
scientists from very diverse areas with the goal of developing new photonic
probes and contrast agents for highly sensitive and selective detection of pre-
cancers in vivo . Dr. Andrew Ellington will use the approaches of combinatorial
chemistry to develop a library of aptamer molecules specific for biomolecular
targets on the surface of cervical cancerous and pre-cancerous cells. He will
use well-established cervical cell lines at different stages of cancer
development provided by Dr. Lotan. Drs. Brian Korgel and Konstantin Sokolov will
develop new photonic probes based on quantum dots (BK) and metal nanoparticles
(KS). They will utilize both the aptamers developed by Dr. Ellington as well as
well-known antibodies currently used in clinical histopathology. Dr. Rebecca
Richards- Kortum will test the conjugates as molecular specific contrast agents
using optical microscopy and spectroscopy. She will use cervical cancer cell
lines provided by Dr. Lotan, three-dimensional tissue phantoms and fresh
cervical tissue slices from Dr. Follen. Experiments with all three biological
systems representing properties of normal and neoplastic cervix at different
levels of complexity will be used to assess and refine the performance and
detection scheme for the new contrast agents. This refinement will include
preparing bioengineered aptamers with high affinity to cancer specific targets,
tailoring optical properties of metal nanoparticles and quantum dots, optimizing
conjugation procedures, and developing optimal imaging geometries. &lt;br/&gt;