* 0119933
* Biocomplexity IDEA: Portable Devices To Map The Distribution of Arsenic In Bangladesh Groundwater & The Relation To Sediment Structure
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Andrew Gelman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/2003
* USD 99,956.00

0119933 Van Geen

Arsenic concentrations in groundwater of Bangladesh can vary by three orders
magnitude within lateral and vertical spatial scales of tens of meters. This
extreme variability is the result of a poorly understood set of hydrological,
microbial, and geochemical interactions that reflect the complex evolution of
the Ganges-Brahmaputra delta over the past 10,000 years. There may also be a
temporal dimension to these complex pattems on shorter time scales with,
potentially, a response of groundwater arsenic to the monsoon and to increased
groundwater usage for irrigation. Understanding these pattems has immediate
societal relevance because at least 25 million people are currently poisoned by
drinking groundwater from millions of tube wells containing >50 ug/L arsenic,
the Bangladesh and (until very recently) US drinking water standard. T'his
proposal for exploratory work under the topical area "Instrumentation
Development for Environmental Activities (IDEA)" is centered around the notion
that the principles underlying the distribution of arsenic in Bangladesh
groundwater can be understood only through the collection of geophysical,
geochemical, and eventually microbiological, data representative of in situ
conditions on spatial scales ranging from meters to kilometers. With this
objective in mind, and as a complement to its current work in Bangladesh
supported by the NIEHS/Superfund Basic Research Program, this interdisciplinary
team of scientists seeks to develop and test two portable devices that measure
key properties of the subsurface by taking advantage of the enonnous ar-ray of
existing tube wells: (1) groundwater arsenic concentrations with a high-
precision, double-beam calorimeter, (2) the vertical sediment structure by
electromagnetic conductivity. In parallel, we will start to develop the
statistical tools needed to interpret and integrate the complex data sets that
can be generated with these instruments. Our intention is to set the stage for a
full-scale Biocomplexity proposal aimed at improving our ftindamental
understanding of the complex set of interactions, including microbial and
societal factors, that resulted in a human tragedy of staggering dimension.













0119933

