* 0119099
* Dissertation Research: Social Power, Centralization, and Settlement Patterns: Late Classic Sociopolitical Organization in the Maya Mountains of Southern Belize
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2002
* Richard Leventhal, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2002
* USD 5,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Richard M. Leventhal, Andrew Kindon will collect data
for his doctoral dissertation. He will continue his participation in the Maya
Mountains Archaeological Project (MMAP), a multidisciplinary scientific research
project based in southern Belize, Central America combining the efforts of
archaeologists, geologists, and biologists. Since 1996, the MMAP has focused its
attention on two sizable sites in the Upper Bladen River drainage of the Maya
Mountains called Ek Xux and Muklebal Tzul. These sites include well-developed
central core areas with large mounds surrounded by extensive settlement in the
form of smaller residential mounds and plazuela groups. Evidence indicates that
the sites were inhabited during the Classic period, about 300 AD - 900 AD.

These sites are particularly significant because, while they are located only 3
kilometers away from each other, preliminary evidence suggests that there are
major differences between them. Burial patterns at the sites differed markedly,
with the residents of Ek Xux burying their dead in rock shelters surrounding the
site and the residents of Muklebal Tzul burying their dead in tombs within their
house platforms. In addition, initial survey work carried out by Kindon from
1998-2000 showed significant differences in the settlement patterns of the
communities. It has been speculated that these differences are due to
differences in the nature of social organization and control at the two sites.
However, issues of contemporaneity and differential developmental stages are
also very important, and the temporal relationship between the two sites must be
clarified.

Kindon's dissertation research will investigate the prehispanic settlement
systems of both Ek Xux and Muklebal Tzul. Intensive study of settlement
distribution combined with architectural, artifact, and carbon analysis will
address three primary research goals: 1. the clarification of temporal
relationships between the two sites; 2. the identification of regional and local
patterns of settlement organization and the exploration of the way these
settlement patterns relate to levels of social organization and control; 3. the
evaluation of the degree to which kin-based and centralized elite social
organization and power were elaborated within the communities, as well as the
amount of variability that existed at both a regional and local level in terms
of social organization and control.

Kindon's work has the potential to make several important contributions to
current anthropological and archaeological theory. First and foremost, the
research will increase current understanding of the nature of social power,
especially as it relates to the emergence and functioning of complex polities.
With relatively simple technology prehistoric Mayans were able to incorporate
large numbers of individuals into functioning social entities and Mr. Kindon's
research will shed light on the mechanisms involved. The project will also
contribute to training a promising young scientist.

