* 0119968
* OEDG:  Connecting with the River:  Geoscience Research and Education for Hartford, Connecticut
* GEO,GEO
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Janet Morrison, Trinity College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 12/31/2005
* USD 333,173.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Connecting with the River: Geoscience Research and
Education for Hartford, CT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The students in the Hartford
public school system come from ethnic backgrounds&lt;br/&gt;not widely
represented in the geosciences (51% Hispanic, 42% African-American
and&lt;br/&gt;3% Asian). This two-year collaborative program seeks to enhance
geoscience&lt;br/&gt;and technological literacy among these urban youth by
drawing upon the rich educational value of the Connecticut River. This river,
the longest in New England, and an American Heritage River, flows through
Hartford CT and provides an excellent earth science laboratory. Connecting these
students with the river provides an ideal opportunity for them to learn about
earth science process, to develop a toolbox of research skills and to understand
the relevance of earth science to their lives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
diverse group of high school students will be engaged in the design and
implementation of an environmental monitoring initiative that will document the
physical processes and biological health of the river. Students at the Greater
Hartford Academy of Math and Science (GHAMS), a magnet high school, and other
area students will conduct this research as part of their regular school
curriculum and during weekends, and in an intensive summer program. Many
community organizations will be involved with the collection and presentation of
the data. Data will be distributed among fellow student scientists and displayed
on a student created website and the project will be promoted at various public
buildings and museums and in print media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br
/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&g
t;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&
lt;br/&gt;