* 0119754
* Workers' Cemetery at Hierakonpolis: Rescue of an Endangered Resource
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2005
* Jerome Rose, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2005
* USD 276,646.00

Dr. Rose and his collaborators will conduct two intensive excavation and
analysis seasons at Hierakonpolis, located 650 miles south of Cairo. The site is
clearly associated with the birth of the ancient Egyptian state, and has
produced spectacular finds, such as the Narmer Palette and the large ceremonial
mace-heads of King Scorpion and Narmer, the earliest Egyptian kings. These
objects and the size of the site indicate its importance as a possible capital
of an early kingdom prior to unification. No other site can tell us as much
about when and how Egypt was transformed from a scatter of farming villages into
a great kingdom of the ancient world. Hierakonpolis is the first where there are
three widely separated and distinct class cemeteries: elites, skilled middle
class, and laboring poor. We focus on the cemetery of the working class. The
site is also unique for the level of preservation where the hot dry sand has
preserved delicate matting, basketry, fabric and food stuffs, as well as human
skin, fingernails, hair, internal organs, stomach contents and human feces.
Teams of will excavate and comprehensively analyze 200 skeletons each season.
Skeletal and dental analyses will be used to reconstruct differences in diet,
disease, stress, and work loads between social classes. We propose to use the
skeletal and archaeological data to test the following: if the elites, skilled
middle class, and laboring poor all derived from the same population; if
disease, stress, and parasite loads low enough not to suppress per capita
production of the laboring poor; if the laboring class received sufficient
nutrition to maintained a high level of economic output; and if the laboring
class was able to produce the surpluses necessary to support the other classes
without exceeding normal levels of effort by looking at
arthritis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is highly threatened by agricultural
development and within several years will be completely destroyed by bulldozing.
Increased soil moisture which results from irrigation will also cause the
deterioration of fragile materials which have been preserved in the dry desert
environment. Thus this research must be conducted now.&lt;br/&gt;