* 0119053
* SGER: Real-time Depth-Image Meshing and Warping
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Renato Pajarola, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* William Randolph Franklin
* 08/31/2002
* USD 68,123.00

0119053&lt;br/&gt;Pajarola, Renato&lt;br/&gt;U of Cal
Irvine&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years a new rendering paradigm based on
the reuse of two-dimensional imagery to generate 3D renderings has evolved,
called Image Based Rendering (IBR). Based on a set of input images, so called
reference views, IBR methods can generate new images from arbitrary view points.
One of the main advantages of IBR techniques is that the rendering cost is
independent of the scene complexity and bound by the image resolution. The use
of IBR techniques thus allows in certain situations to achieve real-time display
performance for other-wise non-interactive rendering of complex geometric
scenes. The main target applications are interactive rendering of highly complex
scenes (virtual reality systems), and rendering on time-budgets (simulations and
computer-game like environments).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will improve
and explore new techniques for interactive rendering applications on the basis
of the depth-image warping approach. Our goal is not to restrict computation of
reference views to a preprocessing step, but to explore and develop algorithms
and data structures that allow the generation and reuse of depth-image reference
views dynamically in an interactive visualization environment. Depth-image
warping is a powerful approach, and using multiple reference views to limit
visibility artifacts it is possible to create new renderings for a wide range of
views. However, the user's movements in a virtual environment are unpredictable,
and thus reference views have to be generated dynamically to optimize their use.
Therefore, from acquiring image based representations for the reference views to
rendering from image data everything has to be done dynamically in an
interactive visualization framework.&lt;br/&gt;