* 0119735
* National Center for Learning about Teaching Mathematics and Science in Rural and Urban Settings (The Rural-Urban Center)
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2003
* Frank Cartledge, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* John S. Bradley
* 08/31/2003
* USD 194,241.00

Submitted under the guidelines for Developmental Centers for Learning and
Teaching, this one-year project is a collaboration among Appalachian State
University, Louisiana State University, Rice University and the University of
Houston, Downtown. The universities will partner with school systems, museums,
observatories and industries to provide a support network that will enhance the
preparation and continuing professional development of teachers, while involving
mathematicians, scientists and their students in mutually beneficial
collaborative activities with teachers, their school systems and their students.
All the institutions already have working relationships with school systems that
serve at-risk students. Support by a foundation grant in their professional
development of mathematics and science teachers first brought the four
institutions together. As research aims, the proposed Center will explore two
recurring themes: the importance of context (geographic, social, economic, etc.)
and of informal enrichment of formal methods of instruction in learning
mathematics and science. Working with science museums, observatories, school
districts and industrial partners, they will develop plans to integrate and
expand their science and mathematics education activities to address critical
national needs in the following ways:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* increase the
quality and number of teachers of mathematics and science being prepared at the
four partner universities through scholarships and increased opportunities for
meaningful field-based experiences;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* strengthen and extend
mathematics and science programs for in-service teachers, especially in the
development of support teachers -- those who will take leading roles in
interactions with novice teachers and university
students;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* increase the quality and number of doctorates
of mathematics and science education being prepared at LSU through scholarships
and through internships with the other partner universities; develop fertile
environments for research in mathematics and science education in the partner
universities, schools, museums, and observatories; and support doctoral
dissertation studies within this research environment.&lt;br/&gt;