* 0119976
* BE/CNH: Coupled Natural and Human Dynamics in Coral Reef Ecosystems: The Effect of Marine Reserve Network Design and Implementation
* GEO,OCE
* 10/15/2001,09/30/2007
* Daniel Brumbaugh, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 09/30/2007
* USD 2,535,119.00

PI: Brumbaugh Proposal: 0119976 The project by Daniel R. Brumbaugh, American
Museum of Natural History, and colleagues is supported by the program
Biocomplexity in the Environment, subprogram Dynamics of Coupled Natural and
Human Systems (BE-CHN). This project will integrate theory and data from
oceanography, biology, and social sciences to address major questions about the
design of marine reserve networks. The researchers plan to establish a general
theoretical framework with linked circulation, population, habitat, and
socioeconomic submodels. This structure will allow systematic exploration of
several core questions, including: (1) what are the crucial cascades and
feedbacks among physical, biological, and social systems that influence how
reserve networks function? (2) What are the roles of different stakeholder
groups, such as various fisher groups, local residents, tourists, etc, in this
network function? and (3) how compatible are network systems based largely on
criteria to promote local acceptability of reserves versus those more centrally
optimized around biophysical criteria? In all questions, network function will
be addressed through the effects on fisheries, biodiversity, and social/cultural
systems. In this way, The analyses will be able to directly address and compare
a range of common network goals.

The project will revolve around the development of a series of integrated models
with increasing spatial complexity and the acquisition of data to parameterize
them. The modeling will start with analytical models and will then extend to
spatially explicit (e.g., grid-based) and realistic (e.g., map-based) versions.
Data collection will initially focus on intensive mining of published literature
and databases for existing information, followed by targeted field work,
including habitat mapping, surveys of species - habitat relationships, sampling
for population genetic structure, and ethnographic studies of stakeholders.
Models and data will eventually be incorporated into a dynamic GIS spatial-
simulation tool- allowing users to run network design and management experiments
via interactive simulation. This product will be made available to researchers,
educators, and managers interested in the analysis of reserve network function.
The researchers, distributed among multiple institutions, are adopting the
Bahamas as their study system. This country, an archipelago of hundreds of
island, is currently in the political process of expanding their set of marine
protected areas (MPAs) into an interconnected network of marine reserves (to
include up to 40 sites). Because of this, several Bahamas government and
conservation agencies are welcoming scientific contributions to their policy-
making discussions. In comparison to many other Caribbean countries, marine
resources in the Bahamas also remain relatively intact because of the county's
large size and relatively small population. The country's close proximity to
Florida also makes it logistically feasible for project researchers to conduct
fieldwork while remaining in close contact with their home institutions and
other project collaborators.

This project, taking advantage of special opportunities in the Bahamas, will
develop new understanding about global phenomena- the anthropogenic degradation
of reef ecosystems and the paradigmatic turn to marine reserves for better
resource management. In exploring these concerns and answering the questions
above, we also plan to support ongoing decision-making and educational
activities in the Bahamas. This double strategy exemplifies the role of
strategic (versus traditionally defined basic or applied) science to elucidate
important processes while helping to solve problems. The proposed work will also
have substantial educational spin-offs in both the US and the Bahamas. Informal
education products, including multimedia presentations and web-base materials
will be produced and disseminated by the museum. In addition, researchers will
work with partner organizations in the Bahamas to develop project-related
materials for teacher training and college courses.