* 0119908
* BE/CNH: Predicting the Dynamics of Human-Dominated Landscapes:  Metapopulation Models for Ecosystems with Sharp Edges
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2004
* Bruce Craig, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2004
* USD 50,000.00

Landscapes increasingly are altered by human activity worldwide, and predicting
the response of native organisms to human-dominated landscapes requires an
understanding of how ecological and socio-economic processes are influenced by
land use, habitat fragmentation, and the sharp boundaries formed between native
and human-altered areas. The purpose of the project is to build an
international, interdisciplinary research team devoted to constructing models
that link social and ecological systems in human-dominated landscapes. The
research team will extend the practical value of metapopulation models by
incorporating the hierarchical nature of ecological and human systems.
Specifically, research will focus on metapopulation processes operating at
multiple spatial scales, heterogeneity of patch and matrix types, and temporal
dynamics of landscapes.

Humans dramatically alter the physical and biological characteristics of
ecological landscapes, often with adverse consequences for native species.
Predicting the impacts of human activities on native fauna and flora will enable
more informed decisions to be made regarding land-use planning and conservation
efforts. Traditionally, ecological models designed to predict the responses of
organisms to disturbance have been incomplete because they have ignored the
socio-economic processes that lead to landscape change. This project will focus
on explicitly linking the dynamics of ecological systems with the social and
economic systems that determine the type and magnitude of change in human-
dominated landscapes. As a result of this research, models will be formulated
that can lead to an enhanced ability to predict species responses and prescribe
appropriate strategies to minimize negative consequences of human activity. This
project is an award emanating from the FY2001 special competition in
Biocomplexity in the Environment focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and
Human Systems.

