* 0119491
* SGER: The February 28, 2001 Nisqually Earthquake:  Juan de Fuca Slab Break-up, Viscoelastic Response, and Interplay with Crustal Faulting
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2002
* M. Meghan Miller, Central Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2002
* USD 61,011.00

Abstract Meghan Miller EAR-0119491

The PANGA consortium will install 8 continuously operating GPS stations in Puget
Sound in a rapid response deployment to the Nisqually earthquake. This
enhancement of PANGA is aimed at gathering basic data to answer opportune
scientific questions. It also provides a demonstration of the ability of the
Plate Boundary Observatory community to master the technical challenges of a
post-earthquake response in a collaborative manner. The continuous GPS
observations will further our understanding of these scientific issues: 1. Is
the series of slab deformation events recorded in 1939,1946 and 1949 a typical
sequence, and will we observe a similar sequence in the 1999 Grays Harbor, 2001
Nisqually, and some near term future event(s)? 2. How is deformation propagated
from a down going slab through a viscoelastic lower lithosphere, to surface
deformation? What are the rheologies that govern this complex scenario and how
is deformation propagated or dissipated? 3. How do these processes reveal the
budget of seismic vs. aseismic slip? 4. Is there a causal relationship between
intra-slab earthquakes and deformation in the brittle upper crust? 5. How does
the concentration of deformation across the Puget Lowlands, where fore-arc
migration ends in a zone of concentrated strain, relate to arching of the down-
going slab and its consequent deformation? 6. Is there an observable role
between deeper, slab events with their broad deformation field, and
teconomagmatic deformation? Page A 011 9491

