* 0119502
* Cloud, Precipitation, and Aerosol Research at FARS: The Facility for Atmospheric Remote Sensing
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2001,03/31/2002
* Kenneth Sassen, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Roddy Rogers
* 03/31/2002
* USD 493,000.00

This grant supports an ongoing research program investigating aerosols, clouds,
and precipitation, using the unique capabilities of the Facility for Atmospheric
Remote Sensing (FARS) at the University of Utah. Instruments include visible,
infrared, and microwave radiometers, a ruby (0.694 micrometres wavelength) Cloud
Polarization Lidar (CPL), a scanning dual-wavelength (0.532 and 1.06
micrometres) high-resolution Polarization Diversity Lidar (PDL), and a W-band
(3.2 millimetres) polarimetric Doppler radar. To this battery of equipment will
be added a nitrogen Raman channel for the PDL, which will enable the
determination of the aerosol extinction coefficient independently of the
backscattering coefficient, and provision for scanning the PDL in elevation, to
study the shapes and orientations of hydrometeors and the anisotropy of clouds
as scattering media. Emphasis to now has been on improving fundamental
understanding of midlatitude cirrus clouds by monitoring their spectral
scattering and emission properties as they move over the FARS site. New
objectives include the study of precipitation development in mixed-phase (ice
and water) clouds, investigations of the shapes and orientations of ice crystals
as revealed by their optical and microwave properties, and studies of the
optical properties and vertical structure of aerosol layers that originate from
local and sometimes distant sources. The work is highly relevant to the
interpretation of present and proposed satellite remote sensing measurements and
to the treatment of clouds and aerosols in climate models.