* 0119786
* The Center for Learning and Teaching in the West
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2009
* Carl Wamser, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Haney
* 09/30/2009
* USD 11,195,655.00

The Center for Learning and Teaching in the West (CLT-West) is a consortium of
five universities -- Montana State University, Portland State University, the
University of Montana, Colorado State University, and the University of Northern
Colorado -- formed to meet the needs of underrepresented students who have
traditionally not benefited from SMET educational reform. It includes
partnerships with Ft. Belknap College in Montana, other community and tribal
colleges, Portland Public Schools, and sixty-eight rural and reservation schools
in Montana and Colorado. The project's goals are to increase the number of
qualified mathematics and science teachers; provide professional development and
support to math and science teachers in low-income and high minority schools in
the West's inner city and rural schools; investigate how technology can improve
graduate education programs; and prepare leaders in science and mathematics
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses CLT program goals in a
variety of ways. It builds an infrastructure that is likely to be
institutionalized in these states and supports new approaches to reaching a
broader community. CLT-West establishes "Fellows", a multi-disciplinary group of
pre-doctoral and post-doctoral students, and "Faculty Fellows" to conduct
research, team teach new courses, work with colleagues on the reform of upper
division science and mathematics courses for preservice teachers and/or provide
professional development to schools and districts involved with the Center. The
Center will educate 75 pre-doctoral and post-doctoral students. In addition, the
professional development plan will impact 520 math and science teachers with
programs consistent with the Center's goals yet catered to the local needs.
Those teachers come from schools that serve just under 40,000 students, who are
predominantly from underrepresented groups in SMET.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
extensive collaborative effort across departments, campuses and states is a
model for sharing expertise, curricula and reform methods, and the utilization
of technology to maximize learning. CLT-West's work with targeted populations
and districts should produce a national research base for connecting university
and college faculties with the needs of underrepresented students in science and
mathematics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;