* 0119046
* Follow-up Study of the Impact of PETE:  Accountability, Understanding and Continuous Improvement.
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Thomas Brady, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 08/31/2005
* USD 1,097,850.00

The El Paso Partnership for Excellence in Teacher Education (PETE), a project
funded through the NSF Collaboratives for Excellence in Teacher Preparation
(CETP) program, has established a partnership of regional educational
institutions including the University of Texas at El Paso and El Paso Community
College to reform science and mathematics teacher preparation. This follow-on
project includes evaluation activities and research studies designed to document
and assess the impact of PETE at the university, at the community college, in
K-12 classrooms, and on new and future teachers. Evaluation research studies are
designed to assess the impact of the project in five areas: institutionalization
and sustainability, the relationship between teacher preparation and the context
of school reform; new teacher knowledge and its relationship to student
outcomes; the development of content knowledge and pedagogy in reformed courses;
and the viability of a model of teacher development and assessment. Teacher
induction activities designed and implemented by former CETP/PETE scholars under
the direction of science and mathematics faculty members are providing support
for novice teachers. Former CETP/PETE scholars pursuing graduate degrees in
science and mathematics education engage in peer mentoring of new teachers
and/or mentoring of future teachers and participate with faculty and evaluators
in classroom research activities designed to support the data collection and
analyses of the proposed evaluation research studies. The evaluation studies are
linked to the CETP Core Summative Evaluation Study, an NSF-funded project at the
University of Minnesota, through the alignment of CETP Core evaluation Questions
with evaluation research questions specific to the PETE context. To strengthen
the collegiality among former CETP/PETE Scholars pursuing graduate degrees, new
teachers, and faculty members, new teacher induction activities will be designed
and implemented by former scholars under the direction of science and
mathematics faculty members. The project is assessing the impact of PETE and
activities designed to increase the likelihood of new teachers remaining in the
profession.