* 0119618
* BE/CNH: Biocomplexity, Spatial Scale and Fragmentation: Implications for Arid and Semi-Arid Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2007
* James Ellis, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Martyn M. Caldwell
* 09/30/2007
* USD 1,900,002.00

This proposal argues that spatial complexity of vegetation plays a central role
in the structure and function of temporally variable, arid and semi-arid
ecosystems. Complexity results from movement-mediated linking of less complex
spatial units by herbivores and humans into spatially extensive, complex
systems. But modern human land use and land tenure systems tend to deplete
spatial biocomplexity through fragmentation of ecosystems into isolated and
simplified units. Ecosystem fragmentation is often justified as a means of
economic intensification in the neo-classical framework, but in fact, it costs
money to replace the natural capital lost through fragmentation. As a result of
fragmentation, many of the world's arid and semi-arid grazed ecosystems are
dysfunctional to varying degrees. The goal of this project is to demonstrate the
importance of spatial complexity, the costs of fragmentation, and to identify
options for sustainability at sites around the world by linking ecological and
socio-economic research, and in the process, create an international network of
scientists addressing these issues. The project focuses on 21 sites in nine
countries on four continents. The interdisciplinary scientific team includes
ecologists, anthropologists, economists, and political scientists. The project
will include case study syntheses, field-based investigations, and model
experiments and analyses. The project is expected to promote a higher level of
understanding of spatial-temporal distribution of complexity, its importance in
grazed systems, why and how complexity is reduced through fragmentation, and
what this means for ecosystems and economic activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;