* 0119276
* Order, Spacing, and Clustering in Visual Exploration of Large Scale Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Matthew Ward, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2006
* USD 640,320.00

The focus of this research project is to develop visualization, interaction, and
data management technologies to address the problems of high dimensionality and
data type heterogeneity in large-scale visual data mining. The basic approach is
to apply multiresolution clustering strategies across the dimensions of a data
set as well as within individual dimensions containing nominal or categorical
values, and exploit the ordering and positioning of data axes and data points to
emphasize relationships within the data. For visualization, the tasks involve
the development of methods for determining ordering and variable spacing within
and between data and dimensions as well as clustering of dimensions into multi-
resolution abstractions, and integrating them into several existing multivariate
display techniques. For interaction, tools for intuitive navigation and
exploration within the multiresolution spaces are developed. This includes
interactive reclustering tools to allow users to guide the process of splitting
and grouping clusters of data objects and dimensions. For data management the
tasks involve the development of high-dimensional indexing and multi-resolution
data view management for high-dimensional data access, and caching and
prefetching strategies to support real-time visual exploration. The ease of use
as well as performance of the display and interactive tools over large data sets
is assessed. The results of this research will provide data analysts in domains
such as bioinformatics, earth and space sciences, and e-commerce the ability to
interactively explore the increasingly large and complex data sets being
generated.