* 0119645
* CLT:  A Model Regional Urban Center for the Advancement of Teaching and Learning of 5th through 12th Grade Students
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Stephen Krulik, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* John S. Bradley
* 08/31/2003
* USD 192,825.00

Submitted under the guidelines for "Developmental Centers for Learning and
Teaching," this twelve-month project would do the developmental planning to
establish a center for SMET education for grades 5-12 in greater Philadelphia.
The project would be based at Temple University. The region served would be
southeastern Pennsylvania and southern New Jersey. Other players in the
collaboration include Millersville and Cheney Universities in PA, Delaware
State, and several community colleges in PA and NJ. Also included are
Philadelphia (PA), Salem County, Gloucester County, and Cherry Hill (NJ) school
districts. The primary mission of the proposed center will be to examine the
unique needs of teaching mathematics and science to urban and urban-fringe
students. There are three major goals:

1) Enhance the content and pedagogical skills of current and future mathematics
and science teachers and to increase both the numbers of, and quality of, these
teachers by designing programs to attract, train and mentor pre-service, novice,
experienced in-service and apprentice teachers. This will include the
development of a model middle school Certification Program.

2) Reshape the institutional infrastructure of faculty and graduate students who
instruct math and science pre-service and in-service teachers and the
infrastructure of the school districts to support these teachers. This includes
attracting, training and retaining doctoral students who will be future SMET
professors.

3)Design and support research in relevant aspects of mathematics and science
education, with a strong emphasis on determining the role of, and value of,
technology in education.