* 0119672
* In Situ X-ray Probes of Surface-Mediated Pollutant Formation
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2003
* Erwin Poliakoff, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* David Nelson
* 07/31/2003
* USD 99,667.00

This project aims to show how an X-ray spectroscopy apparatus can be used to
probe detailed microscopic aspects of pollutant formation that occur at
interfaces in combustion sources. Many pollutants are introduced into the
environment as a result of combustion processes, and there is a growing
realization that important pathways related to the production of the pollutants
involve heterogeneous processes, i.e., surface reactions, for which, there is no
clear mechanistic picture of the reaction pathways or kinetics. This project
carries to develop instrumentation that generates essential information
regarding how pollutants with significant health effects are formed, and thereby
provide the knowledge required for reducing their production. An end-station for
synchrotron-based x-ray spectroscopy experiments will be developed for
monitoring microscopic aspects of combustion processes. The end-station will be
a vacuum system with a temperature-regulated sample holder that can be dosed
with reactants of interest. The system will be designed so that fluorescence
yield XAFS(s-ray absorption fine structure) spectroscopy can be performed in a
variety of ways. Different types of x-ray spectra will be generated. Extended
x-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) spectroscopy will be used for
determining structural information, and x-ray absorption near edge structure
(XANES) spectroscopy will be used for chemical fingerprinting applications.
Specifically, this end-station will be optimized for probing how chlorine-
containing aromatic species (e.g., chlorophenols) are adsorbed on metal oxide
surfaces, and how they react to form polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and
dibensofurans (PCDD/Fs). EXAFS spectra will be used to determine how aromatic
compounds (such as 2-chlorophenol) are adsorbed on oxidized metal surfaces.
Also, EXAFS spectra will be used to determine structural information on reaction
intermediates after the reaction has been allowed to progress. It will also be
possible to generate kinetic data on combustion processes by probing a more
limited spectral range, the XANES region.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The key point
unifying these ideas is that by combining techniques from environmental science
and x-ray spectroscopy, wholly new types of data can generated to elucidate
chemical pathways that generate pollutants in combustion processes. Students
trained in areas of instrumentation development and applications to
environmental sciences, which are also priorities for U.S. industry, will be
highly competitive in this job market.&lt;br/&gt;