* 0119743
* BE/CNH: Agent-Based Modeling of Bering Sea Biocomplexity: Long-Term Ecological Effects of Human Interactions
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2004
* Herbert Maschner, Idaho State University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/2004
* USD 80,000.00

The southern Bering Sea and central North Pacific region is considered to be one
of the world's most important fisheries. Yet recent catastrophic declines in
many species including salmon, Steller sea lion, sea otter, and some pelagic
birds show that this ecosystem is neither healthy nor sustainable given modern
harvesting rates. Explanations for declines in many species, particularly in
relation to several species of salmon, have been monocausal and political
without detailed investigations of the relationships between predators (humans
and sea mammals) and their prey in this region. Using biological and ecological
data, paleoclimatic reconstructions, archaeological data on subsistence and
harvesting rates, historic and modern catch and escapement records, ethnographic
reports and traditional ecological knowledge, this project will use Swarm agent-
based modeling routines to investigate the dynamics of human-salmon-ecosystem
interactions in the southern Bering Sea region of Alaska. The multidisciplinary
investigative team will develop methods to directly test a number of
relationships associated with direct and indirect impacts of changes in one or
more sets of human and/or natural systems on the others. This project will begin
with a series of monocausal simulations based on natural predator-prey
interactions, cultural harvesting strategies, and long-term changes in the
Bering Sea ecosystem. The investigators will follow these simulations with
multivariate tests in order to investigate interactions between various possible
agents. This multivariate testing of simulations should help identify important
interaction effects among different agents, even when individual agents have
been shown no substantial influence on salmon
fisheries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will assess the independent and
interdependent roles of both human and non-human agents in the modeling process.
Humans have lived in the Bering Sea region for at least 10,000 years, and there
has never been a time in recent history where humans did not play an important
role in the regional ecosystem. This project also will add to knowledge
regarding the interplay of agents across multiple temporal and spatial scales.
Data will be included from such diverse scales as seasonal catch records of an
individual boat, 4,000-year nutrient cycles from lake cores, and a 6,000-year
archaeological record of faunal remains. The project also will use of local and
indigenous knowledge and will involve local residents in the evaluation of the
models and results. The project also should have significant practical
implications as it assesses the structure and dynamics of salmon productivity
and success in the complex Bering Sea ecosystem. This project is an award
emanating from the FY 2001 special competition in Biocomplexity in the
Environment focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;