* 0119578
* A Neural Network Based Automated Identification System For Biological Species
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Norman Platnick, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 08/31/2005
* USD 796,818.00

Abstract

0119578 Platnick

This award provides support for the development of a completely automated system
capable of providing species-level identifications of organisms based on digital
images of specimens. The technology uses an artificial neural network and can
use, as input, images transmitted over the internet. At present, obtaining
species-level identifications of specimens can be a difficult undertaking. The
number of trained systematizes for most groups of organisms is low; the success
rate of non-specialists trying to achieve accurate identifications is often
lower. Such a system has the potential to radically increase the use of
biodiversity information in conservation as well as science. This project is
aimed at developing software technology capable of species identification using
spiders as test subjects. The approach is based on digital images of
taxonomically relevant structures of the organism taken through a camera-
equipped dissecting microscope. The images are subjected to wavelet
transformation, a procedure that extracts shape information from the image while
removing less useful, high-resolution information. By this procedure, the image
is reduced to a set of wavelet coefficients that can be supplied to a computing
algorithm known as an artificial neural network. Such networks are capable of
learning to classify objects. The goal is creation of a system with a 95%
accuracy in identification.

In the first phase of the project, three datasets will be used: images of two
families of Australasian spiders (Trochanteriidae and Prodidomidae), and third
set of images defined geographically rather than taxonomically. This geographic
set includes specimens from three consecutive years of collecting at selected
sites in Tennessee, and is typical of ecological inventory data. In the second
phase, a web interface that allows submission of images for identification over
the internet will be developed.

At present, a severely limiting factor on our understanding of community
structure, diversity, and how diversity relates to ecosystem function and
resulting human services is the lack of experts capable of identifying
biological specimens to species. Thus, the potential impact of automated
identification is enormous. A system that can identify any species in a
particular family, or from a particular area, without requiring the user to have
more than the most basic knowledge of the organism to be identified, has the
potential to drastically improve the efficiency and scope of biological
inventories, and subsequent monitoring efforts.