* 0119643
* Scaling the Shape, Motion, and Function of Oscillating Wings, Fins, Legs, and Feet
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Jeffrey Walker, University of Southern Maine
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 08/31/2002
* USD 35,000.00

0119643 Jeffrey A. Walker

When an object, such as a cube, is reduced to smaller and smaller sizes, its
surface area to volume ratio increases proportionally. This scaling relationship
has large consequences on how animals move through air and water because inertia
(mass) and friction are functions of volume and area, respectively. Animals
slightly larger or faster than a fruitfly (about 2 mm long) live in a world
dominated by inertia. In this world, oscillating wings or fins create swirling
vortexes that result from the fluid "separating" from the propulsive structure
as it flows by. These separations create unusually large forces that wreak havoc
for airplanes with rigid wings (they are the source of stall) but recent work
has shown that the separations and sometimes the vortices can be exploited by
animals with oscillating appendages. Animals that are slightly smaller or slower
than a fruitfly live in a world where friction results in a significant
component of the net force generated by a propulsive structure. Friction weakens
vortices and delays or entirely stops separation. A large friction component,
then, must have profound effects on the design of small swimming and flying
animals and, indeed, the propulsive appendages of small animals show remarkable
convergence among diverse taxa (the phyla Arthropoda, Chordata, and Mollusca),
anatomy (antennae, wings, fins, legs, feet), behaviors (swimming and flying) and
fluid media (air and water). The objective of the current proposal is to
investigate how small, oscillating appendages generate forces in air or water,
how the propulsive mechanisms change with scale (size and speed), and how the
optimal design of an appendage changes with scale. Appendage shape and motion
will be measured in various groups of small animals that span the relevant size
range including the sea butterflies (swimming snails with reduced or lost
shells), small wasps, and water beetles. Forces on oscillating plates that
replicate the conditions found in oscillating appendages of small animals will
be measured across a range of sizes. Despite the fact that animals swimming or
flying with oscillating appendages at small scales comprise a large portion of
described animal species, little is known about how oscillating appendages work
at the low end of this range and how the force generating mechanisms scale with
size and speed. The proposed research will be the first to systematically study
the scaling of appendage shape, motion, and function in this important size
range.