* 0119981
* BE/CNH: Coupled Human/Ecosystems Over Long Periods: Mesa Verde Region Prehispanic Ecodynamics
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2008
* Robert Reynolds, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2008
* USD 979,675.00

This project seeks to understand the long-term interaction of humans, their
culture(s) and their environment in southwestern Colorado, USA, from A.D.
600-1300. The research employs agent-based simulation to examine various models
for how farmers locate themselves and use resources on this landscape. Further,
the simulation will examine the exchange of agricultural goods among households,
and whether exchange causes households to aggregate into villages in certain
times and places, and disperse into smaller settlements during other times.
Finally, the simulation will examine why this area is depopulated in the late
A.D. 1200s. Households in this model act in a virtual environment where the
elevation, soil type, temperature, vegetation, potential agricultural
production, and precipitation vary over an 1800-sq-km study area. The simulation
is possible because high-resolution archaeological and environmental records are
available for the study area during this period, including an inventory of
thousands of archaeological sites, tree-ring records, and estimates of available
surface water and ground water. Estimates of agricultural production change
annually according to climatic inputs reconstructed from tree-ring records, and
possibly in response to landscape degradation due to farming as well. Over
longer periods, the same factors affect the availability of surface water and
ground water, and changes in the location and availability of water will also be
incorporated into the simulation. Population size and the location of settlement
on the landscape vary according to the experiences of the households during the
period under investigation, and population flows from and to other areas. The
simulation will employ cultural algorithms (variants of genetic algorithms)
through which households may optimize their landscape and resource use with
respect to other households with whom they exchange corn and compete for
agricultural land. These algorithms will also be used to simulate selection of
farming strategies, including those that use surface water for irrigation. In
this way, the simulation will be used to determine how exchange of agricultural
goods, competition for land, and changing farming strategies affected household
movement and formation of villages. The behavior of households in all variants
of the simulation will be compared against a database for archaeological sites
in the study area that specifies their location, size, function, and period of
occupation, allowing an assessment of how well each variant fits the
archaeological record. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work contributes to
understanding changing land-use strategies in small-scale farming societies
experiencing significant climate change and population growth. It also
contributes to understanding the evolution of economic systems and population
aggregation in such societies. In particular, the study will clarify the factors
that resulted in village formation and the depopulation in one of the most
famous archaeological areas in the world: the Mesa Verde region. In addition,
the research will develop tools to make the future examination of such systems
more effective. The groundwater model will help to predict what might happen to
groundwater supplies in this area as climate changes in the future. Finally, by
clarifying the relationships between climate, culture, and behavior this
research will be useful in unraveling the complexities of coupled human and
natural systems in other areas. This project is an award emanating from the
FY2001 special competition in Biocomplexity in the Environment focusing on the
Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems.