* 0119078
* A Follow-up Summative Evaluation of the New York City Collaborative for Excellence in Teacher Preparation
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Bert Flugman, Research Foundation of the City University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 07/31/2005
* USD 597,780.00

This research and evaluation project is examining the effects of training
prospective teachers to deliver math and science instruction in conformity with
newly established content and pedagogical standards. The specific context in
which this initiative is being investigated is the New York City Collaborative
for Excellence in Teacher Education (NYCETP), a consortium of five campuses of
the City University of New York (CUNY) and New York University (NYU). Since 1995
(with a grant from NSF), these six colleges have embarked on a collaborative
journey of curricular reform in which 30 math and science content and math and
science methods courses have been CETP reformed, in keeping with nationally
recognized standards (e.g., NCTM &amp; NRC). The current project is a three-year
longitudinal study examining how prospective teachers exposed to CETP reformed
courses in three NYCETP colleges change and develop in comparison to teacher
trainees exposed to non-reformed (traditional) courses. This study is being
coordinated with, and will contribute to, an ongoing national NSF-sponsored
study of the funded Collaboratives supported through the CETP initiative. This
NSF study, the CETP Core Evaluation, is being conducted by the University of
Minnesota. In the current project a CETP treatment sample of 175 undergraduate
teacher education students in three urban colleges preparing for K-6 teaching
are being tracked longitudinally for three years, the last two years of college
and the first year of employment. These students, who will have been exposed to
2 to 8 CETP reformed courses, are being compared to 90 students at the same
colleges who have been waived out of CETP reformed courses because they are
transfer students or because they already have obtained a baccalaureate.
Extensive background, course work, and academic achievement data is being
collected on all teacher education students as part of New York State
Certification Requirements. These data are being added to CETP-specific data
(much of it using the University of Minnesota instruments) to form a
comprehensive database for the entire teacher education population under study.
Specifically, additional outcome data include: knowledge, attitudes, and self-
reported teaching strategies as measured by the University of Minnesota Core
Student Survey and Teacher Survey; performance on the math and science content
sections of the New York State Teacher Certification Exam; and actual teacher
performance as measured by the University of Minnesota Core Classroom
Observation Protocol. In addition, data is being collected regarding the degree
to which the school context is supportive of CETP teaching goals. Specific
research questions posed in this study include: How does the CETP treatment
group compare to the non-treatment group on the outcome measures above? Are
teacher education students at different levels of academic ability affected
differentially as a function of their CETP/non-CETP participation? To what
extent does the treatment group's performance in the classroom change over time
(from student teaching to employment) as a function of CETP involvement compared
to the non-treatment group? The significance of this study is in its potential
to provide evidence to support math/science curricular reform in teacher
education programs nationwide, its ability to shed light on how new models of
teacher training can narrow the performance gap among students with different
levels of prior academic attainment, how new approaches to teacher training
(CETP) can stand up to the pressures of urban school environments that have
differential supports for new teachers, and its modeling of the utility of
developing and using a comprehensive teacher education tracking system.