* 0119828
* Reaching Out to Communities and Kids with Science in San Francisco, California: SF-ROCKS
* GEO,GEO
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2008
* Raymond Pestrong, San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,250,171.00

ABSTRACT Reaching Out to Kids and Community with Science in San Francisco

The "Reaching Out to Kids and Community with Science in San Francisco (SF-
ROCKS)" program at San Francisco State University (SFSU) aims to increase the
number of traditionally underrepresented students who enter college as
geoscience majors through a multi-faceted collaborative research project that
will provide teacher training, student education, and several tiers of mentoring
relationships. The activities include: (1) strengthening partnerships with the
San Francisco Unified School District (SFUSD) by engaging high school teachers
and their students in supervised environmental research projects and training;
(2) building bridges between SFSU and City College of San Francisco (CCSF),
where many underrepresented students in San Francisco are first introduced to
geoscience at the college level; and (3) fostering mentoring relationships among
SFSU geosciences faculty, undergraduate students, and high school students
through guidance and supervision of field projects. SF-ROCKS also partners with
local community groups and government agencies for project support and mutual
benefit.

The collaborative program has a research base at SFSU and satellite centers at
CCSF and five high schools in eastern San Francisco in the Islais and Mission
creek watersheds. At each satellite center, instructors responsible for teaching
earth and environmental science work with SFSU Department of Geosciences project
scientist to develop a community- centered, multi-layered, hands-on mapping and
sampling partnership to identify and to monitor environmental hazards and
watershed characteristics. Each satellite center focuses on the area around
their school, with connections to the other centers via teacher workshops,
interactions with the SFSU research base, and a comprehensive interactive web
site.