* 0119875
* BE/CNH: Responding to the Challenges of Human-Natural System Complexity: Assuring the Quality of Models, Improving the Presentation of Findings, and Designing New Institutions
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2001,08/31/2003
* John Harte, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/2003
* USD 99,637.00

This project brings faculty from the social and natural sciences at the
University of California at Berkeley into a comparative analysis of how the use
and presentation of models of coupled human and natural systems can be improved.
With no single model representing the full complexity in a manageable way, both
scientific and public understanding must come through "piecing together"
findings from separate models that emphasize different parts of complex systems.
This process of "piecing together" is currently not working very well. There
are, for example, communication barriers between scientists of different
disciplines as well as between scientists and the public. In some cases,
different models provide conflicting insights, or information with conflicting
policy implications, for which there is no scientific resolution. In such cases,
different political and economic interests find it advantageous to emphasize
selective information from particular models. This project will explore whether
the process of communicating information from disparate models might be
improved, for example, through the establishment of scientific and public
standards. The possibilities for using new institutions such as "science juries"
also will be considered, as well as how the training of scientists could be
modified to reduce the problem. This project facilitates the development of new
approaches and their application; the comparison of case studies; serious, open
discussion in a workshop that will include philosophers of science and graduate
students; and the drafting of a textbook for graduate students who are preparing
to work at the interface of science and policy.

People are now aware that the overall level and especially some types of human
activity are having profound, and largely irreversible, effects on the global
environment. Scientists who study these effects, however, are having difficulty
grappling with the complexity of the couplings between human and natural
systems. These difficulties that are internal to science become amplified as
scientists try to communicate what they know to the public, and different
public's listen selectively according to their economic and political interests.
Communication problems make it very difficult to transform what scientists do
know into effective policy. This project explores ways that these difficulties
can be reduced through standards for the presentation of scientific information
about complex systems, the training of scientists, and the development of new
institutions for connecting scientific information to the public. This project
is an award emanating from the FY2001 special competition in Biocomplexity in
the Environment focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems.