* 0119740
* Online Weather Studies: Promoting Diversity and Collegial Faculty Development in Undergraduate Institutions Serving Minority Populations
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2007
* Ira Geer, American Meteorological Society
* Continuing grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2007
* USD 684,496.00

ABSTRACT

Online Weather Studies: Promoting Diversity and Collegial Faculty Development in
Undergraduate Institutions Serving Minority Populations

The American Meteorological Society (AMS) proposes a project that will enable
thousands of undergraduate minority students who would not otherwise have the
opportunity to be introduced to studies in meteorology. In cooperation with the
U.S. National Weather Service (NWS), the Department of Geosciences at Elizabeth
City State University, NC as focal point for a broad HBCU initiative, faculty
members at numerous other minority-serving institutions across the country, and
the highly regarded UCAR SOARS Program, the AMS proposes to increase access and
opportunities for the educational and research participation of significant
numbers of undergraduate students who are members of groups underrepresented in
the geosciences.

This project will attain this goal by making available to minority-serving
colleges and universities Online Weather Studies, an existing NSF-supported AMS-
developed distance-learning course on the basics of meteorology, coupled with
substantial faculty professional development and student mentoring programs.
Faculty development in this project features scientific and pedagogical
components, along with in-depth treatment of diversity issues, appropriate to
offering compelling meteorological student learning experiences. Highly
motivational learning experiences are designed to encourage students to consider
additional study in the geosciences leading to scientific or Earth science
teaching careers.