* 0119999
* Smart Sensors for In Situ Monitoring of Hydrothermal Vent Systems
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2001,03/31/2007
* John Holloway, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 03/31/2007
* USD 2,454,770.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Smart Sensors for In Situ Monitoring of Hydrothermal Vent
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal: 0119999 Date: June 27,
2001&lt;br/&gt;PI: Booksh Institution: Arizona State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the program
Biocomplexity in the Environment, subprogram Instrumentation Development for
Environmental Activities (BE-IDEA). The objective of this project is to develop
a suite of five sensors designed for in situ analysis of the ecosystem in and
around hydrothermal deep-sea vents. This ecosystem may be one of the most
ancient of Earth and have had a long-term effect on global geochemical cycles,
yet it is one of the least well understood. Hydrothermal vent ecosystems are in
a turbulent state of disequilibrium with large gradients of thermal and chemical
energy. Along this thermal/chemical gradient a complex ecosystem of tube worms,
thermophilic microbes, and specially adapted crustaceans and fish survive The
sensors are chosen that best monitor the physical, chemical, and biological
environment of the vent ecosystem to better understand the inter-relationship
between this unique environment and the life that it supports. The development
of in situ chemical sensors will provide a significant advancement in the state
of the art of hydrothermal vent monitoring. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will employ
a fiber optic surface plasmon resonance (SPR) based sensor integrated with a
thermocouple and conductivity sensor to better measure the density hydrothermal
vent fluid and salinity of the seawater surrounding the vent. Fiber optic SPR
sensors can be made sufficiently small and sensitive to probe the vent fluid/sea
water gradient where many thermophilic microbes reside. A fiber optic coupled
grating light reflectance spectroscopy (GLRS) sensor will be employed to monitor
the size distribution and relative abundance of mineral precipitates that form
during the mixing of vent fluid and sea water. This precipitate forms the vent
chimney walls where most microbes reside. Fiber optic Raman spectroscopy probes
will be tested to detect trace organic molecules that may be forming biotically
or abiotically in the vent fluid. Raman spectroscopy will also be tested to
survey the mineral and microbial distribution on the vent walls. An ambient
pressure driven liquid chromatography-Raman spectroscopy system will be
developed to enhance the selectivity and sensitivity of Raman spectroscopy to
simple organic molecules that may serve as food for or originate as waste from
microbes in the vent ecosystem. Sensitivity enhancement will come from novel
waveguide technology that has been demonstrated to push Raman detection limits
to low ppb for simple alcohols. Finally, a fiber optic, single measurement
excitation-emission matrix (EEM) fluorometer will be adapted to detect and
characterize larger biomolecules such as amino acids, proteins, and DNA
fragments that may prove indicative of biological activity in the vent ecosystem
Each of the proposed sensors has been previously developed past the proof of
concept stage for environmental or industrial process monitoring. The project
will adapt and test the sensors for the more challenging application of deep sea
vent monitoring. The sensors represent a promising technology that fills a large
need in the oceanographic/ life in extreme environments community. If the
proposed NEPTUNE network of deep-sea research nodes were built, these sensors
would be ideal for long-term field deployment. Successful development of these
sensors would lead to expansion of the technology for other biological and
environmental process monitoring applications. &lt;br/&gt;