* 0119572
* BE/CNH: Simulating Complexity in a Dynamic Landscape:  Land-Use and Land-Cover Change in Nang Rong, Thailand
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/2001,09/30/2007
* Barbara Entwisle, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 09/30/2007
* USD 1,309,705.00

Understanding the role of individual, collective, and institutional human
behavior is fundamental to an understanding of land-use and land-cover change.
Human dimensions have been difficult to model, however, because of the need to
incorporate the stochastic behavior of social units at multiple levels of social
organization, the need to make human actions spatially explicit, and the need to
be more explicit about what humans are doing and why, particularly at specific
locations for specific time periods. This project examines the consequences of
land-use and land-cover change in the Nang Rong district of northeast Thailand.
The overall goal of this project is to develop a better understanding of human
behavior in the transformation of the Earth's surface. Nang Rong serves as an
appropriate laboratory for this purpose. The data available for Nang Rong are
unique in their coverage of social, biophysical, and spatial domains and include
three panels of individual, household, and village-level data, which were
collected in 1984, 1994, and 2000. A time series of remotely sensed data that
includes aerial photography (beginning in 1954) and satellite data (beginning in
1972) also has been collected for the district along with a digitized base-map
and a collection of derived GIS thematic coverages. Verification data has been
obtained during multiple field visits, and qualitative interviews will be
conducted as part of the project. The project's first aim is to develop,
calibrate, and validate a cellular automaton (CA) model representing land use
and land cover change over the past half century in Nang Rong. CA models provide
a formal framework for investigating the behavior of complex, extended systems.
The CA model to be developed in this project focuses on the spatial and temporal
dynamics of deforestation, agricultural extensification, and plant succession.
Rules for the CA modeling will be derived from formal theories of growth and
change, and models will incorporate the results of empirical analyses. The
second aim of the project is to use the CA model in dynamic simulations to
explore land-use and land-cover change as both cause and consequence of patterns
of village settlement in a frontier environment; road development and increases
in vehicular traffic; migration and household formation as the frontier closes;
land tenure; monsoonal variability; agricultural intensification; cooperative
use of the hydrological layer; major shifts in world markets; electrification;
the rise in television ownership; and the spread of consumerism. Results of the
simulations will be used to examine the spatial distribution as well as
composition of land-use and land-cover change, and they will be used to evaluate
trajectories for a sample of pixels and other spatial units. The project's third
aim is to package the simulations into a multimedia GIS database. This database,
together with other materials explaining the situation, will be adapted to and
tested for use at the secondary and college levels and then made publicly
available via the Internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the conduct of this
project, the challengers of understanding the role of human behavior in land-use
and land-cover change will be met through the development, elaboration, and
evaluation of the cellular automaton (CA) modeling described above for the Nang
Rong district. The temporal depth, areal extent, and grain size of the social
surveys, remote images, and GIS data afford a unique capability to examine
complex systems operating within a complexity theory context. The coupling of
the simulation power of CA modeling, with its ability to allow for
nonlinearities and feedbacks, and a rich set of empirically derived
relationships will provide valuable new insights into the complex interactions
among natural and human systems. The project also will facilitate collaborations
between U.S. scientists and scientists at Mahidol University in Thailand. This
project is an award emanating from the FY 2001 special competition in
Biocomplexity in the Environment focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and
Human Systems.&lt;br/&gt;