* 0119865
* BE/CNH: Global Change, Globalization, and the Vulnerability of Mountain Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Lisa Graumlich, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/2005
* USD 80,000.00

Mountain regions provide a unique and important setting within which to examine
the interplay of global climate change and globalization. This project seeks to
strengthen an international, interdisciplinary research network whose goal is to
advance understandings of the dynamics of coupled natural and human systems by
characterizing the sources of vulnerability of mountain systems to the combined
effects of global warming and global economic restructuring. The strategy
underlying the project is to develop research ties among scientists from
multiple disciplines studying two mountain regions where the individual impacts
of climate change and globalization are already strongly manifest and well
documented. These regions are: the Greater Yellowstone Region in Montana,
Wyoming, and Idaho in the United States and the Mount Kilimanjaro Region in
Kenya and Tanzania. U.S. and African scientists from the natural and social
sciences will meet at workshops held in Montana and Kenya to address a range of
emerging questions, such as how biophysical heterogeneity and diversity of
institutional arrangements and economic strategies in mountain systems may
enhance, reduce, or change in kind and scale the vulnerability of these regions
to climate change. Participants from mountain regions in Asia, Europe, and South
America also will be invited to participate in these workshops as a first step
in expanding the research network globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will lay the groundwork to develop a global research strategy to address the
vulnerability of mountain systems to the interacting influences of global change
and globalization. Scientifically, mountain regions provide an ideal setting to
develop comparative case studies of differential impacts of global change and
globalization given that mountain regions are distributed all over the globe,
from the Equator almost to the poles and from oceanic to highly continental
climates and are experiencing globalization at widely varying rates. Mountain
regions also are critically important in assessing the impacts of global change
given that they occupy about one-fifth of the Earth's surface and provide goods
and services to about half of humanity. This project is an award emanating from
the FY 2001 special competition in Biocomplexity in the Environment focusing on
the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems.&lt;br/&gt;