* 0119790
* Center for Assessment and Evaluation of Student Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2009
* Steven Schneider, WestEd
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Earle
* 08/31/2009
* USD 12,683,403.00

The Center for Assessment and Evaluation of Student Learning (CAESL) addresses
the national need for increasing the assessment capacity within the K-12 science
education system. Increasing "assessment capacity" means enhancing the
expertise, designs, structures and supports that enable local districts and
schools to use assessment as a critical tool for enhancing science learning. The
primary focus of the Center will be classroom assessment practices. However,
because of the enormous pressure that standardized and/or state-mandated
assessments place on students and teachers, the project also seeks to better
align large-scale assessments with ongoing formative classroom assessments that
inform teaching and improve learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center is a
collaboration among: the Concord Consortium; the Center for Research on
Evaluation, Standards, and Student Testing (CRESST)/University of California,
Los Angeles; Stanford University; Lawrence Hall of Science; the Graduate School
of Education at the University of California, Berkeley; and WestEd, who will act
as the coordinator. There are several major school district partners that will
collaborate with the Center and serve as testbeds for Center activities and
resources. The project also works with San Jose State University, a major
teacher preparation institution, to co-develop and integrate a variety of
assessment resources into its preservice and graduate programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center's graduate programs are aimed to make
significant practical, conceptual and methodological contributions to the
assessment of science learning and achievement. The Graduate Schools of
Education at UC-Berkeley, UCLA and Stanford will develop a cooperative approach
to the masters and doctoral programs to be called the Learning and Assessment
Program (LAP) for 43 students. The LAP includes a series of core courses on
science, learning, cognition and assessment; testing and assessment; and
curriculum, teaching and assessment. Students can "telecommute" to take courses
at institutions other than their own, and all students will participate in a
practicum on assessment development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The professional
development component will be led by the Lawrence Hall of Science, the Concord
Consortium, and WestEd. Participating districts will be part of three-year
cohorts and assemble teams of teachers and district administrators who will
participate in 15 days of professional development each year over three years,
along with follow-up sessions at school sites. The professional development
focuses on testing and using formative classroom assessments. Experiences and
products developed as part of this component will be disseminated widely to
other schools or districts through the extensive networks of the Lawrence Hall
and WestEd. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The applied research component examines (1)
the formative and summative assessment strategies that most effectively increase
student learning and understanding; and (2) how educational technology can
enhance assessment practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, the project targets
public understanding of assessment and the Lawrence Hall of Science and
CRESST/UCLA will mount a public outreach effort that translates the work of the
Center for school administrators, parents and community
members.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;