* 0119042
* Proposal for a Workshop/Symposium Entitled Narrative that Heals to be held at the 4th International Congress of Arctic Social Sciences in Quebec City, Canada
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2003
* Wendy Arundale, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 05/31/2003
* USD 24,696.00

A two-day workshop entitled "Narrative that heals" will be held at the 4th
International Congress of Arctic Social Sciences on 16-20 May 2001 in Quebec
City, Canada. This workshop will convene 25 scholars, storytellers and
practitioners, more than half of them native peoples, from the U.S., Canada and
Greenland. The workshop will enable increased knowledge and understanding of how
storytelling, oral history and other forms of narrative can promote well-being
and help heal psychological and social wounds that afflict many northern peoples
at the individual, family, community and group levels. Workshop goals include
greater understanding of the social and psychological dimensions that can
contribute to more effective applications of healing through narrative, and
explorations of new applications and future research needs. Workshop
participants will address the healing power of narrative through discussions and
demonstration. By combining scholarly and experiential elements, the workshop
will heighten understanding and awareness and increase opportunities for
interaction, new learning and mutual respect. At the conclusion of formal
presentations, three discussants representing the perspectives of native people,
practitioners, scholars and policy makers will summarize, respond to and comment
on the presentations. There will be opportunities also for session participants
and audience members to participate in these discussions. Results of the
workshop will be disseminated via audiotapes that will be made available to
institutions and individuals, and session abstracts will be placed on the
International Arctic Social Sciences Association website. All or part of the
proceedings will be published, probably grouped in a special issue of an
appropriate journal.