* 0119344
* ADVANCED GEOTECHNICAL EARTHQUAKE ENGINEERING RECONNAISSANCE
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2004
* Jean Pierre Bardet, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 05/31/2004
* USD 37,500.00

On January 26, 2001 at 8:46 AM (local time), a magnitude Mw 7.5 earthquake
struck the Kachchh area in Gujarat, India. This is the most damaging earthquake
in India in the last 50 years. The earthquake epicenter is located to the north
of Bacchau about 160 miles (250 km) west of Ahmadabad, India or about 180 miles
(290 km) southeast of Hyderabad, Pakistan. The epicenter was at N23.399 E70.316
and a depth of 23.6 km according to USGS. The earthquake damaged dams, ports and
bridges, obliterated small villages in Gujarat, and caused damage to Ahmedabad,
a large city 250 km away from the epicenter. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As of 2
February 2001, the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation of the Indian
Government reported more than 15,000 dead as the result of the earthquake. There
are reports of ten of thousands of collapsed and damaged buildings, and a great
number of people homeless. The January 26, 2001 earthquake took place in the
Kachchh region, and appears to be an intraplate event with similarities with the
1811-1812 New Madrid sequence, which struck New Madrid, Missouri from December
through January 1811-1812. First reports indicate that damage in Western India
extends over large areas, as was observed in New Madrid, Missouri. The extent of
casualties and damage and the similarities with existing conditions in the
United States of America required the immediate dispatch of a NSF reconnaissance
geotechnical team to document the geotechnical and engineering
geology/seismology features of this earthquake.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project provides funding necessary for sending a small advanced reconnaissance
team to the area damaged by the January 26, 2001, Bhuj, India earthquake, and
for documenting the geotechnical, and engineering seismology features of the
earthquake in as much detail as possible. The reconnaissance team will be sent
to India as soon as the emergency rescue efforts have slowed down, and the means
of transport have been reestablished. The advanced reconnaissance team will be
coordinated by J.P. Bardet of the University of Southern California. The
advanced reconnaissance team will be followed by a larger reconnaissance team
coordinated by Raymond Seed of the University of California, Berkeley. This
larger team will be supported by a separate SGER grant from the National Science
Foundation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed reconnaissance of this
devastating earthquake is expected to yield useful information and data to
understand the effects of large-scale intraplate events, and to apply those
findings to the mitigation of similar earthquake hazards in mid-America.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;