* 0119939
* Enhancing Diversity Through The Penn State Weather Camp
* GEO,GEO
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2003
* Gregory Jenkins, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Huntoon
* 12/31/2003
* USD 24,729.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enhancing Diversity through the Penn State Weather
Camp&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Minorities are poorly represented in the geosciences
in general and in the atmospheric sciences in particular. Research experiences
such as summer science camps are an effective means of introducing minority
students to science. The Penn State Weather camp provides an excellent
opportunity to increase exposure to the atmospheric sciences of students from
traditionally underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will
provide travel and registration costs for students from traditionally
underrepresented groups to attend the Penn State Weather Camp during the
2002-2004 period. Two one-week sessions are expected during this time period.
This camp provides a hands-on opportunity for students entering grades 8 through
10 to learn about fundamental aspects of meteorology. Highlights of this camp
include forecast contests, balloon launches, weather analysis, role playing as
policy makers for climate change and creating a short TV broadcast. On-camera
meteorologists from the Weather Channel Inc. and WeatherWorld will train
students. Students from traditionally underrepresented groups will be surveyed
at the camp and tracked afterward to determine if the camp has directly led to
these students entering the geosciences or sciences.&lt;br/&gt;