* 0119714
* International Symposium on Fast Glacier Flow
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2001,09/30/2002
* Keith Echelmeyer, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 09/30/2002
* USD 27,762.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;OPP-0119714&lt;br/&gt;Echelmeyer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Principal Investigator is requesting funds from the Antarctic Glaciology and
Arctic Natural Sciences Programs to support the participation of several foreign
scientists and U.S. graduate students at an International Symposium on Fast
Glacier Flow. In 1986, a Chapman Conference on Fast Glacier Flow was held to
bring together scientists who were actively involved in the study of surging and
fast tidewater glaciers, and ice stream flow. The meeting illuminated several
outstanding problems which contributed to numerous inter-disciplinary studies in
the Antarctic and Arctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since 1986, there have been many
important new developments in our understanding of the properties and processes
involved in fast glacier flow and of its consequences in the global climate and
ocean systems. For example, the West Antarctic Ice Sheet initiative has brought
the roles of highly deformable subglacial till and marginal shear-zone ice
dynamics to the forefront as important processes in fast glacier motion. This
research has led to new approaches in the study of surging glaciers in the
Arctic. Detailed studies of outlet glaciers in Greenland and tidewater glaciers
in Alaska have been important in determining the roles of fast glacier flow and
iceberg calving in ice sheet mass balance, as well as their roles in ice sheet
disintegration and their effects on ocean circulation through Heinrich-type
events. New remote sensing techniques have been used to illuminate features of
ice stream flow and surge-type glaciers in both Antarctica and the Arctic,
including the identification of a large ice stream in northeast Greenland and
possible rapid drawdown of the Pine Island/Thwaites drainage basins in
Antarctica. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of these exciting new developments,
the Principal Investigator will host an International Symposium on Fast Glacier
Flow in 2002 sponsored by the International Glaciological Society in Yakutat,
Alaska. Yakutat is located among the largest and most active tidewater and
surging glaciers in the North America. The meeting will be organized through the
Geophysical Institute, University of Alaska - Fairbanks. This proposal seeks
funds to partially defray the cost of organizing and carrying out this
symposium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bringing together Antarctic and Arctic
scientists working on these different aspects of rapid ice motion should promote
vigorous discussion and an exchange of ideas on the current state of knowledge.
The symposium will focus on the most pressing unanswered questions of fast
glacier flow, leading to discussions of future directions for international,
inter-disciplinary research. Peer-reviewed papers resulting from oral and poster
presentations at the symposium will be published in the Annals of
Glaciology.&lt;br/&gt;