* 0119961
* BE/CNH: Ecosystem Dynamics and Essential Human Needs: Developing an Interdisciplinary Research Agenda in the Plata Basin
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2001,12/31/2003
* Terence Boyle, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Frances Li
* 12/31/2003
* USD 70,000.00

INT 0119961 Ratchford, Marina S. American Association for Advancement of Science

The Plata Basin comprises the Paraguay-Parana rivers system and the Uruguay
river system; it is shared by Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay.
This large and complex river system has high levels of biodiversity and human
use, making it an ideal location to test a novel interdisciplinary, multi-
stakeholder approach for studying the interaction of natural and human systems
as well as for planning alternative strategies of sustainable development. The
Plata Basin pilot project will focus on the effects of expanding agricultural
and cattle-raising activities on biogeochemical cycles, land-use change, levels
of biodiversity, and the changing hydrological cycles of the Paraguay and Parana
rivers. Computer-based models, using variables reflecting land-use changes,
socio-economic data, and climatic information, will be used to better understand
the consequences of the flooding cycles of the Paraguay and Parana rivers in the
next fifty years.

A two-session planning workshop will take place in Argentina in March 2002 to
construct a research agenda for the Plata Basin. The workshop will include key
political, industrial, and local community stakeholders from the Plata Basin
countries, as well as researchers from the region and the U.S. The planning
workshop will seek to assess the extent, rate, and impact of the expansion of
the agrarian frontier in the Plata Basin. It will also establish a long-term,
interdisciplinary research agenda and will evaluate methods of incorporating
stakeholder input into appropriate models. A website, with the relevant papers
and workshop outcomes will be posted by AAAS, and will include interactive
functions to facilitate dialogue and data exchange between members of the
scientific community interested in the interaction between natural and human
systems.

This project is an award emanating from the FY 2001 special competition in
Biocomplexity in the Environment focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and
Human Systems.

