* 0119457
* Support for the US National Committees of the Bioscience Unions in the International Council for Science (ICSU)
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2002
* Wendy White, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Carter Kimsey
* 09/30/2002
* USD 480,000.00

This action funds a one-year renewal for support of the US Committees for the
bioscience unions that are part of the International Council for Science (ICSU)
and administered through the National Academy of Sciences
(NAS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. biology community is represented by NAS in
five international scientific unions: the International Union of Biological
Sciences (IUBS), the International Union of Physiological Sciences (IUPS), the
International Union of Pure and Applied Biophysics (IUPAB), the International
Union of Microbiological Sciences (IUMS), and the International Union of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (IUBMB). There are two overarching issues to
which the five committees of U.S. scientists who represent U.S. interests in
these international organizations have assigned high priority. The first is the
need for new, inclusive, multidisciplinary, and integrative approaches to
biological questions. The second is the need to build human and research
capacity in developing countries. This award will permit the NAS to continue to
manage U.S. participation and assert U.S. leadership in these bioscience unions.
Further it provides dues have to the five international organizations and funds
to support the activities of the five corresponding U.S. National Committees.
This award will also fund a new US National Committee for DIVERSITAS, an
international cooperative research program on biological diversity under the
sponsorship of the IUBS. &lt;br/&gt;