* 0119531
* SGER: Liberal Studies and the Integrated Engineering Education of ABET 2000 -- A Planning Conference at the University of Virginia, Fall 2001
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2001,08/31/2004
* John Brown, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ronald Rainger
* 08/31/2004
* USD 39,713.00

Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Proposal 01-19531&lt;br/&gt;John K. Brown, Liberal
Studies and the Integrated Engineering Education of ABET 2000: A Planning
Conference at the University of Virginia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under
the impetus of new accrediting guidelines and goals (EC 2000), America's
engineering colleges are poised to embark on far-reaching curricular innovation,
responding especially to the new standards' insistence on integration across the
curriculum and their determination to merge technical and humanistic studies.
But the difficult work has barely begun: How will educators translate the
inspired goals of EC 2000 into integrated courses, holistic design experiences,
and comprehensive degree programs? In particular, how can liberal studies
educators take a leadership role in fostering a truly integrated education for
undergraduate engineers?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With a Small Grant for Exploratory
Research (SGER), this project involves a planning conference that explores
specific obstacles, goals, and models in achieving this curricular revolution.
The holistic approach of EC 2000 builds upon some highly useful precedents in
integrative education developed at a range of engineering schools, some well
known and others that have worked largely in isolation. The conference takes
these scattered reform efforts, develops new concepts for integrative education,
and traces out their benefits, limits, and adaptability to other institutions
and contexts. The gathering draws upon the expertise of leaders from five groups
with a vital interest in engineering education today: engineering school deans,
faculty from the technical disciplines of engineering, liberal studies
educators, engineers and managers employed in industry and government, and
historians of technology. Each group has a vital stake in assuring the success
of EC 2000, while each comes to the table with unique perspectives necessary in
forging realistic plans to achieve that success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is intended as the first step in laying out the parameters and
approaches for a broader effort to provide information and guidance for
engineering and liberal studies and spocialscience faculty seeking to integrate
the techical and non-technical elements of engineering curricula and educational
experiences. &lt;br/&gt;