* 0119532
* Educational Innovation: An Investigation into Aesthetic Computing within the Digital Arts and Sciences Curricula
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2001,09/30/2006
* Paul Fishwick, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 09/30/2006
* USD 455,546.00

Abstract 0119532 Paul Fishwick University of Florida Title: An Investigation
into Aesthetic Computing Within the Digital Arts and Sciences Curricula

This project integrates research in "aesthetic computing" directly into a new
set of CISE programs, collectively called Digital Arts and Sciences (DAS). The
thrust of DAS is to create a student who is endowed with a hybrid-knowledge of
computer engineering and the arts. This enables the student to work effectively
in production-oriented teams centered on projects involving videos, interactive
games, education, scientific and engineering visualization, and software
engineering. The research integration is accomplished through the addition of an
Aesthetic Computing course and a series of Digital World Production Studio
courses. Both Fine Arts as well as CISE students take these courses, and the PIs
team-teach the studio course. Aesthetic Computing refers to the use of genres
and styles in fine art employed as metaphors for formal and diagrammatically
rendered model structures commonly found in computing, such as automata, data
flow graphs, data models and the comprehensive Unified Modeling Language (UML).
This work builds upon many areas outside of CS such as semiotics, linguistics,
analogy, metaphor, and the arts. Ongoing progress in the information and program
visualization literature is most related; however, the project's focus is on a
stronger arts component that both personalizes and enriches the user's modeling
interface. For example, the representation of a finite state machine may be
crafted, through metaphor mapping, to a scale or virtual model of a building.
The style of the building can be taken from the huge variety of possible genres
existing in architecture, without limiting the representation to abstract
entities. And, elements of music and story schemata can be simultaneously mapped
onto the architecture, further personalizing the interface. The goal of the
project is to develop practitioners who understand both the formalisms of
visualization and the practical aspects of human communication that deal with
aesthetic interpretation.