* 0119936
* OEDG:  Mentoring Through Research:  Catalyst for Success in the Geosciences
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* John Yule, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Continuing Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2005
* USD 967,210.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mentoring through Research: Catalyst for Success
in the Geosciences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Department of Geological Sciences at
California State University Northridge (CSUN) will develop a program to attract
and retain underrepresented minorities in its geosciences curriculum. The three-
year Catalyst Program centers on peer-mentored research groups composed of
graduate (CSUN MS candidates), undergraduate (from CSUN and local community
colleges), and high-school students from under-represented groups. The multi-
tiered approach connects students with mentors both horizontally (peer) and
vertically (near-peer and advisor). The three-year scope of the project allows
mentoring relationships developed during the first year to continue into
subsequent years and for continuing students to step into roles of increasing
responsibility and experience. Mentor-protege connections are initiated in a
classroom setting through a course designed to teach mentoring and research
concepts, and to familiarize students with each other, the research projects,
and the faculty advisors. Students then join one of four focused research groups
centered on exciting and engaging research projects of local to global
significance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The selected research projects have
significant topical overlap (e.g., seismology, structure/active tectonics,
sedimentation and tectonics, and sedimentology and low temperature
geochemistry), providing common grounds for student interaction through
coursework and facilitating student transfer from group to group if research
interests change. The Catalyst Program provides mentoring and research training
for the 30 or more students who will participate in the program to ensure
success in academe and industry. It also enhances the mentoring skills and
research productivity of the faculty mentors and strengthens the research
capacity of the department, increasing the likelihood of continued funding from
a variety of sources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt
;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br
/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&g
t;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&
lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;
br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/
&gt;