* 0119252
* WORKSHOP: U.S.-Czech Regional Workshop on the Plant Hormone Cytokinin, June 28 & 29, 2001 in Prague
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2002
* Machteld Mok, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Sharman D. O'Neill
* 05/31/2002
* USD 19,250.00

The award provides support for a two-day workshop on the plant hormone cytokinin
to be attended primarily by U.S. and Czech scientists. The workshop will be held
in Prague on June 28 and 29, prior to the meeting of the International Plant
Growth Substances Association (IPGSA) in Brno, to maximize participation. The
objective is to enhance existing and initiate new collaboration, particularly
between junior faculty, postdoctoral students, and graduate students, with the
goal of extending research partnership to the next generation of scientists. The
funds will be used for organization of the workshop and for travel of young
scientists (faculty, postdoctorals, and graduate students) to the workshop and
the IPGSA meeting. The program will include reviews of recent advances in
cytokinin research and discussions of future opportunities. Recent findings in
selected areas will be introduced by lead scientists, followed by round-table
discussions and small group sessions. The subjects will include: (1)
biosynthetic and metabolic pathways; (2) receptors and signal transduction
pathways; (3) genomics and proteomics; (4) genetic and functional analyses
including mutants, knock-outs and transgenics; (5) methods and significance of
cytokinin quantitation; (6) antibodies and immunology; and (7) regulation of
cytokinin levels and physiological significance. This workshop should promote
innovative research through collaborations between U.S. and Czech laboratories.