* 0119804
* Project SLUCE:  Spatial Land-Use Change and Ecological Effects at the Rural-Urban Interface:  Agent-Based Modeling and Evaluation of Alternative Policies and Interventions
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2001,03/31/2008
* Scott Page, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 03/31/2008
* USD 1,363,063.00

The complex interaction among current landscape conditions, cultural values and
norms, policy prescriptions, and market forces dramatically limits the
usefulness of linear models as tools for understanding the complex interactions
among human and natural systems in many different settings, especially the
transition zones between urban and rural areas. The development of policies and
other solutions for minimizing negative ecological effects and introducing
possible positive ecological effects of land-use change requires tools for
anticipating and evaluating the complex interactions between humans and
ecological systems. To have some predictive power, these tools should
characterize the nature of land-use decision making at the levels of individual
households, firms, and local governments, and they should permit evaluation of
the ecological effects of various decisions. Such tools should recognize
economic, political, and psychological motivations for land-use and management
decisions on the urban fringe as well as utilities for sale of undeveloped land.
This project focuses a multidisciplinary team on developing, evaluating, and
applying agent-based models of land-use and land-cover change processes and on
assessing their interactions with ecosystem structure and function. The primary
objectives of the project are (1) to develop agent-based models of land-use
decision making at the urban fringe, (2) to compile time-series spatial land-use
and land-cover data in southeastern Michigan from roughly 1950 to the present,
(3) to develop and apply spatial data, indicators, and models of ecological
structure and function as associated with land-use change, and (4) to evaluate
policy and design options for maintaining ecosystem viability as land-use
patterns change. Complementing the research activities of this multidisciplinary
team will be a suite of educational activities, including the formal
incorporation of the integrated land-use, decision-making, and ecosystem models
into both "content" classes (such as environmental economics, ecology,
sociology, and policy development) and "methods" classes (such as complex
systems modeling, GIS, spatial analysis, and remote
sensing).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The models and tools resulting from this project
will have direct utility for understanding both human and natural landscape
dynamics within urban systems, and they will assist in projecting patterns of
ecological change at the urban-rural fringe. Because the project focuses on
enhanced understandings of individual decision making that drives land-use
decisions, it will enhance capabilities to formulate and test alternative
policies and interventions that could reduce environmental costs and enhance
environmental benefits. Furthermore, the project's deliberate focus on the model
development and application process and should result in innovative approaches
for integrating agent-based models of the land-use change process with empirical
observations of land purchaser, seller, developer, and agency attitudes as well
as with land-use, land-cover, and ecosystem change. The project also will have a
direct impact on the graduate and undergraduate education through their
incorporation in a broad range of courses at the University of Michigan, and it
will have broader educational and application impacts through its dissemination
to the broader research, education, and practitioner communities. This project
is an award emanating from the FY 2001 special competition in Biocomplexity in
the Environment focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;