* 0119854
* Our Ocean: Enhancing Minority Education in the Marine Sciences at a Caribbean HBCU
* GEO,GEO
* 04/15/2002,09/30/2005
* Stephen Ratchford, University of The Virgin Islands
* Continuing Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 09/30/2005
* USD 148,345.00

ABSTRACT Our Ocean: Enhancing Minority Education in the Marine Sciences at a
Caribbean HBCU

The project is conducted by faculty in the Marine Sciences at the University of
the Virgin Islands (UVI), a predominantly undergraduate, Historically Black
university with campuses on the islands of St. Thomas and St. Croix. The project
takes advantage of the strengths of UVI-the accessible tropical marine
environment of the Caribbean Sea and Atlantic Ocean, high academic standards,
and a strong track record of preparing minority undergraduates for postgraduate
study in the sciences. The program works synergistically with other programs,
including an NSF Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate
Program cooperative agreement (HRD-9979896) to address the education, economic,
and cultural barriers to entry into the marine sciences that Virgin Islanders
face.

This project increases the number of minority Virgin Islanders entering into the
marine sciences at the undergraduate and graduate levels by reducing
educational, economic, and cultural barriers to entry and retention. Specific
activities supporting this goal include: enhancing the interest and preparation
in the marine sciences of minority high school students through a six-week, on-
campus summer enrichment activity; increasing enrollment and retention in UVI's
Marine Biology BS curriculum by providing one new 4-year tuition scholarship to
a minority Virgin Island student each year for 3 years; strengthening
preparation for post-baccalaureate study and/or careers in marine sciences by
supporting mentored undergraduate research projects per semester for three
years; and developing programs to increase awareness and interest in marine
fields.