* 0119934
* Earth Science Pipeline: Recruiting and retaining under-represented ethnic groups in Earth Sciences
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* W. Britt Leatham, University Enterprises Corporation at CSUSB
* Continuing Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2005
* USD 644,798.00

ABSTRACT

Earth Science Pipeline: Recruiting and Retaining Under-Represented Ethnic Groups
in Earth Sciences California State University San Bernardino (CSUSB) has a
minority student population large enough for it to have been designated a
Hispanic Serving Institution. However the Department of Geological Sciences has
an enrollment of under-represented ethnic groups not only less than the
surrounding community but also below that of the national average. CSUSB has
initiated a project entitled "Earth Science Pipeline: Recruiting and Retaining
Under-Represented Ethnic Groups in the Earth Sciences". This project conducts
activities designed to (1) increase under-represented minority enrollment in the
Department of Geological Sciences, (2) retain these students once they have
entered the program, and (3) feed these students into the geosciences pipeline
so that they either enter graduate school or the geosciences profession. The
overall theme that unifies the proposed activities is that studying geology can
be exciting, and that it is possible to pursue a rewarding career in
geosciences.

Specific activities include the development of a collaborative program for the
teaching of geological sciences with local schools with high minority
enrollments, and interaction with, and training of sixth to twelfth grade
teachers through activities such as workshops, demonstrations and formal field
trips. Teachers will also be involved in designing demonstrations and hands-on
activities for use in their classrooms. Activities include annual summer
geological field trips conducted by faculty from the Department. Students will
also be invited to participate during the summer and/or academic year in
research projects under the supervision of a faculty member from the Department
of Geological Sciences at CSUSB.















