* 0119273
* Biophotonics: Biophotonic Sensors Based on Polymer Microspheres Evanescently Coupled to Optical Fiber
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Stephen Arnold, Polytechnic University of New York
* Continuing grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2005
* USD 445,409.00

0119273 Arnold The applicant proposes to investigate photonic sensors based on
dielectric microspheres evanescently coupled to optical fibers, and to develop
microsphere sensors for biochemical and biological sensing. The unprecedentedly
narrow optical resonances in such microspheres open an avenue for a novel class
of all-optical sensors which can measure local properties by detecting optical
frequency shifts of the resonances. Many photonic resonance modes occur in a
microsphere in an extremely narrow linewidth. The resonance spectrum is obtained
by scanning the wavelength of the laser transmitted through the fiber into the
microsphere and observing the intensity through a read-out fiber coupled to the
microsphere. Resonance wavelength shifts are extremely sensitive to changes in
the diameter and the refractive index of the sphere as well as the refractive
index of the medium surrounding the sphere. The latter quantities are determined
by the temperature, adsorption of a second substance onto the sphere surface,
the isotropic and anisotropic stress, and the concentration of a chemical in the
solution surrounding the sphere. Efforts will be especially targeted at
developing microscopic sensing heads for biofluids. For this purpose fibers and
microspheres, all made of polymers that can be rendered biocompatible will be
used. The high specificity in biomolecular interactions will enable detection of
a specific RNA, protein, enzyme, substrate, and antigen. The goal is to allow
one to prepare as many kinds of sensors as the number of biomolecules.
Availability of miniature, high-sensitivity biophotonic sensors will facilitate
the development of 'device on a chip' and other parallel chemical and biological
analysis systems in combinatorial chemistry.