* 0119679
* CLT:  Appalachian Collaborative Center for Learning, Assessment and Instruction in Mathematics
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2011
* Carl Lee, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing grant
* David B. Campbell
* 08/31/2011
* USD 10,397,847.00

Submitted under the guidelines for Centers for Learning and Teaching, the
Appalachian Collaborative Center for Learning, Assessment and Instruction in
Mathematics (ACCLAIM) is a five-year project designed to build a mathematics
infrastructure in the Appalachian regions of Kentucky, Ohio, Tennessee and West
Virginia. ACCLAIM is a collaborative partnership among the University of
Kentucky (UK), Ohio University (OU), the University of Tennessee (UT), and
Marshall (MU) with the Appalachian Rural Systemic Initiative (ARSI). The
mathematics infrastructure in Appalachia will be enhanced through: (a) advanced
degree programs in mathematics and mathematics education, (b) job-embedded
teacher preparation and professional development programs, and (c) education
research in a rural context.

The two goals are to: (a) build mathematics capacity and expertise in the
Appalachian regions of Kentucky, Ohio, Tennessee and West Virginia through
advanced degree programs in mathematics education and through research that
connects mathematics and rural education; and (b) improve the quality of
mathematics teaching at the middle and high school levels in the Appalachian
region through the development of collaborative networks and innovative delivery
systems.

To meet these goals, ACCLAIM will create and implement four interconnected
initiatives:

1. Capacity Building: Doctoral cohorts of 20 students every two years,
masters/specialists cohorts of 30 students every year. 2. Professional
Development: Professional Development Teams in middle and high schools. 3.
Teacher Education: Appalachian Association of Mathematics Teacher Educators --
(AAMTE) fall and spring conferences and a listserv, needs assessment of teacher
education programs, and undergraduate courses online and telelink. 4. Research:
Research agenda focused on mathematics education in rural contexts: a) stimulate
research, b) oversee and coordinate data collection and analysis, c) publish or
disseminate best practices, d) serve as a clearinghouse for research findings,
publish a newsletter -- "The Rural Mathematics Educator."