* 0119992
* BE/CNH: Human And Natural Systems Associated With Mediterranean Watersheds:  An Interdisciplinary Framework
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2001,02/28/2003
* Vincent Resh, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2003
* USD 55,000.00

Mediterranean systems offer an abundance of water over short, unpredictable time
periods, usually between November and April in California. Time periods with
scarce water can be long-lasting, making it difficult to manage water and land
use and to supply consistent goods and services to large population centers. The
primary goal of this developmental project is to develop a theoretical framework
that will allow for an integration of human and biophysical Mediterranean
watershed dynamics. This requires a greater understanding of the inherent
biocomplexity of Mediterranean watersheds and the dynamic relationships among
these environmental systems and human actions, institutions, and policies. A
multidisciplinary team of researchers drawn from both the natural and social
sciences will explore the consistency between hydrologic, biotic, and
socioeconomic models that are used to explain and to regulate watershed
ecosystem behavior and the realities of watershed behavior in Mediterranean
environments. Prevailing scientific models of watersheds and regulatory systems
developed to manage natural resources in watersheds commonly have evolved
without a thorough understanding of Mediterranean watershed dynamics. The
investigators hypothesize that these scientific models are better suited to
relatively homogenous environments with fairly predictable rainfall and tight
relations between stream flow and proximate land uses than they are to
Mediterranean watersheds with their episodic hydrology and frequent disturbance.
The validity of this hypothesis will be tested as a basis for potentially more
useful formulations of Mediterranean problems. In doing so, the investigators
will explore the influence of physical, biological, social, and institutional
processes on the function and health of Mediterranean ecosystems at various
spatial scales ranging stream reaches and individual watersheds to entire river
systems. They will conduct a series of facilitated workshops and field days to
help critically assess the suitability of existing models for Mediterranean
conditions. These workshops and field days will help to identify shared
variables among disciplines and their use in developing interdisciplinary
models; design a comparative research framework to test new models and
hypotheses; provide an operational watershed forum and academic advancement for
the broader community; and enhance support for comparative interdisciplinary
research.

Human population growth in Mediterranean-climate regions has placed considerable
pressure on scarce freshwater resources, resulting in widespread impairment of
river and stream systems. A great deal of capital is being invested in restoring
Mediterranean watersheds with a very shallow conceptual awareness of where, how,
and what is being restored. This has led to many restoration project failures in
California and elsewhere. By integrating theories, perspectives, and methods
from the physical, biological, and social sciences, this project will provide a
sounder basis for the restoration of Mediterranean watersheds, and it will help
address existing laws and institutional structures that are not well-equipped to
deal with this kind of dynamic system. This project is an award emanating from
the FY 2001 special competition in Biocomplexity in the Environment focusing on
the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems.