* 0119785
* Shaking up the Future of Hispanic Students in Rural Southwest Arizona: A Collaborative Research/Teaching Effort Creating a Bridge between Students and the Geosciences
* GEO,GEO
* 11/15/2001,10/31/2005
* Fred Croxen, Arizona Western College
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 10/31/2005
* USD 210,251.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shaking up the future of Hispanic students in
rural southwest Arizona&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arizona Western College (AWC), a
two-year institution situated in rural southwestern Arizona, has a student
population of about 62% underrepresented minorities, most of whom are first-
generation, low-income students of Hispanic origin. "Shaking up the future of
Hispanic students in rural southwest Ariona" is a three-phase geoscience
education program to indentify, recruit, and train talented underrepresented
students in geoscience. The linchpin of the program is a local reserach-quality
seismic network comprising three broadband seismometers. Yuma is situated on the
east perimeter of the seismically-active Salton Trough; a transtensional basin
located at the southern end of the San Andreas Transform system. Most area
residents have felt earthquakes and students in geosciece classes show an
interest and enthusiasm in their origin and potential societal impact. The
project will recruit local minority high school students by engaging them in a
topical sciecne issue that impacts border communities in Arizona and
California.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AWC Seismic Observatory in geoscience
education is a joint effort of the Arizona Western College and the University of
Arizona's Southern Arizona Seismic Observatory (SASO). Phase I of the three-
phase program involves an annual 2.5 week summer seismic program where high
school students and AWC geoscience majors explore the nature of earthquakes in
the field and laboratory. In Phaes II, high school students will bridge up to
one AWC's three geoscience programs. As part of the geoscience curriculum,
students will work in the seismic observatory with a graduate student from SASO
and participate in frequent regional field trips. In Phase III, student
participants move to geoscience programs at the University of Arizona or other
institutions. The relationships fostered in Phase I and II will serve as an
academic bridge connecting AWC students to faculty in the Geoscience Department
at the University of Arizona.