* 0119626
* Modifying the Boundary Conditions of Lubricant Flow
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Steve Granick, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Yip-Wah Chung
* 08/31/2004
* USD 314,256.00

0119626&lt;br/&gt;Granick &lt;br/&gt;This work will provide a critical
experimental assessment of the"stick" boundary condition of continuum
hydrodynamics. The stick assumption is presently one of the cornerstones of
calculation regarding fluid flow in tribology yet recent theories and
experiments raise the exciting possibility that surfaces can be engineering to
produce the boundary condition of partial slip. The approach will consist of
testing the classical Reynolds Equation of continuum hydrodynamics for cases
where systematic prior experiments do not yet exist: partially-wetted surfaces
(finite contact angle of the fluid on the surface) and variable surface
roughness (the roughness will be topographical, chemical, and lubrication
additives). For measurement, a modified surface forces apparatus will be
operated at spacings large enough (10-200 nm) that intervening Newtonian fluids
are believed to behave as a continuum. Nanometer-level oscillatory modulations
of film spacing will be performed such that the amplitude and frequency of
modulation are varied independently, allowing the mean velocity to vary over a
wide range without large change of the film thickness. &lt;br/&gt;First, we will
put to direct test recent theoretical predictions and molecular dynamics
simulations that predict breakdown of stick boundary conditions when low-
viscosity fluids fail to wet completely a smooth solid boundary. Secondly, we
will extend this work to" patchy" surfaces - surfaces that are chemically and
geometrically rough - to test theoretical predictions that" stick" boundary
conditions of fluid flow stem from the presence of roughness. Third, we will
extend this work to "hairy" surfaces - surfaces that bear surface-attached
polymer chains. This is the situation that prevails in oil lubrication owing to
the presence of polymer additives. It is the situation that prevails in
biolubrication owing to the presence of surface-attached biomacromolecules.
&lt;br/&gt;The engineering impact will be to point the way to new ways by which
energy dissipation can be controlled during lubricant flow. The main
applications will pertain not so much to the high-load conditions characteristic
of heavy machines, as to the low-load conditions characteristic of emerging
nanotechnologies and micromachines.&lt;br/&gt;***