* 0119379
* U.S. - Italian Bilateral Workshop on "New Technologies and Cultural Heritage"
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2002
* Bernard Amadei, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Alison Flatau
* 05/31/2002
* USD 81,828.00

This award supports a US-Italian bilateral workshop entitled "New Technologies
and Cultural Heritage" in Venice, Italy on April 23 and 24, 2001, and is jointly
funded by the Engineering Directorate and International Program. Cultural
artifacts link mankind to its artistic and cultural past. It is important that
they be preserved as closely as possible to the state in which they were
created. Deterioration of cultural artifacts has become a major concern around
the world. Broad issues include the preservation of ancient buildings,
monuments, and archeological sites; construction materials; artifact
collections; and collection materials. The workshop is expected to reach two
major goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first goal is to bring together
specialists from various disciplines to explore how advanced technologies can
contribute to the assessment and improvement of the objects that are part of our
cultural heritage. The participants will consist of engineers, scientists, and
conservators, among others. They can be divided into two main groups. One group
consists of experts in the preservation and management of the artifacts
themselves, including historic stone monuments and museum collections. A second
group of experts focuses on materials or environmental research and on advanced
technologies that could be applied for beneficial purposes in the diagnosis,
monitoring, protection, and/or restoration of cultural objects. Traditionally,
these two groups have not interacted much. The workshop constitutes a special
effort to promote exchange of information and ultimately create synergy and
collaboration between these groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second goal of the
workshop is to bring together US and Italian researchers and institutions to
explore topics of common interest and to identify opportunities for constructive
future bilateral research and information exchange. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop will provide a "meeting of the minds" and bring together participants
with diverse educational and professional backgrounds. The workshop will be
attended by 21 participants from the U.S. and 26 participants from Italy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;