* 0119904
* Virginia Collaborative for Excellence in the Preparation of Teachers Follow On
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2005
* George Bass, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 06/30/2005
* USD 600,001.00

Through a grant from the NSF Collaboratives for Excellence in Teacher
Preparation (CETP), the Virginia Collaborative for Excellence in the Preparation
of Teachers has accomplished a complete redesign of the mathematics and science
preparation programs for future K-8 teachers. The participating institutions
(Virginia Commonwealth University, Longwood College, Mary Washington College,
Norfolk State University, and regional community colleges) increased the credit
hours required of future elementary school teachers from an average of 9-12
credits to an average of more than 24 and developed entirely new programs for
future middle school teachers requiring substantial course work in the subjects
to be taught by these teachers. In making the program modifications, the faculty
completely redesigned the content and nature of instruction provided in the
courses taken by future teachers. In addition, the institutions strengthened the
in-school experiences provided to future teachers by preparing a cadre of
outstanding current teachers to serve as Clinical Faculty in the teacher
preparation programs, providing enhanced practicum, class visitation and student
teaching experiences for the future teachers. Finally, a Teaching Apprentice
Program was put in place at each institution to aid in the recruitment and
retention of prospective teachers. A follow-on project at Virginia Commonwealth
University is conducting an assessment of the classroom effectiveness of
teachers prepared under the new programs. The summative evaluation is focusing
on the extent to which project goals were met; the impact of the project on
faculty, preservice students and participating institutions; and the
effectiveness of the VCEPT teacher graduates. The project is also providing
mentoring to effectively transition a group of new teachers into their
profession, by assigning a Clinical Faculty Member to mentor new graduates.
Virginia Commonwealth University continues as the lead institution for the
follow-on proposal.