* 0119409
* Entry Point!2001: Discovering and Developing Talent among Students with Disabilities
* O/D,OIA
* 06/15/2001,11/30/2001
* Virginia Stern, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 11/30/2001
* USD 10,168.00

0119409 American Association for the Advancement of Science Stern

The American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) is the recipient
of an award for summer internship support for the ENTRY POINT! Program. ENTRY
POINT! a national effort to discover and develop talent among students with
disabilities, seeks summer internship opportunities for students majoring in
science, mathematics and engineering. Through the program academically prepared
students have received quality internship assignments throughout federal
government agencies and industry. Participants are exposed to various career
options in the Federal sector that serve as a basis in helping students make
informed career choices and solidify career objectives. By partnering with the
Federal government, AAAS has been able to successfully place over 175 students
in summer positions since ENTRY POINT! commenced in 1997. In an effort to
continue its collaboration with AAAS, the National Science Foundation, one of
two of the participating government agencies, will offer challenging assignments
that will broaden the exposure of participants pursuing careers in science,
mathematics, engineering and technology (SMET). Internship opportunities create
an unique opportunity to assist in the fulfillment of two core strategies
related the goals of NSF's mission: developing intellectual capital, and
integrating research and education. As a result the Foundation actively
participates in strengthening the infrastructure to achieve excellence in SMET
education.