* 0119864
* SACNAS: Initiatives For Equity In The Geosciences
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Mariaelena Zavala, Society for Advancement of Chicanos & Native Americans in Sci
* Continuing Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2006
* USD 875,001.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;SACNAS: Initiatives for Equity in the
Geosciences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project of the Society for the Advancement
of Chicanos and Native Americans in Science (SACNAS) seeks to recruit Native
American and Chicano/Latino undergraduate students in the geosciences,
environmental sciences, earth sciences, and astronomy each year for the next
five years to attend and to participate in the SACNAS National Conference. The
project also supports a session at the annual SACNAS conference that will focus
on advances in the geosciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prospective student
candidates are contacted and informed of the SACNAS initiative and offered
financial assistance in the form of travel and lodging grants to attend the
National Conference. At the conference, students attend small group workshops,
present research posters, participate in scientific symposia, and exchange ideas
in meaningful one-on-one interactions with scientists, teachers, engineers, and
professionals. In an effort to theorize and measure the impact of outreach
efforts SACNAS will add a tracking dimension to the model for purposes of
demonstrating whether programmatic efforts impact student decisions to continue
their education into graduate school and beyond. The tracking system will survey
students at the end of each academic year and after graduation across a number
of educational variables and academic practices. Ultimately, this project
increases the representation of Native American and Chicano/Latino geoscience
students and scientists within NSF-supported research and education initiatives.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt
;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br
/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&g
t;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&
lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;
br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/
&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt
;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&l
t;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;b
r/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&
gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;