* 0119877
* BE/CNH: Intellectual Imperatives in Ethnobiology:  Research, Methodology, Analyses, Education, and Funding for a Rapidly Expanding Field
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2004
* Cheryl Asa, Missouri Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Frances Li
* 09/30/2004
* USD 52,930.00

This workship will bring together biologists, anthropologists, and
archaeologists engaged in research on etnobiology, together with applied
mathematicians, to identify future directions to facilitate growth and
maturation on the field. The workshop will be organized in two parts: an initial
3-day workshop of the organizing committee of mid-career leaders in the field,
followed by a widely advertised seminar to which attendance will be open. The
workshop will attempt to define and focus research objectives; explore modern
methodology appropriate for studying plant/animal-people interactions; assess
and strengthen techniques for quantitative analyses of multidisciplinary data;
develop interdisciplinary education models to train students and practicioners
of ethnobiology; and develop strategies to improve access to academic funding
sources. International research partners from the International Society of
Ethnobiology will attend. The participants will be pledged to apply the insights
and collaborative linkages developed in the workshop to preparing competitive
proposals in etchnobiology to submit to relevant programs in NSF. The output
will be a bulletin defining the intellectual imperatives in ethnobiology, which
will be broadly distributed to professional societies, universities, government
agencies and nongovernmental organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are a
variety of practical problems that would benefit from a more holistic and
theoretically strong ethnobiology discipline. Due to the global nature of the
workshop and the involvemente of foreign participants, the impact on research
and education could be global in scope.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is an
award emananting from the FY 2001 special competition in Biocomplexity in the
Envionment focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;