* 0119011
* ME:  Cloning of Elisabethatriene Cyclase for Use in the Synthesis of Diterpenes
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2006
* Robert Jacobs, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 01/31/2006
* USD 457,535.00

Marine organisms have proven to be a prolific source of novel, biologically
active natural&lt;br/&gt;products. A growing number of these are entering
clinical trials and many more are in preclinical&lt;br/&gt;development. In
general, the production of these compounds through synthesis is not feasible
on&lt;br/&gt;a commercial scale and consequently, the supply of such compounds
presents an escalating&lt;br/&gt;problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
directed at the development of seco-pseudopterosins and related
metabolites,&lt;br/&gt;anti-inflammatory agents from the soft coral
Pseudopterogorgia elisabethae.&lt;br/&gt;These compounds have been shown to be
anti-inflammatory and analgesic agents in mouse ear&lt;br/&gt;models with
potencies superior to that of pseudopterosins which are in clinical use, and
existing&lt;br/&gt;drugs such as indomethacin. A biotechnological production
method of these compounds will be developed based on the cloning of a key
biosynthetic enzyme. In addition to addressing the supply issue of these
specific metabolites, completion of these goals will provide useful models for
the development of a growing number of anti-inflammatory terpenes being
discovered from marine invertebrates. Since all of the pseudopterosin used
commercially is obtained through collections from nature, success with this
project will provide a sustainable source of these valuable compounds and save
delicate reef environments from the effects of large scale
collecting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The synthesis of the targeted anti-inflammatory
agents will be approached as follows. Firstly, the first biosynthetic
intermediate will be generated by sequencing the coral's diterpene cyclase and
cloning this into E. coli. via the construction of a P. elisabethae cDNA
library. The cyclase product will serve as a key intermediate in the syntheses
and will be modified to the seco-pseudopterosin aglycone by chemical methods.
This would then set the state for the ultimate glycosylation to complete the
synthesis of the seco-pseudopterosins. ( This last step is not a goal of the
present project.)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research represents a collaboration
between two labs with complementary expertise. R.&lt;br/&gt;Kerr (PI, FAU) will
conduct the natural products chemistry, enzymology and some of the molecular
work&lt;br/&gt;J. Lopez (Co-PI, HBOI) will compete the cDNA library construction
and work with Kerr on the cloning &lt;br/&gt;experiments.&lt;br/&gt;