* 0119851
* BE/CNH: Climate Information and Forecasts in Agricultural Production Systems of the Argentine Pampas: Planning for Their Effective Use in Decision Making
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2001,12/31/2003
* Guillermo Podesta, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 12/31/2003
* USD 65,000.00

Agricultural production is a complex natural-human system that involves multiple
value-laden objectives and various sources of risk. One of the major risk
sources to agriculture is climate variability. In many parts of the world, the
El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) phenomenon is the major single source of
climate variability on seasonal-to-interannual scales. Links between ENSO-
related climate variability and agricultural production have been established
for many regions, including the Pampas of Argentina, a major production region
and the geographic focus of the proposed effort. Recent scientific and
technological advances have made it possible to forecast, with moderate skill,
ENSO events with a lead time of months. In the agricultural sector, ENSO-related
climate forecasts may help to reduce risks of adverse conditions or to take
advantage of favorable conditions. Simply documenting the effects of climate
variability and providing better climate forecasts is not sufficient to derive
benefits from the emerging predictive capability, however. The factors that make
many farmers reluctant to respond to climate information requires scientific
attention in order to derive significant benefits from to the climate
predictions. This collaborative project between U.S. and Argentine researchers
seeks to enhance understandings of the use of probabilistic climate information
to support decision making in agricultural production systems; to anticipate and
possibly prevent unintended negative societal consequences of climate
prediction, and to inform the design of a future operational system to
disseminate climate information relevant and useful to decision and policy
making in agriculture. The project will involve planning workshops and
preliminary research to inform the planning effort. Two planning workshops will
help to frame the problems to be addressed during the planning process, identify
major research needs, and design a detailed plan for future work. Major issues
to be addressed during planning workshops include the major sources of
uncertainty in each component of the modeling approach and the identification
and explication of the assumptions and limitations associated with all models
that are used. Preliminary research activities to be undertaken include
individual interviews and focus groups with farmers and technical advisors in
the Argentine Pampas. The preliminary work also will include a survey of
institutions that produce and disseminate climate information or agricultural
advice and a description of existing decision-support tools that could be
adapted to include climate forecast information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This end-
to-end exploration of components of a system for the use of climate information
and forecasts in agriculture and other sectors will help assemble an effective
multidisciplinary team of researchers drawn from the natural and social
sciences. This project should foster greater knowledge about the ways through
which newly available climate information can influence the complex interactions
among human and natural systems like agricultural production in the Argentine
Pampas may respond to the. The project should also help to lay the foundation
for future work on the constraints and incentives for the effective use of
climate information in benefit of society. This project is an award emanating
from the FY 2001 special competition in Biocomplexity in the Environment
focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems.&lt;br/&gt;