* 0120727
* BIOCOMPLEXITY: Consequences of Greenhouse Warming for Biocomplexity and Biogeochemical Cycles: A Multidisciplinary Case Study Across the Paleocene-Eocene Boundary
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2007
* Paul Koch, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 09/30/2007
* USD 2,498,392.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Consequences of Greenhouse Warming for
Biocomplexity and Biogeochemical Cycles: a Multidisciplinary Case Study Across
the Paleocene-Eocene Boundary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Approximately 55 Ma, the
Earth experienced a rapid and extreme episode of global warming that was the
product of an unusually massive release of carbon into the ocean-atmosphere
system. This event, known as the Paleocene Eocene Thermal Maximum (PETM), had
far reaching and significant impacts on global marine and terrestrial ecosystems
that ranged from mass extinction of deep sea foraminifera to dispersal and
subsequent radiation of plants and ungulates. The combination of these climatic
and biotic perturbations initiated dramatic changes in the planet's
biogeochemical cycles that eventually worked to restore equilibrium to the
global carbon cycle. However, the recovery process took nearly 200,000 yrs. We
propose a multi-institutional interdisciplinary program to investigate the
effects of the Paleocene Eocene Thermal Maximum (PETM) on the global biosphere
and coupled biogeochemical cycles of carbon and nutrients. This project will
bring together an international team of experts that includes 11 senior
investigators from the US, and 5 from Europe, New Zealand, and China. Building
on a foundation of existing work, this study will utilize an array of models to
determine the coupling of inorganic and organic chemical processes, to evaluate
the relative contributions of these processes in sequestering excess carbon, on
short and long-time scales. Empirical data representing marine and terrestrial
systems will be generated and used to constrain and evaluate model results. We
will evaluate and test existing hypotheses concerning the nature of first order
effects and feedbacks of the PETM perturbation on the biosphere and coupled
biogeochemical cycles. There are many parallels between the events of 55 Ma and
the present day in terms of forcing and response. There are also many
differences in the structure of biotic communities and the configuration of
continents and oceans. Nevertheless, at a fundamental level, biogeochemical
systems and the biosphere would have responded much as they do today. As such,
the PETM provides a unique and, possibly the only, opportunity to investigate
the short and long-term effects of abrupt greenhouse gas induced warming on
global environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;