* 0120369
* Research for Mixed Signal Electronic Technologies: A Joint Initiative Between NSF and SRC: Inter-Pulse-Interval Based Mixed Signal Representations
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Daniel Hammerstrom, Oregon Health & Science University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2005
* USD 150,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although digital signal representation has become
almost universal, there are still many areas where an analog representation is
required to interface with an analog world or to meet various other objectives
such as power dissipation, frequency, or cost. In these domains analog signal
representation is essential for many input modalities such as instrumentation,
sensor interfaces, and communications. Likewise, there are related output
applications, such as biomedical actuation and industrial control. In addition,
the needs of wireless and fiber-optical communication have reinvigorated analog
design. However, there are serious problems concerning how to keep these analog
components on a reasonable scaling curve as Moore's law continues unabated in
the digital domain, and in integrating analog representations into large,
complex digital systems ("system on a chip").&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The purpose
of this proposal is to study a new approach to representing analog signals that
we believe will integrate more cleanly into these deep submicron, single-chip
systems. Today analog signals are almost exclusively represented by current or
voltage quantities. Our proposal is to borrow a page from neuroscience and to
use the Inter-Pulse-Interval (IPI) between single-bit, asynchronous pulses to
represent analog quantities. We are proposing to develop a mixed-mode
analog/digital cell library and design methodology based on IPI representation
and the associated computation elements, and to engineer a case study to
illustrate the outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As we move to deep submicron and
then on to the nanometer/molecular devices, the problems that digital encounters
with scaling, such as threshold inconsistency, subthreshold currents, hot-
electron effects, doping variability, substrate coupling, and transmission line
and complex cross-talk effects, are even more serious for analog circuitry. IPI
representations will provide significantly better immunity to these effects, as
well as to the more traditional process, temperature, and reference voltage
variations. For most applications, pulse based analog systems will require less
power. There are numerous advantages to using pulses or pulses to communicate.
They are significantly more immune to noise. An approximate analogy would be
that of AM versus FM radio signal representation. The outcomes of the proposed
research are&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Create a library of basic communication,
computation (arithmetic and logic) and conversion building
blocks;&lt;br/&gt;Design, implementation and testing of a case study using the
derived building blocks and methodology;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Document an IPI-
based design methodology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;