* 0120735
* Life in the Pit: Unique Biogeochemical Cycling in Highly Stratified, Metal Rich, Aquatic Environments
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2001,05/31/2004
* Johnnie Moore, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 05/31/2004
* USD 99,981.00

0120735&lt;br/&gt;Holben&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More than a century of metal
mining in the Northwest region of the U.S. has created numerous open water
extreme environments with unusual metal and chemical composition. In addition to
their status as Superfund sites, these environments also represent large-scale
outdoor laboratories in which it is highly likely that unusual biogeochemical
cycles and microbial metabolic strategies exist. We are requesting one year of
funding through the SGER component of this program to facilitate development of
a multidisciplinary, polyphasic approach that is generally applicable to
resolving the chemical and biological components of biogeochemical cycling in a
series of these extreme and unusual aquatic environments that vary in key
biogeochemical parameters.&lt;br/&gt;Considering the unique nature of these
environments, and the paucity of information on the biological component of the
biogeochemical cycles, preliminary fundino, is necessary to develop appropriate
sampling strategies, equipment and analytical techniques, assemble the requisite
expertise, determine the key parameters to measure, and develop a model
framework adequate for dealing with a suite of extreme aquatic environments
proposed for future study. The requested year of funding will provide
preliminary data, methodologies, and demonstration of feasibility that will
allow us to prepare a full proposal for the 2002 Biocomplexity Program
Call.&lt;br/&gt;