* 0120310
* Computational Studies of Dynamical Phenomena in Nanoscale Ferromagnets
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2005
* Per Arne Rikvold, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 11/30/2005
* USD 360,000.00

This is an award to Mississippi State University with a subaward to Florida
State University. It is a renewal of an ongoing research program on state of the
art computational studies of nanomagnetism. As such, it captures the spirit of
recent NSF initiatives on ITR and NSE, in that its impact will be felt on new
algorithms for complex interacting systems, understanding magnetism on the
nanoscale, and the design of new ultrahigh-density magnetic strorage
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One technological motivation of the research is
the ongoing effort to increase the information storage density of magnetic
recording media. It is likely that ultrahigh-density magnetic recording media
that can store one bit of information on one single-domain, nanoscale magnetic
particle may become available in the next few years. To achieve this goal with
acceptable data integrity and read/write speeds at room temperature, it is
necessary to improve the scientific understanding of magnetization-reversal
dynamics in magnetic nanoparticles, molecules, and ultrathin films, at nonzero
temperatures. This will require large-scale numerical simulations of realistic
models of technologically important magnetic
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will further develop novel
simulation algorithms for hysteresis and thermally driven magnetization reversal
in models of nanoscale magnets. The materials objective of the project is to
improve understanding of dynamical phenomena in real nanoscale ferromagnetic
materials at nonzero temperature over a large range of time scales.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous work will be extended by conducting simulations
of a wider range of real materials through increased emphasis on quantum
mechanical systems and less strongly anisotropic materials. These
generalizations will include continuous spin models with finite spin anisotropy,
systems with defects and quenched disorder, three-dimensional models and quantum
spin models of magnetic molecules. In order to study these models, novel
algorithms capable of covering a wide range of time scales will be adapted and
developed, in particular the Projective Dynamics and Monte Carlo with Absorbing
Markov Chains algorithms previously developed on this project. The studies of
continuous spin models will also use Langevin Micromagnetics methods for finite-
temperature simulations developed during the previous grant period. Particular
emphasis will be given to developing methods that enable these simulations to
cover a wide range of time scales. It is also proposed to use quantum density
matrices to predict experimental EPR line widths for magnetic molecules and to
provide ab initio transition probabilities for kinetic Monte Carlo and Langevin
simulations. The suitability of these algorithms for various parallelization
paradigms will be studied and they will be implemented on scalable parallel
computers. The scaling properties of parallel simulation algorithms will be
studied using mappings to non-equilibrium interface-growth problems that were
discovered on this project. These algorithmic and parallelization methods
constitute the computational objectives of the research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This is an award to Mississippi
State University with a subaward to Florida State University. It is a renewal of
an ongoing research program on state of the art computational studies of
nanomagnetism. As such, it captures the spirit of recent NSF initiatives on ITR
and NSE, in that its impact will be felt on new algorithms for complex
interacting systems, understanding magnetism on the nanoscale, and the design of
new ultrahigh-density magnetic strorage
systems.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;