* 0120786
* DEM-Research Internships in Science and Engineering (RISE): Linking Undergraduate Female Students in SMET Fields and Female Faculty Mentors
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2006
* Linda Schmidt, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 09/30/2006
* USD 1,079,200.00

The University of Maryland is testing an educational intervention program
designed to &lt;br/&gt;address aspects of both external (contextual) and
internal (individually based) barriers to success and persistence of women in
science and engineering. The program -- called RISE: Research Internships in
Science and Engineering -- offers a hands-on introductory orientation program
for freshmen (Level One) and an enhanced team research experience for upper
class students (Level Two) . The enhanced team experience consists of
participation in all-female research teams, mentoring by female faculty members
and advanced female students (undergraduates and graduate students) who are paid
and trained to perform significant mentoring and teaching of undergraduate
women. The female faculty member's own research program is the setting for the
student teamwork and mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the
intervention addresses the external factors of the "chilly climate" of science,
the lack of female role models and mentors, and the lack of a female "critical
mass" among students and faculty in SMET academic departments. Regarding
"internal barriers," we identify underestimation of abilities as operationalized
by "self-efficacy" as the most useful psychological construct for understanding
the ambivalence related to career choice and persistence in SMET undergraduate
majors. Self-efficacy describes the notion that students develop beliefs about
their personal capabilities at different academic pursuits (e.g., whether or not
they can "do math"). Self-efficacy has been the basis for a large body of
findings in the vocational literature, much of it focusing on the debilitating
effects of low self-efficacy on the selection and persistence of career options
including engineering and science fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Female faculty
are supported in their mentoring of young women (both in terms of training and
finances), and at the same time make progress in their own research program. The
entire research team (consisting of the faculty member, RISE Fellows and up to
four RISE participants) is taking part in training on mentorship, team
functioning, and psychological constructs key to enhancing the successful
learning of women students&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This demonstration program has
the potential to bring some of the advantages of an all-female learning
environment, epitomized by women's colleges, into more mainstream higher
education such as the University of Maryland College Park. Replicable features
include: role model hierarchies, mentor training, and all-female research teams.
Also replicable is the notion of a two level program, beginning with a front end
experience that excites and prepares entering female college students, moving on
to an extended research internship in the later years that involves close
contact with successful woman scientists and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;