* 0120967
* Center on Materials and Devices for Information Technology Research
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2013
* Larry Dalton, University of Washington
* Cooperative Agreement
* Z.  Ying
* 07/31/2013
* USD 36,331,318.00

The Science and Technology Center on Materials and Devices for Information
Technology Research, University of Washington, Seattle is a multi-disciplinary
and multi-institutional activity designed to support a goal-directed, sustained
effort to broadly advance the science and technology of materials, devices and
systems for advancing information technology. Center activities involve six
universities, University of Washington (UW: lead institution), plus the U. of
Arizona (UA), California Institute of Technology (Caltech), U. of Southern
California (USC), U. of California at Santa Barbara (UCSB) and Berkeley (UCB).
The STC emphasizes vertical integration of knowledge and applications that span
the intellectual range in fundamental optoelectronic materials and engineering
research from molecules to integrated devices and systems for improved signal
generation and detection and for improved information transport, processing, and
storage. Research is divided among four strategic thrust areas: 1) Electro-Optic
and All-Optical Materials and Devices; 2) Infrared Organic Light-Emitting
Diodes, Amplifiers, and Lasers; 3) Advanced Assembly and Patterning Approaches
to Integrated Optics; 4) Theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational activity
is planned around three primary elements: 1) Under-represented groups and
institutions in the STC including Minority and HBCU partnerships, emphasis on
undergraduate participation in research, and an aggressive outreach effort; 2) A
vertically integrated program on education in optical science, materials, and
devices; 3) Integration of science, engineering, and business education. The
Center includes assessment strategies for evaluation of the effectiveness of new
approaches in their educational activities which have a strong web based
component. The Center aims to create a vertically integrated, web-based, modular
resource emphasizing optical science, materials and devices, offering 1)
resources for developing courses and for students' independent studies, 2) web-
based courses, and 3) an STC-"IT" news-page (with links to industrial websites)
describing new technical advances, job opportunities, conferences, professional
courses, and academic curricula. The Center has a strong, collaborative program
for fostering outreach to and participation by non-center researchers in
research activities. Interaction with industry and Federal Laboratories will be
implemented at several levels. Projects with early societal impact will be
integrated with longer-term projects. For example, development of 3D integrated
circuitry, the exploitation of photonic bandgap device structures, and the
exploitation of controlled coupling to microresonators will be a theme of both
short-term (e.g., electro-optic information processing) and longer-range (e.g.,
all-optical information processing) impact projects to advance knowledge,
understanding, and technology performance in information technology. This center
is projected to become a focal point in the U.S. for education of the workforce
in the fields of telecommunication and information processing; photonics; and
opto-electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;