* 0120866
* Micro Scale Experiments and Modeling of MEMS RF-Switches
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Horacio Espinosa, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Perumalsamy N. Balaguru
* 09/30/2005
* USD 309,657.00

0120866&lt;br/&gt;Espinosa&lt;br/&gt;A GOALI award supports study of materials
properties and problems relevant to the integration of micro-electro-mechanical
systems (MEMS) with IC components for wireless applications. These systems offer
unique advantages over other technologies because of their low power
consumption, high sensitivity, physical size, and low cost. The technology is
ideal for next generation of cell phones, base stations for wireless systems,
and highly-efficient software-controlled digital radio for military
communications. In these applications the MEMS devices are typically used as
filters or switches. Filters with Q-factors of 94,000 can be employed to pre-
select a communication band and a specific channel within that band. Switches
with insertion losses bellow 0.1 dB per switch can be used for electromagnetic
beam steering in radar antennas, accomplished through phase shifting. This
feature enables antennas to transmit and receive signals without the need for
physical reorientation. However, despite the large industrial interest, the
technology is not yet commercially viable because a number of technical
obstacles have to be overcome first. Key among these are packaging and
mechanical modeling of MEMS materials at the micron scale. For instance, in the
case of RF-switches, the effect of the environment can result in stiction of the
membranes due to humidity or other sources. This requires the development of a
cheap hermetic package. From a reliability standpoint, it is necessary to
consider the plasticity limit and its temperature dependence with the materials
involved. Temperatures as low as minus 50 degrees Celcius can be reached in
satellite and airplane wireless applications while temperatures of a few hundred
degrees can be present during device packaging. Another important failure
mechanism is fatigue caused by excessive actuation cycles. Most of these devices
are actuated trillions cycles pushing the design envelope and our current
knowledge of material behavior beyond known parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this project the reliability of capacitive RF-MEMS switch materials and
components will be investigated. The effect of temperature and number of cycles
on material degradation as a result of defects generation and evolution will be
examined for aluminum alloy and doped nanocrystalline diamond films. Likewise,
the evolution of the built-in stresses will be identified with a nanoindentation
technique for use in the SEM, recently developed in the PI's laboratory.
Experiments will consist of the deflection of freestanding films, to assess the
elastic and inelastic properties of the films, and fatigue analysis by means of
successive electrostatic actuation. Evolution of built-in stresses and material
microstructure will be assessed as a function of the number of actuation cycles.
Modeling of the experiments will be performed at several length scales, from ab
initio calculations and molecular dynamics to discrete dislocation and
continuously distributed dislocation networks; extensive simulations will link
modeling and experiment.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;