* 0120376
* Davidson Data Center and Network for Transition Economies
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2007
* Jan Svejnar, William Davidson Institute
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2007
* USD 398,499.00

This grant establishes the Davidson Data Center and Network (DDCN), a center and
an international network of institutions to make widely available micro and
macroeconomic data on transition economies (those moving from central planning
to a market system). The DDCN has been discussed and formulated with the leading
institutions in the field of transition and emerging markets. Providing access
to these data is important for many reasons. In addition to providing valuable
information on the unprecedented process of reform in transition economies, data
from these economies allow better tests of basic economic theories since mature
market economies rarely display sizable variation in key variables and since
transition economies provide opportunities to analyze the emergence of phenomena
that have been long established in market economies. Research based on these
data will also have considerable policy impact. The transition economies
comprise over one-third of the world's population and a better understanding of
how public policy can improve the functioning of these economies will have a
tremendous impact on the welfare of the poor. Moreover, major reforms in
transition economies have so far been made largely on the basis of the
experience of advanced economies, and at times they have generated undesirable
outcomes. The DDCN will have a significant beneficial impact on graduate
education and academic as well as non-academic research in several respects.
First, it will promote research on transition economies by significantly
lowering both the costs of and the risks associated with such research. Second,
it will increase collaboration among researchers already studying the transition
economies, helping to eliminate wasteful duplication of effort in collecting
data. Third, the DDCN will have a particularly great benefit for graduate
students, many of whom depend on readily obtainable data for the success of
their dissertation research.