* 0120145
* Mixed Integer Programming for Radiotherapy Optimization
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Mark Langer, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2005
* USD 349,999.00

&lt;br/&gt;0120145&lt;br/&gt;Langer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are approximately
1.2 million new cases of cancer each year in the US and about half undergo
treatment with radiation therapy. External beam treatment directs a collection
of high energy beams from outside the patient's body towards the tumor. Using
the widespread method of conformal radiotherapy, beams are positioned at
multiple angles, each shaped to match the tumor. The newest technique, intensity
modulated radiotherapy (IMRT), breaks down whole beams into finer beamlets, each
of which can, in effect, be assigned a separate intensity. The radiation therapy
planning problem is to choose a set of beams/beamlets and assign intensities to
them to push tumor dose as high as the tolerances of nearby healthy tissue will
allow. Even small increments in tumor dose consistent with tolerance constraints
can improve thousands of lives per year. The objective of the proposed research
is to develop computational methods tailored to radiation therapy that can
compute feasible plans provably within a specified percent of the best possible
within the 24-48 hours available for treatment planning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
determine volume distributions of dose, oncologists typically model the
irregular geometry of tissue structures as the union of a large number of
embedded discrete points. Given that the dose delivered to a point can be
approximated as linear in the beam intensities, the task of treatment planning
optimization can be modeled as mixed-integer program (MIP) with variables
corresponding to those intensities, and constraints limiting the dose at each of
the tissue points. Dose-volume constraints, which require a specified fraction
of each normal organ volume receive a dose below its threshold for damage, are
enforced by collecting point constraints for each tissue in a multiple-choice
group with alternatives delineated with binary
variables.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will develop and test two
contributions to generic MIP methodology in order to enable computationally
efficient solutions to be be found for the radiotherapy planning problem. The
aim is to provide solutions that satisfy prescribed constraints with an
objective value that lies within a provable bound around the optimum. The first
of these will strengthen LP relaxations of MIP formulations for the multiple-
choice (dose--volume) constraints by constructing and adding new valid
inequalities. The second will adapt a column-generation approach to deal with
the massive IMRT formulations. Instead of modeling the intensity of each beamlet
within an IMRT beam, whole patterns of beamlet intensities will be represented
as single columns and generated as required.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt
;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br
/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;