* 0120860
* DEM - OPTIONS
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Sheryl Maxwell, Shelby County Schools
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 07/31/2005
* USD 710,938.00

OPTIONS is a demonstration project designed to create small-scale learning
communities that assist girls in achieving in advanced science and mathematics
courses at the high school level, and encourage them to pursue science and math
college degrees and business careers. The project targets high school girls, who
have demonstrated average to above average abilities in math and science and who
are enrolled in one of the seven Shelby County Schools (SCS) high
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the OPTIONS program, 70 students per year for
four years are forming learning communities. Teachers are studying how to craft
proactive approaches to math and science for girls. The objectives of the
program are to: 1 ) increase the interest, confidence, knowledge and test scores
of girls in science and math concentrations 2) train high school math and
science teachers and guidance counselors in gender-equitable approaches to
decrease barriers and assist to aid girls in pursuing science and math majors or
careers; and 3) increase the number of all students who plan to enroll in
classes, choose college majors, or pursue careers in science or math related
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to obtain the objectives, SCS is creating
learning communities of students, teachers, and mentors who engage in specific
after school, professional development, and summer camp activities. The program
includes professional development workshops to modify teacher and counselor
attitudes and skills; project-based, problem-solving exercises to stimulate
girls interest in science and math; mentoring by professional women; exploration
of college options; and internships at local corporations and
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has broad implications. For
educators, OPTIONS will identify factors for women that inhibit their academic
pursuits and career choices in science and math areas, and begin building new
approaches to encourage those choices. Participating female high school students
will achieve a new understanding of the vast opportunities available in science
and math-related industries and learn to work in a small group to solve real
world problems. Corporations that rely on these disciplines will interact with
educators in the design and evaluation of industry specific intern programs to
prepare the next generation of workers and to generate enthusiasm for that work.
Schools, school systems, and local communities will benefit from the increased
emphasis on science and math classes and the career opportunities that come from
that focus.&lt;br/&gt;