* 0120463
* Synthesis of Metal Oxides with Open Framework Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2002,02/28/2005
* Allan Jacobson, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 02/28/2005
* USD 435,000.00

This project aims to use hydrothermal synthesis techniques to expand the
inorganic materials chemistry of metal oxides and specifically to discover new
open framework structures with potential for use as sorbents or heterogeneous
catalysts. An important direction is an emphasis on microporous solids with
stability and intracrystalline reactivity. Two major classes of inorganic
materials have been targeted, the group VB transition metal phosphates, and the
group VB transition metal silicates and germanates. Initial studies indicate
that many new microporous framework silicates can be constructed and this a
major focus of the research. New synthesis techniques that will be developed
include the modification of standard hydrothermal reaction conditions and the
use of higher pressures where necessary. Training of both undergraduate and
graduate students will be emphasized. In particular the participation of women
and other underrepresented groups in the research will be emphasized.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New nanoporous inorganic solids with improved properties
that will have applications in molecule separations and as catalysts in chemical
reactions are vital to the needs of the petrochemical industry in areas that
include oil refining and chemicals production. Improvements in chemical
processing are important for more effective use of U.S. hydrocarbon resources
and to increase energy efficiency. &lt;br/&gt;