* 0120453
* Biocomplexity: The Roles of Resources, Competition, and Predation in Microbial Degradation of Organic Matter
* GEO,OCE
* 10/15/2001,09/30/2007
* Lily Young, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 09/30/2007
* USD 2,000,001.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0120610&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bacteria play
crucial roles in cycling of elements and thus the functioning of the biosphere.
We know a great deal about the metabolic diversity of bacteria, and the pathways
of the reactions they perform. Outside of simple laboratory systems, however, we
cannot predict with any certainty the rates at which bacteria grow, metabolize,
and mineralize organic matter. This project is about understanding, at a
mechanistic and thus quantitative level, what affects the activity of bacteria
in nature. While initially the problem seems straightforward, the investigators
believe that its solution has been elusive because there are complex processes
involved. This complexity exists over several levels of biological organization
(individual, population, community), and in the microscale spatial heterogeneity
of the environments in which bacteria function. The ultimate goal of this study
is to develop, and test, a model that will predict the rates of organic matter
cycling in natural systems. Such a model must include the physical and chemical
factors controlling the availability of resources (reactants) to bacteria,
interactions (potentially competitive) among different bacterial populations,
and interactions among bacteria and their predators. The shorter-term goal, and
the explicit goal of this project, is to focus on one type of environment -
estuarine sediments - and one category of organic matter - polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAHs) in a background of natural organic matter.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach centers on a tight coupling between modeling
and empiricism, since it is our belief that models and experiments lead to new,
useful knowledge only when there is a steady interaction. The model we will
develop considers both bottom-up (e.g., resource availability) and to-down
(e.g., predation) controls on bacterial activity. Estuarine sediment will be
used as the environmental matrix for modeling and experimental testing inasmuch
as these sediments are inherently complex and heterogeneous due to their widely
varied chemical and physical properties, the mixtures of organic and inorganic
constituents of which they are composed, and the simultaneous occurrence of
chemical, physical, and biological processes. Bicyclic and polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAHs) will be chosen as a type of reactant that is used by only
certain types of bacteria in the system. Thus, the time rate of change in PAHs
will be used as a barometer of the activity of some members of the community.
This will provide a sensitive and specific comparison of model predictions and
experimental data. Models will be structured to account for variability in
properties of the biological and abiotic components. The framework of the models
will include spatial heterogeneity in sediment properties, population dynamics
including competition and predation, nutrient and PAH mass transfer, and
molecular dynamic simulations. Complexity will be added incrementally, as
indicated by closely coupling model predictions with experimental results. The
expertise of the group assembled to conduct the proposed research encompasses
ecology, engineering, environmental geochemistry, and microbiology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational and training opportunities, on a variety of
levels, will be built into this research. Specifically, the project will include
mechanisms to enhance coursework in both undergraduate and graduate programs in
environmental technology and engineering education; to broaden student research
training that will explore dynamic interactions within and among environmental
systems and will be directed by a multidisciplinary team of faculty
investigators; and to provide enrichment opportunities for in-service teachers
of science courses in grades 5-8 through a partners-in-learning
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;