* 0120519
* High Risk Exploratory Research: Archaeological investigations on the Mehran plain, southwest Iran
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,02/28/2003
* Abbas Alizadeh, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2003
* USD 19,908.00

The Revolution of 1978 and the subsequent Eight Year War with Iraq resulted in
the cessation of systematic fieldwork in Iran by foreign archaeologists. With
the support of the Iranian Cultural Heritage Organization, an international team
co-directed by Abbas Alizadeh and Nicholas Kouchoukos will begin a new program
of field research in the arid southwest region of the country. Here,
archaeologists in the 1960s and early 1970s produced a rich material record of
fundamental transformations in the economic and political organization of human
societies, including the emergence of sedentary agriculture, nomadic
pastoralism, cities, states and empires. To accomplish this, they developed a
powerful synthesis of archaeological method and anthropological theory that
moved Near Eastern prehistory from an orientalist antiquarianism to the
forefront of the influential New Archaeology. To resume work in southwest Iran
after nearly 25 years is therefore to take up again an enduring set of research
problems and a lapsed conversation between archaeology and social theory. With
these goals in mind, Drs. Abbas Alizadeh, Nicholas Kouchoukos and their
colleagues will conduct six weeks of exploratory survey and excavation on the
Mehran Plain in autumn 2001. Their research will address interrelated sets of
questions concerning: 1) the history of human-environment interactions,
specifically the domestication of sheep and goat, the adoption of agriculture,
and the development of canal irrigation; 2) the interaction between pastoral
nomads and settled farmers in the emergence and development of social and
political complexity in the region; and 3) the relationship between emerging
polities of southwest Iran and the neighboring, more precocious city-states of
southern Mesopotamia. Located near the natural habitat of the wild ancestors of
domesticated cereals and caprines, within the traditional winter grazing lands
of mobile pastoralists, and along the most important historic route between
Mesopotamia and Iran, the Mehran Plain is ideally located for such
investigations. Field research will focus on the excavation of two known sites
which together provide a continuous, stratified sequence of artifact, floral,
and faunal assemblages spanning the 9th through 4th millennia BC. Fieldwork and
subsequent analysis will focus in particular on changing practices of plant and
animal exploitation and the social logics and intersecting institutional forms
through which agricultural and pastoral production were valorized, intensified
and integrated. Ultimately, the project will attempt to understand the
development of these practices and structures in their local, regional and
global context.