* 0120702
* Quantum Fluctuations of the Order Parameter in Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2001,10/31/2005
* Leonid Glazman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 10/31/2005
* USD 270,000.00

This award supports theoretical research and education to study quantum
fluctuations in low-dimensional superconductors. Three projects are planned: (1)
The investigators will calculate corrections to the existing mean-field theory
of the upper critical field in thin superconducting films. They will consider
mesoscopic effects in the distribution of impurities that lead to the appearance
of superconducting droplets above the BCS upper critical field. The Josephson
network of the superconducting droplets may become macroscopically
superconducting at low temperatures. The genuine transition point is determined
by the interplay of the quantum fluctuations of the order parameter and the
proximity effect. The behavior of various physical quantities near the
transition will be considered and contact with the existing scaling theory will
be made. (2) The investigators will construct a theory of the zero-temperature
superconducting transition in finite-length wires and chains of Josephson
junctions. This work is motivated by experiments that show deviations from a
thermally activated resistivity at low temperatures. (3) The investigators will
calculate I-V characteristics for a ferromagnet - d-wave superconductor junction
including the effects of spin-orbit coupling. Diagrammatic expansions and the
Keldysh technique are among the variety of analytical techniques that will be
used. &lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education on quantum mechanical fluctuations in superconductors at low
temperatures. The investigators will use advanced theoretical methods to study
the role of quantum fluctuations in thin superconducting films, superconducting
wires, and junctions involving superconductors. This research is fundamental and
has potential impact on our understanding of quantum phase transitions in other
systems.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;