* 0120446
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  The Consequences of Sexual Conflict on Offspring Fitness
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Deborah Roach, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2003
* USD 9,905.00

Scientists have long recognized that reproduction is costly to females. Research
in various species finds that sexually active females have shorter lives than
virgin females. Recent studies, in fruit flies, have discovered toxic compounds
in the seminal fluid of males that shorten the longevity of females after
copulation. What the toxic compounds are doing and why they have evolved is a
largely unresolved question. Previous experiments conducted in the fruit fly
indicate that the mating frequency of parents affects the fitness of offspring.
The goal of this project is to determine whether females exposed to toxic
seminal fluid compounds have offspring with improved fitness. This project will
compare the fitness of offspring from females that re-mate after holding them
for one week 1) as virgins, 2) with males, 3) with genetically altered males
that produce seminal fluid but not sperm, 4) with genetically altered males that
do not produce seminal fluid or sperm. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This study will
help determine whether female reproductive costs occur to improve the quality of
offspring. This work is important for our general understanding of maternal
care, sexual and parent-offspring conflict, and for the evolution of
reproductive strategies. &lt;br/&gt;