* 0120884
* DEM Project PRISM
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Sandra Cooper, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 12/31/2005
* USD 886,505.00

Project PRISM promotes the success and persistence of girls and ethnic minority
students, particularly Native American students, through sustainable reform
focusing on gender and cultural issues in secondary math and science classrooms
and a university course for education students. The project is initiating
changes that will increase the recruitment of women and ethnic minority
practitioners into the SMET workforce. The target populations include pre-
service teachers at Washington State University (WSU) and Lewis-Clark State
College (LCSC), in-service teachers, counselors, and administrators from eight
school districts, five of which serve the Colville Confederated Tribes (CCT),
and CCT secondary students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative
demonstration project uses a powerful, multi-faceted approach to achieve changes
in teaching and curriculum and in student success. The project promotes an
increased secondary teacher and counselor awareness of gender and cultural
issues that affect the learning and persistence of students, particularly girls
and Native American students, in science, math, engineering and technology
(SMET) classrooms. It likewise stimulates commitment to inclusive teaching and
curricula and facilitates ongoing reform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Teachers and
counselors participate in interactive in-service development opportunities on
gender, culture, and education and a summer institute focused on the process of
SMET classroom and curriculum reform. Participants in faculty development
components are supported in their revision and reform efforts by faculty
learning communities. A university course for pre- and in-service teachers
introduces students to issues of gender, culture, and science as well as foster
increased computer skills and SMET teaching abilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All
faculty development components are designed and developed by teams of secondary
and university faculty in cooperation with Colville Confederated Tribes (CCT)
personnel and a CCT Advisory Council.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Cultural awareness
and appreciation events are ongoing at the schools serving CCT students. Through
field trips, hands-on projects, community service projects, and career planning,
CCT students are developing an increased awareness of and interest in careers,
especially SMET careers, and increased persistence in the education necessary to
succeed in those careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Local leadership for and
commitment to the project efforts are being developed, so that project
components will be sustained after the life of the grant. Manuals detailing the
faculty in-service workshops and the summer institute teaching and curriculum
reform process will be produced and disseminated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is yielding important information on the efficacy of these intervention
strategies incorporating both gender and cultural issues. In particular, it adds
information to the knowledge base on the success of these strategies with Native
American students, and especially Native American girls.&lt;br/&gt;