* 0120718
* BIOCOMPLEXITY: Hexapod Phylogenomics - Bringing Phylogenetic Supercomputing to the Masses
* BIO,EF
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Keith Crandall, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2006
* USD 1,416,000.00

0120718&lt;br/&gt;Whiting&lt;br/&gt;A Biocomplexity in the Environment: Genome-
Enabled grant has been awarded to an interdisciplinary team of researchers at
the Brigham Young University that combines expertise in computer science,
statistics, and phylogenetic systematics to address three fundamental questions
in evolutionary biology, genomics, and computational biology. (1) What are the
major relationships among Hexapods (insects and related taxa)? (2) How has
mitochondrial genome evolution occurred relative to Hexapod diversity? (3) How
can we develop fast, parallel computer algorithms to reconstruct phylogenetic
relationships for large data sets? To answer these questions, the investigators
will sequence about 2500 species across hexapod diversity for about 12 nuclear
genes representing a total sequencing effort of 30 million base pairs. They will
then sequence about 120 mitochondrial genomes across the major lineages
representing each of the hexapod orders to examine mitochondrial genome
evolution in the context of a well established phylogeny from the 12 nuclear
genes. This represents another 1.8 million nucleotides of sequence. Parallel-
processing algorithms will be developed for computational analysis of large
nucleotide sequence data sets. &lt;br/&gt;The results will provide a framework
for understanding Hexapod diversity (crucial for understanding agricultural
pests, disease vectors, etc.), mitochondrial genome evolution (instrumental in
understanding the functional significance of gene rearrangements), and easily
available parallel approaches for phylogenetics. Because phylogenetics is
becoming an instrumental tool in the study of human disease (both due to
infection and the genetic component of complex diseases such as cancer and
coronary artery disease), the ability to reconstruct phylogenetic relationships
accurately and with great speed for ever-increasing data sets is key to making
the link between genetic changes and disease risk factors. The investigators
will heavily involve undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows
in every phase of this work and provide outlets in the form of publications and
informational websites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DEB-0120719&lt;br/&gt;Michael
Whiting, Keith Crandall, Mark Clement, Quin Snell, David
Whiting&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to an interdisciplinary
team of researchers at the Brigham Young University that combines expertise in
computer science, statistics, and phylogenetic systematics to address three
fundamental questions in evolutionary biology, genomics, and computational
biology: 1) What are the major relationships among Hexapods (insects and related
taxa)? 2) How has mitochondrial genome evolution occurred relative to Hexapod
diversity? And 3) how can we develop fast, parallel computer algorithms to
reconstruct phylogenetic relationships for large data sets? To answer these
questions, the investigators will sequence ~2500 species across hexapod
diversity for ~12 genes representing a total sequencing effort of 30 million
base pairs. They will then sequence ~120 mitochondrial genomes across the major
lineages representing each of the hexapod orders to examine mitochondrial genome
evolution in the context of our well established phylogeny from the 12 nuclear
genes. This represents another 1.8 million nucleotides of sequence. Finally we
will develop parallel algorithms for computational analysis of nucleotide
sequence data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results will provide a framework for
understanding Hexapod diversity (crucial for understanding agricultural pests,
disease vectors, etc.), mitochondrial genome evolution (instrumental in
understanding the functional significance of gene rearrangements), and easily
available parallel approaches for phylogenetics. Since phylogenetics is becoming
an instrumental tool in the study of human disease (both due to infection and
the genetic component of complex diseases such as cancer and coronary artery
disease), the ability to reconstruct phylogenetic relationships accurately and
with great speed for ever-increasing data sets is key to making the link between
genetic changes and disease risk factors. The investigators will heavily involve
undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows in every phase of
this work and provide outlets in the form of publications and informational
websites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;