* 0120012
* Building Pathways into the Geosciences for an Hispanic Community of Learners in El Paso
* GEO,GEO
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Kate Miller, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 12/31/2005
* USD 380,900.00

ABSTRACT

Building Pathways into the Geosciences for an Hispanic Community of Learners in
El Paso

The University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP), with an enrollment of about 15,000
students of which 70% are Hispanic and 10% are Mexican Nationals, is one of the
largest Hispanic-serving institutions in the country. The demographics of the
UTEP student body (85% of whom come from the El Paso region) reflect those of
the dominantly Hispanic metroplex of more than two million inhabitants on both
sides of the US-Mexican border that the university serves. Thus, the
characteristics of the community give UTEP advantages in recruiting minority
students into the geosciences. UTEP has both MS and Ph.D. programs in Geological
Sciences.

This project expands minority participation in the geosciences at the university
by increasing the number of Hispanic students who major in either Geological
Sciences or in a new interdisciplinary program in Environmental Sciences. It
proposes to build a community of aspiring geoscientists in El Paso by
establishing an outreach program to enhance awareness of the geosciences among
local high school students. The program offers stipends to college students in
exchange for progress towards a bachelors degree in Geological or Environmental
Sciences and participation in research with geoscience faculty and graduate
students. The centerpiece of the outreach program is a two-week summer camp for
high school juniors that introduces students and teachers to a variety of topics
in the geosciences and demonstrates how the biology, chemistry, and physics
covered in high school courses integrates with geoscience. Students are
encouraged to enroll in introductory environmental science or geology as
freshmen and given the opportunity to serve as peer mentors in subsequent summer
programs.