* 0120798
* Structural Damage Detection and Evaluation Using a Scanning Laser Vibrometer
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* P. Frank Pai, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Perumalsamy N. Balaguru
* 09/30/2005
* USD 168,415.00

Inspection of aging civil structures, after-earthquake buildings and bridges,
aging aircraft, and mechanical systems under fatigue loading requires a method
that can perform on-site quick and accurate damage detection of large
structures. Unfortunately most of conventional non-destructive inspection
methods are local methods; it is slow and expensive to use them for on-site
inspection of large structures. Because damage signals are always contained in
dynamic responses of structures, this research project is to develop a dynamics-
based global inspection method for the detection and estimation of defects in
large composite and built-up structures. &lt;br/&gt;Toward a global inspection
method a scanning laser vibrometer will be used to provide accurate and dense
measurement of Operational Deflection Shapes (ODSs) of structures, and a newly
developed Boundary Effect Evaluation (BEE) method will be used to extract
damage-induced boundary effects from the ODSs to reveal damage locations. The
BEE method is a model-independent method; it uses a sliding-window least-squares
curve-fitting method to decompose an ODS into central solutions and boundary
solutions. Because damage introduces new boundaries to a structure, boundary
solutions exist around damage and structural boundaries and hence can reveal
damage locations. Moreover, crack sizes can be estimated by using stress
intensity factors from fracture mechanics. Experiments have been performed to
verify the capability of this BEE method in locating surface slots, edge slots,
surface holes, internal holes, fatigue cracks, and stiffened sections. Numerical
and experimental results indicate that the BEE method is more sensitive and
reliable than other dynamics- or deformation-based methods. The accuracy and
capability of this BEE method will be improved by investigating the noise
patterns of ODSs, the use of low-order transverse ODSs, a new data acquisition
method using a lock-in amplifier, and a systematic method of selecting ODSs for
examination. This project will result in an efficient and reliable damage
detection and estimation method for performing condition-based structural safety
inspection of large civil, mechanical, and aerospace structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;b
r/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&
gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;