* 0120022
* BE/CNH: Interactions of Riparian Pattern, Policy, and Biocomplexity in Coupled Human/Riverine Systems
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/2001,09/30/2006
* Stanley Gregory, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Martyn M. Caldwell
* 09/30/2006
* USD 1,950,000.00

Complex patterns in river systems emerge because of the interdependence of
biophysical and human processes, non-linearity in factors that shape process and
pattern, and the unique behavior of linear patchwork mosaics within river
networks. This research project combines field studies, biological models,
complex systems techniques, and alternative future depictions to explore two
interrelated aspects of biocomplexity: complexity of biotic communities and
complexity of coupled human/natural resource systems. The investigators
hypothesize that as biotic resources become scarce or impaired, a human/riverine
system becomes more tightly coupled. This research will examine the ecological
vulnerability of these emergent landscapes from the perspectives of likelihood
and reversibility under different policies. The objectives are to explore system
behaviors through a combination of field and model studies. These models apply
complex systems approaches to explore coevolution of policies and landscape
patterns, building on relationships identified through field studies of biotic
complexity in large rivers and their floodplains. The 4-yr research project is
focused on lowland rivers of the Pacific Northwest and is expected to develop of
a set of transferable models of ecological and human interactions in river
floodplains. The project will foster interactions between students, researchers,
river guardians, and the Willamette Restoration Initiative to create a unique
learning environment for students and the public.