* 0120709
* Comparative Chloroplast Genomics: Integrating Computational Methods, Molecular Evolution, and Phylogeny
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2007
* Tandy Warnow, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* William Carl Taylor
* 09/30/2007
* USD 1,357,000.00

0120709&lt;br/&gt;Jansen, Raubeson, and Warnow&lt;br/&gt; A Biocomplexity grant
has been awarded to an interdisciplinary team of&lt;br/&gt;researchers from the
University of Texas, Central Washington University,&lt;br/&gt;University of New
Mexico, the DoE Joint Genomics Institute, and Penn State&lt;br/&gt;University to
undertake comparative evolutionary analyses of complete chloroplast genomes from
more than 50 representative land plants. The team of four biologists (Jansen,
Raubeson, Boore and dePamphilis) and five computer scientists (Warnow, Moret,
Bader, Sankoff and Miller) will address a number of important issues in three
areas at the intersection of biology and computer science: phylogeny of land
plants, chloroplast genome evolution, and computational genomics. Fifty-five
complete genomic sequences will be generated (greatly augmenting the 10 or so
now known), new computational approaches for examining relationships using
genomic data will be designed and&lt;br/&gt;implemented, and bioinformatic tools
and resources for genomics will be&lt;br/&gt;developed. Then, the data and
approaches will be used to study the relationships of plants and the patterns
and processes of mutation as they affect the chloroplast genome. These results
will be made available to both the scientific and lay communities. In addition,
students in the fields of computational biology, bioinformatics, phylogenetic
analysis, and genomics will be trained.&lt;br/&gt; Understanding relationships
among organisms is an essential prerequisite for all areas of Biological
Science, including such diverse fields as ecology, evolution, forensics,
medicine, and molecular biology. Land plants, the focus of this study, include
over 300,000 species and form the basis of terrestrial ecosystems. The
phylogenetic history of this important group of organisms, only imperfectly
understood, will be clarified by this research. This project also will make
major contributions to our understanding of the mutational mechanisms and
evolutionary processes acting within the chloroplast genome. This genome
contains genes essential to plant function; studying its evolution should
provide basic information of fundamental importance to plant scientists.
Finally, this project will have important implications for computational
biology, one of the&lt;br/&gt;fastest growing fields of science today. This
includes the development and&lt;br/&gt;testing of new algorithms in comparative
genomics, such as gene-order changes, that will increase the scope of
theoretical computational biology. All software developed by the team will be
made freely available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;