* 0120878
* DEM:  FUTUREBOUND: Identification of Effective Strategies to Increase Placement and Success of Women in Science and Engineering
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2001,10/31/2006
* Katrina Mangin, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 10/31/2006
* USD 918,268.00

University of Arizona (UA) in partnership with Pima Community College (PCC; a
multi-campus institution) proposes a comprehensive program to increase the
enrollment, retention, and graduation of women especially minority women of
Hispanic and American Indian origins, in tracks leading to BS and graduate
degrees in astronomy, biosciences, chemistry, physics, engineering and related
fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project strengthens previous activities by 1)
building on collaboration between PCC and UA science departments in research
internship programs, extending these efforts to highlight the needs of women
especially minority women students; 2) integrating community college level
programs into UA's Women in Science and Engineering K-12 and university
programs; 3) paying new attention to differences within groups and fields; and
4) identifying and initiating strategies for long-term institutional
changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PCC's multifaceted program will include 1)
increasing recruitment; 2) individual student mentoring and academic advising;
3) enrichment efforts to strengthen students' preparedness and widen their
knowledge of career choices; 4) improvement of institutional instructional and
support programs focusing on interactive learning, classroom climate, enhanced
outreach to high school science teachers, and coordination of minority and
support programs; and 5) financial support for
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Activities at the UA will include new efforts to
enhance students' motivation, performance and financial support and will foster
their use of existing units serving minority and women undergraduates.
Collaboration with the Graduate College and Women of Color Consortium will
address advancement to graduate education. We will compare students' GPAs and
progress towards BS and Graduate education for the target group to those of all
PCC science and engineering students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The prime target
group is women who have been consistently highlighted as most underrepresented
and most difficult to retain and advance in science-related areas. We will
address different needs and issues across fields and among groups, reflecting
the multiple intersections of gender and ethnicity. The most underrepresented of
all -- minority women, will be a special focus. Strategies that work with these
populations can be applied to all students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
offers a potential model for improving on articulation of community college
students into four-year undergraduate and graduate institutions. Since
nationally, community colleges are an entry into higher education particularly
for women and minorities, increased articulation with a focus on science and
engineering could increase participation of these groups at higher
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;