* 0120328
* Research for Mixed Signal Electronic Technologies: A Joint Initiative Between NSF and SRC: Optimal Double-Gate MOSFET Structure for Mixed-signal Circuits
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2004
* Edwin Kan, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 09/30/2004
* USD 150,000.00

0120328&lt;br/&gt;Kan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal focuses on
investigating innovative circuits based on double-gate MOSFET structures in the
mixed-signal environment. The research efforts will establish a whole suite of
knowledge on circuit design, device modeling, device design, and device
fabrication for optimal performance and reliable operations in the deep
submicron double-gate MOSFET technology. The comprehensive aspects from circuit
to fabrication will not only provide a thorough understanding of the mixed-
signal circuit design trade-off, but also will enable a balance development for
graduate and undergraduate students participating in the
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Initial scaling studies on double-gate MOSFET
device design has been performed by analytical solutions and the full-2D
electrostatic solver. Design variables such as channel length, Si film
thickness, gate oxide thickness, and contact work functions will be selected
according to different benchmark in circuit applications. The static coupling
between the two channels can be maximized or minimized, the dynamic coupling can
be tuned to fit the circuit operations. Steep subthreshold slope including DIBL
(drain-induced barrier lowering) consideration can be achieved through
appropriate design consideration on quantum-mechanical effects. Novel Schottky
S/D contact technology by the PI's group will be employed and evaluated in the
overall device operations and circuit requirements. This modeling study will
serve as the scaling guidelines for device and process
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Simultaneously with the fabrication process
development of double-gate CMOS technology, pre-Si prediction of device
parameters will be obtained from detailed modeling and scaling studies based on
experimental measurement on the larger devices with similar structures. A
scalable compact model for double-gate CMOS will be developed based on the
preliminary analytical and numerical solutions. The predicted parameter set and
the scalable device model will enable early analysis of mixed-signal circuit
design, which will in turn give directives to fabrication process trade-off.
Novel mixed-signal circuits will be constructed using the tight (no contact
parasitic) and fast (down to 0.1ps, i.e., 10THz, limited by either the
dielectric relaxation time or carrier transit time of carriers travelling
between two channels) coupling between the two MOS
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI expects that this task will result in
new low-voltage circuit topologies that exploit both gates of the double-gate
MOSFET to achieve high-performance operation with low power consumption. He also
expects to determine a great deal about how the double-gate MOSFET structure can
be optimized for different circuit applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Innovative
Claims&lt;br/&gt;Novel mixed-signal circuit functionality can be obtained from
using the tight and fast&lt;br/&gt;coupling between the two gates of the
proposed structure.&lt;br/&gt;Methodology for device and circuit co-design can
be demonstrated through double-gate&lt;br/&gt;MOSFET analog and mixed-signal
circuits.&lt;br/&gt; Novel low-voltage, low-power mixed-signal circuits with
high performance can be designed utilizing the unique double-gate structure of
the proposed devices.&lt;br/&gt;