* 0120762
* PGE: PLN:  Moving Mountains: A Strategy to Facilitate Appalachian Women's Pursuit of Science and Math Careers
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2002
* Joyce Kronberg, West Virginia University/Parkersburg
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 09/30/2002
* USD 30,000.00

West Virginia University at Parkersburg will partner with Ritchie County High
School and Williamstown High School to provide research experiences for female
high school students in the Appalachian region known as the Mid-Ohio Valley.
Mentoring and peer groups will be important components of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In West Virginia, women are less likely to seek a
college education let alone pursue a career in science or math. One of the most
exciting experiences that a female high school student interested in the
sciences can have is one that involves interaction with a teacher and peers in a
group setting participating in a scientific project. This is particularly
valuable for women students in Appalachia who have attended K-12 schools in
isolated areas where there is little opportunity for advanced study of science,
who have not had personal role models or do not picture themselves doing
science. The research component is the key to the project's impact on high
school students and their decisions regarding entering the sciences as a career.
It will give students their first experience with original research, teach them
how to deal with the open-ended nature of the research process, and give them
the self-confidence to see themselves not just as students, but as actual
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that lessons learned from
the project will inform a full proposal for an expanded Women in Science program
at additional public schools in partnership with WVU Parkersburg. The goal is to
impact how young women perceive careers in science and mathematics and encourage
their pursuit of a college education in these studies. &lt;br/&gt;