* 0120319
* Research for Mixed Signal Electronic Technologies: A Joint Initiative Between NSF and SRC: Novel RF Front-Ends For Future Mobile Communication Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Saeed Mohammadi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2004
* USD 225,002.00

Future mobile communications technologies are expected to provide a wide variety
of services, high-quality audio, high-definition video and quick response
control data, through wide-band access channels. Future systems will acquire
multimedia capability and will facilitate the use of high-speed wireless local
area networks (W-LAN) and Home Broadcasting networks in place of traditional
architectures. These systems will be designed to address user demands for
broadband wireless communications and will drive the development of new
microwave and mm-wave devices and circuits. Possible in-home application
scenarios for both analog and digital transmission will require very compact,
low-cost and high efficiency receive/transmit devices that can provide
asymmetric data transmission from a home server to various appliances for
quality&lt;br/&gt;operation and control. In response to the above technology
needs, this program proposes to develop a novel RF front-end receiver
architecture that consumes very little power, is highly compact, very low-cost
and high-performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed architecture is based on
a CMOS on SOI implementation for both the RF and digital parts of the circuit
and allows for an intimate integration of the circuit with the RF filters and
antenna structure. The new receiver architecture will be based on the use of
metamaterial substrates for the development of highly integrated filter banks,
will rely on vertical integration for the development of highly compact three-
dimensional wireless front ends, will have a novel antenna structure intimately
integrated with the highly selective multi-frequency substrate and have a novel
mixed signal digital IF circuitry. The design of the receiver will be
accomplished through a holistic mixed circuit approach that accurately takes
into account high frequency effects including dispersion, radiation and
electromagnetic coupling. The modeling and simulation problem encountered in the
implementation of the above vision is typical to mixed-signal RFICs. The
proposed technical approach represents a solution to the broader problem and has
the potential to alleviate the design bottleneck at the analog/RF/ package
interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Michigan will use its own
fabrication facilities together with the IBM Blue Logic Cu-11 CMOS on SOI 0.11m
facilities to develop the proposed receiver. North Carolina State University
will provide modeling and simulations necessary for the design of the receiver.
A prototype 4-channel 5-10GHz receiver will be simulated, designed, fabricated,
packaged and tested during the course of this work. In addition, 16-channel very
high-Q electromagnetic bandgap filter bank will be designed, fabricated and
tested. Moreover, topics such as manufacturing tolerance, temperature effects,
filter tuning and frequency scaling will be studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed work will be performed in close collaboration with IBM High performance
logic development and RF Technology development. Graduate and undergraduate
student research investigators in both Universities will execute the research
tasks. A number of these students may spend part of their summer at IBM on
internships to facilitate the collaboration and take the opportunity to interact
with IBM scientists. Furthermore, the research outcomes of this effort, in terms
of the design of the mixed-signal circuit architectures, will become the basis
of a new senior/graduate-level course in high frequency circuits. Special effort
will be placed in attracting&lt;br/&gt;underrepresented students through the
University of Michigan UROP (Undergraduate Research Opportunities) and Maria
Sara Parker Programs specifically designed to provide research experiences to
undergraduate and graduate female and minority students. The results of these
efforts will be disseminated broadly via publications in scientific journal
and/or presentations in technical conferences and the development of an
interactive web site.&lt;br/&gt;