* 0120608
* RUI: Linking Microbial Diversity to Carbon Metabolism in Peatlands of Canada and Siberia
* GEO,OCE
* 10/15/2001,06/30/2003
* R. Kelman Wieder, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 06/30/2003
* USD 99,438.00

ABSTRACT

OCE-0120610

Boreal and subarctic peatland ecosystems cover only about 3-4 % of the earth's
land surface (346-500 Mha) yet they store about 1/3 of the world's soil carbon
as incompletely decayed organic matter, or peat. Most of these peatlands ( ca.
384 million ha) are found in Russia, the Baltic Republics, Fennoscandia, Alaska
and Canada. In terms of the global C cycle, peatlands represent a major C pool,
yet it is unclear whether they function as sources or sinks of atmospheric C,
although Gorham's (1991, 1994, 1995) estimates that northern peatlands represent
a net sink of atmospheric CO2 (76 Tg C yr -1 ) an a net source of atmospheric
CH4 (46 Tg C yr -1 ) remain widely cited. Although the central importance of
peat microbial populations as mediators of both aerobic and anaerobic
decomposition, including the production of both CO2 and CH4, has long been
recognized, little is known about the linkages between microbial community
structure and C cycling in peat. Recent developments in molecular ecological
techniques now permit quantitative characterization of microbial (Archaeal,
eubacterial, and fungal) community structure in peat, so that we can begin to
link microbial community structure to ecosystem function, the overall goal of
this proposal.

In this proposal, researchers at Villanova University seek to integrate
quantitative biogeochemical approaches, quantitative molecular ecological
approaches, and education and training of students in striving to understand how
microbial community structure related to carbon cycling at the process level in
peatlands that appear to be responding to global change on two separate
continents. They will collect intact 1-m long peat cores from the discontinuous
permafrost areas of both continental western Canada and central Siberia, the
latter with the technical and logistical assistance of colleagues at the
Siberian Research Institute of Peat. At 10-cm depth intervals in each core, they
will quantitatively evaluate various aspects of ecosystem function including CO2
and CH4 production potentials, activities of process-specific soil enzymes
(phenol oxidase, chitinase, acid phosphatase, arylsulfatase), concentrations of
low molecular weight dissolved organic anions (acetate, lactate, proprionate,
formate, pyruvate, oxalate and tartrate), and bacterial and fungal biomass
(using muramic acid and ergosterol assays). In addition, they will use total
peat genomic DNA extractions, PCR amplification, plasmid cloning and sequence
analysis to identify specific Archaeal, eubacterial and fungal "species" in each
peat sample. Using this approach, the investigators expect to be able to link
microbial community structure to peatland ecosystem function in peatland regions
where permafrost is actively melting, possibly representing a harbinger of
climate change.

