* 0120914
* STC: National Center for Earth-Surface Dynamics
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2013
* Efi Foufoula-Georgiou, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Cooperative Agreement
* Judith Skog
* 07/31/2013
* USD 37,156,813.00

National Center for Earth-surface Dynamics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Gary Parker,
Efi Foufoula-Georgiou, Christopher Paola&lt;br/&gt; OIA-0120914, University of
Minnesota&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National
Center for Earth-surface Dynamics (NCED) is a Science and Technology Center
focused on understanding the processes that shape the Earth's surface, and on
communicating that understanding with a broad range of stakeholders. NCED's work
will support a larger, community-based effort to develop a suite of quantitative
models of the Earth's surface: a Community Sediment Model (CSM). Results of the
NCED-CSM collaboration will be used for both short-term prediction of surface
response to natural and anthropogenic change and long-term interpretation of how
past conditions are recorded in landscapes and sedimentary strata. This will in
turn help solve pressing societal problems such as estimation and mitigation of
landscape-related risk; responsible management of landscape resources including
forests, agricultural, and recreational areas; forecasting landscape response to
possible climatic and other changes; and wise development of resources like
groundwater and hydrocarbons that are hosted in buried sediments. NCED education
and knowledge transfer programs include exhibits and educational programs at the
Science Museum of Minnesota, internships and programs for students from tribal
colleges and other underrepresented populations, and research opportunities for
participants from outside core NCED institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Earth's surface is the dynamic interface among the lithosphere, hydrosphere,
biosphere, and atmosphere. It is intimately interwoven with the life that
inhabits it. Surface processes span environments ranging from high mountains to
the deep ocean and time scales from fractions of a second to millions of years.
Because of this range in forms, processes, and scales, the study of surface
dynamics has involved many disciplines and approaches. A major goal of NCED is
to foster the development of a unified, quantitative science of Earth-surface
dynamics that combines efforts in geomorphology, civil engineering, biology,
sedimentary geology, oceanography, and geophysics. Our research program has four
major themes: (1) landscape evolution, (2) basin evolution, (3) biological
sediment dynamics, and (4) integration of morphodynamic processes across
environments and scales. Each theme area provides opportunities for exchange of
information and ideas with a wide range of stakeholders, including teachers and
learners at all levels; researchers, managers, and policy makers in both the
commercial and public sectors; and the general public.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;NCED is headquartered at St. Anthony Falls Laboratory, University of
Minnesota. Participating institutions are the University of Minnesota, the
Science Museum of Minnesota, Fond du Lac Tribal and Community College, the
University of California at Berkeley, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
and Princeton University. To learn more about NCED, including opportunities to
participate, please contact us at St. Anthony Falls Laboratory or via the NCED
website: www.nced.edu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;