* 0120278
* Research for Mixed Signal Electronic Technologies: A Joint Initiative Between NSF and SRC - Three Dimensional Planar Device Integration for Mixed Signal Electronics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Sandip Tiwari, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2005
* USD 157,095.00

This research effort is directed to providing a novel solution to the problems
that occur with mixed-signal integration by using three-dimensional
implementation of planar silicon transistors. The planned research will explore
mixed signal technology's viability through research and development of device
and process technology incorporating digital and analog planar transistor
structures in different single-crystal device planes using techniques of single-
crystal silicon layer transfer at low temperatures and by isolating the digital
and analog functions with a ground-plane in between. This will be done while
continuing to allow a large interconnection density in the horizontal and
vertical direction for signal transmission. In order to make this feasible,
transfer of thin (100's of nm) layers of single-crystal silicon on a planarized
low roughness silicon dioxide surface at temperatures below 550 C has been
demonstrated. Interconnections and ground planes based on doped poly-silicon
and/or tungsten are incorporated in between the single-crystal silicon planes.
The use of multiple planes, with oxide in between, also allows incorporation of
other passive elements while limiting the increase in area together with a
reduction in the loss effects of high frequencies.

It is expected that this approach will reduce noise and cross-talk through the
use of ground-planes and reduced coupling. This should provide additional
freedom in the design of analog transistors, such as the metal-oxide
semiconductor field-effect transistors in this project. This approach is also
compatible with and can incorporate other developments in passive elements, such
as high quality factor inductors, filters, etc., in back-end of the fabrication
process. This research addresses significant issues for potential industrial
applications , as analog and digital technologies can differ from each other in
quite substantial ways because of the design requirements inherent to high
frequency or low power. Maintaining low cost, the need for operation at low
power, and the circuit and systems issues arising from interference between
analog signals and digital signals are a few of these challenges.