* 0120781
* SGER:  Interpersonal and Interorganizational Networks for Strategic Alliance Development in the High Technology Sector: A Comparative Study of Israel and Colorado
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Paul Olk, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* John L. Naman
* 08/31/2003
* USD 48,792.00

This study investigates the impact of interpersonal and interorganizational
networks on the formation of high technology strategic alliances in two
countries: the United States and Israel. The project significantly expands the
purview of prior work, making use of a model recognizing that different
exchanges create two types of relationships - interpersonal and
interorganizational - which represent the starting points for network formation
processes reported by Doz, Olk & Ring (2000). This study extends that research
by examining the relevance of variations in interpersonal and organizational
networks for strategic alliance development, examining organizational
relationships in terms of prior and current relationships; and interpersonal
relationships both in terms of formal, role-based relationships and informal
friendship ties, and their relationship with strategic alliance characteristics.
The study will control for the influence of the alliance's technology, the
strategic interests and organizational characteristics of the partners and the
institutional settings, while examining these networks' relationship to the
performance of the strategic alliance. The study focuses on two of the world's
extremely high-growth high technology communities of similar size and growth
rates, Colorado and Israel, taking advantage of the formation of some 40
strategic alliances in the immediate vicinity of two institutions - the
University of Denver and the Technion - with relationships to the communities.
It is anticipated that this study will be the first, pilot stage of an eventual
multi-stage project.