* 0120208
* Conference: " Experimental Approaches to Conservation Biology," Los Angeles, CA, September 11-14, 2001
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/2001,04/30/2002
* Malcolm Gordon, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 04/30/2002
* USD 14,284.00

The worldwide rate of extinctions of living species is near the highest level
that has occurred since the asteroid collision of 65 million years ago. Unlike
that past natural event, present extinctions are mostly the direct or indirect
results of human activities. Massive modifications in habitats plus global
climate changes are combining with comparably massive introductions of exotic
species (some willful, but most inadvertent or accidental) to destroy naturally
evolved native floras and faunas on all continents.

Modern experimental biology is making a variety of important contributions to
international efforts to at least slow, and in rare cases to halt, this
destruction of major parts of the planet's biological environmental
infrastructure. To highlight some of the most important of these efforts, and to
provide a lasting written record that might serve as the basis for additional
work, the PI and a group of his associates are organizing an international
conference devoted to these topics. Primary sponsors for the conference are the
UCLA Institute of the Environment and the International Commission on
Comparative Physiology of the International Union of Physiological Sciences. A
major university press will subsequently publish a book summarizing the
proceedings.

The title of the conference is: EXPERIMENTAL APPROACHES TO CONSERVATION
BIOLOGY: The roles of experimental biology in the protection of endangered
species and the control of exotic species. It will take place on the campus of
the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) from September 11-14, 2001. The
central portions of the conference will consist of three days of both invited
and contributed papers, plus several panel and workshop discussions and poster
sessions. The first day will be devoted to endangered species, the second day to
exotic species, and the third day to policy and regulatory issues. Participants
will be professionals active in the subject areas of the conference (including
researchers, managers, and regulators) and interested students. Information
about the conference may be found at its website:
www.ioe.ucla.edu/biodiversity/.