* 0120825
* DEM-Changing Faculty through Learning Communities
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2001,10/31/2005
* Karan Watson, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 10/31/2005
* USD 918,750.00

The Dwight Look College of Engineering and the College of Science at Texas
A&amp;M University will conduct a demonstration project aimed at changing
faculty knowledge, personal vision, commitment and interactions with students,
through learning communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will help faculty
improve four strategic disciplines that underpin improvement of learning
environments for women, underrepresented minorities and all
students:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Development and invitation -- Faculty members
examine mechanisms through which women and men develop intellectually and
motivationally, and understand the role of invitation in the development
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) Mental models -- Faculty members understand and
make explicit how they build chains of reasoning from observable data through
assumptions to action.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) Personal vision -- Faculty
members improve their capacity to imagine and act in ways that maximize their
individual self-fulfillment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4) Personal commitment --
Faculty members improve their capacity to move from creating a personal vision
to recognizing that they have power and responsibility to realize
it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The critical element of learning environments on
university campuses is the faculty; therefore, development of learner-centered
educational environments rests on helping faculty develop the mental and
interpersonal disciplines that provide the foundation for such environments.
Changing how women are treated, how the classroom is managed, how teaching is
performed, how graduate students are mentored, all depend on numerous individual
faculty. However, university campuses are not analogous to neural networks that
can be trained by feeding back quantitative error measurements through
algorithms such as the back-propagation method. Instead, university campuses
more closely resemble complex adaptive systems in which diversity, interaction
and selection of numerous and complicated agents gives rise to observable,
emergent properties. If the aim is to create learning environments that are both
more inviting and more welcoming, it is not sufficient to bombard faculty with
messages such as "Be inviting!" or "Be welcoming!". Instead, it is important to
identify disciplines that should be nurtured and developed across the entire
faculty with the conviction that if faculty members practice these disciplines,
then they will create learning environments that are inviting and
welcoming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As faculty members become more proficient in the
four strategic disciplines, the project should observe changes in attitudes
about learning, teaching and the role of women and minorities in SMET. The
project also should observe increasing participation in the workshops and
faculty learning communities sponsored by the project. Finally, the project
should observe improvement in retention of women in undergraduate
physical&lt;br/&gt;science and engineering; improvement in the enrollment in
graduate study; and improvement in retention of women in graduate physical
science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;