* 0120594
* Biocomplexity:Coupled Biogeochemical Cycling of Sulfur and Carbon in Anoxgenic Acidic Sulfidic Thermal Springs (AASTS)in Relation to Microbial Composition of Phototrophic Mats
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2001,12/31/2004
* Donna Bedard, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Tornow
* 12/31/2004
* USD 99,930.00

Life in restrictive environments and its interaction with biogeochemical cycling
and mineralization are of paramount importance for understanding modern and
ancient biogeochemical cycles, as well as similar interactions in bioengineered
systems. Anaerobic, acidic, sulfidic, thermal springs (AASTS) represent
potentially important settings for the earliest organisms on Earth, and the
phototrophs inhabiting them (e.g., green sulfur bacteria) are excellent
candidates for Earth's earliest photosynthesizers. If environments similar to
AASTS were more widespread on the early Earth, the paleo-significance of
thermophilic green sulfur bacteria for the global biogeochemical cycling of
carbon and sulfur could be immense, and its implications to other
element/metallic cycling and mineralization could also be very significant.
Understanding phototrophic communities in AASTS could also have practical
implications for waste treatment and energy production. The long-term goal of
this incubation project is to model the linkage between (i) coupled
biogeochemical cycling of sulfur, carbon and other nutrients and (ii) the
metabolic activities of phototrophic communities in AASTS. The working
hypothesis is that the existence and biodiversity of phototrophic communities
are emergent properties of the coupled geochemical cycles in these environments.
The cycling of carbon and sulfur in AASTS, along with other environmental
parameters (e.g., pO2, pH, T), stabilizes the community composition, which in
turn affects the distribution of carbon and sulfur compounds available to
microbial communities downstream. This incubation project is specifically
designed to establish the basic microbiological and biogeochemical
characteristics of AASTS, and lay the foundation for quantitative modeling of
the interactions between the two. Modeling of emergent properties of AASTS,
specifically the non-linear interactions and feedback between the microbial
community and the abiotic environment, requires absolute estimates of microbial
diversity and quantification of fluxes of crucial life-sustaining components
(e.g., sulfur and carbon). To accomplish this goal classical microbiological and
16S rRNA-based molecular techniques are being utilized to characterize the
microbial composition of two recently discovered AASTS inhabited by thermophilic
green sulfur bacteria in the Philippines. In parallel, field studies of sulfur,
carbon and overall geochemical cycling in the same AASTS are being carried out,
focusing on characterizing sulfur and carbon speciation, and using stable S, C
and H isotope compositions of isolated species and select biomarkers to study
the cycling of these components in these unique microbial habitats. Examining
the isotope composition of inorganic sulfur and carbon species in the associated
thermal waters will allow the assessment of the magnitude and sequence of S
utilization and C fixation in these microbial communities. Finally, preliminary
modeling of coupled S and C cycling in relation to the microbial distribution
and structure in AASTS will be performed. The initial model will examine species
fluxes, transport and transformation in the water column of AASTS, specifically
focusing on the interaction between geochemical fluxes and microbial occurrence,
composition and distribution. This project plans to foster interdisciplinary
scientific research and education for undergraduates, graduate students,
international collaborators and the public. Highlights include development of a
web-based multi-level Virtual School on Biocomplexity in AASTS and workshops for
the Philippine and US collaborators on the same topic. Given the global
recognition of the need to preserve and understand unique microbial systems for
fundamental and biotechnical reasons, plans are incorporated for strong
international partnerships in research and education.