* 0120009
* BE/CNH: Alternatives to Crisis: Constructing Models of Resilience in the Red River Valley of the North
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2002
* Dennis Keeney, Institute for Agriculture and Trade Policy
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 09/30/2002
* USD 70,000.00

Around the world, regional ecosystems dominated by resource-based extractive
economies (agriculture, forestry and fisheries) are in crisis, facing painful
transitions imposed by the convergence of processes operating at local and
global scales. The Red River of the North (that forms the border of Minnesota
and North Dakota flowing north into Manitoba and Hudson Bay), an area of
intensive and industrialized agriculture that has long been considered one of
the most fertile farming regions in the world, is one such system in a painful
transition. Crop disease, abnormally wet climate patterns, and low commodity
prices have combined with long-term economic, social, and ecological declines to
generate an increasingly severe regional crisis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this project is to distill from the multiplicity of causal factors
a simple systems model that can be used to explore the natural, economic and
social dynamics observed in this most recent crisis in the Red River Valley
(RRV), and to use the model to explore alternative policies with stakeholders
and decision makers in the RRV. Through the use of an interdisciplinary dynamic
simulation process (Adaptive Environmental Assessment) involving citizens,
scientists and resource managers, the project seeks to generate insight into the
small and tractable set of key processes that have precipitated the simultaneous
collapse of regional systems and to explore what other outcomes might have been
possible under different decision-making scenarios. The model will have both
practical and theoretical significance. By exploring how a stable but brittle
regional system collapsed through a series of subtle multiple and reinforcing
discontinuities, and by simulating the response of that system under different
decision-making and reorganization scenarios, the model will advance
understanding of resilience dynamics in coupled social-ecological systems. It
also will provide a solid, practical foundation for expanding dialogue among
diverse stakeholders, develop additional modeling and outreach efforts, and
build capacity for regional problem-solving. Insights and understanding derived
from this model may prove valuable to agro-ecosystems in other regions facing
similar challenges that have not yet experienced large-scale collapse. What are
the implications for other commodity based agricultural economies around the
world (e.g., the corn belt of the Upper Midwest)? Can agro-ecosystems and other
economic activities in the RRV be reorganized to arrive at longer-term, more
resilient solutions that will allow the region to escape from the vicious cycle
of spiraling ecological and economic crisis? This project is an award emanating
from the FY2001 special competition in Biocomplexity in the Environment focusing
on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;