* 0120642
* (RES) Assessing Women in Engineering Programs: Developing Exportable Tools for Success.
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2006
* Rose Marra, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 09/30/2006
* USD 1,175,301.00

This project will develop standardized, exportable and comparable assessment
instruments and models for Women In Engineering (WIE) programs nationwide, thus
allowing them to assess their program's activities and ultimately provide data
for making well-informed evaluations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish this
goal, the principal investigators at the University of Missouri and Penn State
University will work over a three-year period with their institutions' WIE
programs and three cooperating programs at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute,
Georgia Tech, and University of Texas at Austin. With these five programs that
collectively represent a variety of private and public, years of experience for
WIE directors and student body characteristics, the investigators will pilot,
revise, implement, conduct preliminary data analysis and disseminate easy-to-
access, reliable and valid assessment instruments. The principles of formative
evaluation will be applied to all instruments and products. All institutions
will use the same set of instruments, thus allowing them to have access to
powerful benchmarking data in addition to the data from each of their respective
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A prior project, the Women's Experience in
College Engineering Project (WECE) sought to characterize the factors that
influence women students' experiences and decisions by studying college
environments, events and support programs that affect women's satisfaction with
their engineering major, and their decisions to persist or leave these majors.
In contrast to WECE's macro-level and student focus, this proposal's target
audience is WIE directors, with a focus on WIE programs, not
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Women in Engineering programs around the United
States are a crucial part of our country's response to the need for more women
in engineering professions. There are about 50 WIE programs nationwide. Half
have expressed interest in this effort. WIE directors will benefit by having
ready-made assessment tools that will allow them to collect data on programs,
evaluate these programs, and make decisions on how to revise programs and / or
redistribute limited resources to maximize overall program effectiveness. Data
from these instruments will also provide substantiated evidence for
administrators, advisory boards and potential funding agencies. Finally, because
these instruments will be available nationwide, programs will have the
opportunity to take advantage of powerful benchmarking data for their decision-
making processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides the next logical
step in the national movement to recruit and retain women in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;