* 0120345
* Research for Mixed Signal Electronic Technologies: A Joint Initiative Between NSF and SRC: Pipelined Data Converter Design Strategies for Sub-100nm Processes
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Randall Geiger, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2004
* USD 150,000.00

Analog to Digital Converters (ADCs) are one of the key components that are
needed in many integrated circuits today and the application and demand for the
converters will only accelerate throughout the next decade as applications
expand and the ability to put large systems on a chip becomes reality.
Paralleling and enabling this growing demand is an evolution in semiconductor
technology with processes that have a continued shrinking of feature sizes and
supply voltages. Although these evolutions are providing dramatic speed and
transistor density improvements in most digital circuits, they are presenting
increasing challenges for realizing analog and mixed-signal functions and the
two decade-old strategy of using the same basic circuit structures to implement
key functional blocks such as the analog to digital converter will no longer be
successful in the sub-100nm processes that are now under
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is focused on developing design
methodologies that can be used to design high-performance analog to digital
converters in sub-100nm semiconductor processes in which not only the supply
voltages are decreasing but also the gain characteristics of the basic
transistor are deteriorating. The three major initiatives in the project are a)
developing techniques for building fast high-gain operational amplifiers that
can operate with very low supply voltages, b) developing built-in self-
calibration and built-in self-test algorithms for pipelined data converters, and
c) incorporating these results into a prototype converter than will be
fabricated in a fine resolution process so that the theoretical performance
characteristics can be experimentally validated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The low
voltage operational amplifiers should find applications in
sub-100nm&lt;br/&gt;processes well beyond their use in pipelined data
converters. The self-calibration strategy is based upon treating the pipelined
data converter as a system, which is identified through the use of a dedicated
digital signal processing block. This approach will provide for yield
enhancement and will inherently provide capability for built-in self-test which
will be of increasing importance as increasingly complex analog and mixed-signal
functions become deeply embedded in large single-chip
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;