* 0120809
* RES - AnimalWorld:  Enhancing High School Women's Mathematical Competence
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2001,10/31/2005
* James Royer, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 10/31/2005
* USD 900,284.00

Some national assessments show that the gender gap in math achievement has
narrowed dramatically in the last decade, and that there has been a significant
increase in the number of mathematics courses taken by high school women.
However, other data indicate that female students do not confront the critical
transition from high school to college with deep, conceptually based
mathematical competence that supports entry into STEM (science, technology,
engineering, mathematics) careers. Specifically, female students perform much
less well than males on complex problem solving, when they must apply novel
problem solving approaches, and when they must work under time pressure or
transfer skills to problems not previously seen. Other research points to
differences in female and male students learning styles; female students require
more structured, concrete and repetitive instruction whereas males do equally
well with more abstract hints and help, suggesting that they have a deeper
understanding of mathematical concepts. A related concern is that female
students increased math course taking has not translated into a higher number of
women in the pipeline towards careers; that is, women are taking additional math
but are not planning to utilize it in their careers. The consequences are seen
in the continued under-representation of females in STEM majors and careers, and
the critical lack of mathematically sophisticated workers in numbers sufficient
to meet our nations needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is designed to
investigate the factors that contribute to female students shallower
mathematical competence, as well as the learning styles that characterize male
and female students at the critical transition from high school to college. Our
investigations take place in the context of a multimedia, multi-component
simulation environment: AnimalWorld. AnimalWorld provides high school women (and
men) with 1) an intelligent tutor for high school mathematics (fractions;
algebra; geometry; ratios/proportions/decimals; probability) that provides
gender adaptive instruction and allows for analysis of male and female learning
styles; 2) a virtual mentor component, in which students who are solving math
problems in the simulated world can meet real female researchers and experts
(through video clips embedded in the simulation) who discuss their training and
the importance of math for their careers; 3) a math at your fingertips module in
which students periodically rehearse math facts to free cognitive resources for
higher-order problem solving, predicting increased math test scores; 4) a module
to enhance students spatial cognition through dynamic manipulation of objects in
simulated three-dimensional environments, which will allow us to provide a
strong test of the hypothesis that females poorer math achievement reflects less
well developed spatial cognition; and 5) an SAT-Math preparation module designed
to narrow the striking gender gap on this critical achievement
test.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our prediction is that female students who work with
AnimalWorld will show significant increases in their complex math problem-
solving skill, including their SAT-Math exam performance; that gender adaptive
instruction will foster greater conceptual understanding in female students; and
that virtual mentors will encourage female students to report greater interest
in STEM careers. The results will increase our understanding of male and female
learning styles, as well as provide new approaches to effective mathematics
instruction for all students.&lt;br/&gt;