* 0120522
* US-Middle East Materials Planning Meeting and Workshop
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2001,12/31/2008
* Robert Chang, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 12/31/2008
* USD 235,267.00

The sixth workshop in a series of international materials workshops is being
planned for the Middle East in 2002. The U.S.-Middle East Materials Workshop is
an international workshop dedicated to materials research, education, and
technology. The goals of the workshop are to clarify in detail the major
materials science issues in the Middle East through plenary sessions and
breakout group discussions; further the development of collaboration via the
establishment of a Materials World Net; and strengthen the relationships between
the participants and their colleagues. To these ends, the organizing committee
plans to invite approximately 20 participants from the U.S., 40 from the Middle
East, and 15 government officials from various countries. Previous NSF sponsored
materials workshops held in the NAFTA countries, Europe, Latin America, Asia,
and Africa have consistently expressed the desire to establish a Materials World
Net, which would link materials scientists and engineers around the world by
providing them with access to comprehensive databases and collaborative research
and education programs.There is evidence to support the conclusion that the
World Net is also desirable among researchers in the Middle East. The principal
organizer (PI) of the workshop, Professor R.P.H. Chang at Northwestern
University, will work together with the co-organizer Dr. Albert Narath from the
U.S. and an organizing committee (OC), with members drawn from Egypt, Jordan,
Turkey, Israel and additional Arab countries. Those parties will come together
at a planning meeting in Turkey in late 2001. Over the course of two days, the
group will determine an appropriate location, time, speakers, topics, and an
agenda for the workshop to be held the following year. The planning meeting will
serve as the beginning of a dialogue among the organizing committee members
during the next year. The culmination of the planning will be a workshop in 2002
focused on materials research, education, and specialty topics that the planning
meeting participants will have identified.&lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;Previous NSF
co-sponsored international workshops have involved NAFTA countries (1995),
European countries (1996), Pan-American countries (1998), Asian Pacific
countries (1998), and Africa (2000). All of these workshops shared the common
goal of fostering greater international cooperation and collaboration in the
broad field of materials research. Topics which are presumably important to the
region include corrosion, thin films, concrete, minerals, petroleum and natural
gas, and polymers. The participants will be asked to make recommendations in
each area and devote special attention to the development of virtual institutes
as a vehicle for furthering cooperation. The U.S.-Middle East Materials Workshop
is being jointly supported by the Division of Materials Research, the Office of
Multidisciplinary Affairs, the International Division, and the Division of
Chemical and the Division of Chemical and Transport Systems.&lt;br/&gt;