* 0120372
* Research for Mixed Signal Electronic Technologies: A Joint Initiative Between NSF and SRC: Design of High-Speed Serial-Links in CMOS
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Won Namgoong, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2004
* USD 150,000.00

The focus of the proposed research is on high-speed serial-links, where the goal
is to maximize&lt;br/&gt;data rates between IC chips. As fabrication technology
improves, the challenge in next-generation serial-link design is in handling
transistor mismatches and on-chip noise, both of which are expected to grow
sharply. Consequently, future serial-link architectures must be able to tolerate
high-levels of transistor mismatches and on-chip noise. The general approach
followed by most researchers is to use advanced circuit techniques to mitigate
their adverse effects. In contrast, we propose to use signal processing
techniques in addition to circuit techniques to overcome these problems. This
integrated design approach motivates&lt;br/&gt;a new class of high-speed serial-
link architecture that is fundamentally more robust to
transistor&lt;br/&gt;mismatches and on-chip noise. The proposed architecture
also enjoys many other important&lt;br/&gt;implementation advantages, making it
well suited for future generation high-speed serial-link
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will demonstrate the feasibility and
effectiveness of the proposed architecture&lt;br/&gt;for reception and
transmission of broadband signals. We will provide a complete design frame-work
based on a clear understanding of various design options and the corresponding
trade-offs in performance and implementation complexity. Furthermore, we will
demonstrate the feasibility and the advantages of the proposed architecture by
realizing it on silicon. Our goal is to achieve faster data rates than the
fastest published serial-link system. The concepts and techniques developed in
the proposed research are not limited to serial-link systems. They are easily
applicable to any high-bandwidth communication systems where the symbol rates
exceed the achievable on-chip clock frequency. Some specific examples of such
applications are ultra-wideband and high-speed satellite communication
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;