* 0120846
* Particle Sizing and Velocity Measurement in Multiple Scattering Flowing Media
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2001,06/30/2003
* Ronald Dougherty, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Cyrus K. Aidun
* 06/30/2003
* USD 69,905.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CTS-0120846&lt;br/&gt;R. Dougherty, University of Kansas
Center for Research Inc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Physical characterizing of the
suspended particles in liquid is required for many particulate processing
systems such as applications in pharmaceutical, chemical, oil, and other
industries. Dynamic light scattering has been successfully used in the
laboratory with limited success in industrial processes involving particulate
transport. Although for single scattered light, the particle size can be
accurately determined. However, multiple scattering occurring in suspension
transport prevents accurate particle size or velocity
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To resolve this problem, previous efforts
have been focused on development of correlation theories in multiple scattered
problem with limited success. A novel approach is proposed here where the
signals from two detectors with small but finite angular separation are cross-
correlated to detect only the single scattered speckle patter. This method is
proposed in combination of 'flow suppression' technique where the scattered wave
vector perpendicular to the flow direction is used to avoid the disturbance due
to the fluid velocity, allowing more accurate measurement of the particle size
in a flowing suspension. The preliminary results for submicron particles at low
velocities show some potential.&lt;br/&gt;