* 0120582
* An Integrated Approach Towards a Quantitative Model of Salt Marsh Biocomplexity and Morphodynamics
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* David Furbish, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/2003
* USD 67,245.00

Furbish&lt;br/&gt;0120582&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Salt marshes are important
ecosystems that are frequently impacted by human activities. Because of the
nonlinear nature of many salt marsh processes and the complex interactions among
them, computer modeling based on experiments, field studies and emerging remote
sensing techniques offers a critical opportunity for achieving significant
advances in understanding and predicting salt marsh dynamics. During this
project we will: (i) identify essential key physical, biological and chemical
components that should become the foci of predictive models of salt marsh
dynamics; (ii) identify and assemble key personnel necessary to pursue a
collaborative modeling effort, coordinating our efforts with scientists pursuing
related work at Pace, Yale and Rutgers Universities; (iii) identify key
theoretical concepts, computational tools and field-based studies necessary for
rigorous model development and testing; and (iv) prepare a full-scale proposal
for a comprehensive research program that effectively combines these
theoretical, computational and field-based components. The centerpiece of our
efforts during the 1.5-year project period involves organizing and convening two
novel workshops. The first will be focused on salt marsh processes and dynamics;
the second will be focused on implementing and testing predictive modeling, and
the coupling of remote sensing techniques with modeling. Both will involve field
excursions to wetland/salt marsh sites. Project activities will be organized
through the Center for Earth Surface Processes Research (CESD), an
interdisciplinary Center of Excellence at FSU, and involve mutual participation
of scientists at FSU and the Pace-Yale-Rutgers group.&lt;br/&gt;