* 0120368
* Mixed Signal Electronic Technologies: Joint Initiative Between NSF and SRC : Three-Dimensional Impedance Engineering of Substrates for Mixed Signal Integrated Circuit Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2001,12/31/2004
* King-Ning Tu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 12/31/2004
* USD 300,000.00

0120368 Xie

Technological demand exists for mixed-signal integrated circuits based on Si
VLSI. Such technology will enable the reduction of the form factor, power
consumption, and circuit design complexity of mixed-signal IC's that are the
core of portable electronics, personal communicators, the read-write channels of
computer hard drives, and modems for internet access. The advancement of the
technology is currently hampered by the cross-talk issue, for which there is no
viable solution insight.

The PIs propose an innovative solution to the problem. Through-the-wafer porous
Si regions analogous to a moat are inserted between the noise producing and
noise sensitive circuits to isolate electromagnetic interference (EMI). Such
isolation is achieved via the high impedance nature of the porous Si region
comparing to the alternative pathway of Si substrate for the EMI to reach true
ground. The same porous Si regions can also be used to isolate high performance
passive components (inductors and capacitors) from the substrate. Similar porous
Si moat can be converted to highly conductive regions by coating the internal
pore surfaces with metal. Highly conductive regions can serve as grounded
shields for RF interference. Alternatively, through-the-wafer porous Si "posts"
can be fabricated with porous Si removed afterward. This will result in deep
vias. Metal can be introduced into the vias, resulting in Faraday cage type of
structures for shielding electromagnetic interference. An appropriate name for
the proposed research is three-dimensional impedance engineering of the
substrate.

In the proposed research, The PIs will scrutinize the effectiveness of all three
approaches for RF cross-talk isolation. They will focus on the frequency range
from 100 MHz up to above 40 GHz. This is the targeted frequency range by Si-
based mixed-signal integrated circuits for the near future. By introducing this
porous Si-based comprehensive process module into Si VLSI process flow, they
will provide a unique solution to several of the most challenging issues present
today in the Si mixed-signal IC technology.

Their research will address the following critical issues relevant to the
realization of the innovation. The issues include the isolation effectiveness,
long-term stability of the isolation region, the preferred masking scheme and
material, the method for introducing metal into the porous Si region, the
mechanical integrity of the porous Si with and without metal coatings, the
compatibility with Si VLSI processing, and potential contamination concerns.

The proposed research encompasses materials science and electrical engineering.
It will migrate from mostly material and processing issues at the beginning of
the project, to RF circuit fabrication and testing towards the end of the
project. The research will be carried out in collaboration with Conexant where
their test chips will be fabricated, and Agere Systems (supporting our research
in porous Si via SRC) where their initial study into this strategically
important field started.

In addition to the expected technological impact, the proposed research will
serve the important function of educating a new generation of engineers by
exposing them to the frontier of the information technology. Conducting thesis
research on such a project will give them an education in the combined areas of
fundamental materials science and a keen sense of the requirement of practical
devices through the collaboration with industry. They will become members of the
innovative workforce that has been the drive force for the prosperity of our
society.