* 0120250
* Dissertation Research:  Ecological Bases of Agonistic Coalitions in Capuchin Monkeys
* SBE,BCS
* 12/15/2001,11/30/2002
* Charles Janson, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 11/30/2002
* USD 8,684.00

The ecological basis for pair-wise aggressive encounters has been investigated
in many species of non-human primates. Some species also form aggressive
coalitions while searching for food, but the ecological correlates of such
coalitions have yet to be studied. A coalition is defined as cooperation by two
or more individuals in an aggressive encounter against one or more other
individuals. This study will focus on pair-wise and coalitional aggression in
the white-faced capuchin, Cebus capucinus in the context of feeding. The
objectives of this study are (1) to measure the ecological factors that may
affect the rates of aggressive contests by quantifying the costs and benefits
associated with resource competition and (2) to test an ecological explanation
for the evolution of coalition behavior in non-human primates. &lt;br/&gt; Data
will be collected at two dry-forest study sites in Costa Rica. The researchers
will examine whether the ecological costs and benefits associated with coalition
formation differ systematically from those that prevail during pair-wise
contests, and whether males and females are equally likely to form coalitions.
Because males are usually dominant to females in C. capucinus, one would expect
females to form coalitions to gain access to food patches occupied by a male.
The ecological benefit of fighting over a food patch will be measured as the
nutritional gain available to contestants in the patch, whereas the cost to an
individual includes both the cost of a physical injury and the time needed to
find alternate food patches if it loses. The ecological explanation will be
tested against the simple alternative that the frequency of fights and
coalitions reflect overcrowding or the availability of coalition partners in a
food patch. This study will help us to understand the origins of cooperative
behavior in non-human primates and humans. &lt;br/&gt;