* 0120616
* Development of a Biocomplexity Research Program for the Analysis of Ecosystem Structure and Dynamics in Urban Salt Marshes
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2001,02/28/2003
* Gaboury Benoit, Pace University New York Campus
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 02/28/2003
* USD 31,755.00

0120616&lt;br/&gt;Levandowsky&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purposes of this planning
grant are: (1) to bring together a group of scientists with various specialties,
from several universities, who have been studying salt marshes in the vicinity
of the Hudson River estuary; and (2) to allow this group to interact with a
group of scientists at Florida State University who are studying salt marshes in
Florida. We wish to develop a proposal, to be submitted a year from now to NSF's
Biocomplexity program, that will integrate our various skills and interests to
explore the biocomplexity of these systems and the effects of urban
anthropogenic stress upon it. We will develop a program using new mathematical
approaches to analyze the connectivity of components of the marshes, and also
the nature of inherent space and time scales in these systems. Regarding time
scales, we will develop a research program to detect the existence of nonlinear,
chaotic phenomena. The locations of the New York area marshes to be studied are:
(1) the New York shore of the Arthur Kill, in Staten Island, highly impacted by
oil pollution; (2) the Meadowlands of New Jersey, with high levels of mercury
and other heavy metals; (3) Tuckerton, in Southern New Jersey, relatively
unimpacted by anthropogenic sources. The group will hold several workshops at
the Meadowland Environmental Research lnstitute's environmental center to which
the FSU scientists will be invited, and will also participate in workshops held
at FSU. At these workshops we will plan the scope and operational details of an
eventual full scale research proposal.&lt;br/&gt;