* 0120591
* The Cnidarian Genetic Toolkit
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2007
* Daniel Martinez, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Chris T. Amemiya
* 09/30/2007
* USD 1,367,056.00

0120591&lt;br/&gt;Bode&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is becoming increasingly clear
that understanding how an organism interacts with its environment will require a
complete accounting of the genes which make up the organism and the expression
patterns of the genes under various conditions. Members of the phylum Cnidaria
(jellyfish, corals, sea anemones, and hydras) are key members of their
environments, yet very little is known about their genetic makeup. To address
this problem, a collection of cloned DNAs representing the messenger RNA
populations (cDNAs) of two well-studied cnidarians will be generated. The two
organisms that will be used are the freshwater cnidarian Hydra and the colonial
marine cnidarian Podocoryne. Bacteria containing the cloned cDNAs will be
robotically arrayed to generate archives of the clones. Sequence data will be
obtained from approximately 50,000 of the cDNA clones from each organism. The
resulting sequence data will be analyzed in various ways using bioinformatic
computing tools. The analyses will provide information on what genes are present
in cnidarians and how those genes are evolutionarily related to those in animals
which diverged more recently than cnidarians, such as vertebrates and insects.
Such information will be very valuable for defining the processes by which
multicellular animals have evolved. The availability of cloned cDNA sets from
two model cnidarians will also make it possible to examine the expression of
large numbers of genes in these organisms using the technique of DNA array
analysis. In particular it will be possible to identify genes whose expression
changes when the organisms are placed under conditions which reflect those
present during periods of environmental stress (e.g. elevated temperature).
Genes whose expression levels change under stress conditions in the laboratory
may be useful tools for monitoring the health of cnidarians (e.g. corals) in
their natural setting.&lt;br/&gt;