* 0120225
* Mixed Signal Electronic Technologies: A Joint Initiative Between NSF and SRC: Radio Frequency CMOS Design Techniques for Multi-Standard Wireless Communications Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2001,10/31/2004
* Mohammed El-Naggar, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 10/31/2004
* USD 150,000.00

This proposal deals with new design techniques and chipsets for the coming
generations of wireless systems, which provide a wider domain of services and
work with different standards. The emphasis will be on the design of low power
RF, analog and mixed-signal transceiver front-ends in standard MOS technology.
Interdisciplinary research work is proposed at the architecture, block, circuit,
and device levels leading to CMOS chipsets and single chip front-end design for
both cellular and indoor wireless applications. Transceiver architectures for
the implementation of multi-standard TDMA and CDMA wireless systems are
proposed. Research is then proposed in three main thrusts encompassing RF,
baseband and frequency synthesis CMOS design techniques. In the RF part, MOS
modeling of GHz Nonlinearities will be studied and optimization techniques using
device widths and bias currents as design parameters to achieve low power and
high linearity will be developed. The proposed modeling and optimization
techniques will then be used in the design of low noise amplifiers, linear
power-efficient power amplifiers and mixers with controllable gain
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the baseband part, a multi-standard Sigma-
Delta data converter architecture is proposed for TDMA (GSM family and DECT)
systems while a pipeline architecture is proposed for CDMA systems. Digitally
programmable variable gain amplifiers and filters are proposed as part of a CMOS
cell library for baseband signal processing. In the frequency synthesis part,
techniques for multi-standard frequency synthesizers together with tuning
schemes for multi-standard voltage controlled oscillators are
proposed.&lt;br/&gt;Based on the proposed ideas, several chipsets at the sub-
system level will be demonstrated togther with two multi-standard single chip
CMOS receivers at the system level, one for TDMA systems and one for CDMA
systems (WCDMA, CDMA 2000).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A management plan for the
proposed activities is provided and a discussion on the education component of
this work is included. The proposed work should contribute to the preparation of
the nation's critical mass of well trained engineers and scientists that is
desperately needed in integrated circuits and systems for future wireless
systems. This will enable us to compete effectively on the global
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;