* 0120024
* BE/CNH: Modeling Interactions Among Urban Development, Land-Cover Change, and Bird Diversity
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2001,02/28/2006
* Mark Handcock, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2006
* USD 1,128,818.00

The interactions between urban development and ecological processes are
extraordinarily complex. Urban development evolves over time and space as the
outcome of microscopic interactions of individual choices and actions taken by
multiple agents. These decisions affect ecosystem structures and functions
through the conversion of land, fragmentation of natural habitat use, disruption
of hydrological systems, and modification of energy flow and nutrient cycles.
Environmental changes at local and regional scales affect human well-being and
preferences as well as the decisions people make. This project will develop an
integrated model of urban development and land-cover change in the central Puget
Sound region that can interface with models representing a large set of
ecosystem processes. The focus of this project will be on linking urban
development to bird diversity as a test case for an integrated modeling
approach. This approach builds on model traditions in urban economics, landscape
ecology, bird population dynamics, and complex system science, each of which
offers different perspectives on modeling urban ecological interactions. The
project will apply Bayesian networks and a multi-agent microsimulation approach
because of the potential for those approaches to support complex inference
modeling in problem domains with inherent uncertainty. Instead of separately
simulating urban growth and its impacts on birds habitats, this project will
develop a framework to simulate metropolitan areas as they evolve through the
dynamic interactions between urban development and ecological processes and link
them through a spatially explicit representation of the urban
landscape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Assessments of ecological impacts of urban
growth that are timely, accurate, and transparent are crucial to sound policy
and management decisions. Although extensive urban research has focused on the
dynamics of urban systems and their ecological interactions, these diverse urban
processes have yet to be synthesized into one coherent modeling framework.
Simulation models of urban and ecological dynamics have evolved in separate
knowledge domains. While both of these research areas deal with human-
environmental interactions, they do so with very different emphases, scale,
methodology and objectives. This research will investigate how best to model
complexity and uncertainty of coupled socioeconomic and biophysical processes in
metropolitan regions and their interactions with the policy domain. This project
will emphasize the importance of explicitly representing human and ecological
processes in modeling urban systems, including patterns, processes, and impacts.
Ultimately, this project will assist in identifying answers to questions related
to the potential use of public policy to intervene in urban ecological systems
in ways that may reduce ecological damage from urban processes while sustaining
economically and socially viable urban communities for people. The project
therefore should help in the development of tools for policy makers to explore
the links between human behaviors and environmental change. This project is an
award emanating from the FY 2001 special competition in Biocomplexity in the
Environment focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;