* 0120396
* High-Frequency Low-Noise Mixed-Signal Adaptive Equalizer Towards SOC Design of Data Transmission Circuits
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* John Fonseka, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 12/31/2005
* USD 225,000.00

This research proposes to design a 1GHz receiver equalizer in CMOS technology
for system-on-chip (SOC) implementation of high-speed long transmission distance
transceivers. Analog FIR filter will be used as the equalizing filter, which has
higher speed than the equalizing filters commonly used today. This proposal will
address the challenges in designing high-speed FIR filters, including analog tap
delay line and the learning algorithms. A low-noise error detection scheme is
proposed and will be studied in terms of communication theory for better
understanding and improvements. Potential application of the proposed equalizer
in high-speed wireless data communications will also be studied. In addition, we
propose to explore design for test methodology for low-cost test, diagnostics,
and characterization of the proposed adaptive mixed-signal
equalizer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In data transmissions, the signal containing the
data is attenuated when transmitted through media and the attenuation is a
function of the transmission distance and frequency. Frequency dependent
attenuation within the signal bandwidth causes inter-symbol-interference (ISI)
in the received signal. ISI in turn causes errors in data recovery, thus limits
the transmission distance and transmission rate. To reduce ISI, the frequency
dependent attenuation must be compensated, or
equalized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Depending on the transmission media, the state
of the art CMOS transceivers operate at the speeds ranging from 100-Mbit/s to
about 10-Gbit/s. Currently, equalization is only used in lower speed (100- to
200-Mbit/s) data transmission over low-cost cables (around 130-meter UTP5
cables). For transmission bit rates in the order of Gbit/s, pre-emphasizing
filters have been used&lt;br/&gt;to boost high frequency components in the
transmitter. Multiplexing techniques, such as&lt;br/&gt;multilevel signaling and
multi-phase clocks, allow the pre-emphasizing filters to operate
at&lt;br/&gt;several-hundred-MHz, while enabling multi-Gbit/s data transmission.
But, pre-emphasizing&lt;br/&gt;filter boosts the high frequency components of
the transmitted signal and introduces strong&lt;br/&gt;emission in the
transmitter. To avoid emission problems, receiver equalizer is more
desirable.&lt;br/&gt;The main challenges of receiver equalizer are the design of
high-speed equalizing filters and the&lt;br/&gt;complexity of filter adaptation
algorithm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the broader impacts of the proposed
activity is on providing trained mixed-signal&lt;br/&gt;design engineers for the
industry. There has been growing concern over the expected shortage
of&lt;br/&gt;graduating engineers specialized in the mixed-signal circuit design
area. The proposed research&lt;br/&gt;will strengthen the mixed-signal circuit
design program in university for educating skilled design&lt;br/&gt;engineers
for industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;