* 0120617
* SGER:  Analysis of Exterally-Sustained MMHD Processes for Enhanced Electrical Power Generation Efficiency Using Gas from Reformed Coal
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2001,01/31/2003
* Richard Miles, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 01/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

0120617&lt;br/&gt;Miles&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program will explore
the potential of electron beam sustained MHD power generation for enhancing the
electrical efficiency of advanced ground based coal fired power plants. In
conventional MHD, the high temperatures that are required (even with seeding)
lead to significant oxides of nitrogen production. The electron beam sustained
MHD has the capability of operating at relatively cool temperatures, without the
need for seed material to be added to the flow. The lower temperature allows of
a variety of new, possibly high efficiency, low polluting approaches to be
explored, the most desirable of which would be the utilization of the high flame
temperature to drive a high velocity, low temperature supersonic flow with rapid
quenching of the formation of oxides of nitrogen through a supersonic expansion.
The active control of the conductivity that electron beam sustained MHD affords
also opens the door to advanced methods of control for MHD processes,
particularly to suppress parasitic current paths and permit operation in dynamic
modes that might allow for improved performance. The electron beams enter the
MHD channel along magnetic field lines, and the conductivity is sustained by the
secondary electrons that are produced. To suppress the electron loss rate, the
channel must be operated at low pressure. For ground based facilities, this
means the flow will need to be supersonic. Since the presence of coal slag along
the walls will cause difficulty with electron beam transmission into the MHD
channel, the main focus of the research will be to examine the coupling of the
electron beam MHD concept together with new membrane technology gasification
processes that convert coal to hydrogen and CO2. MHD has the potential for more
efficient electrical conversion of hydrogen through combustion at a temperature
higher than is possible with turbine inlet temperature limits. This research
explores the possibility of e-beam sustained MHD for high efficiency conversion
by independently&lt;br/&gt;controlling the combustion temperature through
combustion in a supersonic nozzle, the formation of oxides of nitrogen through
kinetic rate differentials, and the optimization of the conductivity profiles.
Modeling indicates that the cost of the electron beams can be relatively small
if the electron loss rate is minimized.&lt;br/&gt;