* 0120960
* MPS Internships in Public Science Education - MPS-IPSE: Seeing is Believing: A multi-disciplinary proposal to create public exhibits and curriculum integrating current research
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2001,05/31/2006
* George Davis, Minnesota State University Moorhead
* Standard Grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 05/31/2006
* USD 209,194.00

AST-0120960&lt;br/&gt;PI: Craig, Matthew&lt;br/&gt;Inst: Minnesota State Univ.
Moorhead&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award under the MPS Internships in
Public Science Education Program, Minnesota State University Moorhead (MSUM) and
the MSUM Regional Science Center (RSC) will develop a traveling public exhibit
and associated curricular material in each of four topics : dark matter in
spiral galaxies, probability games of chance and beyond, X-ray microtomography,
and green chemistry. The underlying theme of these topics is 'Seeing is
Believing'. Using regional resources and examples, participating teachers and
students will be able to visualize the underlying concepts and develop material
to increase public understanding of this topical research. Each summer five
teachers, six undergraduates, and a member of the White Earth Tribal and
Community College staff will work with MSUM scientists and educators and RSC
staff to develop material for two projects. Exhibits will be introduced to the
general public during a multi-day exhibit at WETCC scheduled to coincide with
the White Earth Reservation's annual pow-wow. Exhibits will then be displayed at
the Regional Science Center over the summer and circulate through local
classrooms during the academic year. Curricular materials will be disseminated
through a yearly educational workshop offered at MSUM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded by the MPS Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities.&lt;br/&gt;***