* 0120978
* Center for Advanced Materials for Water Purification
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2014
* John Georgiadis, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 07/31/2014
* USD 38,354,609.00

Center for Advanced Materials for Water Purification,&lt;br/&gt;University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign &lt;br/&gt;(OIA-
0120978)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S.
and the world are facing the very real dangers of depleted aquifers, inadequate
surface water supplies, and contamination from a variety of sources including
agricultural runoff, industrial discharges, acid rain, and ground-water
pollutants. Waterborne pathogens are also a growing threat for water supplies.
These dangers are expected to increase as populations continue to grow. Numerous
technologies are being implemented to purify water, but current membrane and
adsorbent materials used in water purification are not sufficient to solve all
contamination problems and meet increasingly stringent new standards being
proposed to protect health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The best state-of-the-art
materials have well-known shortcomings that are due to shortfalls in the current
understanding of the underlying science. Indeed, to develop the revolutionary
new materials and systems for safe and economical water-purification technology
needed to counter the impending water crisis requires a coordinated, intensive,
multi-year effort of scientists and engineers. The vision of this Center is to
forge multi-disciplinary groups of researchers, educators, and practitioners
into a cohesive team with the overarching goal of developing new functional
materials and systems to purify water for the peoples of the United States and
the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Science and Technology Center (STC) has
several distinguishing features. First and foremost, it provides coordinated
participation of researchers in the following areas: water quality at Stanford
and the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC), material science at
UIUC, basic physical science (chemistry and physics) at the University of
California at Berkeley, Clark Atlanta University, Stanford, and UIUC, and
system-level experts at Stanford and UIUC. Furthermore, the Center facilitates
the technology transfer and feedback from practitioners in water treatment
through linkages with the UIUC Waste Management Research Center, and the Orange
County (CA)Water District, as well as other water-quality organizations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another distinguishing feature of the STC is its
establishment of a collaborative laboratory (collaboratory) for its education,
research, and outreach functions, to ensure the integration of the activities.
In this multi-disciplinary collaboratory, chemists, material scientists,
physicists, biologists, and engineers will work together with library and
information-science experts in the Center to disseminate information and
research results showing how to synthesize, characterize, and understand new
material systems designed to separate compounds from water and/or transform
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The premise of this STC is that advanced, selective
and efficient water-treatment technologies will be based on membrane filters,
adsorbents, and catalytic surfaces. Rational development of the required
materials requires a firm grasp of the basic science of the aqueous interface.
The key issue is to observe and to manipulate on the Angstrom to nanometer scale
interactions between the aqueous solution and the solid substrate. The goals of
the STC are: (i) to advance the basic understanding of these interactions; (ii)
to use the results to radically improve membranes, filters, adsorbents, and ion-
exchange materials through the synthesis of new materials that are able to
separate selectively and/or transform compounds in water; (iii) to integrate
these new materials into viable water purification systems; and (iv) to
integrate the human and knowledge infrastructure with the research mission to
implement effectively the science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish these
goals, the STC is organized in four core teams: (i) Interfacial Processes and
Molecular Characterization, (ii) Materials Synthesis and Development, (iii)
System Analysis and Integration, and (iv) Collaboratory Education and
Outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center supports education and outreach
activities for: (i) K-12 teachers and students to learn why clean water is
important and how fundamental research and sound engineering can help make water
cleaner; (ii) underrepresented groups in science and engineering, encouraging
members of such groups to pursue careers related to water purification, material
science, and engineering; (iii) citizen groups, water industry professionals,
and local governments to help formulate, debate, and implement policies related
to water quality control; and (iv) the general public to understand the need for
basic research on water purification. All constituent groups are supported by a
web-based collaborative laboratory to support knowledge dissemination,
mentoring, learning, public debate, and discussion. The main tool used for the
collaboratory is the INQUIRY-based learning and research environment developed
in the UIUC School of Library and Information Science, which allows two-way
research and education to be conducted between the partners and all the
participants and constituent groups of the Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The STC
seeks aggressively to increase diversity in education, research, and
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;Diversity is essential for increasing the numbers of under-
represented groups in science and technology. The STC can make the greatest
impact if the knowledge and technologies developed are implemented throughout
the U.S. and the world by diverse educators and researchers. To achieve this
impact, the proposed STC has&lt;br/&gt;partnered with the Environmental
Technology Consortium (ETC) of historically black colleges and universities
(HBCUs) and other minority institutions (MIs) to increase minority
participation. In addition, CAU is an active water-treatment research partner,
which supports the training of a diverse group of students in water purification
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to the critical need for improved materials
and processes for water purification, this&lt;br/&gt;STC has an immediate
opportunity to transfer the knowledge gained from basic science and engineering
research to the practitioners in the field. In addition to the usual modes of
dissemination in conferences, proceedings, journal articles, and courses, the
collaboratory two-way learning and research tools developed through the STC
quickly transmit knowledge between the academic partners and the partner
organizations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;