* 0120677
* Genomic Assessment of Phenotypic Plasticity in an Aquatic Bacterium: Water Quality and Microhabitat Effects
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2001,03/31/2006
* Anwarul Huq, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 03/31/2006
* USD 1,260,000.00

PI: Taylor Proposal: 0120677

The project by Ronald Taylor, Dartmouth College is supported by the program
Biocomplexity in the Environment, subprogram Genomic-Enabled Environmental
Science and Engineering (BE GEN-EN).

Heterotrophic bacteria play a key role in pelagic nutrient cycling because they
remineralize organic matter before it sinks out of the system. Two key bacterial
behaviors that may influence remineralization rates are dormancy and attachment
to plankton. Both of these behaviors are phenotypically plastic, allowing
bacteria to respond to changes in their environment. For example, a high
dormancy rate (30-95%) suggests that the bacterial community has a tremendous
capability to respond rapidly to changes in environmental conditions that
trigger the transition back to a metabolically active state. In contrast, little
is known about the potential impact of bacteria living on planktonic substrates
on ecosystem processes.

The goal of this research project is to study the interaction between dormancy
and attachment behaviors using whole-genome expression profiles for a focal
species (Vibrio cholerae) under contrasting environmental conditions in both the
field and laboratory. We are particularly interested in determining (1) the
extent to which dormancy and attachment may be co-regulated under realistic
environmental conditions and (2) how these behaviors might be altered by
anthropogenic activities such as land use change or organic pollution. We will
conduct three interrelated studies, each using microarrays, that will make major
contributions to our understanding of the genetic processes that instigate
transitions between active and dormant states and between unattached and
attached states. Aim 1 contrasts the temporal dynamics of gene expression in
unattached and attached bacteria under favorable vs. unfavorable environmental
conditions over a two-week period. This will be the first comprehensive analysis
of genetic co-regulation of dormancy and SRBs.

Aim 2 will determine the direct effects and interactions of four key
environmental parameters (temperature, salinity, pH, and nutrients) on gene
expression in bacteria exposed to three different microhabitats (unattached,
attached to zooplankton, attached to phytoplankton). This will be one of the
first multi-factor experiments with microarrays, and will require introduction
of new methods for analyzing microarray data.

Aim 3 will quantify gene expression under seasonally varying field conditions
using in situ incubations of bacteria in Bangladeshi ponds with contrasting
anthropogenic impacts. As such, this will be one of the first projects to use
microarrays to evaluate gene expression in a natural system rather than under
laboratory conditions.

The focal species, V. cholerae, is ideal for investigating these questions: it
is found in plankton communities worldwide, is representative of a large family
of bacteria (the Vibrionaceae), and has a fully sequenced and well-studied
genome which enables the use of microarray technology. V. cholerae is also of
considerable medical importance as the etiological agent of cholera. This
research will be accomplished by an interdisciplinary and international team of
researchers who specialize in ecology, microbiology, genetics and statistics. We
plan to make all microarray results publicly available, and to educate the
scientific community and the public about our results through a website, talks
at scientific meetings, and our undergraduate and graduate courses.