* 0120999
* Center for Biophotonics Science and Technology
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2002,11/30/2013
* Dennis Matthews, University of California-Davis
* Cooperative Agreement
* C.  Caldwell
* 11/30/2013
* USD 39,323,651.00

Biophotonics is the science of generating and using light and other forms of
radiant energy whose quantum unit is the photon for visualization, measurements,
analysis, and manipulation of biological materials. The discipline strives to
exploit the high spatial resolution, sensitivity, and spectral specificity of
photonics to understand and affect biological structure and/or function.

The Center for Biophotonics Science and Technology (CBST), an NSF Science and
Technology Center, is a multi-disciplinary and multi-institutional activity
designed to support a goal-directed, sustained effort to broadly advance the
science of biophotonics. Center activities are spread over four university
campuses, UC Davis, UC San Francisco, UC Berkeley, and Stanford University, and
the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. The CBST emphasizes vertical
integration of knowledge and applications that span the intellectual landscape,
from creating new instrumentation and techniques to helping understand molecular
mechanisms to providing technology that will enable the creation and development
of important new biomedical tools.

Research at the Center is divided among four strategic thrust areas: 1)
biomolecular mechanisms; 2) imaging and diagnostics; 3) computational
biophotonics; and 4) biomedical applications. The area of biomolecular
mechanisms concentrates on experiments and tools related to the newly emerging
field of single molecule imaging and detection, methodologies that are used in
individual projects to investigate on a sub-cellular level molecular mechanisms
related to DNA-protein interactions. The area of imaging and diagnostics focuses
on the development of new instruments for a number of imaging methodologies,
including ultra-high resolution optical microscopy, imaging non-linear optical
properties of tissues, optical interference imaging through otherwise opaque
tissue, and imaging tissue oxygenation by NIR imaging. Computational
biophotonics focuses on the application of new simulation codes and
supercomputers to support the projects in areas one and two and, in general,
increase the understanding of photonic transport in and interaction with tissue.
The area of biomedical applications focuses on optimizing and applying existing
technologies to significant medical problems, including hyperspectral microscopy
for searching for new optical signatures of disease, development of new, light-
activated materials for surgical applications, and the utilization of x-ray
sources for protein crystallography and live cell imaging.

The centerpiece of the educational activity is the development of a series of
six teaching modules, or "stepping stones," that bring the concepts of light,
biology, and biophotonics to students from kindergarten (Step One, K-3) through
graduate and post-doctoral research (Step Six). Central to the concept of the
"stepping stones" approach is that the modules emphasize hands-on science
activities promoting scientific inquiry and concept development. The "stepping
stones modules" are disseminated widely to schools in the community through
various mechanisms, among them the MESA and 4-H Youth Development Program.

The Center has a strong, collaborative program for fostering outreach to and
participation by non-center researchers in research activities. An Industry
Partners Consortium (IPC) is used to bring interested members from industry
together with CBST participants for the purpose of knowledge exchange,
collaborative research, and the direct transfer of intellectual property and
technology know-how to the commercial sector.

