* 0120188
* SGER: Corporate Venture Capital: Fostering Innovation through Equity Investment
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Alan Meyer, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* John L. Naman
* 08/31/2003
* USD 65,358.00

ABSTRACT (SES 0120188-SGER) MEYER

Principal Investigator: Alan D. Meyer, University of Oregon - Eugene Corporate
Venture Capital: Fostering Innovation Through Equity

Analysis: This highly innovative project proposes to investigate the emerging
practice of corporate venture investing whereby corporations seek to invest in
start-up ventures, often as an alternative to investment in in-house R&D.
Externalizing R&D can take the form of R&D alliances and research consortia, but
a growing share of corporate R&D dollars has been devoted to equity investments
in start-ups, the focus of this research. Corporations seek both financial
returns and strategic benefits, including exposure to new and disruptive
technologies, access to new products, and identification of propsective
acquisition targets. While independent venture capital has been highly
successful, however, corporate venturing has been more challenging. Levels of
equity investment fluctuate with economic cycles, so many firms started
venturing units only to close them down when economic times turned tough. Much
of the knowledge upon which independent VC firms prosper is tacit, and some of
their central practices clash with corporate cultures and systems within which
the corporate venture efforts are embedded.

The research objectives of this project include:

Contentualize corporate venturing by conducting an historical analysis of
corporate venture investment (CVI) programs.

Evaluate the transferability of practices developed by private VC firms into CVI
units;

Develop a typology of alternative organizational structures being used to house
and pursue CVI;

Conduct a real-time longitudinal analysis of the rapid coevolution of CVI units
and the venturing environment;

Identify best practices for corporate venturing.

Cooperation has been arranged with Atrium Capital, IBF (International Business
Forum), Allegis Capital, Sun Microsystems, 3M Enterprise Development, Compaq
Computer Corporate Development, Adobe Systems, and Intel. There exists no other
work examining this emerging area of corporate innovation, nor any comparing
internal versus independent venture capital. In light of extensive outsourcing
of R&D, information as to the potential for this practice as well as its hazards
seems highly likely to yield interesting insights of theoretical and practical
impact. In the judgment of the Program Director, the cooperation of these
corporations and the track record of the researcher argues strongly for
important contributions from this Small Grant for Exploratory Research.