* 0120010
* Snowmass 2001 Summer Study on the Future of Particle Physics; Snowmass, Colorado
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2001,04/30/2002
* Chris Quigg, Universities Research Association Inc
* Standard Grant
* MARVIN GOLDBERG
* 04/30/2002
* USD 60,000.00

Snowmass 2001 will consider experiments at the highest energies, experiments of
exceptional sensitivity, and experiments that explore very high scales through
virtual effects; accelerators to address a broad range of scientific
opportunities; accelerator research to provide information for knowledgeable
decisions about future projects, and accelerator research and technology
development for the long term; theory that develops hand-in-hand with experiment
and visionary theory that hasn't yet engaged experimental particle physics
directly. The workshop will examine accelerator experiments as well as
astroparticle, particle astrophysics, and cosmological studies that use natural
sources. It will examine the interplay between particle physics and new
technologies, and will explore the interactions between particle physics and
related fields. &lt;br/&gt; Snowmass 2001 will be a forum for the critical
examination of future projects, and will provide crucial community input to the
long-range planning activities undertaken by the science funding agencies and
the High Energy Physics Advisory Panel. It will be an ideal place for a broad
community of scientists to examine initiatives for new accelerators and new
detectors that are being developed throughout the world.&lt;br/&gt; The entire
request is for funds for education and outreach activities and to subsidize the
attendance of students and post-doctoral associates who would otherwise be
unable to attend this important meeting. &lt;br/&gt;