* 0120774
* DIS:  A Guide for Recruiting and Advancing Women Scientists and Engineers in Academia
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2004
* Jong-on Hahm, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Ruta Sevo
* 09/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

The Committee on Women in Science and Engineering (CWSE), National Research
Council, of the National Academy of Sciences is preparing a guide to the best
policies and programs that academic institutions have implemented to recruit,
retain, and advance women in science and engineering in academia. The guide is
meant to be a practical tool in the replication of successful programs at many
academic institutions across the country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CWSE will use
both formal and informal networks to identify the most successful
programs&lt;br/&gt;for each level, e.g., undergraduate recruitment, reducing
attrition in freshman and sophomore years, graduate student recruitment and
retention, transition to postdoctoral fellowships. This will include contacting
granting organizations, disciplinary societies, academic administration
societies, faculty groups, and non-profit advocacy organizations. Programs from
different size institutions, both public and private, will be reviewed.
Identified programs will be asked to provide data on the increased participation
of women resulting from the implementation of their programs. From this group a
subset of programs will be selected for site visits. The project will include up
to five site visits to institutions with successful programs to interview the
students, faculty, and administrators involved. No institution will be
identified by name in the guide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The target audience for
the guide includes college and university presidents, deans, provosts and other
administration officials, department chairs, faculty, and other individuals with
the interest and capacity for establishing a successful program that promotes
the participation of women in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Other guides produced by the National Academy
of Sciences (NAS) have had a wide impact. Tens of thousands of copies of
previous NAS guides have been disseminated worldwide. On Being A Scientist, the
NAS guide on science ethics, has been reprinted in several languages. The NAS
guide on mentoring, on which this guide will be modeled, Advisor, Teacher, Role
Model, Friend: On Being a Mentor to Students in Science and Engineering, is
distributed by some institutions to all their faculty, and serves as the basis
of their mentoring efforts. Many other faculty mentoring programs are based on
the mentoring guide.&lt;br/&gt;