* 0120630
* Biocomplexity in African Savannas
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Philip Omi, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2006
* USD 1,440,040.00

Abstract

Biocomplexity in African savannas Niall P. Hanan, Robert J. Scholes, Michael B.
Coughenour, Luanne Otter, Philip Omi, Gerhard Dangelmayr

Savannas are globally important ecosystems of great significance to human
welfare and economies, especially in many less developed countries in Africa and
Eurasia. In Africa, the savannas are also home to the greatest density and
diversity of large herbivores and carnivores of any ecosystem on earth. However,
the mixture of trees and grasses that defines savanna systems is inherently
unstable and multiple factors related to soil type, climate, herbivore density,
and wild-fire frequency are thought to contribute to their coexistence. Thus
savannas are biocomplex systems where processes such as grazing intensity and
fire frequency simultaneously depend on and control savanna structure,
productivity and nutrient recycling. This project will investigate biocomplexity
in the context of African savannas. We are developing the conceptual and
numerical understanding of savanna ecosystems that will allow prediction of
savanna structure and function resulting from the complex interactions and
feedback between driving variables. This will include the change in stable
states under varying conditions, the resilience of the different forms of
savanna to change, and the thresholds between stable states. The project will
further use savanna systems as a general model for understanding complexity in
biological systems and to develop methods of analysis and interpretive tools
that promote a broader public understanding of the inter-relatedness of
environmental systems.

