* 0120247
* Support of the 3rd Biennial Geochemical Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry (SIMS) Workshop, Tempe, Arizona
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2001,10/31/2002
* Laurie Leshin, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 10/31/2002
* USD 14,827.00

0120247&lt;br/&gt;Leshin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides support for
the 3rd Biennial Geochemical SIMS (Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry) Workshop to
be held at The Buttes Hotel and Conference Center in Tempe, AZ, October 12-14,
2001. The third in a series of biennial workshops, this meeting will bring
together the bulk of U.S. geoscientists who either manage, maintain and/or
utilize secondary ion mass spectrometry for microspatial trace element and
isotopic analyses of natural and man made materials. The workshop will focus on
presentations from the community that address developing new SIMS techniques for
geological and cosmochemical applications, providing improved service to the
community through NSF-sponsored SIMS facilities (i.e. WHOI; EAR-0115433 and
UCLA; EAR-0113563) and the sharing and development of laboratory standards. The
PI, Laurie Leshin, currently oversees a newly established (EAR-9871270) CAMECA
6f SIMS facility at Arizona State University and has included a list of invitees
from the preeminent SIMS labs in U.S. academia and government labs. Additional
attendees will include representatives from the manufactures of SIMS instrument
(CAMECA and Australian Scientific Instruments) and should ensure that the
analytical needs of U.S. geoscientists who use SIMS will be effectively
transmitted to the private sector capable of facilitating instrumental
improvements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;