* 0120255
* Research for Mixed Signal Electronic Technologies: A Joint Initiative Between NSF and SRC: Scalable Design and Test Methods for Single-Chip Multi-Link Radio-Frequency Transceivers
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Mani Soma, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2005
* USD 241,999.00

Recent developments in mixed-signal systems, especially those integrating
computing and&lt;br/&gt;communication in a system-on-a-chip, have focused on the
goal to communicate information via wireless devices and networks. While digital
system design to process baseband information is moving into the low gigahertz
(GHz) frequency range, the mixed-signal transceivers have to operate in the ISM
bands (2.5 GHz up to 5.8 GHz) with even higher frequencies in the near future to
satisfy bandwidth demands. Analog design advances have produced several
transceiver designs up to 5 GHz, using CMOS, BiCMOS, and other technologies. To
reduce noise, these designs tend to separate the transmitter and receiver, and
so far, have provided only a single physical link (one transmitter and one
receiver) in a wireless device. In the design area, this proposal addresses the
creation and verification of scalable systematic design methods to integrate two
or more physical links on one single chip to provide more bandwidth and
flexibility in communication applications. A methodology to incorporate multi-
links is scalable in the sense that more links can be added by application
demands. To create this methodology, we propose the following design
approaches:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Noise cancellation techniques and circuits
to deal with digital switching noise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Noise cancellation
techniques and circuits to deal with RF noise interference between different
transceiver links and circuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These circuits will be
validated using case studies from industry with whom we have had
close&lt;br/&gt;collaborations: Texas Instruments, Motorola, and National
Semiconductors, who will provide&lt;br/&gt;advanced fabrication technologies and
simulation models for this study.&lt;br/&gt;The designs will be fully tested and
the development of scalable test methods is the second focus of this proposal.
Mixed-signal test advances, despite intense activities, have been rather slow,
especially in high-frequency (GHz) test. We propose to investigate the following
approaches and distill the results into a test methodology that can be scaled
with respect to operating frequencies and process
advances:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. End-to-end digital test methods using one
transmit link and one receive link on the same chip&lt;br/&gt;to verify correct
information transmission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Designs of on-chip delay and
phase measurement circuits, operating at the same frequency as&lt;br/&gt;the
transceivers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Interface between ATE and on-chip test
circuits to use test resources efficiently.&lt;br/&gt;During the validation of
these test methodologies, we will need access to advance test equipment for
comparison purposes, and these equipment will be provided by our collaborator at
Teradyne (Tualatin, OR) and Wavecrest (San Jose,
CA).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another level of integration involves the curriculum -
research aspects of the proposed work,&lt;br/&gt;which is being implemented in
our current curriculum revision. Dissemination approaches re-used the distance
learning methods and assessment supported by NSF, FIPSE, and our
own&lt;br/&gt;university. The proposal will deliver fundamental methodologies
and techniques, and train the&lt;br/&gt;first-generation system architects in
high-frequency mixed-signal design and test.&lt;br/&gt;