* 0120613
* MPS Internships in Public Science Education - MPS-IPSE: Carbon Dixoxide in Nature and Technology: Internships in Public Education
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Ruben Carbonell, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Kuczkowski
* 12/31/2005
* USD 374,378.00

Ruben G. Carbonell of North Carolina State University, Mary A. Brittain of the
North Carolina Museum of Natural Sciences, and Joseph M. DeSimone of the
University of North Carolina in Chapel Hill have support from the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities to establish a Math and Physical Sciences-
Internship in Public Science Education (MPS-IPSE) in the area of Carbon Dioxide
in Nature and Technology. The program is a joint effort of the Kenan Institute
for Engineering, Technology and Science at NC State University, the NSF Science
and Technology Center for Environmentally Responsible Solvents and Processes
(CERSP) led by UNC Chapel Hill, and the North Carolina Museum of Natural
Sciences. Outstanding math and science K-12 teachers from the Research Triangle
area in North Carolina will be recruited as MPS Fellows for a three-year
program. During this time period, the Fellows will have summer internships at
the NC Museum of Natural Sciences and the NSF CERSP facilities at NC State
University and the UNC Chapel Hill. Scientists in the CERSP and staff in the
museum will serve as mentors throughout the three-year program to help the
teachers develop novel curriculum tools for K-12 education, and educational
programs and displays for the museum public. At the same time, the teachers will
be able to obtain graduate credit for advanced degrees in education at local
universities, and they will participate in professional and personal leadership
training programs throughout the academic year.