* 0120371
* Research for Mixed Signal Electronic Technologies: A Joint Initiative Between NSF and SRC: Fast Methods of Coupled EM. Circuit and Logic Simulation for Giga-Scale
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Vikram Jandhyala, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2005
* USD 225,003.00

This project aims at developing fast algorithms for rapid simulation of giga-
scale systems-on-chip, where coupled circuit, logic, and electromagnetic (EM)
effects (including RLC parasitics, coupling, cross talk, skin and thermal
effects---both quasi-static and full-wave), are becoming increasingly important.
For coupled EM and circuit simulation, we propose to investigate a novel
partial-element equivalent electric circuit (PEEC) approach. For coupled EM and
digital simulation, we propose to investigate variant time stepping in EM
analysis and to use conservative synchronization with digital events. More
specifically, our approach consists of the following key
elements:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing fast integral-equation-based solution
methods that will make feasible EM simulation in these settings, and will permit
hierarchical or multilevel EM analyses at varying degrees of model
complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Implementation of fast and hierarchical schemes
through a variation of the partial equivalent electric circuit method for
triangular mesh tessellations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coupling of EM simulation
schemes directly to digital logic simulation in order to analyze switching and
ground bounce in power-ground plane
situations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Exploitation of structure and redundancies
present in EM, circuit-level as well as coupled-system matrices in order to
drastically reduce memory and computation time to a degree such that rigorous
and complete coupled simulation will be feasible for complex-systems-on-chip.
Sensitivity analysis, reduced-order modeling, and multi-physics simulations are
targeted in addition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of optimized compilation
techniques for generating ordinary differential equation (ODE) code for circuit
simulation, and for exploiting the circuit structural regularity for fast
hierarchical circuit/EM simulation. The application drivers for testing proposed
coupled EM/circuit and EM/digital simulation will include (1) Giga-hertz CMOS
transceivers on chip, and (2) Power/ground network of giga-hertz digital
circuits including gate switching activity modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
intended that the development of fast and rigorous EM/circuit and EM/logic
simulation will enable accurate yet efficient sign-off simulation of next
generation mixed-signal circuits and systems, enable simulation in the loop
design optimization and architecture tradeoff, and finally enable design for
testability where EM effects are becoming hard to characterize, predict, and
measure.&lt;br/&gt;