* 0120732
* Regulation of the Hydrologic and C Cycles by Native Shrubs in Soils of Sub-Sahelian Africa
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2008
* Richard Dick, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,216,694.00

ABSTRACT

REGULATION OF HYDROLOGIC AND C CYCLES BY NATIVE SHRUBS IN SUB-SAHELIAN AFRICA
R.P. Dick PI, Oregon State University, Corvallis OR

Soil degradation in relation to desertification of Sub-Sahelian Africa is a
major concern. Farmers of semiarid land are being considered to be paid for
practices that sequester C in soils, which could enable farmers in vulnerable
ecological landscapes to adopt practices that promote sustainability and improve
soil quality and degraded environments. However, assessing soil degradation and
the potential to sequester C is spatially and temporally complex in this
semiarid landscape. In particular, we have identified a largely unrecognized
component in the landscape of the vast semi-arid Sahel, namely woody shrubs
(Piliostigma reticulatum and Guiera senegalensis) that voluntarily regrow in
farmers' fields after the summer cropping season. These shrubs seem to be much
more important than trees or other organic inputs such as animal manure at the
landscape level in regulating C inputs/sequestration and hydrologic processes.
Under current management farmers who cut and burn the shrub biomass each spring
are not utilizing this organic matter effectively. An intriguing ancillary
theory is that these shrubs may do "hydraulic lift". This has been documented in
other semiarid regions and is the process of water movement from moist subsoil
to dry surface layers using root systems as a conduit which can be released from
roots to surrounding soil during periods when transpiration ceases (usually at
night) This could drive rhizosphere processes in "dry" soil such as nutrient
mineralization and mobility and possibly provide small amounts of water to
shallow rooting crop species during dry periods. The overall objectives are to
(1) quantify annual C cycling and storage, water balance, and litter
decomposition of two dominant shrubs of Sub-Sahelian agroecosystems; (2) couple
indigenous knowledge to biogeochemical and hydrological results with the ecology
of these shrubs; and (3) use modeling to determine the effect of alternative
shrub management systems on soil C and soil quality at the landscape level. The
work has implications for large areas of Sub Sahelian West Africa that have
similar agroecosystems to Senegal. The approach will be multidisciplinary and
the ecological research of these shrubs would be a basis for practical
applications in agricultural nutrient and water management, and as a viable
management tool to off set soil degradation and promote C sequestration to
reduce global climate change.