* 0120465
* DIS - Gender Schemas and Science Careers:  Tutorials for Change
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2004
* Virginia Valian, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Ruta Sevo
* 09/30/2004
* USD 101,500.00

The project will produce on-line tutorials for SMET students and faculty at
colleges and universities, and for anyone else interested in a summary of
research about the role of gender in science careers. The tutorials will be
developed using Powerpoint slides with voice-over narration. Each will include
an annotated bibliography, a questionnaire for site visitors to fill out
(voluntarily), the opportunity to send queries and comments to PI, and question
and answer material from those emailed messages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work
will be performed at Hunter College - CUNY and the tutorials will be mounted on
a Hunter College server. The tutorials can thus be reached by anyone in the
world with access to the web. Once a demonstration tutorial is created, the PI
will contact educational institutions and groups concerned with gender equity in
science in order to invite such groups to evaluate the tutorial and to provide a
link to the Hunter College site. As the project continues, more organizations
and groups will be invited to create links to the
site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tutorials like these do not currently exist. The PI
is uniquely qualified as the author of a published book on women's advancement
in the professions (extensively summarizing research), as a cognitive
psychologist who has developed new courses related to gender, as a frequent
presenter on the topic (having given 100+ presentations to and discussions with
science students and educators), and as the developer of a web site for
prospective graduate students to Hunter's MA Program in Psychology. The PI in
particular will leverage experience giving lectures to diverse
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outcome measures will be evaluated from a) the
number of visits to the site and to each tutorial, b) the number of educational
institutions and organizations with links to the site, c) analysis of
questionnaires and emailed messages. Feedback results that are relevant to the
larger community will be posted to the site once they have been
analyzed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Science-based information about inadvertent bias
in evaluations of men and women is available in technical sources but is not
known to most students or educators. The resulting product will provide a suite
of 15-minute tutorials that could be incorporated into workshops, briefings,
classroom discussions, web sites, and on-line courses aimed at anyone studying
the underrepresentation of women in SMET. The content drawing on many research
findings and results is a substantive and accessible complement to many
briefings and reports that primarily present summaries of statistics.&lt;br/&gt;