* 0120204
* Development of Sol-Gel Synthesis Methods for Organo-Ceramic Adsorbents for Separations of Cobalt, Chromium and Arsenic Ions
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2005
* Lawrence Tavlarides, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Eric S. Peterson
* 11/30/2005
* USD 300,000.00

The goal of the proposed work is to develop efficient metal-ion separation
systems based upon the development of a new class of organo-ceramic hybrid
materials which can be used as adsorbents for the extraction of toxic and
valuable metal ions from aqueous streams. These organic-inorganic hybrid
materials are designed at a molecular level to take advantage of desirable
properties from both components such as a high reactivity of functional organic
molecules for metal extraction and a high physico-chemical strength of the
ceramic structure as well as fast metal transport in the pores. The development
of these hybrid adsorbents is a multi-disciplinary work in which organic
synthesis chemistry, nano-scale materials science, and engineering/technology of
chemical and environmental applications are closely interrelated. In this
project, over 10 functional organic compounds will be developed and tested for
their affinity for the proposed target metal ions, chromium and arsenic. After
prescreening, two or three functional organic compounds will be selected for
further evaluation with each metal ion to develop the most desirable adsorbent
materials. These materials will be used to demonstrate their applicability for
separating the target metals in a variety of industrial and environmental fluid
streams.&lt;br/&gt;Successful developments in the proposed project will lead to
the understanding and advancement of the sol-gel processing technology and the
identification of methodologies to produce and characterize organo-ceramic
hybrid adsorbents for separation of toxic and industrially important metals. For
example, a hybrid adsorbent developed for arsenic separation might be employed
to produce safe drinking water from arsenic-contaminated ground water in many
regions. Similarly efficient adsorbents for chromium separations could be
applied to recycle this metal from contaminated effluent streams in the
electroplating industry. In addition, the technology might be extended to other
industrial applications to produce catalysts or new additives for polymers,
flame-retardants, and lubricants. The project will also disseminate basic
knowledge through research publications and novel industrial applications
through patents, and it will provide training and education to students,
including Native Americans concerned with contaminated lands. &lt;br/&gt;