* 0120222
* Conference:  FASEB Summer Conference on Prokaryotic Transcription Initiation to be held Summer 2001, at the Vermont Academy in Saxton's River Vermont.
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2002
* Lucia Rothman-Denes, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Vicki B. Vance
* 06/30/2002
* USD 5,000.00

The FASEB Summer Conference on Prokaryotic Transcription Initiation will be held
July 14-19, 2001, at the Vermont Academy in Saxton's River, Vermont. The meeting
will bring together biochemists, biophysicists, and geneticists. It will focus
on eubacteria, but there will be consideration of both archaea and eukaryotes
where comparison is interesting. Areas of intense study that will be featured at
the 2001 FASEB conference include the following:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1.
Structure of DNA-dependent RNA polymerases&lt;br/&gt;2. Sigma factors and core
interactions&lt;br/&gt;3. Promoter recognition and initiation&lt;br/&gt;4.
Transcription activation&lt;br/&gt;5. Complex regulation&lt;br/&gt;6. Global
regulation&lt;br/&gt;7. Formation and stability of elongation
complexes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All cells regulate the flow of information from
DNA to protein at several different levels. A primary, and most economical,
target of regulation is the initiation of transcription, the process by which
the information in a gene on a chromosome is encoded in a small (relative to a
chromosome) mobile form for use by the cell. Using easily manipulated bacterial
systems, scientists have discovered many fundamental principles of
transcriptional regulation and are exploring many more today. This meeting will
facilitate the free exchange of experimental results and ideas so essential to
this scientific search. The financial support provided by the National Science
Foundation will enable students and postdoctoral fellows to attend this
important meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;