* 0120794
* DEM/RES: Small Group Mathematical Modeling Approaches to Improved Gender Equity in Engineering (SGMM) Project
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2001,06/30/2007
* Judith Zawojewski, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 06/30/2007
* USD 951,301.00

The Small Group Mathematical Modeling Approaches to Improved Gender Equity in
Engineering (SGMM) Project is a collaboration between the engineering and
mathematics education faculty at Purdue University. The plan is to demonstrate
that innovations in collegiate engineering courses have the potential to address
gender differences in interest and persistence, and that the implementation is
systemic. The proposed effort will be designed to address mathematical topics
that have been identified as foundational to engineering and likely barriers for
women in these courses, and to design environments where skills and abilities
women bring to engineering are rewarded and valued.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
modeling activities will be incorporated into selected early engineering courses
at Purdue University, including those required of all incoming freshmen
engineering students. Those involved are over 3000 engineering students (~600
women) in freshman engineering courses, all instructors in freshman engineering
(including faculty and graduate assistants), and a number engineering faculty
teaching sophomore level courses. During Phase I, a small technical team,
realistic, modeling activity will be a required of all freshmen. The activity
will be delivered via WebCT, an internet-based instructional tool
[www.webct.com]. During Phase II additional realistic modeling activities will
be incorporated in sophomore-level materials engineering
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complementary research efforts will be used to
build a case study of this innovation. The purpose of the research is to inform
(1) how these modeling activities are used to identify emerging student talent,
(2) how the various constituencies react to the use of these activities (male
and female students, instructors), (3) how these activities address the targeted
mathematical areas, and (4) how students' vision of their future engineering
career and their gender identity interact. The information will provide insights
into the&lt;br/&gt;potential effects of the small technical team, realistic,
modeling activities in engineering courses, the dynamics of gender-equity issues
of the Purdue engineering program, and factors outside the engineering program
that may influence the interest and persistence of students (especially women)
in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project studies gender-related
issues at the student, the instructor, and the programmatic level. The
activities and supporting materials will be available to other universities on a
web site already sponsored by Purdue University, and linked to the Purdue Women
in Engineering Program web site. &lt;br/&gt;