* 0120928
* Collaborative Research on Distributed Control and Communication Design for Networked Dynamic Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* John Hedrick, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* mario rotea
* 08/31/2005
* USD 211,872.00

This is a collaborative research project between UC Berkeley and Stanford
University to develop a validated analytical methodology for designing control
systems where some of the feedback loops are closed over wireless communication
links. The proposed work is an interdisciplinary effort between two very
disparate research areas: wireless communications and control theory. This work
will have a great impact on many fields where wireless communication is
beginning to see an increasing presence such as transportation, manufacturing
and remote sensing applications.

Most current controller designs assume that communication between the sensors
and actuators and the central logic system is done over hard-wired lines
providing essentially perfect transmission. Thus, the controller design
typically assumes no rate constraints, delay, or loss of information. However,
there are many applications where this communication must take place over
imperfect wireless links where these imperfections can lead to loss of
performance and even instability. There currently exists no unified theory for
the design of closed loop control systems using wireless links. This proposal is
aimed at developing such a theory.

The first stage of the proposed work will focus on characterizing the
communications network carrying the sensor, actuator, and control information in
terms of its rate constraints, and delay and packet loss statistics. The next
stage will investigate joint optimization of the controller and communication
system.

The research results will be presented at both communications and controls
conferences. The final results will be incorporated into advanced graduate
courses. A very important aspect of this project is the involvement of
undergraduate students in the research. Both UC Berkeley and Stanford have
active UROP (Undergraduate Research Opportunities Programs). The area of
communication/control is very attractive to undergraduates and it is anticipated
that undergraduates will participate in the project due to its interdisciplinary
nature and its potential to impact real world problems.

