* 0120997
* MPS Internships in Public Science Education - MPS-IPSE: Internships for Creating Presentations on Nanotechnology Topics at a Science Center
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2004
* Richard toon, Arizona Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Ulrich Strom
* 09/30/2004
* USD 142,631.00

This award to Arizona Science Center (ASC) funded by the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities of the Directorate for Mathematics and Physical
Sciences provides paid Internships in Public Science Education for undergraduate
students and school teachers affiliated with the Center for Solid State Science
at Arizona State University (ASU). The interns from the university will work
with science center staff to develop programs for the public and for school
outreaches on topics in materials science, with an emphasis on nanotechnology.
The ASC-ASU collaboration will create internships for three students per
academic year for three years and internships for two local high school teachers
per summer for two summers.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;ASC exhibits and programs
focus on science as experienced and applied by people in Arizona and is visited
by over 400,000 people annually. ASU promotes research, outreach, and education
in a variety of cross-discipline areas in the physical sciences. In the proposed
program, student interns will work with research faculty of the Center for Solid
State Science and with educators at the Science Center. They will create public
demonstrations, "table-top" activities, and multimedia domed planetarium theater
presentations in which important developments and concepts in materials science
research are presented in an accessible way. Teacher interns who have
participated in a summer program in materials science will work with researchers
and educators at the two institutions during the summer to develop education
programs in materials science subjects suitable for inclusion in ASC's school
and after school outreach programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three-year project
would produce 13 new programs, delivered beyond the life of the project to an
estimated 160, 000 visitor's to the Center per year and to over 1200 children
per year attending ASC's outreach programs in their schools. Write-ups of the
presentations and the results of the project will be disseminated through
publications and presentations to museum, science education, and science
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;