* 0120789
* Integrative Approaches to Natural History: A Student Symposium: November 9-12, 2001: Ventura, California
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2002
* Michael Graham, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 07/31/2002
* USD 10,920.00

The organizers are requesting funding to support a student-organized symposium
and workshop to be held at the next annual meeting (November 9-12, 2001) of the
Western Society of Naturalists (WSN). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The symposium,
entitled "Integrative Approaches to Natural History", will explore the role of
non-traditional research to the study natural history. The proposed speakers
represent diverse fields, ranging from evolutionary biology and ecology to
molecular biology; some work in terrestrial systems and some in marine systems.
The common thread uniting these scientists from different disciplines is the way
that they use techniques from other fields of biology (e.g. genetics,
biochemistry, molecular biology, physiology) to gain insight into the ecology
and evolution of their systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop, entitled
"Communicating Science to Non-scientists", will be an interactive tutorial on
how to disseminate research results to the media, policy makers, and general
public. Therefore, unlike most symposia and workshops at ecology or evolutionary
biology meetings that focus on specific topics within a field, these events seek
to cut across diverse biological fields to discuss general themes in the way
scientists conduct and disseminate their research. The purpose of the symposium
and workshop is not only to explore these important and timely topics, but also
to provide students with the valuable experience of organizing and running their
own events and participating in the governance of a scientific society.
&lt;br/&gt;