* 0120128
* Modeling of Unified Channel Mobility for Quantum Hydrodynamic Simulation of Nanoscale MOSFETs
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Ting-wei Tang, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence S. Goldberg
* 08/31/2005
* USD 209,997.00

The CMOS technology is now being ushered from l8Onm node to 13Onm node. For
lOOnm-l3Onm generation technology, many key issues of transistor design must be
reexamined. One of them is non-equilibrium transport which takes place in
nonoscale MOS devices. Because of continuous down-scaling of the device, the
gate length now becomes comparable to or smaller than the inelastic mean-free-
path. In this regime, the non-equilibrium /non-local transport of carriers in
MOS devices requires substantially different formulation from that of the
conventional one. In this research project, it is proposed to construct a
unified mobility model for carriers in the channel of bulk, SOI, thin-body SOI,
and DG MOSFETs applicable to gate length below lOOnm. Based on sound physics of
non-equilibrium transport including quantum effects, the conventional low-field
inversion layer mobility will be extended to the high-field regime by seeking an
effective average carrier energy which characterizes the non-local transport
occurring in the device. A series of self-consistent Monte Carlo (MC)
simulations of carriers in inversion layers with a quantum mechanically
corrected potential will be carried out in the region encompassing retarding-,
low-, and high-fields. A unified channel mobility will be constructed in such a
way that it can accurately predict velocity overshoot at the drain end of the
channel, quantization effects in the inversion layer including tunneling, as
well as thermionic emission-limited current density across the source-channel
barrier. This unified channel mobility will then be incorporated in the quantum
hydrodynamic (QHD) transport equations for numerical simulation of nanometer-
scale bulk, SOI, thin-body SOI, and DG MOSFETs. It is expected that this
research will provide a consistent and easy means of moving the simulation
hierachy from drift-diffusion to MC Boltzmann via a hydrodynamic (HD)
formulation. The project will enable simulation of MOS devices with the channel
length of 100nm and below. Such capability is required of simulation of next
generation of integrated circuits, which are expected in a few years. The
proposed research will also benefit both graduate and undergraduate students on
campus and engineers in industry who take P.I.'s device simulation course
through the distance learning. The P.I. has constantly updated course materials
based on research results of the past NSF projects and other research projects
supported by the industry.

