* 0120458
* RES - Women in Information Technology:  Pivotal Transitions from School to Careers
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2007
* Carol Burger, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 09/30/2007
* USD 921,557.00

The " Women in Information Technology: Pivotal Transitions from School to
Careers" project is gathering primary research data for K-12 and university
educators, policy makers, and administrators about those pivotal transition
points in girls' lives that result in their positive or negative view of
information technology as a viable career choice. It is gathering new
information about how the total environment - at the high school, community
college, and university levels, both inside and outside the school -- helps
shape girls' perceptions of technology as friendly or unfriendly to them. It
will document longitudinally the impact of family, peers, school, and community
on girls' perceptions of IT careers; examine the key transition points in girls'
experiences with technology; and determine how the choice of a nontraditional
career is associated with the development of self-
authorship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project combines standard interview and
survey techniques within the theoretical framework of self-authorship. Methods
include a pre- and post-survey; individual interviews; small group interviews; a
videotape documentary and case studies of the longitudinal development of girls'
career transitions and choices; and group activities using computer programs to
stimulate girls' interest in and understanding of IT careers. A set of IT
careers workshops are planned as an incentive for participating students and
parents, as another data collection point, and as a model for IT career
exploration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is an interdisciplinary
collaboration among faculty with expertise in the areas of gender and science,
quantitative and qualitative research methods in the social sciences, and
information technology impacts on children, youth, and families. Dr. Marcia
Baxter Magolda, leading expert in the study of how college students' and young
adults' self-authorship effects their learning capacity, will act as an advisor
for this project. The other advisors include a former school principal and
superintendent, evaluation and data analysis expert, educational technology
expert, state technology workforce director, and a
communications&lt;br/&gt;researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;