* 0120520
* The Albert Einstein Distinguished Educator Fellowship Program
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2002
* J. Patrick White, Triangle Coalition for Science and Technology Education
* Standard Grant
* Rowena S. Douglas
* 07/31/2002
* USD 70,535.00

This project will fund an Albert Einstein Fellow to work in the Division of
Elementary, Secondary, and Informal Education of the National Science Foundation
for ten months, beginning August 15, 2001. ESIE, the Program Director, and the
Fellow will determine the specific duties of the Einstein Fellow. The majority
of the time the Fellow will work on the Presidential Awards for Excellence in
Mathematics and Science Teaching program (PAEMST). It is anticipated the
Einstein Fellow will:

1. Work on the professional development component of the PAEMST Program. The
PAEMST program works with major national mathematics and science teacher
organizations to provide precessions for the Presidential Awardees attending
annual meetings of these groups. The Fellow will help design these activities
for the past awardees and identify other possible professional development
opportunities. This will include but not be limited to helping the Program
Director make arrangements for the audiovisual needs of the speakers; conference
meals; and selection and coordination of speakers. 2. Act as a liaison with
former awardees in the field. 3. Review and screen all state nominee's
applications for eligibility and prepare them for the National Selection
Committee. 4. Help the Program Director organize the National Selection
Committee meeting. 5. Monitor and encourage the submission of requested data
from State Coordinators. Collect, organize, and analyze requested data. This
includes but is not limited to annual reports, number and category of
applications received, and opinion surveys. 6. Assume various responsibilities
with respect to the PAEMST Website. 7. Assist in the planning and conduction of
the awards week. 8. Review and edit PAEMST correspondence including but not
limited to letters, posters, the BioBook, and brochures.

The NSF Einstein Fellow will not perform the work of a Program Officer, handle
any NSF proposals (including proposals for the PAEMST Program), conduct any part
of the review process, or access NSF data systems where access is restricted
under the Privacy Act to NSF employees and contractors. The Fellow will provide
three written reports to the Triangle Coalition, which will describe her
responsibilities and on-going activities. These will be used to evaluate the
Fellow's accomplishments during the Fellowship period and to offer personal
perspectives and recommendations to the Fellowship program.