* 0120610
* Biogeochemical Processes and Community Dynamics in Gas Hydrate Systems of the Gulf of Mexico
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2002,10/31/2002
* Timothy Lyons, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 10/31/2002
* USD 358,342.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0120610&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Gulf of
Mexico is an ideal natural laboratory for studying the complexity of biological
communities associated with gas hydrates. The development of growth-fault
networks provide conduits for the migration to the sea floor of hydrocarbons
formed in deep reservoirs. The resulting hydrocarbon seeps and solid gas
hydrates on the sea floor support a diverse and abundant micro- and macro-biota.
In addition, biologically mediated processes of hydrocarbon oxidation and
sulfate reduction lead to the deposition of massive quantities of carbonates
that modify sea floor geology and are critical to development of invertebrate
communities. The long-term goal of this project is to understand the feedback
relationships between carbon and sulfur cycling and community dynamics in gas
hydrate systems in the Gulf of Mexico. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This will be a one-
year pilot study involving investigators from the University of Missouri -
Columbia, Texas A &amp; M University, and the University of Tennessee. The first
goal is to obtain basic information on the abundance, diversity, and activity of
microorganisms, which are poorly understood relative to the geochemistry and to
the invertebrate communities in gas hydrate systems. The second goal is to
organize two workshops bracketing the research aspects of the project to foster
future collaboration. The workshops will enhance dialog between different
disciplines and prepare scientists in several fields to address questions at a
systems level using interdisciplinary skills. The pilot study will be centered
on testing of hypotheses using field and laboratory measurements. The
investigators hypothesize that (1) the gas hydrate system harbors a distinct
microbial community, which has high population density and high rates of sulfate
reduction, hydrocarbon (including methane) oxidation, and H2 S oxidation
compared to the normal marine environments; (2) methane oxidation coupled to
sulfate reduction below the sediment surface provides reduced sulfur compounds
that diffuse upward and serve as the energy source for sulfur-oxidizing bacteria
at the sediment or gas hydrate surface where oxygen is available; (3) microbial
oxidation of methane and other hydrocarbons strongly affects carbonate
diagenesis. The experimental approach includes (1) culture-independent DNA-based
molecular methods, lipid biomarkers, microscopic, and radioactive isotope tracer
techniques to determine microbial abundance, activity, and species diversity,
and (2) stable carbon and sulfur isotope fractionation, and pore-water chemistry
to understand the kinetics and mechanisms of element cycles. Results of this
project are expected to speak broadly to the evolution of biocomplexity in the
marine biosphere given the wide occurrence of gas hydrates throughout geological
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;