* 0120271
* Support to Maintain Research and Education at the La Selva Biological Station and to Enhance OTS' Database Management Program
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2007
* Elizabeth Losos, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 01/31/2007
* USD 2,548,666.00

This award provides partial support for the operation and the improvement of the
La Selva field station in Costa Rica, one of three stations in Costa Rica owned
and operated by the Organization for Tropical Studies (OTS), a U.S. nonprofit
consortium of 58 universities and research institutions in the United States,
Costa Rica, Peru and Australia. The La Selva station encompasses 1,515 hectares
of classic lowland tropical rain forest in northeastern Costa Rica where it
adjoins Braulio Carrillo National Park. This allows the station to offer access
to protected forests from near sea level within the La Selva reserve to the
summit of Barva Volcano (2,906 m) within the park. The station's research
potential has been noted by the Committee on Research Priorities in Tropical
Biology of the National Research Council, which has recommended La Selva as one
of four tropical forest sites in the world where ecosystem-level studies should
be focused. In the 48 years since its establishment, La Selva has hosted 3,000
research projects, resulting in over 2,000 scientific publications and 160
theses and dissertations, and a number of important books. In 2000 alone, La
Selva hosted 282 researchers and research staff working on 118 separate
projects, representing over 9,000 person-days. Use of the station for education
and training of high school, undergraduate and graduate students is as
significant as its research use, with nearly 10,000 person-days distributed
among 3,000 students and faculty in 2000. A major focus of the support provided
with this award will be provisions and planning for modern, high speed computer
and communications infrastructure that will significantly improve outside access
to data acquired and stored at the station, and also improve the ability of
researchers and students to organize and save such data while at the station or
in the field.