* 0120071
* Building a Scalable Biological Information Network - A Workshop Proposal to be held September,  2001 at the San Diego Supercompter Center, San Diego, CA
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,02/28/2006
* Chaitanya Baru, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 02/28/2006
* USD 93,106.00

A grant has been awarded to Alison Withey at the University of California, San
Diego to convene a workshop to investigate user requirements, enabling
technologies, and costs for building scalable information networks for the
environmental sciences. The workshop, hosted by the Partnership for Biodiversity
Informatics*, will assemble research scientists, directors of field stations and
marine laboratories, as well as experts in computational and information
sciences to discuss the technical requirements for building local, regional, and
national-level networks designed to deliver continuous, integrated, high-quality
data in real or near real time. Each of these audiences will contribute to and
learn from the information exchange. Scientists will share their experiences in
expanding site-specific science to broader spatial scales, and will discuss
future information infrastructure needs in light of new sensors (field and
satellite) and data collection capabilities. Directors of field stations and
marine laboratories will ground the workshop in the present-day realities of
existing infrastructure and capabilities, and will contribute to a new vision
for how field stations and marine laboratories can expand to meet the needs for
a national capability for observing and understanding environmental complexity.
Computational and information scientists will present state-of-the-art
developments in sensor technologies, networking, information delivery, and
knowledge generation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Workshop presentations, discussion,
and working group sessions will focus on three topics: 1) Enabling technologies
and user requirements for data and information management and delivery, 2)
Building distributed sensor networks: design and implementation issues, and 3)
Building a scalable environmental information networks: from researchers to
field stations to a national architecture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As
environmental research becomes more complex and multidisciplinary, gains in our
understanding of ecosystem biocomplexity can be furthered through the
application of technologies that improve data management and delivery; enhance
modeling and prediction capabilities; and facilitate communication among
individuals, environmental sensors, computers, and databases. This workshop will
be the first attempt to envision a scalable national environmental information
infrastructure that meets the needs of scientists working at local and broader
scales, as well as decision-makers and educators that may require information at
regional to national scales. Consequently, the discussions and working group
reports are anticipated to be of broad interest to many disciplines. Workshop
products will be made available to a broader community via a webcast and web
archive of the presentations; a white paper of the proceedings and
recommendations which will be posted online; and peer reviewed article(s)
outlining present technical capabilities, the design of a future environmental
information infrastructure, and a research and implementation plan that will
enable this goal to be achieved. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* The
Partnership for Biodiversity Informatics (PBI) is a consortium consisting of the
San Diego Supercomputer Center (SDSC), the National Center for Ecological
Analysis and Synthesis (NCEAS), the Natural History Museum and Biodiversity
Research Center at the University of Kansas (KU-BRC), and the Network Office of
the Long Term Ecological Research Program (LTER).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;