* 0120175
* Dissertation Research:  Behavioral Style and its Endocrine Correlates in Young Chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes)
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2001,05/31/2004
* David Watts, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 05/31/2004
* USD 11,970.00

Many psychologists have studied the influential role of personality in mediating
how humans approach life. Physical anthropologists and primatologists have
largely ignored this variable in nonhuman primates, focusing instead on the
significance of a group-living individual's dominance rank in the social
hierarchy. But using dominance rank to predict variables such as stress levels
often proves unsatisfactory: dominance has been found to only weakly correlate
with variables such as baseline hormone levels. In this project the researcher
will consider the role of personality or behavioral style as an additional
variable that explains differences between nonhuman primate individuals.
Specifically, behavioral and physiological data from captive, peer-housed groups
of young chimpanzees at the University of Southwest Louisiana Research Center in
New Iberia, Louisiana will be collected. Individuals of similar rank with
respect to variables that define behavioral styles will then be compared. For
example, how good is individual X at picking fights that he/she can win? How
adept is individual Y at forming valuable friendships? It is expected that these
variables may not perfectly correlate with rank; a low-ranking individual may
actually be quite good at picking winnable fights, for example. Individuals with
different behavioral styles will be compared for urinary and serum hormone
levels in order to assess the relative effects of dominance rank and behavioral
style on stress physiology, health, and growth. It is predicted that
consideration of behavioral style will provide for a fuller understanding of the
factors affecting intra-group relations and physiological parameters than
dominance rank alone, and will broaden our approach to primate socioecology.