* 0120394
* Symposium for ABS: "Behavior Genetics for the Next Decade: Beyond Heritability"; to be held Corvallis, OR July 2001
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2003
* Christine R. Boake, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Jerry  O. Wolff
* 07/31/2003
* USD 9,485.00

Symposium for ABS:"Behavior Genetics for the Next Decade:Beyond Heritability"
PI: Christine Boake

This is a proposal for a symposium and related activities that are designed to
educate behavioral biologists about the developing field that integrates
behavior and biotechnology. The symposium will be held at the annual meeting of
the Animal Behavior Society in Corvallis, OR on 15 July 2001. It is a follow-up
to the workshop on integrating biotechnology and behavior that was held at NSF
in August 2000. The symposium was one of the major specific recommendations from
the workshop. The related activities are to publish the symposium proceedings as
a special issue of the professional journal The American Naturalist, and to
include in the special issue an introductory paper that discuss reasons to
investigate the genetic architecture of behavioral traits. The symposium
speakers either attended at least one of the two biotechnology and behavior
workshops, or are in the lab of a participant. The topics of the symposium talks
are (a) microarray analyses of the genetic basis of learning and memory, (b) the
relationship between the major histocompatibiltiy complex and mating preferences
in bird species, (c) the genetics of behavior in guppies, (d) the effects of
gene interactions on animal behavior, (e) genetics and social interactions among
kin, (f) genetic influences on maternal care, (g) molecular genetics and social
behavior, and (h) neurogenetics of fruitfly behavior. These topics were chosen
in order to show the listeners the sophisticated genetic techniques can be
applied to a great breadth of species and many kinds of behavior.