* 0120666
* Advancing Community College Leadership in Science, Mathematics, Engineering and Technology Education
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2001,11/30/2006
* Lynn Barnett, American Association of Community Colleges
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 11/30/2006
* USD 1,767,569.00

This project features seven interrelated activities designed to advance
community college leadership in science, mathematics, engineering, and
technology (SMET) education, to encourage the development of ATE-related
programs in more community colleges, and to share information about the value,
accomplishments, and community impact of the ATE program in and beyond the
education field. The activities build upon the successes of AACC's previous
efforts supported by the National Science Foundation. They support the network
of community colleges dedicated to improving SMET education, and help to expand
and focus the future of the ATE program as it positions itself to meet the
challenges presented by a new century and an increasing demand for a trained
technical workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is activity in seven
areas:&lt;br/&gt;* Three National ATE Principal Investigators Conferences in
2002, 2003, and 2004,&lt;br/&gt;* Development of an ATE Leadership Program to
include three ATE Centers Meetings, three ATE Presidents Meetings, and a Summit
on Technological Education that combines community college and business
representatives to develop strategies to strengthen the nation's technical
workforce and faculty pipeline,&lt;br/&gt;* Continuation of the AACC ATE
Mentoring Program to help ten community colleges establish new programs in
science, mathematics, engineering, and/or technology,&lt;br/&gt;* Two AACC
Briefs, one focusing on the outcomes of the ATE Mentoring Program, and one
focusing on impact and results of the ATE PI Conference.&lt;br/&gt;* A summary
of recommendations and findings from the Summit on Technological
Education,&lt;br/&gt;* Dissemination of information about ATE programs and goals
through AACC publications, presentations, feature stories, conference
proceedings, a listserv, and a Web page, and&lt;br/&gt;* Evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;