* 0120990
* Synthesis and Characterization of New Transition Metal Pnictides and Pnictide Oxides and Their Characterization
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Susan Kauzlarich, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* David Nelson
* 12/31/2005
* USD 388,000.00

This project focuses on the synthesis of new ternary transition metal pnictide
and pnictide oxide phases. It combines exploratory synthesis with systematic
structure-property studies. The primary emphasis is on property measurements and
characterization of compounds involving alkaline earth or rare earth with
transition metals and the group 15 pnictide elements, along with the suboxides
of these mixtures. This group utilizes the Zintl concept to direct the synthesis
of new magnetic and electronic compounds. The approach provides a good starting
place for the discovery of new structures and properties. In order to explore
new compounds and to measure properties, fluxes will be used to produce large
crystals. In addition novel properties and structure-property relationship of
these pnictide and layered pnictide-oxides will be investigated. The primary
goal is to train students in solid state synthesis and characterization
techniques. Students are involved in all aspects of new discovery and property
measurements. Some of the experiments outlined in the proposal make use of
national facilities such as the Advance Light Source and the National Center for
Electron Microscopy at Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory. In addition, there is a
strong collaboration with chemistry, physics, and materials science groups at
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. This type of synergism provides the
student with a well-rounded education and prepares them for the
multidisciplinary science of today's industry. In addition, the education of
undergraduates and outreach to the general public in the importance of materials
synthesis to our future technological advances is included as a theme of the
project.

The development of new materials is an important cornerstone of new
technologies. One of the fundamental issues in this development is the synthesis
of new materials coupled with property measurements. Combining synthesis with
state-of-the-art characterization tools with an aim towards discovering new
magnetic, and electronic materials significantly enhances the chances of timely
technological impacts.