* 0120728
* Multiplex in Situ Visualization of the Drosophila Transcriptome in Blastoderm Embryos
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2007
* William McGinnis, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Chris T. Amemiya
* 09/30/2007
* USD 1,350,000.00

0120728&lt;br/&gt;Bier&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major challenge following the
completion of genome sequencing is to determine the expression patterns of all
genes during development and in the adult. Obtaining this data is critical if we
are to unravel the complex regulatory networks that regulate genome expression.
Although whole genome gene expression can be analyzed by current microarray
techniques, this method lacks spacial discrimination and is relatively low
resolution in time and magnitude, since by its nature, it measures average gene
expression levels over large heterogeneous cell populations. To understand the
regulatory interrelationships between genes, many of which are regulated in
highly dynamic and spatially restricted patterns, one must ultimately know how
the genome is expressed on a cell-by cell basis throughout development. The most
obvious way to obtain fine scale gene expression data at single cell resolution
is by performing genome scale in situ hybridization experiments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Bier, Dr. McGinnis, and Dr. Pevzner will address this
problem jointly by developing a multiplex in situ hybridization method that will
greatly facilitate and enable the acquisition of genome expression data at
single cell resolution. In addition, this collaborative team will validate the
method by applying it to two well defined hypothesis driven questions. The
specific goals of this proposal are to: 1) Develop a multiplex RNA in situ
hybridization labeling technique, 2) Analyze Hox gene regulatory networks
repressing limb development, and 3) Identify genes mediating cross-talk between
signaling pathways.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Impact Statement: Because the same
genetic systems create pattern during development in diverse metazoans, fine
spatial and temporal scale analysis of these regulatory relationships in
Drosophila will provide an essential framework for analyzing how these core
genetic pathways have served as substrates for modification by natural selection
during evolution to tailor body plans to different environments and ecological
niches. This knowledge is essential for resolving deep structures of metazoan
phylogeny and may reveal whether multicellular metazoans co-opted a polarity
generating mechanism present in facultative colonial unicellular organisms to
create metameric pattern along the A/P axis. In addition, the methodologies we
develop and the understanding we gain of cellular responses to developmental
signals will form the basis for creating detailed mathematical models of
cellular states and will be critical for evaluating how adult organisms respond
&lt;br/&gt;