* 0120333
* Breakdown of Balance and the Generation of Inertia-Gravity Waves in Upper-Tropospheric Jets and Fronts
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Albert Barcilon, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 09/30/2005
* USD 225,406.00

The topic of balanced flow and its breakdown is of fundamental importance to
geophysical fluid dynamics and weather prediction, yet the dynamics associated
with it remain largely unknown. The objective of this project is to investigate
the nature of balance in upper-tropospheric jets and fronts, the conditions for
it to breakdown and the generation of inertia-gravity waves, and the physical
mechanisms responsible for it. The approach is to start with a simple two-layer
primitive equation for the examination of the fundamental dynamics and then
extended to frameworks with increasing complexity, such as including the
stratosphere. Numerical simulations using these models will examine the life
cycles of baroclinic waves in which frontal systems develop and inertia-gravity
waves are generated. Based on the results from the numerical studies, an
idealized analytic model will be developed to describe the essential dynamic
behavior of the generation of inertia-gravity waves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will enhance the understanding of the inertia-gravity waves that are
important to weather forecasting. The importance of this work extends beyond the
pedagogical applications to include potential benefits to aviation and weather
forecasting. If an analytical approach for forecasting significant gravity wave
activity generated by some kind of flow imbalance can be formulated, then it
will have direct applications to forecasts of clear-air turbulence associated
with upper-level jet streams, and to the generation of severe weather resulting
from gravity wave forcing. Results from the project can demonstrate the roles
that breaking waves from frontal systems may play in the atmospheric general
circulation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;