* 0120275
* Research for Mixed Signal Electronic Technologies: A Joint Initiative Between NSF and SRC: Coupled Device and Circuit Simulation for Critical RF IC Blocks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Kartikeya Mayaram, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2005
* USD 150,000.00

With the proliferation of RF ICs in consumer electronic products there is a
critical need for simulation and modeling tools that enable first pass success
in silicon. The trend towards integrating complete systems on a chip, requires
very high performance digital, analog, and RF circuits to be integrated on the
same silicon substrate. Successful integration of these complex systems requires
new design tools and design approaches that significantly advance the state-of-
the-art. Certain aspects of RF system performance are easier to characterize and
verify in steady state. Examples of these are distortion, power, frequency,
noise, and transfer characteristics such as gain and impedance. The proposed
work focuses on developing a coupled device and circuit simulator that will
accurately address the modeling and simulation needs of critical and noise
sensitive analog and RF devices and circuits. A coupled device and circuit
simulator provides a&lt;br/&gt;direct link between the IC fabrication
technology, device design and the higher level of circuit design. Since the
models from the device simulator (numerical models) are predictive, they can be
used to evaluate the impact of technology on circuit performance. Additionally,
this work provides the foundation for new design approaches that will advance
the state-of-the-art for analog and RF circuits
blocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will focus on modeling, simulation,
and design of high performance and high frequency analog and RF circuits. The
key contributions of this work will be:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A software
architecture for incorporating general purpose device simulators in the coupled
device and circuit simulator CODECS. The architecture will allow integration
without extensive modifications to the device simulator and enable simulation of
technologies such as SiGe and SOI, and also simulation of optical devices. This
tool architecture also facilitates parallelization over a cluster of
workstations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Availability of time-domain and frequency-
domain steady-state simulation methods within one simulator. Numerical
(physical) models and compact circuit models can be used within this
simulator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Capability of simulating device-to-device
interactions including substrate and thermal
couplings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coupled device and circuit noise simulation
techniques for RF circuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Validation of simulator with
fabrication of improved designs for the following RF circuitry: low noise
amplifier (LNA), mixer, and voltage controlled oscillator (VCO). These circuits
are critical blocks in a transceiver and are particularly sensitive to
noise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research in this proposal is tightly integrated
with a significant educational&lt;br/&gt;component. This will include
development of courses in RF integrated circuits, and modeling and simulation
for RF applications. A new undergraduate course will be developed. This course
will focus on transceiver architectures and discrete design and will include a
lab in which students will gain hands-on experience in radio design. The
emphasis will be on projects related to transceiver design. The research
results, including the software, circuit designs, and course-related materials
will be available on the world wide web. In addition, results from the proposed
work will be presented at meetings of the Semiconductor Research Corporation and
the NSF Center for Design of Analog and Digital ICs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;