* 0120676
* U.S.-Hungary Mathematics Research on Cohomology and Deformations of Infinity and Lie Algebras
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Michael Penkava, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 08/31/2005
* USD 9,800.00

This U.S.-Hungary research project between Michael Penkava of the University of
Wisconsin, Eau Claire, and Alice Fialowski of Eotvos Lorand University,
Budapest, features versal deformations of infinity algebras. The collaboration
builds upon Penkava's strengths in infinity algebras and deformation theory and
Fialowski's in deformation of Lie algebras. A qualified undergraduate from the
U.S. institution will participate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Their joint research
plan entails automated computing of the Lie brackets in the cohomology as a
continuation of their study of versal deformations of Lie algebras equipped with
an invariant inner product. They anticipate that the cohomology of the infinity
algebra inherits a natural filtration and that this filtration can be used to
give a definition of a graded dual space which is small enough to be useful in
the construction of the versal deformation. Related work by this US-Hungarian
team on application of generalized Massey products to computations of miniversal
deformations of Lie algebras will be extended as well. The combined work is
expected to improve current understanding of the structure of versal
deformations of Lie algebras with invariant inner products as well as the
homology of the graph complex. If successful, the results may be useful in
physics where the algebra of observables can describe physical reality, as a
deformation quantization of the commutative algebra of classical physics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This mathematical research project fulfills the program
objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling experts in the United
States and Central Europe to combine complementary talents and share research
resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence.