* 0120366
* Research for Mixed Signal Electronic Technologies: A Joint Initiative Between NSF and SRC: Advanced CMOS for Mixed-Mode Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2004
* Jason Woo, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2004
* USD 225,000.00

0120366 Woo

The PIs propose to investigate the design of CMOS devices, circuits, and
architectures in the sub-100nm regime with emphasis on high-performance mixed-
signal, and RF applications. The thrust of this work will be
device/circuit/architecture co-design targeting critical building blocks of
mixed-mode systems. The goals are (1) to understand the fundamental
device/circuit issues of deeply scaled CMOS, and (2) investigate and develop
novel device engineering with novel thin film materials and new circuit
architectures that will enable much superior speed, power, and noise
performance.

Recently, there is much discussion concerning the scaling of MOSFETs into
sub-100nm dimensions. Topics such as alternative high-k gate dielectrics, gate
leakage, shallow junction formation, source/drain extension engineering, and
channel doping engineering are under intensive investigation. Many fundamental
device problems such as short channel effects (DIBL and VTH roll-off), off-state
leakage current, parasitic capacitance and resistance, and gate tunneling
current are currently being examined. It is apparent that sub-50nm transistors
can be realized with very high performance limited primarily by parasitics such
as series resistance and capacitance. The challenge is mainly how to reduce the
off current. This is fundamentally due to the electro-static coupling between
the channel region and the source/drain. Although the PIs can reduce the
coupling by scaling the junction depth, the ultra-shallow junction implies high
series resistance and worse transistor performance. In order to expand the
device-design window and to overcome the above-mentioned difficulties, novel
device structures and new material systems need to be explored.

So far, most of the advance device technology studies have concentrated on
digital applications despite the growing interest in RF CMOS and high-speed
mixed-mode circuits for communication and multimedia applications. Until now,
technology development does not adequately address the issues of concern to
analog circuits. Device models are also not sufficient for accurate circuit
simulation. In this project, they propose to investigate the design of CMOS
devices, circuits, and architectures in the sub-100nm regime with emphasis on
high-performance mixed-signal, and RF applications. They propose to study the
"analog nonidealities" of short-channel devices, e.g., gate current,
nonlinearity, noise, intrinsic gain, variation of output impedance with the
drain-source voltage. CMOS on SOI has been suggested as an alternative to bulk
CMOS in sub-150nm regime. In the case of digital applications, the key advantage
is probably in low-power circuits. For analog circuits, the choice of partially-
depleted technology versus fully-depleted technology is still under debate. In
the case of RF applications, the small parasitic capacitance of SOI CMOS is
particularly attractive. However, many issues related to the floating body need
to be clarified. In this project, the PIs will examine the many issues, such as
noise, frequency performance, gain, and linearity of SOI MOSFETs for use in
high-speed analog circuits. They will also examine novel sub-50nm device
structures such as SiGe CMOS, low noise (buried channel) CMOS on SOI, high-
performance LBJT as well as DTCMOS. In the case of SiGe, by having the smaller
bandgap SiGe source/drain regions, the built-in potential is reduced and can
substantially reduce the DIBL and other short channel effects. In addition, the
higher mobilities can also improve the source/drain series resistances.