* 0120073
* Travel Support for Participation by young U.S. Scientists in Assemblies of the International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics (IUGG)
* GEO,GEO
* 06/01/2001,11/30/2003
* Catherine O'Riordan, American Geophysical Union
* Standard Grant
* Louis B. Brown
* 11/30/2003
* USD 150,310.00

The American Geophysical Union (AGU) will provide partial support for travel of
more than ninety students and young scientists from the United States to
participate in the major international Assemblies of five international
geosciences associations under the International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics
(IUGG): the International Association of Geodesy (IAG); the International
Association of Geomagnetism and Aeronomy (IAGA); the International Association
of Seismology and Physics of the Earth's Interior (IASPEI); the International
Association of Hydrological Sciences (IAHS); the International Association of
Meteorology and Atmospheric Sciences (IAMAS); and the International Association
of the Physical Sciences of the Ocean (IAPSO). All of these Associations are
members of the International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics IUGG). This effort
will promote and encourage international communication, collaboration and
coordination in the geosciences, especially among scientists at an early point
in their career. It is intended that this will lead to long-term international
interactions among these scientists as they advance in their research careers in
their respective institutions and countries. The five Assemblies will address a
wide range of important geosciences problems. The AGU will advertise widely
opportunities for applying for such support and will undertake a thoughtful and
balanced review and selection process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;