* 0120931
* Symposium on RNA Biology IV: RNA Tool and Target to be held October 18-21, 2001 at the Friday for Continuing Education at the University of North Carolina in Chapel Hill
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2002
* Paul Agris, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 09/30/2002
* USD 1,000.00

The objectives of the Symposium on RNA Biology IV. RNA: Tool and Target are: To
promote communication in a variety of research areas central to understanding
the role of the structure and function of RNA in biological systems in a focused
and intimate manner not obtainable at regular society, or other group meetings.
To provide an educational experience for young investigators, postdoctoral
fellows and graduate students (especially women and minorities) in a setting
conducive to open discussions with access to established investigators who have
broad experience in all fields of RNA biology. To stimulate inclusive discussion
and the sharing of ideas and techniques by postdoctoral fellows and graduate
students, as well as principal researchers. To bring researchers to a venue
where three major universities, federal research institutions and laboratories,
and many corporate research centers are located. RNA research, especially RNA as
target and tool, has spawned a dozen biotechnology companies in the US alone and
has been funded extensively by several large, well-established corporations,
including those in North Carolina's Research Triangle. This proposal requests
funds to cover the costs of bringing several major speakers to the meeting, to
cover the registration fees for selected young speakers and for covering some of
operating expenses that will be incurred during the symposium.