* 0120490
* A Replacement 6000+ Meter Human Occupied Submersible for Ocean Research to be Operated by the United States National Deep Submergence Facility
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2001,03/31/2005
* Barrie Walden, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Emma R. Dieter
* 03/31/2005
* USD 551,731.00

Proposal #: OCE0120490&lt;br/&gt;PI: Barrie Walden&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award will support a design study for a 6000+ Meter human occupied submersible
for the National Deep Submergence Facility (DSF) operated by Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution and dedicated to support ocean science research. The
Ship Acquisition and Upgrade Program provides funds for ship constructions,
upgrades, acquisitions, and design studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will allow the PI to begin a conceptual design study for a deep submergence
vehicle that may eventually replace the aging deep submergence vehicle (DSV)
Alvin. A submersible capable of operating to depths greater than 6000 meters
would provide US scientists access to an additional 35% of the ocean floor to
carryout studies pertaining to biodiversity, biomass, and processes at work on
the abyssal plain and in deep sea trenches. The study will include a detailed
evaluation of new technology and hardware options. Other countries, such as
France, Japan, and Russia, already have manned submersibles capable of operating
to this depth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Project Director, Barrie Walden is fully
qualified to direct this project having had considerable experience in
supervising the DSV Alvin, and other submersibles through his management of the
DSF. ***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;