* 0120792
* International Summer School on Biocomplexity, June 24 - July 1, 2001 in Hanover, New Hampshire
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2002
* Metin Akay, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 05/31/2002
* USD 42,700.00

The biological sciences have the potential to become substantially more
quantitative because emerging computational and mathematical tools could
facilitate collection and analysis of vast amounts of biological data. New
methods for computational analysis and mathematical modeling of complex
biological processes and signals can be used for characterizing variability and
uncertainty of biological data across scales of space and time. For example,
such signals or measurements are direct indicators of the biological state of
the corresponding cells or organs in an organism. There is an increasing demand
for interactions among biologists, engineers, mathematicians, computer
scientists and medical researchers in the use of these emerging technologies and
methods to be able to develop a new interdisciplinary workforce that is able to
understand and facilitate reliable quantitative approaches and answers to the
major integrative biological challenges. The main objective of this summer
school is to expose undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral biological science
and bioengineering students to the relatively new approaches of nonlinear
dynamical analysis and biosignal interpretation in complex biological systems,
and to facilitate rapid diffusion of these mathematical and computational tools
in the biological sciences. These methods will be helpful, also, to both
students and post-doctoral fellows in computer science and mathematics who are
interested in pursuing research in biology and bioengineering, since the summer
school provides exceptional insights into the fundamental challenges in
biological sciences. The summer school uses lectures, oriented toward biological
science students, by expert faculty. The faculty will describe their research
areas, and focus on ways to use the mathematical and computational tools to
understand the underlying mechanisms of complex biological systems and
processes. In addition to these lectures, the summer school will employ a two-
hour panel discussion, with active participation of undergraduate, graduate and
post-doctoral fellows, focused on future developments in biocomplexity and their
potential impacts on biology and medicine. In addition, tutorials and hands-on
research projects using computers will allow students to explore real-world
biological applications of the new computational and modeling approaches.
Students will present the results of their projects in a culminating poster
session, which will facilitate discussion of both the biology and computational
approaches. The summer school will stimulate further interdisciplinary research
and collaborations among engineers, mathematicians, computer scientists, and
medical researchers, and will help in identifying new, challenging directions in
complex biological science and bioengineering research.