* 0120450
* Program for Gender Equity in Science, Mathematics, Engineering and Technology (PGE): Increasing the Participation by Women in Undergraduate Physics: What Works?
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2001,05/31/2003
* Barbara Whitten, Colorado College
* Standard Grant
* Ruta Sevo
* 05/31/2003
* USD 131,468.00

A team based at Colorado College is conducting a study of undergraduate physics
departments with high and average participation by women, in order to learn what
works in attracting and retaining women in the undergraduate physics major. Ten
schools that offer a bachelor's degree in physics, but no graduate degrees, were
selected. Both public and private schools are included, and at least two are
HBCU's.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has several goals:&lt;br/&gt;oTo study
some of the many things that have been tried by the physics community
and&lt;br/&gt;learn what works to increase the number of women majoring in
physics.&lt;br/&gt;oTo investigate the unusual success of some primarily
undergraduate institutions in&lt;br/&gt;cultivating women physics
majors.&lt;br/&gt;oTo find examples of common errors in programs and practices
that could be corrected&lt;br/&gt;if they were recognized and
understood.&lt;br/&gt;oTo see whether and how innovations in physics pedagogy
have improved the climate&lt;br/&gt;for women.&lt;br/&gt;oTo communicate our
results back to the physics community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A team consisting of
two physics professors, one social science professor, and one&lt;br/&gt;student
assistant are collecting demographic information about the faculty and students
at each department. The team is making a two-day site visit to each department,
which includes interviews with students, faculty, and administrators, and visits
to classes and laboratories. The team is investigating departmental climate, the
quality of teaching and advising, the style of classes, and other factors that
have been proposed to make physics departments more comfortable for women
students. The high participation departments will be compared with the average
participation departments to determine what works to recruit and retain women in
the undergraduate physics major.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of this study will
be reported in a peer-reviewed journal, and publicized in&lt;br/&gt;talks,
journal articles, and on the Web. It is hoped that the results of this project
will help the physics community evaluate its efforts to attract more women, and
find ways to further improve its efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The physics
community has been concerned about the low participation by women for a decade
or so, and much progress had been made; the percentage of bachelors degrees
awarded to women has more than doubled in the last twenty-five years. But
physics continues to lag behind the other sciences; in 1998, 19% of bachelor's
degrees in physics were awarded to women, in contrast to 40% of bachelor's
degrees in mathematics and chemistry, and more than half in the life sciences.
Several national initiatives are devoted to making physics more attractive to
women and other members of underrepresented groups. In addition, individual
physics departments are trying a variety of formal and informal programs to
increase the level of participation by women. These efforts are unevenly
distributed among physics departments, and departments vary widely in the
percentage of women majors, some departments have as many as 40% women, and
others are far below the national average.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;