* 0120114
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  The Political Power Of Galindo Elites
* SBE,BCS
* 10/15/2001,09/30/2003
* Garth Bawden, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2003
* USD 11,495.00

Under the direction of Dr. Garth Bawden, Mr. Gregory Lockard will collect data
for his doctoral dissertation. Through archaeological excavation at the site of
Galindo, located in the Moche Valley of northern coastal Peru, he will examine
the processes which gave rise to the Chimu Empire. This, the largest coastal
polity in South American prehistory encompassed, at its height two-thirds of all
irrigated land along the Pacific desert coast. The empire was ruled by a small
group of powerful elites who resided in the capital city of Chan Chan, also
located in the Moche Valley. Chan Chan was founded ca. AD 1000 and over the next
four and a half centuries Chan Chan elites directed the conquest of over 1000 km
of Pacific coastline. Their power and territorial ambitions came to an end only
after a long and bitter war with the Inka, who finally prevailed and conquered
the Chimu Empire ca AD 1470. Archaeological evidence and ethnohistoric documents
have revealed much concerning the political power of Chimu elites. The origins
of this power however must be sought earlier and because Chimu elites emerged at
Chan Chan in the Moche Valley, this area holds the key to understanding this
development. Through excavation at Galindo, which was occupied immediately
before and was a direct precursor to the Chimu, Mr. Lockard hopes to gain
insight into this process. The site itself covers an area of approximately four
square kilometers and a combination of physical and cultural features (walls and
ditches) divide the site into at least six distinct zones. Survey of the site by
Mr. Lockard has shown that architectural remains within each of these zones are
relatively homogeneous and functionally differentiated from those of other areas
of the site. Based on the method and quality of construction, surface area and
artifactual content, they can be divided into low, moderate and high status
residences and thus demonstrate that a hierarchical social structure existed at
this time. Through a program of mapping and careful excavation to collect faunal
and botanical remains, Mr. Lockard plans to reconstruct the Galindo social
organization. It is quite likely that elites, at least in part, exercised power
through the control of scarce goods and analysis of how food remains as well as
other valuable materials are distributed should provide insight into this
system.

This research is important for several reasons. Complex societies arose
independently in many parts of the world and through multiple case comparison it
is possible to determine the controlling factors which underlie this
development. Prehistoric Peru provides one example and Mr. Lockard's work will
help to fill a major gap. The data he collects will be of interest to many
archaeologists and the project will help to train a promising young scientist.