* 0120897
* MPS Internships in Public Science Education - MPS-IPSE: Making the Nanoworld Comprehensible
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2001,02/28/2005
* Paul Krajniak, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Ulrich Strom
* 02/28/2005
* USD 515,085.00

This IPSE award, funded by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the
Directorate for Mathematics and Physical Sciences, involves a partnership
between Materials Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) on Nanostructured
Materials and Interfaces at UW-Madison (UW) and the Discovery World (DW) science
museum in Milwaukee aimed at bringing cutting-edge research on advanced
materials and nanoscale science and technology into the museum and K-12 school
settings. This multi-faceted project will enable Internships for Public Science
Education (IPSE) participants to enhance their communication skills
substantially while bringing the excitement of state-of-the-art MRSEC research
themes to pre-college and public audiences. Through the IPSE program, a diverse
group of graduate and undergraduate students will team with UW MRSEC
researchers, DW personnel, and K-12 educators to develop grade-appropriate
curriculum materials.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;Initially, laboratory experiments
and demonstrations will be developed around existing MRSEC-created education
products, making the materials science and engineering concepts associated with
such advanced materials as ferrofluids, shape memory alloys, and amorphous
metals accessible. New initiatives will create instructional materials for DW
and K-12 teachers and students around he current research themes of fullerenes,
nanotubes, and Giant Magnetoresistance (GMR). A new module teaching students
about polymers in chemical engineering using polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) will be
produced. An innovative museum program, the Test Pilot Training Program (TPTP),
will link IPSE participants with middle and high school students to provide
mentoring on scientific themes and career development related to materials
science and engineering. These pre-college students will serve as ambassadors
for DW, making presentations at DW and local schools, and assisting with the
training of newly recruited TPTP participants. Nearly 50 graduate and
undergraduate students will participate over the three-year project period.
Program results will be disseminated through meetings and publications of
professional disciplinary and pan-disciplinary organizations, workshops for
regional K-12 teachers that will be held as part of the project, and a workshop
held in partnership with the Association for Science-Technology Centers (ASTC).
Formal evaluations of the program's impact on museum visitors and on the IPSE
participants will be conducted. The UW-DW IPSE project can serve as a model for
the professional development of technically oriented students, providing them
with rich opportunities for sharing their scientific knowledge and enthusiasm
with pre-college and museum audiences. This will enhance the communication
skills of IPSE participants while also making the public and K-12 teachers and
students aware of exciting research developments. The project will thus
contribute to science literacy and to the development of a diverse, technically
trained workforce. &lt;br/&gt;