* 0120007
* Exploratory Research: Complementary Development of New Chemical Sensor and Probe Microscopy Techniques for Environmental Research in Hydrothermal Ecosystems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Carrick Eggleston, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* David Nelson
* 08/31/2003
* USD 91,481.00

The objectives of this project are to develop the concepts for robust
multiplexed arrays of sensors for the detection of inorganic and organic
analytes as well as microorganisms and to develop instrumentation to quantify
heterogeneous kinetics and molecule/surface interactions in complex, groundwater
and surface water, and extreme ecosystems. Electrochemical, Surface Plasmon
Resonance (SPR) and Surface Enhance Raman Spectroscopy (SERS) method will be
used as detection schemes for the quantification of inorganic and organic
analytes in hydrothermal fluids. The development of robust polymeric thin film
sensors will be assisted by current Hydrothermal Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM)
instrumentation. The investigators will also further the development of the AFM
instrumentation to enable intermittent-contact imaging of "soft" materials and
surface adsorbed molecules and organisms in hydrothermal conditions. Groundwork
will be laid for the development of a low-power, lightweight AFM for potential
development into a field-deployable instrument.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The
results from this project could lead to new methods for obtaining chemical and
biological information from complex ecosystems. Furthermore, the research will
be used to enhance educational opportunities in this growing field of scientific
discovery. Students trained in these areas will be very competitive in the job
market as these are areas of high priority in industry.&lt;br/&gt;