* 0120441
* Convex Underestimators for Dynamic Optimization Problems
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Paul Barton, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 12/31/2005
* USD 291,205.00

ABSTRACT

PI: Paul I. Barton Institution: MIT Proposal Number: 0120441

The objective of this research is to develop deterministic global optimization
algorithms for nonconvex dynamic embedded optimization problems, mixed-integer
dynamic optimization problems and nonconvex variational problems. The approaches
need to be practically implementable and they should provide theoretical
guarantees of locating the global optimum.

Research: In the first research task, the PI will develop a convexity theory and
convex underestimators for optimization problems with a very general integral
objective function and linear time varying dynamic system embedded. With these
theoretical foundation, it will be possible to adapt existing deterministic
global optimization algorithms for nonconvex nonlinear programs and mixed-
integer nonlinear program, hence also addressing mixed-integer dynamic
optimization problems. Next, the PI will explore how this composite function
approach can be extended to problems with nonlinear dynamic systems embedded.
This extension will draw heavily on the theory developed for the linear case. In
the final research task, he will explore the construction of convex
underestimators for variational and optimal control problems, i.e., convex
underestimators on linear spaces of functions. A number of major research
challenges exist in the application of these variational convex underestimators,
including the numerical generation of rigorous lower bounds from the convex
underestimating problems, and how to partition a linear space of function in,
for example, a branch-and-bound procedure.

Impact: The research will make fundamental contributions via developing a
convexity theory for dynamic embedded optimization problems, and developing
methods for the construction of convex underestimators for dynamic embedded
optimization problems and variational problems. This theory will lead to a
series of practical deterministic global optimization algorithms for the
solution of these problems. The capability to solve such problems to guaranteed
global optimality will have broad practical implications. For example, in the
area of process operations there is hope for solving problems such as formal
safety verification, the synthesis of integrated batch processes, and the design
of major process transients such as start-up and shut-down procedures, using
detailed dynamic models. Most serious industrial accidents occur during such
transient events. Furthermore, the method will have applicability in other
engineering disciplines as well as applied mathematics.