* 0121239
* ITR/AP+IM: Computational Tools for Modeling, Visualizing and Analyzing Historic and Archaeological Sites
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2007
* Lynn Meskell, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Griffin
* 08/31/2007
* USD 2,014,044.00

e are proposing to develop computational tools for researchers&lt;br/&gt;and
students to model, visualize, and analyze historic and ancient&lt;br/&gt;sites.
This proposal addresses four major scientific components&lt;br/&gt;to support
this research. First, we are proposing new methods&lt;br/&gt;of creating
complex, 3-D, photorealistic models of large sites.&lt;br/&gt;This includes a
mobile robot sensing system that can be used as&lt;br/&gt;an intelligent sensing
device over a large scale. Second, we are&lt;br/&gt;proposing to develop new
methods to image below-ground data accurately&lt;br/&gt;and efficiently. These
methods are especially suited to modeling&lt;br/&gt;the wealth of subsurface
information at archaeological sites.&lt;br/&gt;Third, we will be developing new
database technology to catalog&lt;br/&gt;and access a site's structures,
artifacts, objects, and historical&lt;br/&gt;references. This will significantly
improve a user's ability to&lt;br/&gt;query and analyze a site's information.
Fourth, we have created&lt;br/&gt;a wearable augmented reality system for
presenting georegistered&lt;br/&gt;information to mobile users, using overlaid
graphics and sound.&lt;br/&gt;We will extend this system to create a new class
of information&lt;br/&gt;visualization systems that integrate 3-D above- and
below-ground&lt;br/&gt;models, 2-D images, text and other web-based resources to
annotate&lt;br/&gt;the physical environment We will apply this system to
support&lt;br/&gt;scientists in the field, as well to allow on-site and remote
tours&lt;br/&gt;of historic and ancient sites. The research will utilize a
local&lt;br/&gt;testbed, the Cathedral of St. John the Divine in New York
City,&lt;br/&gt;and a unique and important archaeological excavation at the
Dakhleh&lt;br/&gt;Oasis in Egypt. The project will attract students and the
public&lt;br/&gt;to the study of world heritage; provide an exceptional
opportunity&lt;br/&gt;for active learning; and develop our ability to explore,
analyze,&lt;br/&gt;critically evaluate and interpret material culture within
historical&lt;br/&gt;contexts. The challenge is to bring the on-site experiences
that&lt;br/&gt;develop these skills to the classroom and the public in
general.&lt;br/&gt;Through critical inquiry and a variety of techniques,
teachers&lt;br/&gt;and students can reconstruct examples of material culture to
develop&lt;br/&gt;a complex understanding of the past. In this way, we can
resist&lt;br/&gt;the temptation to replicate with new technologies what we
have&lt;br/&gt;done successfully with other means and instead expand the
possibilities&lt;br/&gt;for learning. Through learning in context, this project
will bring&lt;br/&gt;together the primary sources of various fields and draw the
social&lt;br/&gt;sciences out of the classroom into the historical milieu.
This&lt;br/&gt;project will hopefully redefine the relationships among
technology,&lt;br/&gt;faculty research and curriculum content. Most important,
it will&lt;br/&gt;disseminate this information to as wide an audience as
possible.