* 0121210
* BMPs Regulate Ionotropic Glutamate Receptors
* BIO,MCB
* 11/15/2001,10/31/2005
* Jerome Roth, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Jermelina Tupas
* 10/31/2005
* USD 370,386.00

Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) regulate many aspects of neural development
and they are also neuroprotective in mature animals. It is, therefore, important
to understand the mechanism of action of these neurotrophic factors. Previous
studies of BMP signaling pathways have focused on the transcriptional activities
of these proteins and have emphasized their ability to alter neural cell fate by
inducing or repressing gene expression. Preliminary studies from this
laboratory, however, indicate that BMPs can also induce rapid (<1 second)
changes in the conductance state of ionotropic glutamate receptors and that this
occurs in both mature (adult human retinal) and developing (rat hippocampal)
neural cell populations. Thus, there may be a second, parallel pathway for BMP
signaling that acts independently of nuclear events and that alters neural
function by acutely regulating existing ion channels in cultured neurons. The
experiments in this project will characterize this pathway by comparing the
effects of BMPs on the three types of ionotropic glutamate receptors and by
determining whether BMPs also affect voltage-sensitive ion channels. In
addition, the project will characterize the types of receptors mediating the
effects of BMPs on glutamate receptors and will determine whether BMPs modulate
glutamatergic synaptic transmission in tissue culture. It is anticipated that
these experiments will substantially expand our knowledge of BMP signaling
mechanisms and that they will also provide an initial assessment of the ability
of BMPs to function as synaptic modulators.