* 0121947
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Neural processes underlying the integration of perceived gaze direction and facial expression in emotion recognition
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2002
* Robert Kleck, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2002
* USD 17,525.00

With National Science Foundation support, Mr. Adams and his advisor Dr. Kleck
will conduct a year long investigation to identify areas of the brain where eye
gaze perception and facial expression perception are integrated in the
processing of facially expressed affect. Previous research has demonstrated that
both perceived direction of eye gaze and perceived facial expression are social
cues of great importance to humans, however these cues have been examined
independent of one another. There is good reason to believe that eye gaze and
perceived facial expression are not independent. Eye gaze direction is likely
associated with the production of emotional expression during experienced
emotion. Eye gaze direction and at least some facial expressions of emotion may
share a common information value as signals of either approach or avoidance.
Such signals may be traced to a more primitive behavioral repertoire that likely
evolved into present day emotion relevant behavior. Thus, it is possible that
perception of eye gaze direction and facial expression share common neural
substrates enabling integrated processing of these two cues to occur. Using
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), Adams and Kleck will image the
brain of volunteers as they perform psychological tasks measuring whether direct
eye gaze will increase the perceived salience of anger and joy expressions and
whether averted eye gaze will increase the perceived salience of fear and
sadness expressions.

This research will serve to increase our understanding of the facial cues that
contribute to the perception of facially expressed affect and of the neural
processes involved in the processing of such facial displays. The findings will
provide new insight into the interactions amongst brain systems representing
emotion, facial expression, and gaze. Insight into these systems, which play
critical roles in everyday social interactions, will be useful for a variety of
social and psychological issues.