* 0121970
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Human Orbital Prefrontal Cortex and Social Regulation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2002
* Robert Knight, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2002
* USD 12,323.00

With National Science Foundation support, Ms. Beer and her advisor Dr. Knight
will conduct a year-long investigation of brain areas that may be involved in
successful social interaction. Human social interaction occurs in specific
contexts in which there are norms dictating which behaviors are appropriate.
Previous research suggests that the orbital prefrontal cortex may be involved
when individuals restrain their social behavior. This area is thought to be
active when individuals inhibit their emotional behavior or use emotional
information to make social judgments. In two studies, Beer and Knight will
examine whether orbital prefrontal cortex mediates emotional regulation (i.e.,
the ability to control the expression of emotion), whether the regulatory
processes of orbital prefrontal cortex extend to self-disclosure (i.e., any
information about oneself that is personally communicated to another
individual), and whether the orbital prefrontal cortex is important for
utilizing emotional information when making social judgments? Beer and Knight
will compare individuals with orbital prefrontal cortex damage to individuals
with intact orbital prefrontal cortex. Both groups will be asked a series of
personal questions by a stranger and subsequently watch a videotape of this
interaction. If the orbital prefrontal cortex is involved in restraining social
behavior in accordance with social norms, the group with orbital prefrontal
cortex damage will inappropriately express emotion and disclose more personal
information than the healthy group. Similarly, if the orbital prefrontal cortex
is involved in applying emotion information to social judgments, the group with
orbital prefrontal cortex damage will inaccurately judge their behavior after
watching the videotape of their social interaction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research is likely to increase knowledge about the brain basis of emotional
regulation, self-disclosure, and the application of emotional information to
behavioral judgments. These behavioral and brain functions have significant
roles in personal and social life.&lt;br/&gt;