* 0121288
* ITR/AP+IM: Procedural Representation and Visualization Enabling Personalized Computational Fluid Dynamics
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2008
* John Hart, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2008
* USD 3,419,155.00

Computer power has increased dramatically over the past decade and has allowed
computational fluid dynamics (CFD) researchers to more accurately simulate many
types of complex flow. These simulations have enabled great leaps forward in the
design and safety of ships, airplanes, automobiles, and other vehicles. However,
this new power has also yielded terabytes of data, and CFD researchers now face
a very difficult task in trying to find, extract, and analyze important flow
features (e.g., time varying vortices, shock waves) buried within these
monstrous datasets. Unlike the explosive growth in computer power, visualization
tools for very large datasets have evolved modestly and cannot yet help with
these tasks significantly. In particular, since detailed visualization of such
large datasets is impractical, CFD researchers must work at a very cumbersome,
low level to dice their datasets into workable pieces.

CFD researchers desperately need new techniques that simplify and automate the
iterative process of finding the appropriate portion of their data set. They
need a system that will allow the user to articulate appropriate types of
features of interest, provide a compact representation of those features, and
effectively visualize the feature information locally. The system will have to
overcome the challenges of loading a sufficient portion of the data set over a
network connection into a desktop machine, mapping the entire data set to a
visual representation, and rendering the results at interactive rates.

This project will attack these CFD visualization problems by developing
techniques for creating and using a procedural abstraction for a dataset. The
major research objectives are to: 1. Detect features (e.g. shocks) in complex
flows using topological operators. 2. Characterize the data relative to these
features using a procedural representation consisting of implicit models and
free-form deformations. 3. Adapt the procedural representation to the
appropriate level of detail using multi-resolution techniques. 4. Encapsulate
domain-specific knowledge as metadata to explore these extremely large datasets.
5. Visualize the data directly from the procedural representation. 6. Verify the
accuracy of the procedural representation by tracking approximation error. 7.
Apply these techniques to the large-scale computational flow simulation problems
currently studied at Stanford and Mississippi State University. The resulting
system will allow CFD researchers to work more effectively by interactively
exploring their data to pinpoint the features of interest. Moreover, the results
of this project will provide solutions not only for CFD researchers, but also
for a wide variety of other visualization challenges and applications. The
project's main goal is to develop techniques that allow visualization
exploration, feature detection, extraction, and analysis at a higher, more
effective level through the use of procedural data abstraction and
representation.