* 0121396
* ITR/PE+SY:Mapping Meetings: Language Technology to make Sense of Human Interaction
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2001,02/28/2006
* Mari Ostendorf, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 02/28/2006
* USD 1,474,685.00

Meetings are essential and ongoing processes in almost every enterprise. To
record meetings is to provide a history of human interactions. However, two
central challenges remain: (1) how to make sense of the group dynamics in those
meetings and (2) how to search through a history of those interactions to find
the information one may want. This research aims to develop automatic
information processing systems based on the metaphor of a "meeting map", a
structured representation that supports the presentation of multiple views of a
meeting at different scales. The project will focus on two broad map categories:
content maps, portraying topics discussed and decisions made; and interaction
maps, identifying the roles and relationships of the participants and the level
of concurrence. Building content and interaction maps will involve automatic
classification of information from topic changes and salience to
disagreement/consensus. These maps will be used for generating simple indicative
summaries, and off-the-shelf visualization tools will be used for map
presentation. The project will build on analyses of 100 hours of meetings.
Evaluations will use objective recognition accuracies and expert assessments of
automatic summaries. Meeting maps respect the diversity of information present
in meeting scenarios, and provide effective support for human-to-human
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;