* 0121682
* `ITR/AP: Collaborative Research: Exploring the Tree of Life
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Annamaria Amenta, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Charles Lydeard
* 08/31/2005
* USD 784,958.00

0121682 and 0121651&lt;br/&gt;Amenta, Hillis, and St. John&lt;br/&gt;Defining
and understanding the evolutionary relationships among species is fundamental to
contemporary biology and the application of the comparative method in the life
sciences. The results of such evolutionary research can be represented by a
branching sequence of relatedness among species known as a phylogeny. Because of
the geometric resemblance of a phylogeny to the branches of a tree, a phylogeny
can be thought of as a tree of life. The proposed collaborative research by
biologists and computer scientists at University of Texas-Austin and at CUNY-
Lehman College in New York will provide specialized visualization and data
mining tools to facilitate creation of a "Tree of Life" for all living organisms
on the earth. This includes the development and refinement of algorithms to
visualize and analyze multiple complex data sets for large numbers of species.
More specifically, this project will: (1) integrate biological data through
visualization and clustering techniques developed by computer scientists, and
(2) apply these tools to taxa which comprise very large numbers of species with
topologically complex and varied tree structures. The interdisciplinary team of
biologists and computer scientists will integrate their newly developed software
with existing computational tools in systematic biology, and make them freely
available to and easily used by the scientific community. The project involves
substantive efforts to provide undergraduates and students from under-
represented groups with the opportunity to collaborate with scientists
throughout the academic year and summer.&lt;br/&gt;