* 0121984
* Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging of Preparatory Function in the Human Cerebellum
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2003
* Greg Allen, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Lynne Bernstein
* 09/30/2003
* USD 37,151.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Allen will conduct a year-long
investigation of a theory that the function of the cerebellum is to predict and
prepare the internal conditions needed for mental or motor operations. The
cerebellum was thought for many decades to be devoted solely to the coordination
of movement. However, a number of recent neurology, psychiatry, and neuroimaging
findings indicate the cerebellum may be involved in a wide range of cognitive,
emotional, and sensory. These findings do not yet clearly indicate what role the
cerebellum serves. One recent proposal is that the cerebellum is involved in
predicting and preparing for mental and motor operations and that to perform
this function, it learns predictive relationships within sequences of neural
activities. Dr. Allen will attempt to test this proposal using functional
magnetic resonance imaging of humans performing a visual selection attention
task. Blood flow activity in the cerebellum will be recorded as human volunteers
alternate between passive viewing of and selective attention to visual stimuli.
During the visual selective attention tasks, subjects will passively listen to a
structured sequence of tones that predicts the appearance of visual targets. As
subjects learn to improve their performance by attending to the predictive
pattern of the tones, the intensity and distribution of activity in the
cerebellum and elsewhere will be used to evaluate Dr. Allen's hypothesis. The
findings of this study should be useful for the development of a new account of
cerebellar function. The proposed theory is one of the few to adequately
encompass the apparent diversity of the cerebellar function and testing it
should bring us closer to understanding the fundamental role the cerebellum
plays in the central nervous system. The cerebellum is a large and intricate
brain structure with connections to many other neural systems. Clarifying its
function will modify our understanding of many other aspects of brain function.
Such advances are also expected to have significant implications for
understanding symptoms of cerebellar dysfunction.