* 0121705
* Investigating the Role of Calcium in Bacterial Cellular and Metabolic Processes Using Vibrio parahaemolyticus as a Model System
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Jodi Enos-Berlage, Luther College
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 08/31/2003
* USD 35,000.00

Calcium plays a critical role in many metabolic processes in eukaryotic
organisms, serving as a key intracellular signaling molecule that ultimately
affects numerous cellular activities. However, a systematic analysis of the role
of calcium function has not been performed in any prokaryote. The goal of this
project is to investigate the involvement of calcium in bacterial cellular
processes, metabolism, and regulation. The marine bacterium Vibrio
parahaemolyticus will be used as a model system. This organism has a number of
attributes that make it attractive for this study. V. parahaemolyticus undergoes
significant phenotypic changes in response to altered calcium levels, including
changes in colony morphology. In addition, data strongly suggest that calcium
levels regulate gene expression in V. parahaemolyticus. Thus, calcium is likely
to play a role in cellular processes in this organism. In this project,
experiments will be performed to: (i) obtain biochemical support for an
involvement of calcium in V. parahaemolyticus metabolism, (ii) identify and
characterize cellular processes in V. parahaemolyticus that are affected by
calcium levels, and (iii) identify genes involved in calcium metabolism or that
are regulated by calcium. Many biological processes in numerous organisms,
including plants and animals, require calcium ions. The project described above
is important because, although calcium ions are likely to play important roles
in bacterial processes, a thorough investigation of the involvement of calcium
in these organisms has not been performed. The experiments described above are
expected to significantly increase understanding of the role of calcium in
bacteria at the biochemical, cellular, and molecular level.

