* 0121044
* ITR/SY: Collaborative/RUI Research on the Perceptual Aspects of Locomotion Interfaces
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2007
* Herbert Pick, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Daniel F. DeMenthon
* 08/31/2007
* USD 420,759.00

This is a standard award to one of three institutions collaborating as partners
on Thompson's project (0121084). No current system allows a person to naturally
walk through a large-scale virtual environment. The availability of such a
locomotion interface would have impacts on a broad range of applications,
including education and training, design and prototyping, physical fitness, and
rehabilitation; for some of these applications natural walking provides a level
of realism not obtainable if movement through the simulated world is controlled
by devices such as a joystick, while for others realistic walking is a
fundamental requirement. Prototypes have been built for a variety of computer-
controlled devices on which a person can walk, but there has been little
investigation of the utility of such devices as interfaces to a virtual world
and almost no study at all of the interactions of visual and biomechanical
perceptual cues in such devices. This project addresses key open questions, the
answers to which are needed if locomotion interfaces are to offer effective
interaction between users and computer simulations. An effective locomotion
interface must provide users with accurate visual and biomechanical sensations
of walking; thus, a key objective of this work is to determine how to
synergistically combine visual information generated by computer graphics with
biomechanical information generated by devices that simulate walking on real
surfaces. Thompson and his collaborators will investigates methods that allow
more accurate walking in a locomotion interface while accurately conveying a
sense of the spaces being walked through. Specific issues to be considered
include how to facilitate the perception of speed and distance traveled, how to
provide a compelling sense of turning when actual walking along a curved path is
not possible, how to give a user the sense that he/she is walking over a sloped
surface, and more generally how to give a user a clear sense of the scale and
structure of the spaces being walked through. The team's findings on these
issues will be relevant across the spectrum of possible approaches to locomotion
interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;