* 0121285
* ITR/IM+PE+SY: Summer Workshops on Human Language Technology: Integrating Research and Education
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2008
* Jason Eisner, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 09/30/2008
* USD 3,840,403.00

We propose to organize yearly, intensive six-week research workshops at Johns
Hopkins University, focusing on Language Engineering, including the mutually
related areas of automatic speech recognition and synthesis, natural language
processing, machine translation, information extraction and summarization.
Applications of language engineering techniques to other domains such as
language instruction or bioinformatics will also be appropriate workshop topics.
These workshops will bring together teams of leading professionals and graduate
and undergraduate students in a cooperative effort to advance the state of the
art. The first goal of the proposed workshop series is to establish new research
directions in Language Engineering. The second goal is to attract students to
the field and to offer them an intensive hands-on mentored research education.
The third is to engender extensive cross-fertilization between researchers
distributed across industrial, academic and government institutions, forging
intensive links in the 6-week summer period and offering a shared research
environment for follow-on collaborative work. To ensure that the projects
address current problems in the state of the art, each year an open call for
workshop project proposals will be issued to researchers in the worldwide
language engineering community. The proposals received will be evaluated
competitively at planning meetings held each year. The meetings will draw
together project proponents, government representatives, and experts from
related fields to assess the viability and promise of the proposals and to
identify three candidate projects for the summer workshop. Throughout this
process of soliciting proposals and recruiting the personnel to carry them out,
we will make a diligent attempt to include researchers from underrepresented
institutions and communities.