* 0121943
* Imaging High-level Semantic Memory: A Pilot Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) Investigation
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2001,03/31/2003
* Charles Perfetti, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 03/31/2003
* USD 51,251.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Perfetti will conduct a one year
investigation into the possibility that the brain stores information about words
in ways that depend on their meanings. For example, concrete words such as "dog"
and abstract words such as "faith" are quite different in the contexts of their
use as well as their meaning categories. Thus, people often have specific common
images associated with concrete words whereas abstract words evoke more
idiosyncratic images. Although little is known about how the brain represents
these and other meaning differences, one very general possibility is meanings
are represented across an integrated set of brain regions. A concrete word such
as "dog" may include extensive experience with a particular dog, in addition to
more general information about visual (what most dogs look like) and auditory
attributes (sounds made by a dog) associated with dogs. People typically have
category information as well, inferring that a dog is a mammal as well as an
animal. By comparison, our knowledge of word meanings that are derived more from
verbal contexts and less from concrete objects (e.g. "faith") could be
represented differently. For example, an abstract word such as "faith" may have
weaker connections to perceptual systems and more reliance on connections within
the language system. To explore these possibilities, fMRI methods will examine
blood flow to specific brain regions when adults perform simple tasks that
involve the meanings of words. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The initial goal of this
project is to identify the promise of this method for providing information
about the organization of word meanings. The longer term goal for research of
this kind is to learn how brain areas work together to support the human ability
to grasp concepts that are only indirectly connected to everyday experience.
Increased knowledge of this type is important to a scientific understanding of
human intellectual abilities and to the loss, recovery, and reorganization of
these abilities that can follow impairments of various kinds. &lt;br/&gt;