* 0121629
* ITR/SY: Augmented Cognition: Combining Human and Digital Memory
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2007
* Randy Pausch, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2007
* USD 1,212,000.00

The PI will design and build human-computer interfaces that improve human
memory, which he terms infocockpits. The basic approach is to take well-
understood psychology principles and apply them to the design of information
displays, in particular the fact that human beings are adept at remembering
information based on its location relative to their body and on the place where
they were when they learned it. The implementations will use two basic
strategies: multiple spatial displays surrounding the user, to engage human
memory for location; and ambient context displays (both visual and auditory), to
engage human memory for place. This work leverages prior collaborative efforts
by the PI and Co-PI in virtual reality. The project relates to, and represents a
new paradigm for, the retention of information instead of its manipulation.
Although the PIs postulate just two fundamental design principles, the design
space is very large. The basic research apparatus - the infocockpit - will be a
computer system with a number of traditional display monitors arrayed relative
to the user's body. These display screens are then placed in a room where images
can be projected onto the walls. This projected imagery, plus ambient 3D
surround sound, creates a distinctive place in which information is viewed. The
PI will systematically vary the configuration, and will run controlled
experiments, in which users access information and then later are tested for
their ability to recall it, to examine the benefits of: multiple monitors
arrayed around the user vs. a single monitor; the addition of projected
background context; stationary vs. animated background contexts; having the
context semantically related to the accessed information; having ambient and/or
localized sound as part of the context; and using hierarchical places to avoid
having confusions between many different contexts. The PI will partner with the
Virginia Center for Digital History which will employ the new design principles
to build and provide content for infocockpit systems for teaching American
history; this will allow the PI to observe how the new techniques work in a real
world educational application developed by others. A preliminary study conducted
by the PI has found a 63% increase in users' memory capabilities; moreover,
functional brain imaging assessment of the participants from this study and
found that experience in the infocockpit resulted in brain activations in areas
associated with spatial representation, working memory, and visualization. Thus,
the question is no longer whether this approach can improve the user's ability
to remember information; the question is by how much.&lt;br/&gt;