* 0121469
* ITR/SI: Integrated Design of Broadband Wireless Transceivers
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2007
* Shu Lin, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 09/30/2007
* USD 1,159,677.00

0121469&lt;br/&gt;Ding&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The imminent commercial deployment
of the 3rd generation 3rd wireless communications systems has placed the
development of future high rate wireless internet and mobile computing at the
top of wireless R&amp;D agenda. Wireless channels are known to be unreliable and
volatile. To develop even faster wireless data networks that can serve as the
essential last link for both nomadic and highly mobile users, wireless system
design may require fundamental changes in approach. To this end, it has been
widely recognized that quality-of-serve (QoS) awareness should be introduced to
lower network layers through a unified design. Even within the physical layer
itself, separate function blocks such as transmit diversity, equalization, and
coding must be further integrated to better exploit the available channel
bandwidth, antenna diversity, and channel coding in order to compensate for
unknown and time-varying channel distortions as well as co-channel
interferences. This proposal presents a novel framework for the design
integration and VLSI implementation of ARQ based wireless data networks and
highlights a number of critical open research issues for investigation along
with many highly promising solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
centers on a unified approach to the design integration of ARQ,
transmit/receiver diversity, equalization, and channel coding in broadband
wireless communication systems. It represents a clear departure from the current
transceiver (physical layer) design approach that separately determines and
optimizes each individual functionality such as channel coding, coded
modulation, and channel equalization. Central to the PIs proposal is the idea to
exploit the use of QoS driven hybrid ARQ at both the transmitter and the
receiver. This idea represents an important step of design integration based on
the network use of hybrid ARQ. The PIs proposal focuses on a specific mechanism
facilitated by an ARQ feedback channel to achieve design coordination of
physical layer functions of channel equalization/pre-compensation, transmit
antenna diversity, (turbo) coding, amid hybrid ARQ. Their proposed approach is
very general and is not limited to a specific modulation or network standard. In
particular, their research objectives amid tasks include&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;o
Joint optimization of turbo coding, turbo equalization, amid multiuser detection
through code awareness based on temporal diversity introduced by hybrid
ARQ;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;o Turbo equalization amid multiuser detection
algorithms for transmit diversity with variable rate codes that are exploited by
the transmitter amid demodulator;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;o Broadband spatial turbo
equalization combined with H-ARQ diversity utilizing codes of different levels
of error protection as well as iteratively decodable multilevel
codes;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;o New type II hybrid ARQ based on integration of
parity retransmission, concatenation, Reed-Solomon (RS) outer code, low-density
parity check (LDPC) inner code, arid turbo coding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;o VLSI
design amid implementation of high speed decoders for integrated equalization,
LDPC, and RS turbo decoding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;o Low complexity two-stage
turbo decoding of Reed-Solomon codes through their binary decomposition into
binary component codes with relatively small state
complexity;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rather than pursuing incremental advances
separately in diversity combining, H-ARQ, equalization, and coding, this project
presents a new and specific network integration approach that will have a strong
impact on the design of future wireless data networks. The VLSI design amid
implementation will represent the latest technology for broadband high speed
communication systems.&lt;br/&gt;