* 0121540
* A Digital Library of Ceramic Microstructures
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2003
* Naresh Thadhani, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Roger Seals
* 12/31/2003
* USD 649,589.00

This project is creating a digital library of microstructures for functional
ceramics with emphasis on materials used for structural, electronic, and thermal
applications. This library will be used in ceramic education to (1) illustrate
the role of microstructure in dictating the macroscopic properties, (2)
highlight changes in the microstructure resulting from degradation processes
associated with the intended function, and (3) conduct virtual measurements of
selected properties. Digital images of these materials are being collected and
compiled into a master database. For each material, representative property data
(e.g., strength and fracture toughness for structural ceramics, dielectric
constant for the electrical ceramics, and thermal conductivity, thermal
expansion, and compressive creep for refractories) are being included in the
database as well. Software is being developed to (1) access this database via
the Internet, (2) measure microstructural features such as grain size and
distribution, (3) illustrate key property data appropriate&lt;br/&gt;for the
microstructure being examined, and (4) conduct virtual measurements. The
database and software is being beta tested and then refined based upon the
results. Ultimately, the digital library of ceramic microstructures (DLCM) is
being transferred to the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
and will be linked with an existing Web site, Ceramics WebBook, which provides a
guide to data centers, tools, and resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is a partnership among three universities, University of Missouri at Rolla,
Georgia Tech, and North Carolina A&amp;T; and the University of Dayton Research
Institute. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significant co-funding of this project is being
provided by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the NSF Directorate
for Mathematical and Physical Sciences in recognition of the emphasis on
collections development in the area of materials science. &lt;br/&gt;