* 0121555
* ITR/SY: Discrete Models &amp; Algorithms in the Sciences
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2007
* Richard Karp, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 09/30/2007
* USD 2,899,392.00

The research is centered on four major computational themes which &lt;br/&gt;are
linked in various ways:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Quantum Computation:
&lt;br/&gt;A study of novel quantum algorithms, of entanglement as a
computational &lt;br/&gt;resource, and of connections to fundamental issues in
quantum physics, &lt;br/&gt;such as the transition from classical to quantum.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Modeling the Regulatory Processes of the
Cell:&lt;br/&gt;In the post-genomic era, the computational modeling of the
operation &lt;br/&gt;of an entire cell at the level of interactions among genes,
proteins &lt;br/&gt;and environmental conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3.
Statistical Physics and Computational Complexity: &lt;br/&gt;A study of central
concepts of statistical physics, such as phase &lt;br/&gt;transitions and
critical exponents, with emphasis on their computational
&lt;br/&gt;manifestations and their relevance to the analysis of large systems
&lt;br/&gt;with local interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4. Mathematical
Economics and the Internet: &lt;br/&gt;A study of the Internet as a novel
computational artifact and a complex &lt;br/&gt;economic arena, as well as of
the algorithmic adaptations of Game Theory &lt;br/&gt;and Mechanism Design
necessary for such a study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The four PIs --- Richard Karp,
Christos Papadimitriou, Alistair Sinclair &lt;br/&gt;and Umesh Vazirani --- are
all based in the Computer Science Division at &lt;br/&gt;UC Berkeley. Each of
them has a track record of research in at least one &lt;br/&gt;of the above
areas, and a substantial interest in at least one other. &lt;br/&gt;The project
also includes one senior scientist from each of the four areas:
&lt;br/&gt;Birgitta Whaley (Quantum Physics), Adam Arkin (Quantitative Biology),
&lt;br/&gt;Yuval Peres (Probability and Statistical Physics), and Scott Shenker
&lt;br/&gt;(Economics and the Internet). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is
rooted in a realization that a computational perspective &lt;br/&gt;is becoming
increasingly important in the Natural and Mathematical Sciences,&lt;br/&gt;and
conversely that the Sciences are posing new challenges for the theory
&lt;br/&gt;of computation, many of which are related. It aims to foster this
connection &lt;br/&gt;within a dedicated program of research and graduate
education.