* 0121146
* ITR/SY: Center for Modeling of Quantum Dynamics, Relaxation and Decoherence in Solid-State Physics for Information-Technology Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2007
* M. Lawrence Glasser, Clarkson University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2007
* USD 1,600,000.00

This grant is the result of a proposal submitted to the Information Technology
Research (ITR) Initiative. The grant supports a Center for Modeling of Quantum
Dynamics, Relaxation and Decoherence in Solid State Physics for Information
Technology Applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theoretical research center
will investigate solid state implementation of coherent, controlled quantum
dynamics in support of the recently established experimental efforts in quantum
information processing. The initial research focus of the center will be on the
theoretical study of few- and multi-qubit systems where the medium for the qubit
interaction, relaxation, and decoherence is a semiconductor heterostructure
containing a two-dimensional electron gas. For quantum computing applications,
the latter is frequently considered at low temperature and high magnetic fields,
corresponding to the conditions of the quantum Hall effect. This project
includes exploration of the main research topics of relevance to quantum
computing in the solid state, for instance, transport associated with single-
quantum (single-spin) measurement ideas, or effects of gates on qubit
interaction control, relaxation and decoherence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Owing to
the emergence of several large-scale experimental efforts in implementing
quantum coherent devices for computation, the center will respond to the growing
need for research into promising directions of the design of such devices. The
theory center will provide an added fundamental and overarching approach
complementing goal-oriented experimental efforts. The center will provide
research in the application of many-body physics techniques to the analysis of
quantum information systems, including relaxation, decoherence, measurement, and
quantum transport features; education of the next generation of scientists who
will be concerned with the implementation and application of quantum computers;
formation of the scientific network in this emerging field of solid state
physics by means of publications, conferences, seminars and exchange visits.
Members of this interdisciplinary center include those with backgrounds in
mathematics and computer science, electrical and computer engineering, materials
science and physics.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;