* 0121402
* U.S.-Hungary Workshop on Natural Attenuation of Metals along the Tisza River's Floodplain-Wetlands Continuum
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2001,01/31/2004
* Domy Adriano, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 01/31/2004
* USD 55,750.00

This U.S.-Hungary workshop will bring together expert scientists and engineers
as well as postdoctoral associates and students to examine the environmental
issues associated with metal contamination of the Hungarian Tisza River
throughout its floodplain and wetlands. The organizers are Prof. Domy Adriano of
the University of Georgia and Prof. Nemeth Tamas, of the Hungarian Research
Institute for Soil Science and Agricultural Chemistry. Their objective is to
determine the key scientific issues and to help define research priorities that
are longer-term and cross-disciplinary. To accomplish this, workshop discussions
will feature pollutant cycling and the effects on local aquatic and terrestrial
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the U.S. and Hungarian
organizers intend to use this forum to: 1) formulate hypotheses regarding the
rates and mechanisms of natural attenuation, from the landscape to molecular
levels; 2) determine bio-availability and the natural attenuation of metals in
the Tisza's chronically contaminated landscape; 3) relate the kinetics of metal
attenuation to biological responses and chemical indices; and 4) develop novel
monitoring protocols and enhanced predictive models for managing ecological
habitats, in the context of land use and water management policies. Overall the
participants are motivated by the goal of defining suitable environmental
management and mitigation strategies. If successful, this workshop should lead
to the delineation of collaborative and linked US-Hungarian subprojects on
ecological and engineering topics that will yield results applicable to the
metal pollution problems found in big rivers around the world.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop in environmental engineering fulfills the
program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling experts in the
United States and Central Europe to combine complementary talents and share
research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence.