* 0121717
* Collaborative Project:  StandardConnection--Mapping NSDL Educational Objects to Content Standards
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2001,11/30/2008
* Bruce Fulton, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Curtis T. Sears
* 11/30/2008
* USD 824,219.00

This is a collaborative project with Award No. 0121543 (Syracuse University;
Elizabeth D. Liddy, Principal Investigator). Researchers at the University of
Washington's Information School and Syracuse University's Center for Natural
Language Processing are leading this effort, with assistance from Mid-continent
Research for Education and Learning (McREL) and Achieve,
Inc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators are developing a natural language
processing tool ("StandardConnection") for the automatic assignment of content
standards and benchmarks to educational resources in the collections of the
National Science, Mathematics, Engineering, and Technology Education Digital
Library (NSDL) and to other educational resources on the Web. The standards and
benchmarks come from the Compendium of Standards and Benchmarks developed by
McREL, and the Achieve Standards Database. Supplementing general descriptive
metadata, the content standards metadata generated by the StandardConnection
tool will make it possible for a teacher in any state to use the NSDL to locate
appropriate teaching resources for helping students achieve a particular
competency set by the state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project entails acquiring
a "training" and "testing" collection of educational resources for analysis;
cultivating a sophisticated level of understanding of the human cognitive
processes involved in manually assigning content standard metadata tags to
resources; designing and developing the technology based on this understanding;
running the StandardConnection tool on an unseen set of data; analyzing the
results and adjusting the tool, through iterations, until a highly reliable
tagging is produced; and employing a group of teacher-experts to analyze the
quality of the tool's mappings of resources to standards and
benchmarks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project constitutes a logical extension of
work conducted under Award Nos. 0085837 and 0085838, "Breaking the Metadata
Generation Bottleneck," in which the investigators are processing the text of
educational resources to automatically assign Gateway to Educational Materials
(GEM) metatags for the descriptive and subject aspects of educational
resources.&lt;br/&gt;