* 0121578
* Textual-Geospatial Integration Services for the National SMETE Digital Library
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2001,12/31/2004
* James Frew, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 12/31/2004
* USD 449,265.00

The emerging National Science, Mathematics, Engineering, and Technology
Education Digital Library (NSDL) includes many sets of items whose
representations, while different at the user level, contain semantically related
information. Consider, for example, the association between land-use maps of
some region, and references to that region in a book concerning agricultural
practices. The NSDL aims to support its users with services that help them find
and integrate such semantically related information in such heterogeneously
represented items.

This project is constructing operational services to make it easy for users of
the NSDL to have integrated access to information from texts, maps, and images--
specifically, information that is semantically related in terms of geospatial
features and regions. These services will help users find:

-- maps or images containing features or places that are referred to implicitly
within texts, and -- texts that implicitly reference features and places
contained in maps and images.

More advanced services will help users evaluate the consistency between
geospatial information obtained from such varying sources. Collectively, these
services will allow large collections of texts to be indexed and accessed
geospatially, even if their "cataloging records" do not contain explicit
geospatial references.

To implement these services, the project team is integrating the geospatial
search services of the Alexandria Digital Library (ADL;
http://www.alexandria.ucsb.edu) at the University of California at Santa Barbara
with the high-performance information retrieval (IR) services developed by the
Illinois Institute of Technology's Information Retrieval Laboratory
(http://www.ir.iit.edu). The key component in this integration is the 4+ million
item gazetteer and associated services developed for ADL. (A gazetteer provides
a mapping between textual representations of places and features, and
coordinate-based representations of their geospatial "footprints," thus allowing
a semantic mapping to be made in either direction between textual and map/image
representations of related phenomena.) Specifically, the project team is
integrating a gazetteer into an IR engine, integrating an IR engine into a
geospatial digital library, and developing services that check the consistency
of alternative geospatial references. These services will allow seamless
geospatial queries across distributed heterogeneous (text and non-text) digital
libraries and will enable geospatial referencing of texts that have not
otherwise been geographically cataloged (i.e., almost all texts currently
available).