* 0121623
* Thematic Real-time Environmental Data Distributed Services (THREDDS)
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2001,09/30/2004
* Ben Domenico, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jeffrey G. Ryan
* 09/30/2004
* USD 900,001.00

The UCAR Unidata program is developing an organizational infrastructure and a
software infrastructure, Thematic Real-time Environmental Distributed Data
Services (THREDDS), to enable educators and researchers to locate, analyze,
visualize, and publish a wide variety of environmental data in both their
classrooms and laboratories. The framework for this infrastructure is based on
the concept of publishable (data) inventories and catalogs (PICats) and ties
together a set of technologies already in use in existing, extensive collections
of environmental data that reside on remote, distributed servers. These include
client/server data-access protocols from the University of Rhode Island and the
University of Wisconsin-Madison, the real-time Internet Data Distribution system
from Unidata, the discovery system at the Digital Library for Earth System
Education (DLESE), and an extensive set of client visualization tools. Based on
the eXtensible Markup Language (XML), metadata in the form of PICats are created
in many different ways. Sites receiving real-time environmental data instrument
decoders to create PICats describing data products as they arrive. Crawlers can
also create PICats by traversing existing retrospective data collections. Since
the PICats do not necessarily reside on the server with the data, researchers
can create PICats for research publications that point to datasets residing on
several data servers. Likewise educators can incorporate PICats of illustrative
datasets into educational modules that also include the tools for data analysis
and visualization. Students may also use PICats to point to datasets related to
their research projects, just as they now use URLs to point to relevant
documents. Finally, the text-based nature of PICats allows them to be harvested
and indexed in digital libraries not only by current document search engines,
but also by specialized tools that make use of the internal structure and
semantic content of the PICats. Partial co-funding of this project is being
provided by the Division of Earth Sciences in NSF's Geosciences Directorate.