* 0121963
* Scales and Characteristics of Convective Processes in Orographic Precipitation
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Sandra Yuter, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 05/31/2006
* USD 404,444.00

Orographic precipitation is important both economically and from a public safety
(flash flooding) standpoint. In this research, the Principal Investigator will
investigate the physical processes that control orographic precipitation. Four
questions to be addressed:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. What are the relative
contributions of coalescence and riming to accretional growth of precipitation
in storms that extend several km above the freezing level?&lt;br/&gt;2. Is there
a significant difference in precipitation growth due to coalescence between
storms that do and do not extend above the freezing level?&lt;br/&gt;3. What is
the size distribution of and spacing between precipitating convective elements
that contribute to the observed small-scale variability of
precipitation?&lt;br/&gt;4. Is there a significant difference in the
characteristics of the raindrop size distribution within fallstreaks and between
fallstreaks?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will be observationally based and
will utilize data collected from two completed field programs - the Mesoscale
Alpine Programme and the Pacific Landfalling Jets Experiment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The answers to the above questions will contribute to
improvement of parameterized and explicit descriptions of cloud microphysics
within numerical models of orographic precipitation and to better
characterization of sampling and beam filling errors for satellite remote
sensing applications.