* 0121186
* Singular Vector and Predictability Diagnosis of Pacific Large-Scale Cyclogenesis Events
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Michael Morgan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 02/28/2006
* USD 377,444.00

A pronounced feature in atmospheric weather patterns is the onset and subsequent
development of wintertime large-scale cyclogenesis (LSC) over the Northern
Pacific Ocean, extending to North America. The project will use singular vector
(SV) diagnostic techniques, a fairly new approach, to identify and understand
the precursors for the establishment of cyclogenesis events through an
examination of the spatial patterns of errors in weather prediction models for
periods before, during, and after occurrences of the enhanced jet flow within
the cyclogenesis lifecycles. The research will be conducted through the analysis
of global observational data sets, simulations with numerical models, and
ensemble forecasts from operational models. An analysis of the characteristic
evolution of differences between members of ensemble forecasts will be used to
understand the sensitivity of LSC forecasts to initial condition uncertainties.
Other problems the PIs will investigate include: the role of dynamical
instability on the transient growth in LSCs and possible degradation in
predictability during LSC events.

Understanding the dynamics and predictability during LSC events will contribute
to the improvement in the medium range weather prediction. The research will
contribute to educating a new generation in a fairly new scientific area,
namely, singular vectors and adjoint systems associated with numerical models.
The principal investigators will organize two workshops that will be tailored
for weather forecasters to share information on predictability and to educate
the weather forecasting community on how to use SV analysis in daily forecasts.
Presently, SV analysis remains a formidable topic to many. This project may
provide an opportunity to transform a complicated mathematical formulation into
practical applications.