* 0121141
* ITR/SI+AP: Active Sensor Networks with Applications in Marine Microorganism Monitoring
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* David Caron, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2005
* USD 1,587,861.00

EIA-0121141&lt;br/&gt;Requicha, Aristides&lt;br/&gt;University of Southern
California&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ITR/SI+AP: Active Sensor Networks with
Applications in Marine Microorganism
Monitoring&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research combines networking, distributed robotics, nanorobotics, and
microbiology in an effort to develop and apply technology for the in-situ, real-
time monitoring of microbial populations in aquatic environments, such as the
ocean or water supply systems. The application context provides feedback from
experiments with realistic systems, and this feedback is essential to the
progress of the Information Technology (IT) research proposed here. This project
addresses two key challenges for IT during this decade: moving from virtual to
physical applications, and moving from macro to micro and
nano.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IT focus is on the study of Physically-Coupled
Scalable Information Infrastructures (PCSIIs), which effectively "embed the
internet". The sensors and actuators in the proposed PCSII must have small
physical dimensions, comparable to those of the microorganisms to be monitored.
They must be deployed in very large numbers to achieve the unprecedented spatial
and temporal resolution necessary to investigate the causal relationships
between environmental conditions and microorganisms. Control and coordination of
a multitude of such devices of limited and heterogeneous capabilities raise
major challenges for networking, distributed coordination and distributed
algorithms. Sensing for detection and identification of microorganisms is
another challenge, which will be tackled by using nanorobotic Scanning Probe
Microscope technology.&lt;br/&gt;