* 0121814
* Nanooptics with Plasmonic-Nanomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2005
* Vladimir Shalaev, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 11/30/2005
* USD 180,000.00

In this project, optical properties of nanomaterials with different structures
will be theoretically studied. The fundamental problem to address is how the
symmetry of a nanostructured material influences its optical properties and,
related to this, what geometrical structure should be chosen for best
performance of the material. We specifically focus on metal-dielectric crystals
and composites that can support various plasmon modes, resulting in strongly
enhanced optical responses. In our research we particularly consider local
optical phenomena that occur in sub-wavelength, nanometer-sized areas of the
material.

We plan to study photonic crystals made of periodically structured metal, which
we refer to as i) plasmonic crystals. The goal here is to develop robust band-
gap materials, with large and scaleable gaps in the visible and near-infrared.
Because of large and negative permittivity of metals, they are intrinsically gap
materials and can dramatically improve performance of photonic band-gap crystals
and ease their fabrication. By employing the skin effect that expels light from
metal, losses can be dramatically decreased, which is a major foe for metals. By
taking control of losses we hope to open new avenues for various applications of
plasmonic crystals in photonics.

By combining plasmonic crystals with submicron-sized resonators made of nearly
percolating composites, we will develop ii) left-handed materials in the visible
and near-IR, which have a negative refractive index in this spectral range. The
plasmonic mesh-like crystals, in this case, can provide negative permittivity,
whereas the composite resonators lead to negative permeability. Such material
with simultaneously negative permittivity and permeability should have negative
refraction. Another possibility for developing left-handed materials, which we
also plan to explore, is based on periodical arrays of metal needles. The left-
handed materials have unique optical properties and can find a number of novel
applications, for example for developing super-lenses, which are capable of
perfect image reconstruction.

In these projects we also plan to study iii) light-managed extraordinary optical
transmittance through an optically-thick metal film. This new idea stems from
our recent theory that has successfully explained the earlier observed
extraordinary transmittance through subwavelength hole arrays. Because of the
optical Kerr nonlinearity of a film, the interfering light beams can result in a
periodic modulation of the refractive index in the film. This modulation can act
as a periodic "hole array," created by light itself, allowing the extraordinary
light transmittance through the film. This idea, when developed into a theory,
can open new avenues for manipulating light with light and for developing all-
optical transistors, switchers, and modulators. %%% In this project, optical
properties of nanomaterials with different structures will be theoretically
studied. The fundamental problem to address is how the symmetry of a
nanostructured material influences its optical properties and, related to this,
what geometrical structure should be chosen for best performance of the
material. We specifically focus on metal-dielectric crystals and composites that
can support various plasmon modes, resulting in strongly enhanced optical
responses. In our research we particularly consider local optical phenomena that
occur in sub-wavelength, nanometer-sized areas of the material. ***