* 0121953
* Neurocognitive Dynamics Of Sleep Onset
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2001,03/31/2002
* Matthew Walker, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Lynne Bernstein
* 03/31/2002
* USD 59,168.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Walker will conduct a year long
investigation of the human brain systems which control the descent from full
consciousness into the reduced consciousness of sleep and produce the cognitive
experience of sleep onset dreaming. Sleep is an essential part of human life,
occupying approximately one third of our time. The shift from wake to sleep
arguably represents the most striking transition that the human brain and mind
normally experiences. Although we are beginning to understand what brain
mechanisms trigger this shift, the actual processes that produce the state of
sleep remain unknown. Of additional interest is the type of mental experience
that accompanies this wake-sleep transition, often involving brief
hallucinations/dreams containing visual and auditory events as well as feelings
of movement. Recent studies have suggested that these sleep-onset dreams are
related to the re-play and consolidation of memories of novel daytime
experiences, particularly those requiring the learning of new skills (e.g.
engage in novel physical or mental activities for extended periods of time such
as the first day of skiing). Dr. Walker and colleagues have been able to
reliably produce near identical, stereotyped sleep-onset dreams by having human
subjects play a ski simulator game for extended periods during the day. The
present project uses this method to observe and control the cognitive processes
of sleep onset dreaming as volunteers brains are being imaged in functional
magnetic resonance scanner.&lt;br/&gt;Identifying the brain mechanisms involved
in the sleep-onset process would provide information of wide value to both the
basic neurosciences and to clinical research. It would not only increase our
understanding of the neurocognitive basis of both the sleeping brain and the
dreaming mind, but would also expand our understanding of human sensory and
perceptual experience and of how new knowledge and skills are acquired, learned
and reprocessed. This information would also provide a platform for new theories
of human perception, cognition and learning, and will assist in the formulation
of new treatments for a variety of neurological and sleep disorders.&lt;br/&gt;