* 0121269
* ITR/IM: Enabling the Creation and Use of GeoGrids for Next Generation Geospatial Information
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Mary-Kate Beard-Tisdale, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2006
* USD 1,500,000.00

The objective of this project is to advance science in information management,
focusing in particular on geospatial information. It addresses the development
of concepts, algorithms, and system architectures to enable users on a grid to
query, analyze, and contribute to multivariate, quality-aware geospatial
information. The approach consists of three complementary research areas: (1)
establishing a statistical framework for assessing geospatial data quality; (2)
developing uncertainty-based query processing capabilities; and (3) supporting
the development of space- and accuracy-aware adaptive systems for geospatial
datasets. The results of this project will support the extension of the concept
of the computational grid to facilitate ubiquitous access, interaction, and
contributions of quality-aware next generation geospatial information. By
developing novel query processes as well as quality and similarity metrics the
project aims to enable the integration and use of large collections of disperse
information of varying quality and accuracy. This supports the evolution of a
novel geocomputational paradigm, moving away from current standards-driven
approaches to an inclusive, adaptive system, with example potential applications
in mobile computing, bioinformatics, and geographic information systems. This
experimental research is linked to educational activities in three different
academic programs among the three participating sites. The outreach activities
of this project include collaboration with U.S. federal agencies involved in
geospatial data collection, an international partner (Brazil's National
Institute for Space Research), and the organization of a 2-day workshop with the
participation of U.S. and international experts.