* 0121144
* Preliminary Design and Model Testing for the High Latitude Research Vessel -- Phase II Alaska Regional Research Vessel
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2001,02/29/2008
* Terry Whitledge, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 02/29/2008
* USD 1,738,658.00

OCE - 0121144&lt;br/&gt;Whitledge&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests
support for the second phase of the design and model testing of a Marginal Ice
Zone (MIZ) Research Vessel. The Science Mission Requirements have been
established and reviewed by UNOLS, and the concept design was started in the
fall of 2000. The proposed vessel will replace the current UNOLS regional
research vessel, the R/V Alpha Helix, with a more capable, multi-purpose and
somewhat larger ship, better able to address the contemporary research support
needs of a variety of users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The waters surrounding Alaska
Stretch from the southeastern Alaskan fjords, to the Bering Sea and north to the
Chukchi and Beaufort Seas. This vast region accounts for the majority of the
United States continental shelf and its only Arctic waters. Some of the most
productive fisheries in the world are found here, and there is strong demand for
research on the marine ecosystems that support these populations. Marine mammal
and bird research is increasing, and is likely to increase even more due to the
"need to know" for management and legal purposes. Indigenous people live along
the coasts, and use marine resources for subsistence. Increasing support for
research in the Bering Sea and northern Gulf of Alaska, is, in part, driven by
these considerations. Little is understood of major decadal and interannual
variability in oceanographic and atmospheric conditions or the role of high
latitude marine systems in global climatic processes. As a result, there is
increasing demand for ship support in the region, and this year the R/V Alpha
Helix is providing the maximum number of sea days possible, given her size,
capabilities and seasonal restrictions imposed by the challenging subarctic
conditions. This demand is expected to increase with a more capable
vessel.&lt;br/&gt;