* 0121565
* ITR/SI: Broadband MIMO OFDM Wireless Access
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Gordon Stuber, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 09/30/2005
* USD 1,950,800.00

The convenience of wireless communications and the ever-increasing demand for
higher data rates has motivated the proposed study of more efficient methods of
transmission. One highly spectrally efficient link architecture is the multiple-
input multiple-output (MIMO) architecture, which uses multiple transmit antennas
and multiple receive antennas. Under ideal conditions, the theoretical capacity
of a MIMO channel increases linearly in the number of transmit/receive antennas.
In other words, the theory promises that more bits can be conveyed through the
same bandwidth by simply adding more antennas at each end of the link.
Orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (OFDM) is a high-data rate modulation
technique that is already part of some single-transmitter communications
standards and is known for its scalability and its convenient and cost-effective
implementation using standard digital signal processing architectures. This
study seeks to determine how to combine OFDM with MIMO architectures over real
channels. A challenging goal of this research is to arrive at a flexible,
scaleable, wireless modem with bandwidth efficiency on the order of 4 to 10 bits
per second per Hertz.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will include analysis of
the major functions of the physical (PHY) and medium access control (MAC)
layers. Hardware experimentation will include MIMO channel measurements,
including characterization of MIMO interference, and verification of the MIMO
OFDM link in real-time on a software radio test-bed. Methods for performing MIMO
OFDM channel estimation and synchronization jointly over the spatial channels
are being investigated, taking into account noise and channel estimation and
synchronization errors. An adaptive transmitter is also being studied that
combines space-time processing based on singular-value decomposition (SVD) with
adaptive modulation. Solutions to the major transmission impairments in OFDM
systems, which include intersymbol interference (ISI) due to insufficient guard
interval, interference from co-channel systems, and the effects of amplifier
non-linearities on OFDM will be sought for MIMO OFDM systems. To provide data
reliability, the combination of space-time coding, Turbo coding with iterative
receivers, and hybrid ARQ strategies for error control across the PHY and MAC
layers are being considered. Finally, media access protocols will be optimized
to work with the parameters of the OFDM air interface, such as the OFDM symbol
period. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;