* 0121405
* Collaborative Proposal-ITR/SY:    Molecular Computation with Automated Microfluidic Sensors (MCAMS)
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Lydia Sohn, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 09/30/2005
* USD 1,150,514.00

EIA-0121405&lt;br/&gt;Sohn, Lydia L&lt;br/&gt;Princeton
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Proposal-ITR/SY: Molecular
Computation with Automated Microfluidic Sensors (MCAMS)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
The main objective of this cross-disciplinary project between Princeton
University, Stanford University and UC Berkeley is to combine microfluidic
technology with recently-developed algorithms of RNA-based computing to create a
compact, automated nucelotide-based computational device capable of rapid
detection of the computational output. Realization of such a device would
greatly impact not only the field of molecular computing but also the general
field of molecular biology, as the proposed platform technologies would provide
novel, advanced tools for biological research.&lt;br/&gt;The project is
addressing three main questions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; - Can a microfluidic
device be used to automate RNA-based computation?&lt;br/&gt; - Can alternative
detection methods be used to avoid labor-intensive readout &lt;br/&gt; steps in
RNA-based computation?&lt;br/&gt; -Can these detection methods be applied to
other problems encountered in general biological v
research?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The success of this project will represent a
leap forward in the direction of "hands-free" molecular computation. In
addition, it will provide the necessary platform technologies to accelerate
biological research, particularly in the areas of rapid DNA sequencing and
fingerprinting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;