* 0121677
* Gender and Science Digital Library
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Katherine Hanson, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Stephen R. Cunningham
* 08/31/2003
* USD 849,971.00

The Gender and Science Digital Library (GSDL), a collaborative project between
the Gender and Diversities Institute at Education Development Center, Inc. and
the Eisenhower NationalClearinghouse (ENC) at Ohio State University, seeks to
create a high-quality, interactive library of K-16 gender and science resources.
The GSDL assists educators in promoting and implementing gender-equitable
science education in both formal and informal settings. This is accomplished by
developing, piloting, and launching a cohesive collection focused primarily on
classroom climate, curriculum, and practice, including copies of print
materials, videos, interactive websites, and other resources. Focus groups with
a diverse population of K-16 educators and students, and teacher preparation
faculty and students are used in developing an intuitive interface that allow
multiple approaches for users. These approaches are integrated into the existing
ENC digital library structure. While the primary audience is K-16 science
educators, teacher educators, and gender equity&lt;br/&gt;specialists, the
collection is also be useful to families, community organizations, and to
researchers, and students in post-secondary education. Materials for the GSDL
are from the ENC and Women's Educational Equity Act (WEEA) Resource Center, NSF
grants, and the collections of various science education centers and equity
assistance centers. The project also aggressively solicits submissions through
its websites, listservs, and links to equity and science networks and to
publishers. Guidelines for submissions to assist publishers, or for developers
to place their work into the collection are in place. Submissions are reviewed,
catalogued&lt;br/&gt;and abstracted according to a criteria developed with our
national advisors and collaborating organizations. The library infrastructure
uses a structured, query-language relational database and the USMARC framework,
thus aligning the GSDL with the national digital library system.&lt;br/&gt;