* 0121438
* ITR/SY+AP: Acquisition, Representation, and Remote Visualization of Digital Artifacts
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Kenneth Calvert, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Wu
* 12/31/2005
* USD 1,011,500.00

The goal of this project is to research and develop high-quality, scalable, and
reconfigurable acquisition&lt;br/&gt;and display systems for digital library
collections accessed via the Internet. We will acquire new
digital&lt;br/&gt;collections at the Museo de Arte de Puerto Rico and provide
access to them through end-user displays&lt;br/&gt;that are scalable and
reconfigurable. These displays will cooperate with a remote model server
to&lt;br/&gt;provide the highest possible display fidelity under the current
network conditions. In order to allow&lt;br/&gt;the widespread acquisition and
dissemination of digital collections, revolutionary advances in 3D
model&lt;br/&gt;acquistion, content delivery, and display are required. To
thisend,we will focus on the following research&lt;br/&gt;challenges:&lt;br/&gt;
Acquisition: we willprovide new acquisition strategies designed to produce high-
quality layered,&lt;br/&gt;image-based representations, 3-D shape descriptions,
and multi-layerd data. These new strategies&lt;br/&gt;will enable efficient
access and high-resolution end-user display. hybrid representation of
texture,&lt;br/&gt;shape, and metadata.&lt;br/&gt; Representation: we will
encode the acquired collection in a way that moves toward the
features&lt;br/&gt;provided in the MPEG-4 multimedia standard. This encoding
will preserve the richness and&lt;br/&gt;fidelity of the data while achieving
standardization for access, manipulation, and evolution of&lt;br/&gt;collections
over time.&lt;br/&gt; Remote Access: we will develop new techniques supporting
distributed access to digital col-&lt;br/&gt;lections in a heterogeneous
networked environment. These techniques will be designed to
satisfy&lt;br/&gt;access requirements across a spectrum that varies from very
high quality local display and low-&lt;br/&gt;latency interactive manipulation,
to remote access over wide-area, potentially low bitrate links.&lt;br/&gt;
Display: we will develop new techniques for deploying scalable tiled projection
displays for&lt;br/&gt;institutions and users who do not have access to
sophisticated and dedicated technical support and&lt;br/&gt;high-cost hardware.
These scalable display systems can be assembled from commodity
hardware&lt;br/&gt;and provide automatic, continuous calibration, and rapid
reconfigurability.&lt;br/&gt;The motivation for this work stems from the need
for high-quality preservation, access, and display&lt;br/&gt;techniques for
digitized collections. Libraries, museums, and research scholars who want to
acquire,&lt;br/&gt;manipulate, and provide remote access to (and high-definition
display of)digitized artifacts need cost&lt;br/&gt;effective, non-intrusive,
easily configurable methods for creating and viewing high-quality
collections.&lt;br/&gt;New techniques will be evaluated on real-world library
collections with particular focus on the preser-&lt;br/&gt;vation and
dissemination of artifacts at our partner institution for this work, the Museo
de Arte de&lt;br/&gt;Puerto Rico . With the aid of expert consultants who will
contribute significant effort towards this&lt;br/&gt;project at our partner
institution (see attached letter), we willdevelop and deploy a prototype
system&lt;br/&gt;for acqusition and display using the techniques developed as
part of this project. The resulting digital&lt;br/&gt;archive will be made
accessible to patrons of the museum as well as a much larger audience around
the&lt;br/&gt;world via the Internet.&lt;br/&gt;We believe that this research
will have significant immediate, medium-term and long-term impact.&lt;br/&gt;The
immediate impact of the project will be the development of new acquisition,
access, and display&lt;br/&gt;methods that will be deployed and tested at the
Museo de Arte de Puerto Rico, making parts of their&lt;br/&gt;collections
available in forms not previously possible. In the medium term, our new
technical approaches&lt;br/&gt;will be valuable not only to the digital library
community, but also to other research, instructional, and&lt;br/&gt;commercial
areas where configurable large-scale display systems are needed (e.g.,
classroom, research&lt;br/&gt;visualization centers, conference venues, etc). In
the long term, we believe this proposed work has&lt;br/&gt;the potential to
substantially impact the way people view and interact with data, whether the
data is&lt;br/&gt;a collection of historical artifacts, a visual representation
of a complex simulation, data/illustrations&lt;br/&gt;presenting in the
classroom, etc. Moreover, the cost effectiveness of our approach means that it
will be&lt;br/&gt;affordable to a wide range of users.