* 0121345
* ITR/PE: A Learning Environment for Information Technology Concepts Using Intensive, Unobtrusive Assessment
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Earl Hunt, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2005
* USD 1,031,249.00

EIA-0121345 &lt;br/&gt;Tanimoto, Steven&lt;br/&gt;University of
Washington&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ITR/PE: A Learning Environment for Information
Technology Concepts Using Intensive, Unobtrusive Assessment&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt
;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although many learning environments
have been developed that effectively engage students in assembling computational
objects, simulations, or mathematical constructions, for the most part these
systems fail to take pedagogical advantage of the wealth of assessment-related
data that results from the fact that the students are working on computers. This
is due less to the newness of these environments than to the challenges of
effectively utilizing the event logs, student writing, and student constructions
as evidence of cognitive state, learning preferences, and skills. We propose to
integrate and extend two software systems for online education in order to
perform a series of experiments that assess the impact of using intensive,
unobtrusive assessment tightly integrated with a constructive learning
environment upon learning outcomes and efficiencies. The integrated learning
environment will be tested primarily with University of Washington freshmen but
also with Mercer Island High School seniors, in problem solving and construction
activities involving digital image representation and processing, web-based
communication, and computer programming. The students' writing, online
constructions, online sketches and computer-generated activity logs will be
analyzed using a combination of computer-assisted and automated mark-up. The
results of mark-up will trigger pedagogical recommendations to instructors, and
in some cases, directly to the students. Such interventions may take a variety
of forms; for example, a group of students stuck at the point of frustration in
solving some problem may benefit by having a key step, performed well by a
student in another group, called to their attention. Our objective will be to
determine effective methods both for extracting pedagogically useful information
from the products and byproducts of online learning and for designing the
instruction to enable and benefit from the use of this
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;