* 0121483
* The Relocatable Atmospheric Observatory:   A Global Incoherent Scatter Radar
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2003,10/31/2009
* John Kelly, SRI International
* Cooperative Agreement
* Robert M. Robinson
* 10/31/2009
* USD 48,399,562.00

This award is for the design and construction of the Advanced Modular Incoherent
Scatter Radar (AMISR). Originally conceived to be a large steerable, dish-type
radar, the project now features a powerful, modular, solid-state, electronically
steerable phased-array design capable of observing many properties of the upper
atmosphere and ionosphere. The modular design will enable the radar to observe
properties of Earth's atmosphere from the equator to the pole. Pulse-to-pulse
beam swinging will be used for observing rapidly evolving ionospheric structure.
The AMISR design includes unique features that allow cost-effective dismantling,
shipping, and re-assembly in about six months. The antenna consists of three
faces that can be deployed independently. As an initial deployment strategy, the
first face will be constructed at the Poker Flat Research Range in Alaska, while
the second two faces will be assembled at Resolute Bay in the Canadian Arctic.
AMISR will provide the means for practically unlimited new scientific
observations via two significant features that have not been technically
feasible in the past, and that will greatly enhance the way observations and
campaigns are conducted. First, an incoherent scatter radar with a solid-state
transmitter and no moving parts will increase immunity to single point radar
failures and allow extended operating periods with remote internet access and
minimal on-site personnel. Second, the phased-array concept will allow pulse-to-
pulse beam steering, thus enabling three-dimensional imaging of electron density
features in high signal-to-noise environments such as discrete auroral
structures.

Broader Impacts: Scientific studies enabled by the radar include those related
to space weather, global change, atmospheric physics, and plasma science. The
data will be widely disseminated to researchers world-wide, and will be an
excellent teaching tool for the next generation of atmospheric and radio
scientists