* 0121948
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: ERP Correlates of Morphosyntactic and Word Order Phenomena in Adult Native Speakers and L2 Learners of English
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2001,06/30/2003
* Gita Martohardjono, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 06/30/2003
* USD 17,848.00

With National Science Foundation support, Ms. Kessler and her advisor Dr.
Martohardjono will conduct a year long investigation of the processing of three
types of errors commonly observed in second language learning. The specific
source of grammatical errors produced by second language learners is not well
understood. Certain persistent types of errors may be linked to grammatical
operations of the second languages. Kessler and Martohardjono will use timing
and spatial distribution of electrical potentials from the brain (ERPs) as
people respond to syntactic, morphosyntactic and morphological errors. These
different errors involve different kinds of operations: syntactic errors involve
word order violations, morphosyntactic errors involve the omission of
inflection, and morphological errors involve word structure violations. The
investigators will compare brain electrical patterns of native speakers with
those of non-native speakers at various levels of proficiency and test of
correlations between behavioral data (detection of errors through grammaticality
judgements) and brain electrical data associated with the perception of these
errors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute to our understanding
of the acquisition and processing of structural and inflectional information in
adult second language learning. Furthermore, it will serve as a baseline for
future investigation of both adult and child learners of a second language that
will enhance our understanding of differences in how child and adult L2 learners
process different types of linguistic information.&lt;br/&gt;