* 0121111
* SGER:  A Method to Identify and Characterize Potentially Redundant Genes within the Drosophila Genome
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2003
* James Mahaffey, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 06/30/2003
* USD 90,000.00

0121111 Mahaffey

Genetic analyses of Drosophila melanogaster have yielded substantial insight
into the mechanisms governing many aspects animal development and life. However,
though we have learned much from these studies, there is still much that we do
not know. This became alarmingly apparent upon examining the initial phase of
the annotated genome where it was found that over two thirds of Drosophila genes
had not been identified from prior studies. Further, though numerous genetic
screens have been completed, there are still many gaps in our understanding,
even in well-studied processes. There may be several reasons for this; one
significant reason is that some genes are refractory to analysis by conventional
genetic screens because of genetic redundancy. Given that genes with redundant
or overlapping functions are likely to have important roles, and that there may
be numerous cases of overlapping gene functions in Drosophila, it is essential
that we develop methods to detect and to test the function of potentially
redundant genes, yet a systematic method to identify redundant genes has not
been employed in the past.

Dr. Mahaffey will conduct a screen to identify potentially redundant gene pairs
functioning during Drosophila embryonic development. The scheme involves first
identifying potential candidates by similarity, then cloning and using in situ
hybridization to determine if there is overlap in expression. Finally, RNA
interference will be used to determine whether or not the gene pairs have
overlapping roles. To test the validity of this method, Dr. Mahaffey will
initially select candidate gene pairs that encode zinc finger proteins. It is
important to note that the design of this project is not limited to Drosophila;
it should be useful in studies of redundant genes in other organisms (certainly;
C. elegans, and in other model organisms using morpholino antisense procedures).