* 0121749
* Ethnomathematics Digital Library
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2004
* Nancy Lane, Pacific Resources for Education and Learning
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 09/30/2004
* USD 798,525.00

Pacific Resources for Education and Learning (PREL) is the lead agency in a
network of institutions of higher education working together to establish and
maintain the Ethnomathematics Digital Library (EDL). Collaborative partners,
including the Australian Academy of Science, the University of the South
Pacific, the University of Guam, the University of Hawaii at Manoa, and Ohio
State University's Eisenhower National Clearinghouse for Mathematics and Science
Education, comprise the Pacific Ethnomathematics Collections Network
(PECN).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EDL is an interactive learning environment and
resource network for ethnomathematics of the Pacific region. The project
involves identifying, collecting, cataloging, and organizing high quality
ethnomathematics curriculum and instructional materials, research articles, and
other professional resources of interest to elementary, secondary and tertiary
students and teachers, curriculum developers, researchers, and members of
institutions of higher education. The library provides users with a premier and
readily accessible source of documents and materials describing the mathematics
created and used by indigenous cultures around the world. The source for much of
this material is contained in the PECN libraries and partner organizations,
thereby providing reliable regional, national, and international accessibility
to information on the Pacific island communities' particular mathematical ways
of knowing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The creation of a central, reliable, and easily
accessible repository of high quality ethnomathematics information has the
potential to further the advancement of current understandings of the
mathematical constructs of indigenous communities. It also has the potential to
foster the creation and distribution of classroom instructional materials that
acknowledge and honor these constructs. EDL encourages teachers to search the
database for relevant ethnomathematics information, create customized classroom
materials based on this information, and submit these materials for review and
possible archiving. The digitized ethnomathematics library promotes
interactivity between resource users and resource providers and the integration
of research and education.&lt;br/&gt;