* 0121549
* ITR/IM+AP Early Defect Detection and Management at Construction Sites Using Integrated Project Models, Laser Scanners and Embedded Sensor Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2008
* Mark Patton, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 08/31/2008
* USD 2,062,618.00

The construction industry suffers from costly remedies associated with late
defect detection at construction sites. Frequent and accurate assessment of the
status of work-in-place, identifying critical spatio-temporal and quality
related deviations, and predicting the impacts of these deviations during a
construction project are necessary for active project control and for developing
an accurate project history. This research project builds on, combines and
extends the advances in generating 3D environments using laser scanners,
collecting quality information about built environments using embedded sensors,
and generation and utilization of semantically-rich Architecture/Engineering/
Construction (A/E/C) project models, in developing an integrated early defect
detection system. The research objectives include: (1) formulating
strategies/mechanisms to utilize laser scanning and embedded sensor systems for
frequent and accurate collection and representation of spatial and quality
related as-built data, (2) developing mechanisms for integrating and
interpreting data acquired from these systems with the project model, (3)
developing a general, flexible and integrated representation schema to model
product, process and as-built information, and (4) formalizing mechanisms for
automated defect detection and management. The expected contributions of this
research fall within the fields of robotics, embedded sensing in civil
engineering, A/E/C project modeling and analysis. The societal impacts of this
research include potential savings in rework and maintenance costs. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;