* 0121989
* Large Scale Siesmic Performance of Urban Regions
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2001,02/28/2006
* Joerg Meyer, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynn Preston
* 02/28/2006
* USD 1,213,615.00

This award from the Engineering Research Centers Program is to connect the
expertise in large-scale computational simulation and visualization at the
Engineering Research Center on Computational Field Simulation at Mississippi
State University, in geotechnical and structural response simulation at the
Pacific Earthquake Engineering Research Center at the University of California,
Berkeley, and in advanced computational ground motion and soil-foundation-
structure-interaction modeling at Carnegie Mellon University to develop an
advanced computational capability for modeling and visualizing the effects of
earthquakes in urban regions on the built infrastructure, and to apply this
capability to simulate the performance of collections of buildings and other
structures in an urban region. The ultimate goal is to forecast the amount and
distribution of damage throughout an urban region. The proposed methodology will
integrate "end-to-end" the earthquake source, path, basin, and surficial effects
of the geological structure of the region on ground motion, with realistic
models of buildings and bridges, including soil-foundation-structure-interaction
effects, to develop a distributed, high resolution simulation capability. Key
features of the proposed distributed high-performance computational simulation
environment are the following: realistic representation of the structure type,
geometry and properties; detailed modeling of the soil structure in the near
region of the structure; use of real surface topology and sub-surface
geotechnical properties; high resolution in the node density of the ground
motion to capture the higher frequencies required for determining structural
response; explicit consideration of soil-structure-foundation interaction
effects; analysis of the simultaneous earthquake response of a portfolio of
buildings to examine structure-to-structure interaction effects through the soil
and the effects of the built environment on the free-field earthquake ground
motion; automated data storage, access, and transport; visualization of complex
and large datasets representing behavior of individual structures and
aggregates; and integration of these components in a distributed computational
environment. This project will use the simulation environment to investigate the
effects of earthquakes in the Los Angeles urban region. This problem is of great
importance to hazard mitigation and seismic risk reduction because assessing the
ground motion to which structures will be exposed during their lifetimes, and
predicting their response to this ground motion, including potential damage, is
an essential step for the appropriate design and retrofit of earthquake-
resistant built infrastructure. Performance-based earthquake engineering
methodologies are motivated by the need for scientific and transparent methods
to relate seismic hazard to structural performance and loss. Forecasting damage
and loss can also be of great use for emergency planning and management
purposes. Visualization of damage in an urban region can aid policy makers and
stakeholders in making informed decisions on how to reduce earthquake losses.
The proposed simulation environment will use the Globus toolkit for access to
the computational grid, the deployment of which NSF plans to support as part of
the George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES).
When developed, the simulation environment will be accessible to the earthquake
engineering community through NEES. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;