* 0121998
* FSML: Environmental Monitoring System For The Romberg Tiburon Center
* BIO,DBI
* 10/15/2001,09/30/2004
* Edward Carpenter, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 09/30/2004
* USD 63,942.00

The National Science Foundation's Biological Field Stations and Marine
Laboratories (FSML) has awarded a grant to the Romberg Tiburon Center (RTC), the
marine science laboratory and teaching facility of San Francisco State
University. This grant will fund the purchase of a long-term environmental
monitoring system that will be located on the north shore of San Francisco Bay
at the RTC. Because of the dynamics of marine physics, chemistry, and biology in
the region, the San Francisco Bay estuary is a site of constantly changing
conditions of weather, salinity, temperature, clarity, current direction, solar
irradiance and phytoplankton (microscopic algae) concentrations. Marine
scientists need a long-term record of these conditions to place project-specific
observations into the context of changes in Bay conditions over various temporal
scales. Furthermore, anticipated long-term changes in climate can only be
assessed via a record of conditions in the Bay. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds from
the grant will be used to establish a weather station that will record
temperature, wind speed and direction, barometric pressure, rainfall and solar
irradiance. In addition, sensors will be placed at a series of seawater depths
off the RTC pier to record water quality conditions. All data will be collected
continuously, saved on a workstation computer at the RTC, and graphed to show
minute by minute trends. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The information will be available
to scientists from other laboratories both on the Bay and at nearby marine
laboratories outside the Bay. There are many immediate applications for the
information collected by this system. For example, the data will help a
scientist working on a research ship to understand how his or her observations
fit into trends in the biology and physics of the estuary. Long term changes in
warming or in salinity of the Bay water can be documented. A Data Center will be
constructed at a site at the RTC that is easily accessible to the public. SFSU
will also make the data available to the public via a website. The University
anticipates that students will find the information to be an excellent learning
tool in which they can study the interplay among the tides, seasons, weather and
the biology of bay waters.&lt;br/&gt;