* 0121277
* ITR/SY: Communication and Data Sharing Services for Dynamic Distributed Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2008
* Alexander Schwarzmann, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,030,000.00

This project is developing and analyzing algorithms to solve problems of
communication and data sharing in highly dynamic distributed environments such
as found in networks of mobile and embedded devices. The term dynamic here
encompasses many types of changes, including changing network topology,
processor mobility, changing sets of participating client processes, a wide
range of types of processor and network failures, and timing variations. The
properties being studied include ordering and reliability guarantees for
communication and coherence guarantees for data sharing. The algorithmic results
are accompanied by lower bound and impossibility results, which describe
inherent limitations on what problems can be solved, and at what cost. This is
particulary important in the networks of embedded devices that need to operate
subject to the resource constraints such limited battery power, storage
capacity, communication bandwidth and computation power.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The communication and data-sharing problems to be solved
are viewed as high level global services, which span network locations. These
services generally provide performance and fault-tolerance guarantees,
conditioned on assumptions about the behavior of the environment and of the
underlying network substrate. Traditionally, research on distributed services
has emphasized specification and correctness, while research on distributed
algorithms has emphasized complexity and performance. This project combines and
synthesizes these two concerns: It yields algorithms that perform efficiently
and degrade gracefully in dynamic distributed systems, and whose correctness,
performance, and fault-tolerance guarantees are expressed by precisely-defined
global services. Because the setting is so complex, the algorithms are also be
very complex, which means that it it is necessary to decompose them into
smaller, more manageable pieces. In this project, many of those smaller pieces
are being viewed as lower-level, auxiliary global services. These auxiliary
services provide lower-level communication and data-sharing capabilities, plus
other capabilities such as failure detection, progress detection, consensus,
group membership, leader election, reconfiguration, resource allocation,
workload distribution, location determination, and routing. This work is being
carried out in terms of a mathematical framework based on interacting state
machines. The state machines include features to express issues of timing,
continuous behavior, and probabilistic behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
theoretical work in this project is guided by the requirements of systems that
include networks of mobile and embedded devices and examples chosen from several
prototype applications, including distributed file management, information
collection and dissemination, computer-supported cooperative work, distributed
games, and multimedia transmission. &lt;br/&gt;