* 0121048
* Mesoscale Studies of Convection, Tornadogenesis and Fronts
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2002,02/29/2008
* Roger Wakimoto, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 02/29/2008
* USD 708,997.00

The Principal Investigator will perform research in the areas of: 1) tornadoes
and tornadogenesis, 2) structure of bow echoes, 3) mesoscale documentation of
warm fronts, and 4) participation in the field phase of the international water
vapor project (IHOP). The research on the first three areas is based upon a
thorough analysis of existing data collected from past field experiments.

Two case studies based on data collected during VORTEX (Verification on the
Origins of Rotation in Tornadoes Experiment) are being examined. A well-
documented tornado associated with a supercell that developed near Sweetwater,
Texas will be studied in order to investigate the generality of prior research
results. The Sweetwater storm also spawned several low-level mesocyclones that
did not produce tornadoes. Accordingly, there is a unique opportunity to compare
tornadic and non-tornadic low-level mesocyclones associated with the same
supercell using data of comparable spatial and temporal resolution. A second
case study is based on airborne Doppler data collected on a bow echo that
developed within a squall line. The bow echo is a common radar signature that is
often associated with downbursts and derechos. The present case provides an
opportunity to examine the evolution of this echo from a linear structure into a
bow-shape.

During the winter of 1997, an international field experiment called FASTEX
(Fronts and Atlantic Storm Track Experiment) was organized to study oceanic
cyclogenesis. The primary data platforms were several research aircraft which
released dropwindsondes, recorded in situ measurements at flight level, and
collected high-resolution radar reflectivity and Doppler velocity information
using on-board radars. Observational and numerical studies on cold fronts have
dominated the literature largely because of its well-defined structure, often
manifested as abrupt wind shifts and temperature discontinuities, and its
frequent association with severe convective weather. In comparison, there have
been relatively few observational studies of surface warm fronts. This is due,
in part, to the fact that warm fronts are often not associated with strong
discontinuities especially over the continents. A unique data set was collected
on a warm front during FASTEX. Detailed kinematic and thermodynamic data were
collected on the frontal zone using Doppler wind syntheses and dropwindsonde
information. Specific goals of this research include examining the degree to
which the flow was in geostrophic balance and the terms of the frontogenesis
equation.

The primary goal of IHOP (International H20 Project) is to improve measurements
of the four-dimensional distribution of water vapor and better understand the
impact of water vapor on precipitation forecasting. The field phase of the
experiment is planned for Spring 2002. In this project the PI will address a
number of research objectives that deal with the convection initiation component
of IHOP. These objectives include: 1) a thorough documentation of the impact of
horizontal convective rolls on moisture variations within the convective
boundary layer; 2) determining the generating mechanism(s) of
inflections/circulations that develop along convergence boundaries and their
impact on the evolving moisture fields; and 3) a quantitative assessment of the
importance of the balance between the horizontal vorticity generated by the cold
pool from thunderstorm outflows with the environmental vorticity produced by the
low-level shear vector in determining the potential for convection initiation.