* 0121161
* Collaborative Research: ITR/AP&amp;IM A Data Intense Challenge: The Instrumented Oil Field of the Future
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Alan Sussman, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 09/30/2005
* USD 157,501.00

Collaborative Research: ITR/AP&amp;IM Data Intense Challenge: &lt;br/&gt;The
Instrumented Oil Field of the Future&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mary Wheeler -
University of Texas at Austin - 0121523&lt;br/&gt;Alan Sussman - University of
Maryland, College Park - 0121161&lt;br/&gt;Joel Saltz - Ohio State University
Research Foundation - 0121177&lt;br/&gt;Manish Parashar - Rutgers University -
0120934&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increasing production from existing oil
and natural gas reservoirs is crucial for the US economy. In order to better
monitor and optimize oil and gas production, advanced technologies from field
instrumentation to information technology and computational science are
essential. Field technologies include time-lapse surface and borehole seismic,
permanent downhole sensors, intelligent well completions, fiber optics, and
remote control operations. IT technologies include data management, data
visualization, parallel computing, and decision-making tools such as new wave
propagation and multiphase, multi-component flow and transport computational
portals. These diverse technologies can be integrated to achieve real-time
monitoring and optimization of reservoir production: The Instrumented
Oilfield.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major outcome of the proposed research is a
computing portal which will enable reservoir simulation and geophysical
calculations to interact dynamically with the data and with each other and which
will provide a variety of visual and quantitative tools. Test data will be
provided by oil and service companies currently participating in UT Austin
industrial affiliate programs. Since the proposed research is directed towards
the general problem of modeling and characterization of the earth's subsurface,
it has immediate application to other areas, including environmental remediation
and storage of hazardous wastes.&lt;br/&gt;