* 0121573
* ITR:    Scalable Portable Algorithms for Thermal Radiation/Turbulence/Chemistry Interactions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2007
* Michael Modest, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick E. Phelan
* 08/31/2007
* USD 1,761,000.00

In many important combustion applications, heat transfer is dominated by thermal
radiation from combustion gases and soot. Thermal radiation from combustion
gases, even in the absence of turbulence interactions, is extremely complicated;
accurate and efficient predictions are only now becoming possible. The coupling
between turbulence and radiation has to date essentially been ignored due to
their extreme complexity, although preliminary calculations have shown that
turbulence-radiation interactions (TRI) can more than double the radiative loss
from a flame. Integration of finite volume and finite element methods,
stochastic methods based on a probability density function (PDF), and ray
tracing Monte Carlo schemes, exploiting the strengths of each method, can
potentially produce a formidable computational tool to describe the highly
nonlinear interaction between turbulence, chemical reactions and thermal
radiation in turbulent flames over a broad range of conditions. An
interdisciplinary team of Co-PI's, together with collaborators from industry and
national laboratories, will address these issues using an innovative IT-based
approach. The goal of this study is to develop modular, portable, scalable,
parallel computational tools that address the interactions of all three
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;