* 0121326
* ITR/PE: Interaction and Participation in Integrated Land Use, Transportation, and Environmental Modeling
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2007
* Paul Waddell, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Brandt
* 08/31/2007
* USD 3,524,000.00

EIA-0121326&lt;br/&gt;Borning, Alan&lt;br/&gt;University of
Washington&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ITR/PE: Interaction and Participation in
Integrated Urban Land Use, Transportation, and Environmental
Modeling&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Patterns of land use and transportation play a
critical role in determining the economic vitality, livability, and
sustainability of urban areas. Transportation interacts strongly with land use:
different kinds of transportation systems induce different patterns of land use,
while at the same time, different kinds of land use induce demands for different
kinds of transportation systems. Both have significant environmental effects.
This integrated research program will support the construction and deployment of
sophisticated models of land use, transportation, and environmental impact. The
goal is to provide tools for stakeholders, such as urban planners, government
staff, and citizens' groups, to help predict future patterns of urban
development under different possible scenarios over periods of twenty or more
years, allowing them to make more informed choices. Anticipated scientific
advances include: in human-computer interaction, more effective ways of
understanding the results from and interacting with complex simulations, and
ways of linking stakeholder values with design choices in simulations and their
interfaces; in graphics, capabilities for producing simulated street-level
animations of urban environments from a policy-driven simulation; and in
software engineering, new software structures that allow us to design,
integrate, and evolve complex and diverse urban submodels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;