* 0121317
* SGER:  Optimized Irregular Electromagnetic Field Transformation Elements
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Kevin Webb, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 08/31/2002
* USD 55,000.00

0121317&lt;br/&gt;Webb&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigation of a new class of
diffractive structures having optimized irregular wavelength-scale elements is
proposed. One interpretation of this class of structures is as a generalized
photonic bandgap system, either within a waveguide or in unbounded media. While
the characteristics of photonic bandgap structures, being based on classical
periodic systems, is well known, the physical characteristics (attributes,
limitations etc.) of irregular structures are essentially unknown. Webb
introduced the concept of compact, wavelength-scale irregular field
transformation elements in the context of a microwave mode converter, showed
spectacular performance, a dramatic reduction in size, and increased
functionality relative to traditional periodic (perturbation) approaches, and
fabricated and tested an example. Generalized interpretations of this new class
of diffractive structures offer tremendous application potential, such as
revolutionary broad area vertical cavity surface emitting laser diode mode
control and optical fiber wavelength division multiplexing elements, once the
physics and synthesis approaches are taken from the current anecdotal stage to a
more fundamental level of understanding. It is the purpose of this proposed
research effort to do just that by addressing the following two
objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;o Physical Characteristics and Performance
Metrics: The PI proposes to investigate the attributes of irregular, sub-
wavelength diffractive structures, synthesized using a nonlinear optimization
algorithm coupled to a forward numerical electromagnetic solver, in order to
develop the phys-ical understanding necessary to exploit a variety of possible
applications. He will study field control using wavelength-scale structures
having conducting and/or refractive index variations in waveguide arid unbounded
media systems that utilize evanescent field. Using a functional metric for the
required field transformation, search algorithms will be developed and
sensitivity analyses to degrees of freedom, wavelength and input field
performed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;o Synthesis: Nonlinear optimization techniques,
while widely applied in areas such as imaging and signal processing, are not
well developed for the synthesis of electromagnetic structures. The PI used a
relatively simple multi-resolution algorithm in the design of irregular
waveguide mode converters. He proposes the development of more rigorous and
efficient synthesis tech-niques suitable for irregular diffractive structures by
studying both continuous and discrete optimization approaches.&lt;br/&gt;