* 0121730
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Production of Architectural Artifacts: An Analysis of Cliff-Dwellings in the Northern Sierra, Sonora, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2001,01/31/2003
* Patricia Crown, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2003
* USD 11,952.00

Under the direction of Dr. Patricia Crown, MS Elizabeth Bagwell will collect
data for her doctoral dissertation. She will direct a crew of experienced
volunteers in intensive architectural recording at four cliff-dwellings located
in the Sierra Madre Occidental along the border between the states of Sonora and
Chihuahua, Mexico. These five to twenty room adobe buildings are believed to be
contemporaneous with the regional center of Casas Grandes (or Paquime) 40 km to
the east, which dates to ca. A.D. 1100-1475. MS Bagwell will examine these sites
to determine how the production of architecture was organized among prehistoric
societies in Northern Mexico. While full-time building specialists were probably
necessary to build the pyramids and palaces common in more complex societies
like the Aztecs, archaeologists know very little about the role of specialists
in the every-day construction of the homes of the common people. &lt;br/&gt; A
technological analysis of architecture is one way to determine if specialists
helped produce these buildings. Buildings built by specialists should be more
uniform than those built by non-specialists. Raw material composition,
manufacturing techniques and planned construction of more than one structure at
a time has been associated with architectural specialists. Therefore this work
will compare these attributes and their production through time. One way of
gaining a fine-grained understanding of architectural production through time is
with tree-ring dating, a technique that uses the pattern of thick and thin
growth rings in a tree, much like a bar code, to determine the year that the
tree died and by association the year that the structure was built. Temporal
information resulting from tree-rings will be combined with technological data
to create construction histories and settlement growth patterns. Ultimately, if
uniform attributes are identified, they will be interpreted as evidence of
prehistoric architectural specialists. &lt;br/&gt; MS Bagwell's research will
contribute to the understanding of the way architectural production was
organized in non-state societies. It will also expand our knowledge of a poorly
understood Northern Mexico and establish the relationship between these sites
and other contemporary groups such as the Hohokam, Casas Grandes, Rio Sonora and
Animas. Finally, this research will move one step closer to establishing a badly
needed chronology for the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;