* 0121926
* Evaluating the Efficacy of a New Functional Imaging Protocol for Obtaining Data on Functional Connectivity
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2003
* Michelle Hampson, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2003
* USD 49,996.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Hampson will conduct a year-long
investigation of techniques for using the covariation in activity of brain
regions during periods of unconstrained cognition (without a psychological task)
to build maps of the connected neural systems that support reading and
understanding language. Recent advances in neuroimaging have led to the
production of a plethora of new data on brain function. However, methods for
deploying such data to develop models of interacting brain regions are presently
limited. One new functional neuroimaging technique for studying brain
interactions (or connectivity) examines low-frequency temporal correlations
between resting state activity levels in different brain areas. This technique
is used with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Dr. Hampson's project
will apply this technique to the neural circuitry of reading in order to
evaluate and refine the method. She will investigate the relationship between
such maps of connectivity and psychological measures of reading performance. She
will also assess whether resting state fMRI data can provide information
regarding the existence and strength of interregional connections in individual
subjects. The connectivity of this system has been previously investigated using
imaging methodologies that examine across-subject correlations between brain
areas. In the present project, the pattern of connections found between brain
areas involved in reading will be correlated across individuals with their
scores on a range of reading skills tests to determine which neural connections
are most important for the different sub-processes of
reading.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The techniques developed in this project are
likely to lead to general methods that could be used to study relationships
between brain connectivity patterns and psychological measures across subjects
in many different high level cognitive systems. Such methods will be an
important tool for investigating brain function at the systems level. Moreover,
the findings will be incorporated into a new model of the neural substrate
underlying reading ability. This model is intended to provide a framework for
understanding reading disorders and to guide future experimental efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;