* 0121182
* ITR/AP: An Ensemble Approach to Data Assimilation in the Earth Sciences
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2001,11/30/2008
* Alan Willsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 11/30/2008
* USD 4,369,999.00

ITR/AP: An Ensemble Approach to Data Assimilation in the Earth
Sciences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New data sources are beginning to have a dramatic
impact on our ability to understand the earth as an integrated system. Our
prospects for dealing with the environmental issues of the 21st century --
climate change, population pressures on natural resources, and major
modifications in global element cycles -- depend largely on this new
information. However, our ability to process and interpret environmental data is
not keeping pace with the dramatic increase in available information, especially
information from airborne and orbital remote sensing platforms. If we are to
realize the potential benefits of new sensing technologies we will need to
develop intelligent environmental data assimilation procedures that are able to
efficiently extract useful information about the earth from a diverse set of
data sources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Environmental data assimilation can be posed
as a problem of estimating a large number of unobservable or highly uncertain
variables (e.g. sea surface heights, atmospheric pressures, hydrologic fluxes,
etc.) from a large number of related but noisy measurements (e.g. microwave
radiances or backscatter detected by a satellite sensor). The estimation
procedure relies on mathematical models that relate unknowns to measurements.
Environmental estimation problems are challenging because the systems of
interest: 1) are spatially distributed and highly variable over a wide range of
space and time scales, 2) are difficult to describe with precision, 3) are often
nonlinear, even chaotic, and 4) are often characterized by non-unique
relationships between unknowns and measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is concerned with very large problems (many measurements and many
unknowns) which are not amenable to traditional data assimilation techniques but
are of crucial interest to researchers in the earth sciences. An
interdisciplinary team will develop a better understanding of the issues of
dimensionality reduction and uncertainty propagation that are crucial to large-
scale data assimilation. So-called ensemble methods provide a particularly
informative way to identify these key features. A new generation of
"intelligent" data assimilation methods will be developed that build on the
understanding gained from the reduced problem. The applicability of these
methods will be investigated on problems of broad interest in the earth
sciences, including problems that 1) deal with coupled systems, 2) cut across
traditional disciplines, and 3) work with remote sensing data
sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This ITR project brings together acknowledged experts
on environmental data assimilation. It is a group ITR project, rather than
several individual projects, which cuts across earth science disciplines. The
research will be coordinated with: 1) a seminar series, 2) joint supervision of
Ph.D. students and post-doctoral researchers, 3) a Ph.D. mentoring program, 4) a
selection of cross-cutting sample problems, and 5) co-authored
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;