* 0121902
* Scalable Enterprise Systems Phase II: Network-Based Distributed Relational Decisions Framework
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Alan Desrochers, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 08/31/2005
* USD 534,000.00

This Scalable Enterprise Systems Phase II project effort will build upon the
work in Phase I by: (1) extending the relational decision framework to support
efficient integration of distributed heterogeneous databases into a global
decision framework; (2) building on the theory of co-evolutionary search
algorithms using intelligent agents to address issues in multi-criteria
decision-making; and (3) developing a comprehensive model of dynamic decision
networks, integrating characteristics of software algorithms and network
hardware and software for communications in order to evaluate performance and
guide system design. Advances in information technologies are driving
fundamental changes in the processes and organizations of global enterprises.
Innovations in software, networks, and database systems enable widely
distributed organizations to integrate activities, share information,
collaborate on decisions, and execute transactions. While many existing tools
and techniques of information infrastructure may be adopted and implemented to
support these enterprise applications, there has been little focused research to
provide a scientific basis to support these developments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major outcome of this research will be an integrated
demonstration of network-based distributed decision methods applied to real
industrial problems and evaluated through sophisticate evaluation and simulation
methods. The outcomes of this work offer advantages of local autonomy,
reliability, improved performance, scalability, shareability, data
confidentiality, and efficient software support for a new class of enterprise-
level software systems. This research project includes efforts to incorporate
these ideas into existing and new educational programs and courses with special
attention to the recruiting and retention of underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;