* 0121467
* Modeling the Growth of Crystals from Solution:  Nonlinear Interactions of Kinetics and Transport
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Jeffrey Derby, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/2005
* USD 277,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CTS-0121467&lt;br/&gt;Derby, J&lt;br/&gt;U of Minnesota -
Twin Cities&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modeling the Growth of Crystals from Solution:
Nonlinear Interactions of Kinetics and Transport&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The growth
of crystalline materials ranges from the one-time creation of milligrams of
single-crystal protein pharmaceuticals to the annual production of metric tons
of electronic-grade silicon. Due to these broad applications, the great variety
of crystals needed, and the exacting quality typically required of single-
crystal materials, their successful growth ranks among the most difficult
challenges of modern materials processing. The work proposed here is part of
longer-term effort to employ mathematical modeling coupled with numerical
methods and high performance computing to understand crystal growth processes
and the influence of processing conditions on crystal structure and
composition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of the research contained in
this proposal is to develop and apply modeling tools to understand the
interactions of transport phenomena and crystal growth kinetics in solution
crystal growth processes. The specific tasks proposed here include the study of
fluid dynamics and mass transfer at the continuum level, the continued
development of step-growth model to describe the growth of vicinal facet, and
the linking of these two models in self-consistent manner. The proposed research
will significantly extend the modeling capabilities and understanding of
solution crystal growth systems. The multi-scale model proposed here couples
methods for computing three-dimensional, time-dependent flow and transport in
the bulk with detailed surface kinetic models based on ideas of step growth
dynamics. Such an approach has yet to be successfully implemented for describing
realistic solution crystal growth processes. In addition, powerful ideas from
nonlinear dynamics, namely chaotic mixing to describe the bulk system and
nonlinear dynamics to describe step growth on the facet, will be applied to
study solution crystal growth systems in novel manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
predictive capability provided from the models developed in this work will be of
great utility&lt;br/&gt;for understanding solution crystal growth experiments
and for the rational optimization of growth processes. More importantly,
knowledge generated from this work will ultimately lead to the ability to link
crystal properties with growth conditions and the macroscopic factors which
influence them. In general terms, the understanding gained from successful
modeling of crystal growth systems will lead to better process operation and
design, ultimately yielding better quality crystals at higher production rates
and lower costs. As another outcome of this work, the computational challenges
of realistically modeling these systems are significant, and the continued
development of algorithms for high performance computing will be noteworthy.
Such developments are needed to advance them realistic modeling of materials
processing systems using state-of-the-art scientific
computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are also broader impacts of this
proposed activity. The fundamental issues addressed here&lt;br/&gt;are
applicable to many other processes, including the hydrothermal and flux growth
of crystals,&lt;br/&gt;liquid-phase epitaxy, and industrial crystallization
(including protein crystals and other organic&lt;br/&gt;crystals). The
development of the theoretical tools and the increased understanding of the
coupling of transport and kinetics during the growth of crystalline materials
obtained from this research will undoubtedly impact these areas. Finally,
significant component of this activity is the training of Ph.D. graduate
students and undergraduate students in research involving crystal growth,
mathematical modeling, and high performance computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;