* 0121377
* Collaborative Research: ITR/AP Reconstructing Complex Evolutionary Histories
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2007
* David Bader, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2007
* USD 813,540.00

EIA-0121377 Moret, Bernard M University of New Mexico

Collaborative Research: ITR/AP: Reconstructing Complex Evolutionary Histories

Reconstruction of the evolutionary history of a group of organisms has changed
the face of biology and is being used increasingly in drug discovery,
epidemiology, and genetic engineering. Unfortunately, such reconstructions
typically involve solving difficult optimization problems, so that even
moderately large datasets can require months to years of computation. In
addition, almost all evolutionary reconstructions presently assume that the
historical pattern is one of strict divergence that can be represented by a
binary tree. This assumption is frequently violated, especially by plants which
often hybridize readily and thus produce networks of relationships.

This project brings together computer scientists and biologists from two
institutions to develop new models and algorithms to address these two problems.
Successful completion of this project will have an enormous impact by providing
tools for reconstructing phylogenies of large datasets, and the first tools for
inferring network models of evolution appropriate to hybridizing speciation.
Such network models will alter how biologists think about speciation, while the
development of methods for large-scale analyses will strongly benefit medical
and pharmaceutical practice. Information technology will be advanced in
fundamental ways as well, as the project will demonstrate how algorithm design
and high-performance algorithm engineering can jointly solve very difficult
discrete optimization problems.

