* 0121657
* ITR/SY: Electronic Books for the Tele-immersion Age: A New Paradigm for Teaching Surgical Procedures
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Gregory Welch, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2005
* USD 1,750,000.00

Tele-immersion will provide a dramatic new medium for groups of people remote
from each other to work and share experiences together in an immersive 3D
virtual environment, much as if they were co-located in a shared physical space.
Immersive electronic books that in effect blend a "time machine" with 3D
hypermedia, will add an additional important dimension, that of being able to
record experiences in which a viewer, immersed in the 3D reconstruction, can
literally walk through the scene or move backward and forward in time. While
there are many potential application areas for such novel technologies (e.g.,
design and virtual prototyping, maintenance and repair, paleontological and
archaeological reconstruction), the focus here will be on a societally important
and technologically challenging driving application, teaching surgical
management of difficult, potentially lethal, injuries. Today, the pace of
surgical innovations has increased dramatically, yet the mechanisms for training
and re-training suffer from inflexible timing, extended time commitments, and
limited content. Traditional videotaped instruction has long been available to
help surgeons learn new procedures, but this approach is only marginally
effective due to the fixed point of view that is integral to the narration, lack
of depth perception and interactivity, and missing information; in short, the
experience of watching a video is not sufficiently close to being there and
seeing the procedure. In this project the PI will develop a new paradigm for
teaching surgical procedures that allows surgeons to witness and explore (in
time and space) a past surgical procedure as if they were there, with the added
benefit of instruction from the original surgeon or another instructor, as well
as integrated 3D illustrations, annotations, and relevant medical metadata. The
trainees should be able to freely and naturally walk around a life-sized, high-
fidelity, 3D graphical reconstruction of the original time-varying events,
pausing or stepping forward and backward in time to satisfy curiosity or allay
confusion. To make this reality, the PI and his team bring together experts in
several disciplines, and will be able to collectively leverage their prior work
in tele-immersion, time-varying 3D scene capture, interaction metaphors,
"cinematic" techniques. and authoring tools.