* 0121481
* ITR/SY+SI:The System Architecture of a Computing Utility
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2001,12/31/2009
* Dan Boneh, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Sajal Das
* 12/31/2009
* USD 2,911,212.00

Computing services in the future should become just as available and easy to
use as any of the modern&lt;br/&gt;utilities: power, water, or telephone
service. A compute utility should work reliably and
invisibly,&lt;br/&gt;providing users with simple, efficient access to their data
and individualized computing environments&lt;br/&gt;anywhere in the world. Data
kept in the utility may be private, publicly available, or shared
between&lt;br/&gt;designated parties.&lt;br/&gt; Our proposed compute utility
architecture is based on the idea of a compute capsule, which
captures&lt;br/&gt;the entire logical state of an active computing environment.
A capsule is portable, persistent,&lt;br/&gt;host-independent, self-contained
and can be suspended on disk, arbitrarily bound to different
machines,&lt;br/&gt;and transparently resumed. Compute servers in a utility run
a small trusted computing base, which&lt;br/&gt;manages the compute capsules
like a cache. Users' capsules can be run on any of the compute servers
in&lt;br/&gt;the utility and are typically run on local machines for enhanced
interactive performance. Capsules provide&lt;br/&gt;users with customizabililty
as well as a guarantee of isolation from other users. As persistent objects
that&lt;br/&gt;can be shared, duplicated and version-controlled, capsules can be
easily managed and administered.&lt;br/&gt; The compute utility model has
significant advantages over our current environment. First, instead
of&lt;br/&gt;requiring end users to procure, administer and upgrade their
equipment individually, resources of a utility&lt;br/&gt;are shared and managed
centrally by experts, thus resulting in a more efficient system. Second, a
global&lt;br/&gt;utility allows users efficient access to their computing
environment everywhere. They need not juggle a&lt;br/&gt;large number of
different interfaces and deal with the discontinuities as they move between home
and work&lt;br/&gt;every day. Third, a professionally managed compute utility
designed to support global mobility and&lt;br/&gt;sharing can provide greater
security than our current environment. In contrast, today novice users
are&lt;br/&gt;responsible for keeping their systems secure, and the lack of
adequate support for sharing and mobility&lt;br/&gt;leads to practices that
jeopardize security. Fourth, the infrastructure of a utility serves as an
excellent&lt;br/&gt;platform for several emerging computing trends: software
hosted remotely by application service&lt;br/&gt;providers, support of
ubiquitous access devices, and large-scale distributed computing.&lt;br/&gt; The
goal of this research project is to investigate the viability of a compute
utility and to lay the&lt;br/&gt;technical foundation for such an
infrastructure. The techniques developed can also be applied to manage
an&lt;br/&gt;institution's distributed resources.&lt;br/&gt; First, we will
investigate the concept of capsules fully by studying their design and
applications.&lt;br/&gt;Capsules can be implemented at the machine, operating
system and application level; trade-offs between&lt;br/&gt;these different
approaches will be studied. We will also explore novel uses of capsules:
capsules can be&lt;br/&gt;used to run untrusted software; they can provide
secure and shared environments for group projects;&lt;br/&gt;capsules can also
serve as pre-installed software packages ready to run on any machine. We will
develop&lt;br/&gt;the associated tools to make capsuleseasy to use.&lt;br/&gt;
Second, we will develop the technologies to ensure security in a compute
utility. Security will be&lt;br/&gt;provided at three levels: a small trusted
kernel that provides isolation between capsules and monitors&lt;br/&gt;capsules
for added security; the use of certified capsules to create trusted computing
environments; data&lt;br/&gt;security will be provided by encryption, and
sharing will be supported by a flexible key management&lt;br/&gt;scheme. We plan
to conduct a careful analysis of the vulnerabilities of the system.&lt;br/&gt;
Third, this research will produce the technologies useful for creating scalable,
efficient, and easily&lt;br/&gt;maintainable compute utilities. They include
techniques for managing machines in a globally distributed&lt;br/&gt;environment
by treating them as caches of capsules, and techniques that combine capsule
caching and&lt;br/&gt;remote display technology to support global mobility and
sharing.&lt;br/&gt; This research will develop a prototype compute utility to
validate the technology developed. To make&lt;br/&gt;extensive experimentation
possible, the prototype will support legacy software. The experiments will
be&lt;br/&gt;designed especially to address the information technology needs of
universities.&lt;br/&gt; Computer systems have gone through two major eras,
time-sharing on mainframes and personal&lt;br/&gt;computing. The success of this
research may usher in a new era of compute utility and have a
significant&lt;br/&gt;impact on our future computing practice.