* 0121084
* ITR/SY: Collaborative/RUI Research on the Perceptual Aspects of Locomotion Interfaces
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2008
* William Thompson, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,459,750.00

No current system allows a person to naturally walk through a large-scale
virtual environment. The availability of such a locomotion interface would have
impacts on a broad range of applications, including education and training,
design and prototyping, physical fitness, and rehabilitation; for some of these
applications natural walking provides a level of realism not obtainable if
movement through the simulated world is controlled by devices such as a
joystick, while for others realistic walking is a fundamental requirement.
Prototypes have been built for a variety of computer-controlled devices on which
a person can walk, but there has been little investigation of the utility of
such devices as interfaces to a virtual world and almost no study at all of the
interactions of visual and biomechanical perceptual cues in such devices. This
project addresses key open questions, the answers to which are needed if
locomotion interfaces are to offer effective interaction between users and
computer simulations. An effective locomotion interface must provide users with
accurate visual and biomechanical sensations of walking; thus, a key objective
of this work is to determine how to synergistically combine visual information
generated by computer graphics with biomechanical information generated by
devices that simulate walking on real surfaces. The PI and his collaborators
will investigates methods that allow more accurate walking in a locomotion
interface while accurately conveying a sense of the spaces being walked through.
Specific issues to be considered include how to facilitate the perception of
speed and distance traveled, how to provide a compelling sense of turning when
actual walking along a curved path is not possible, how to give a user the sense
that he/she is walking over a sloped surface, and more generally how to give a
user a clear sense of the scale and structure of the spaces being walked
through. The PI's findings on these issues will be relevant across the spectrum
of possible approaches to locomotion interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;