* 0121796
* Science Policy in a Changing Environment: Issues and Strategies in Agency Adaptation
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2002
* W. Henry Lambright, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce E. Seely
* 05/31/2002
* USD 9,999.00

This project is supported by a Small Grant for Exploratory Research. It's basic
assumption is that a transition is taking place in national science policy due
to the end of the Cold War, globalization, the quest for economy and efficiency
in government, increased demands for cooperation across agencies and governments
and the enlarged role of the private sector and other trends. A number of
reports by NAS, AAAS, and Congress make it clear that the management of change
is a major challenge facing the federal research and
development&lt;br/&gt;establishment in the post-Cold War, early 21st-century
era. However, these reports treat science policy in broad brush, and do not
investigate what the agencies experiencing change are doing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is to explore, from the
perspective of the field of public administration, how the federal various
research and development agencies are adapting to new priorities and pressures
facing them. After conducting field work in Washington (interviews and archival
research), the PI prepares a "scoping paper" to frame the principal new issues
facing federal science managers and their strategies in addressing them. On the
basis of this scoping paper, a workshop/conference involving science policy
scholars and practitioners will be designed and proposed. The
workshop/conference will address and illuminate issues of utmost importance in
the relation of government to science and technology. It can aid policy and its
administration, as well as stimulate further research. However, getting to this
point (the delineation of a conference), requires the exploratory research
carried out under this award.