* 0121643
* ITR/SI: Guarding the Next Internet Frontier: Countering Denial of Information
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2008
* Mustaque Ahamad, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 09/30/2008
* USD 1,988,025.00

As applications enabled by the Internet become information rich, ensuring access
to quality information in the presence of potentially malicious entities will be
a major challenge. The goal of this research project is to develop defensive
techniques to counter denial-of-information (DoI) attacks. Such attacks attempt
to confuse an information system by deliberately introducing noise that appears
to be useful information. The mere availability of information is insufficient
if the user must find a needle in a haystack of noise that is created by an
adversary to hide critical information. The research focuses on the
characterization of information quality metrics that are relevant in the
presence of DoI attacks. In particular, two complementary metrics are explored.
Information regularity captures predictability in the patterns of information
creation and access. The second metric, information quality trust, captures the
known ability of an information source to meet the needs of its clients. The
development of techniques to derive the values of these metrics for information
sources is a key goal of the research. Other planned research activities include
the building of a distributed information infrastructure and experimental
evaluation of defensive techniques against DoI attacks.