* 0121897
* Conference:  Travel Grant for 2002 IEEE-AP-S International Symposium &amp; USNC/USRI National Radio Science Meeting to be held in San Antonio, TX June 16-21, 2002.
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2003
* Jeffrey Young, Institute of Electrical & Electronics Engineers, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Kawthar A. Zaki
* 03/31/2003
* USD 9,975.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2002 IEEE-AP-S International Symposium &amp; USNC/USRI
National Radio Science Meeting is an annual international conference co-
sponsored by the Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE), and
the Union of Radio Science International (URSI). The conference regularly draws
about one thousand participants representing academia and industry. The Antennas
and Propagation Society (AP-S) of the IEEE along with several subgroups of URSI
will meet in San Antonio, Texas in June 2002.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each year,
the Antennas and Propagation Society promotes student participation in the
conference through a number of mechanisms. One of the most important is the
Student Paper Competition at the conference. This selective program brings the
world's best students together in an integrated program in which they present
their work to a technical audience including a group of judges. The program
helps develop the students' technical acumen as well as their communication and
presentation skills. It also helps introduce them to the international technical
community and helps to build a community of students who will lead the next
generation of electromagnetic technologists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AP-S
provides financial support of various forms including assistance in finding low
cost housing. but does not reimburse travel expenses. Travel support from NSF
will aid students from U.S. universities only and will ensure that the program
is open to the widest range of interested applicants from the U.S.
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests support to defray the
travel expenses for young investigators whose papers have been selected for
presentation at the Conference, but who lack funds and might not be able to
attend without such support. It is proposed that the AP-S Technical Program
Committee select those from U.S. universities to receive the support.&lt;br/&gt;