* 0121619
* US-South Africa Collaborative Research on Supported Gold Complexes and Nanoparticles: Synthesis, Characterization, and Catalysis
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Bruce Gates, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
*  John R Regalbuto
* 08/31/2006
* USD 810,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: US-South Africa
Collaborative Research on Supported Gold Complexes and Nanoparticles: Synthesis,
Characterization, and Catalysis&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
CTS-0121619&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Harold Kung&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Northwestern University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
proposal is to develop a collaborative effort with investigators from South
Africa to study several model reactions on gold nanoparticles. This research
area was identified as a prime candidate for the joint investigation at the US-
South Africa Workshop on Heterogeneous Catalysis held in Pretoria in June, 2000.
The focus of the work is to elucidate the nature of the active sites and the
effects of modifiers on these sites. A combination of organogold complexes and
gold salts will be used to prepare catalysts containing clusters of controlled
distributions of metallic gold atoms and gold ions. The performance of these
catalysts in CO oxidation, propene oxidation, and acetylene hydrogenation will
be tested and compared with results derived from a model. In-situ methods used
to probe active sites include atomic-resolution microscopy, Mossbauer
spectroscopy, and synchrotron radiation techniques. To foster collaboration
among the seven investigators, the US faculty will invite several South African
graduate students to spend one to two years in their laboratories, and US
students will visit South Africa to perform research. The results of the
research are expected to advance an understanding of the mechanisms of gold
catalysis and to further opportunities for new applications of gold in
industrial catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;