* 0121361
* ITR/AP: Tools and Methods for Multiscale Biomolecular Simulations
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2007
* Lee Pedersen, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 09/30/2007
* USD 2,962,227.00

This award is the result of a proposal submitted to the Information Technology
Research (ITR) Initiative. The grant is being funded jointly by the Divisions of
Materials Research, Chemistry, Biological Infrastructure and Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large-scale electronic structure and
atomistic simulations have proven themselves to be essential in advancing our
understanding of the complex physical and chemical transformations undertaken by
biomolecules in carrying out their cellular functions. The breathtaking progress
in computer performance and recent advances in algorithms for molecular
simulations systems are opening unprecedented opportunities to investigate the
biomolecular processes in silico, i.e., by accurate modeling of fundamental
natural laws and processes through their computer representations. The
overarching goal of this project is to seize this opportunity and develop a set
of computational methods and tools which will achieve a qualitatively new level
of usefulness, flexibility, accuracy and scientific impact. These goals will be
achieved by combining significant new developments of both quantum and classical
simulation methods, exploring their interoperabilities, and by the exploitation
of parallelism and recent algorithmic advances. Realistic biomolecular
simulations are notoriously difficult because they typically involve very large
and complex mamcromolecules such as DNA or proteins, which need to be simulated
in a proper solvent environment. While ideally one would like to describe
biomolecules and all their transformations with ab initio accuracy, this is
clearly an unreasonable goal given the computational demands of such
simulations. What is, however, well within reach is an integrated multiscale
approach that treats different parts of the biomolecular system with differing
levels of accuracy, depending on their imporatnce. For instance, in order to
understand enzymatic reactions, there is a need to understand the structure and
chemistry of the complex reaction centers built up by the three-dimensional
folding of proteins as accurately as possible. Our strategy is to decompose the
large system into a set of overlapping nested regions, using an appropriate
physical representation (quantum, classical, or continuum) and to develop
interfaces that provides a physically consistent description and keeps the
fundamental physical laws intact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these goals we
aim to develop a set of modular tools for biomolecular simulations which treat
parts of the system at a quantum, classical atomistic or continuum level, as
needed for efficient studies of large moelcular complexes. At the quantum level,
we will treat the system with a combination of quantum Monte Carlo (QMC),
quantum chemical post-Hartree-Fock and density functional methods (DFT). At an
intermediate level, calssical molecular dynamics with empirical force fields
will be used, while continuum methods may serve to describe the large length-
scale properties of the solvent environment. In order to build such tools,
substantial algorithmic improvements to current methods need to be developed at
each "level" of the physical representation, along with proper interfaces
between the different descriptions of the system. The most important innovative
features of our approach will be the following: (i) the unprecedented use of the
highly accurate QMC approach and its new developments for biological
simulations; (ii) at a density functional level, algorithmic improvements will
enable routine calculations of thousands of atoms including quantum molecular
dynamics, and also dynamically call the QMC approach for checking the accuracy
of the DFT functionals in problematic cases; (iii) the electrostatic
interactions will be treated in a highly accurate manner in the classical
mechanics regions, with the implementation of point multipolar expansions,
polarizabilities and low-order continuous wavefunctions, which will provide a
robust interface between the quantum and classical regions; (iv) the codes will
be based on real-space grids as these enable true O(N) scaling on parallel
machines, are more flexible in terms of boundary conditions, and allow for
additional gains in accuracy, while preserving stability, via the introduction
of non-uniform grids; (v) our methodology relies on proven multigrid methods
that allow for an accelerated convergence to the proper solution on different
length scales; (vi) the codes will be developed under an Open Source GPL license
and made available to the public as "add-on" packages to existing codes, such as
AMBER; (vii) the codes will be scalable and portable, running on both massively
parallel supercomputers and workstations. They will use modern Web-based
technologies for providing access to simulations and their
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new capabilities will enable us to attack key
challenges and paradigmatic biomolecular problems, such as enzymatic reactions,
blood coagulation proteins, and others, both as a part of our ITR program and
through the efforts of the scientific community at large. Ultimately, we will
distribute our codes freely to the biosimulation community via the GPL license
in order to achieve a wide spread dissemination of results and maximum
scientific impact. In addition to the research goals, this program has
considerable educational goals, aimed at developing a set of interdisciplinary
modern courses that will generate student interest and excitement about
computational and simulation science and technology. Toward this end, we will
develop a curriculum for the Center for High Performance Supercomputing being
currently formed at NCSU, build a set of educational tools which will be
introduced and disseminated during summer workshops for students and
postdocs.&lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;