* 0121446
* ITR/IM:3D Shape-Based Retrieval and Its Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Bernard Chazelle, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Griffin
* 08/31/2005
* USD 500,000.00

This research will investigate methods for automatic retrieval and
analysis&lt;br/&gt;of 3D models. It will develop computational representations
of 3D shape&lt;br/&gt;for which indices can be built, similarity queries can be
answered&lt;br/&gt;efficiently, and interesting features can be computed
robustly. Next, it will&lt;br/&gt;build user interfaces which permit untrained
users to specify shape-based&lt;br/&gt;queries. This will include queries
specified with text, 3D models, 2D&lt;br/&gt;sketching, and high-level methods
based on constraints and rules. It will&lt;br/&gt;combine elements of computer
graphics, computer vision, and
computational&lt;br/&gt;geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Applications of shape-
based query methods will include Internet search engines,&lt;br/&gt;computer-
aided design, molecular biology, medicine, and security. In
each&lt;br/&gt;application the researchers will work with domain experts to
understand the&lt;br/&gt;critical elements of the 3D databases and the
challenging shape queries for&lt;br/&gt;which new methods are required. For
example, working with molecular biologists&lt;br/&gt;will help develop query
tools for the Protein Data Bank to find macromolecules&lt;br/&gt;matching a
given shape. These methods will aid classification of proteins
for&lt;br/&gt;which only low-resolution electron density maps are available, and
aid searches&lt;br/&gt;for proteins matching a specific binding site.