* 0121709
* The Digital Archive Network for Anthropology (DANA)
* EHR,DUE
* 11/01/2001,05/31/2004
* William Perrizo, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey G. Ryan
* 05/31/2004
* USD 712,846.00

This award has established a digital library collection for anthropological
materials. Faculty, students, and staff affiliated with the Archaeology
Technologies Laboratory (ATL) and the World Wide Web Instructional Committee
(WWWIC) at North Dakota State University (NDSU) are developing and implementing
the pilot program for the Digital Archive Network for Anthropology (DANA), a
network infrastructure for the seamless linking of distributed databases with
content of relevance to the domain of anthropology. The PI's are actively
collaborating with other individuals and institutions to develop a management
process for the operation of the digital archive and the policies and practices
necessary for quality assurance. Through this&lt;br/&gt;collaboration, standards
that promote stability, interoperability, and reusability of materials and
products are being developed. A unique feature of this Archive is the inclusion
of accurate, measurable, three-dimensional (3D) models of the material objects
along with 2D images and digitized documents.&lt;br/&gt;Specific goals of the
project are as follows:&lt;br/&gt;- Refine the protocol for creating accurate,
measurable 3D models through digitization that can be retrieved, inspected, and
analyzed;&lt;br/&gt;- Develop applications and protocols to enable the sharing
of data worldwide;&lt;br/&gt;- Improve current Java applications and client
servlets for data searching and retrieval;&lt;br/&gt;- Continuously evaluate the
efficacy of our Java applications and our servlets;&lt;br/&gt;- Develop software
modules to enable search and retrieval access to linked databases by way of
specially designed searching interfaces and common search protocols;&lt;br/&gt;-
Collaborate with colleagues across the country and abroad to develop metadata
compliant information structure for archiving and accessing digital
models;&lt;br/&gt;- Use eXtensible Markup Language (XML) as the primary medium
for information exchange;&lt;br/&gt;- Create an anthropology markup language
(AnthML) for facilitating information exchange;&lt;br/&gt;- Develop a series of
software tools that provide varying levels of morphometric analyses so users can
select the level of search and analysis appropriate to their needs;&lt;br/&gt;-
Establish a set of collaborating institutions that will develop and maintain
participating databases;&lt;br/&gt;- Establish a DANA Advisory
Board;&lt;br/&gt;- Establish a set of criteria for content standards and quality
control;&lt;br/&gt;- Provide academic training in all of the areas covered by
ATL activities mentioned above.&lt;br/&gt;State-of-the-art technology for
digital archiving and distributed networking is being employed to develop DANA,
the content of which will be available via the Internet and will promote sharing
of data while still protecting pre-published data and culturally sensitive
objects and information.&lt;br/&gt;