* 0121758
* 2001 Rustbelt RNA Meeting to be held November 2-3, 2001, at the Lodge at Deer Creek Park in Mt. Sterling, Ohio
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2002
* Jennifer Hines, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Tornow
* 07/31/2002
* USD 5,000.00

The Rustbelt RNA Meeting will be held November 2-3, 2001, in the Lodge at Deer
Creek State Park in Mt.Sterling,Ohio.The Rustbelt RNA Meeting (RRM)is the only
major Midwest regional meeting of RNA researchers. Approximately 100
participants are expected. The Rustbelt RNA Meeting was originally envisioned by
Drs.Dan Schoenberg, Chris Milcarek and Tim Nilson, among others ,to address the
needs of Midwestern RNA researchers for a regional meeting. A need was perceived
for a meeting venue that would include not only faculty,but also postdoctoral
researchers and students, in a location readily accessible to universities in
the area bounded by Cleveland, Columbus and Pittsburgh.The geographical scope
was later expanded to include researchers from neighboring states because of
their enthusiasm for the idea. The objective of the RRM is to provide an
inexpensive, high caliber, interdisciplinary regional meeting for RNA
researchers in the Midwest. An emphasis is placed on participation by
undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral trainees such that in the previous two
years trainees made up 75-80% of the attendees and gave 80-85% of the
presentations.The RRM has also attracted and served young independent
investigators as a place to showcase their emerging research program. For each
of the past two years approximately a third of the attending PI's were junior
faculty. The meeting is open to principal investigators, postdoctoral fellows,
graduate and undergraduate students who are interested in the broad
interdisciplinary field of RNA research.&lt;br/&gt;The meeting format is
designed to foster interaction between trainees at the participating
institutions with each other and with the participating principal
investigators.&lt;br/&gt;