* 0121293
* ITR/SI: Real-Time Long-Distance Terascale Computation for Full Bandwidth Tele-Immersion
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Henry Fuchs, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel F. DeMenthon
* 08/31/2005
* USD 2,663,710.00

Tele-immersion, an ability to share presence with distant individuals,
situations, and environments, may provide vast new possibilities for human
experience and interaction in the near future. In order to make these dreams a
reality, a host of technical difficulties must be solved: acquisition,
communication, display, and interaction. This project focuses on answering two
of the major questions: 1) Is tele-immersion as good as its promise or is there
some inherent weakness? By using overwhelming computation power, the PI hopes to
accelerate development so a real system can be tried within three years. 2) Is
there a show-stopper with tele-immersion over long distances? The PI will try it
for real, not just simulated distance via artificial delays. Specifically, the
PI will build a 60-camera system at the University of Pennsylvania, compute
depth on the 3000-processor Terascale Computing System at the Pittsburgh
Supercomputing Center, and display at the University of North Carolina. The PI
will have a more modest acquisition system at UNC (15 cameras) and a more modest
display system at UPenn to enable local development and two-way collaboration.
The testbed application will be remote medical consultation by a trauma surgeon,
chosen because of its inherent demand for real-time response and its great
potential benefit to societal. The PI expects to be able to provide demonstrable
progress within the three year period of the project. Team members who are
leading trauma surgeons will guide the design; evaluation will be by other
trauma surgeons. The three years of effort will lead to a testable prototype
with sufficient power and scope to be evaluated by application experts not on
the research team. The results will indicate the likely success of other tele-
immersion applications, as well as providing experience in building real-time
applications on a remote terascale facility over fast wide-area
networks.&lt;br/&gt;