* 0121190
* Project Science: A Program in Education and Training in Management of Big Science Projects
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2001,09/30/2008
* Gary Sanders, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* MARVIN GOLDBERG
* 09/30/2008
* USD 338,955.00

Efficient management of large science facilities requires experience and skills
not usually found in the repertoire of research scientists. This proposal plans
to address this need by establishing a program conducted by a cadre of
knowledgeable project managers that includes workshops and summer schools to
which mid-career research scientists, as well as other interested groups, with
an interest in project management will be invited. The first steps will proceed
through "prototype" activities that will identify the detailed needs as
perceived by institutions and groups involved with major scientific projects.
Training workshops and courses will then be developed through a series of such
prototypes. The first prototype workshop will target a single emerging project
and will involve leaders, middle level managers, individual scientists and
students associated with the selected project. This workshop will yield a set of
recommendations for the targeted project, and will begin the collection of tasks
and solutions that will form the basis for the remaining work of this proposal.
A week-long workshop will be planned using lessons learned from earlier
prototypes. Attendance at this workshop is anticipated to be between 50 and 100
"students" , and would complete the definition of training and management
materials to be delivered by this proposal. The proposers will author a set of
materials and lecture notes for a university course in facilities management.