* 0121950
* Enhancing Human Cortical Plasticity: Visual Psychophysics and fMRI
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2002
* Russell Poldrack, Massachusetts General Hospital
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2002
* USD 49,623.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Poldrack will conduct a year long
investigation of a new approach to enhancing brain plasticity and increasing the
speed of learning in adult humans. It has long been known that the brain changes
extensively early in life, and that these changes are dependent upon particular
experiences in the child's environment. However, more recent research has
discovered that the brain continues to change throughout adulthood in response
to experience. This ability to change is called plasticity, and is thought to
underlie many forms of learning. Dr. Poldrack's project will explore an approach
based upon results from studies of experimental animals, which have shown that
plasticity in the cerebral cortex can be greatly enhanced by increasing the
levels of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine. New drugs, known as cholinesterase
inhibitors, that safely and effectively increase acetylcholine levels in humans
have recently been developed and FDA-approved. The specific drug that Dr.
Poldrack will use is galanthamine hydrobromide (tradename Reminyl). The effect
of the drug on cortical plasticity will be assessed using both visual behavioral
testing and functional magnetic resonance imaging, which is a non-invasive
method for measuring the brain activity that occurs as a person performs a
cognitive or perceptual task. The behavioral measure will be the rate at which
the subjects learn to more accurately perform a simple visual perceptual
learning task: learning to discriminate the orientation of a grating. The
hypothesis to be tested is that learning of the visual task that takes place
under the influence of the drug will proceed more quickly than learning that is
paired with a placebo. Functional magnetic resonance imaging will be used to
assess the effect of the drug on cortical plasticity, by comparing the pre-
training versus post-training brain activation changes that are caused by
learning the visual task while on the drug against those caused by learning the
task on placebo. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If this new method of enhancing
plasticity should turn out to be successful, it will provide fundamentally
important and novel knowledge about the nature of plasticity in the adult human
brain, and could also lead to a wide range of potential clinical and practical
applications. Understanding how brain plasticity works in adult humans is of
critical importance, because recent research suggests that plasticity can be
capitalized upon in order to remediate neurological problems, such as movement
disorders resulting from stroke or from repetitive strain injury, and reading
and language disorders. &lt;br/&gt;