* 0121687
* ITR/IM+AP: Automated Compilation and Computational Analysis of Regulatory Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2006
* Shaw-Hwa Lo, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2006
* USD 1,200,001.00

EIA-0121687&lt;br/&gt;Rzhetsky, Andrey&lt;br/&gt;Columbia
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ITR/IM+AP: Automated compilation and
computational analysis of regulatory
networks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
provide advanced information management systems as well as software applications
relevant to the fields of bioinformaticis, molecular biology, and medicine. It
will contribute to fundamental Information Management by developing advanced
algorithms for the efficient retrieval of information about biological pathways
from research articles (using natural language processing techniques), machine-
learning-assisted data mining in biological texts, and information management
via a uniquely designed database with two levels of representation of biological
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific aims of the project are the
following: to implement and test natural language processing techniques for the
automatic retrieval of signal-transduction pathways from the research
literature; to develop general and portable text-mining techniques for the
automatic recognition of genes, proteins, and other domain terms, and of
relationships between them; and to develop a mathematical framework for the
statistical analysis of heterogeneous data on regulatory pathways. &lt;br/&gt;