* 0121755
* SGER: Nonlinear Self-Excited Vibration Mechanism for Rotating Disks interacting with Fluid-Flow in the Enclosed Environment
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Albert Luo, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Alison Flatau
* 08/31/2003
* USD 30,172.00

In the proposed project, the nonlinear vibration of rotating disks, induced by
fluid-structure interaction, is investigated because rotating disks are
extensively used as computer disk drives, turbine disks, automotive disk brakes,
and circular machine tools and saws. The objectives of this project are to
develop an accurate mathematical model to describe such a nonlinear vibration of
rotating disks, and to further determine the corresponding stability for a
better understanding of nonlinear dynamics for these fluid-structural systems
and the development of control strategies for vibration and instability
suppression. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To solve the aforementioned problem, the
Galerkin method and perturbation approach are used for the reduction of the
vibration problem to a dynamical system, and the bifurcation and stability
theories in nonlinear dynamical systems are used for obtaining the stability
conditions. The work plan includes: the vibration model for disks rotating on
the air film close to the rigid wall is developed; the steady state response and
stability and bifurcation conditions are obtained, and numerical simulations are
completed; and the achieved results and further research directions in this area
are summarized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact and significance of this
research include that the approaches and methodology, and results achieved in
this research are applicable for other problems in nonlinear fluid-structure
interaction. Additionally the proposed understanding of harmonic vibration,
stability and solitary waves in a disk rotating on the air film will bring an
improvement of hard-disk drive technology&lt;br/&gt;