* 0121072
* ECS/EPSCoR, NSF Grantees Conference on Electronics, Photonics and Device Technologies, July 9-10, 2001, Univ. of Arkansas, Fayetteville, Ark.
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2002
* Ajay Malshe, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2002
* USD 72,417.00

The objective of this proposal is to request funds to organize ECS-EPSCoR,
NSF&lt;br/&gt;Grantees Conference on Electronics, Photonics and Device
Technologies. The&lt;br/&gt;conference will be conducted during summer of 2001
at the University of Arkansas,&lt;br/&gt;Fayetteville, Arkansas. Arkansas is an
EPSCoR state where significant progress has been&lt;br/&gt;demonstrated in the
conference related topics through major NSF sponsored
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another important objective is to establish an
interactive platform of leading researchers&lt;br/&gt;from the states with
leading as well as evolving research programs in the areas related
to&lt;br/&gt;the conference. The meeting will invite grantees from EPSCoR states
(over 60% out of&lt;br/&gt;the total number) and from non-EPSCoR states. This
will be a singular opportunity to&lt;br/&gt;generate and discuss new academic
concepts, research and education directions by&lt;br/&gt;establishing teams of
leading researchers. The conference will provide a basis
for&lt;br/&gt;discussing recent research findings as well as sharing first-hand-
teaching experiences in&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary education across cultural,
age and gender boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The choices of conference venue
is conducive for the subjects as well as inter and intra&lt;br/&gt;state teaming
due to presence of outstanding research and education programs in
the&lt;br/&gt;related areas on this campus. For example, this campus houses
various leading NSF&lt;br/&gt;funded laboratories, centers, programs and
projects including the Arkansas Center for&lt;br/&gt;Electronic-Photonic
Materials Innovation (ACEMI), Materials Research Science
and&lt;br/&gt;Engineering Center (MRSEC), Distributed seed Program at AR-NB-OK
for Science and&lt;br/&gt;Engineering Research Center (SERC) for Durable Nano
and Micro System, femtosecond&lt;br/&gt;laser microvias drilling at Materials
and Manufacturing Research Laboratories (MRL),&lt;br/&gt;Integrative Graduate
Education and Research Training (IGERT) in Microelectronics
and&lt;br/&gt;Photonics, and MEMS packaging at High Density Electronics Center
(HiDEC).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will result in promoting
interaction among scientists and engineers&lt;br/&gt;leading to germination of
new ideas and themes, team formation, new proposal&lt;br/&gt;submissions,
student involvement and exchange, proceedings of extended abstracts,
and&lt;br/&gt;generation of more fiscal and intellectual resources at EPSCoR
states, K-12 and school&lt;br/&gt;teacher outreach, more technology transfer.
The outcome of the conference will be&lt;br/&gt;disseminated through proceedings
and related material on internet, recordable media, and&lt;br/&gt;at various
related technical conferences.