* 0121517
* Field And Modeling Studies Of Warm Cloud Precipitation Physics
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Kenneth Beard, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Johannes Verlinde
* 08/31/2004
* USD 599,998.00

Two different physical mechanisms account for the formation of precipitation. In
clouds cold enough to contain a mixture of ice crystals and supercooled water
droplets, the crystals grow by the diffusion of water vapor to sizes large
enough to coagulate with one another to form snowflakes or to accrete cloud
droplets and form graupel, snow pellets, or denser forms of ice precipitation.
All of these forms of ice-phase precipitation may melt when falling through
warmer air and reach the ground as rain. In so-called warm clouds, which are not
cold enough for ice to form, precipitation can be created by an all-water
process. Cloud droplets grow initially by condensation - though at a rate slower
than ice crystals, because the cloud environment is only slightly supersaturated
relative to water though it may be strongly supersaturated relative to ice. Once
some of the droplets reach a radius of about 20 micrometer, they begin to
collide with smaller droplets and grow by coalescence. Either the collision-
coalescence process or the ice-crystal process, depending on cloud temperature,
can explain the development of precipitation. However, an uncertain link in the
collision-coalescence process is the slowness of drop growth by condensation and
the consequent long time for drops to reach a size where collisions become
important.

The goal of this continuing research project is to develop a physically
consistent understanding of the development and evolution of rain in warm
clouds. The approach is based on (1) analysis of data from radars, instrumented
aircraft, and surface observations, and (2) simulations with a detailed cloud
microphysical model to examine physical processes that cannot be inferred from
observations alone. Key unresolved questions are: (1) How do giant nuclei
(hygroscopic particles larger than 1 micrometer) affect the rate of
precipitation onset in different kinds of clouds? (2) What are the microphysical
mechanisms that account for the observed radar characteristics of growing
cumulus clouds? (3) How do these clouds modify the environment for subsequent
cloud development? (4) How do environmental parameters such as wind shear
influence the rate of precipitation production? (5) Do giant nuclei affect the
total precipitation falling from clouds of different kinds? Answers to these
questions are critical for understanding precipitation development and have
significance for questions related to artificial cloud modification, global
precipitation measurements, and climate studies.