* 0121764
* ITR/PE - A Live Performance Simulation System: Virtual Vaudeville
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2001,02/28/2006
* Michael Zyda, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Griffin
* 02/28/2006
* USD 900,000.00

This project brings together a diverse array of scholars from
around&lt;br/&gt;the country, including computer scientists, 3D modellers and
animators,&lt;br/&gt;theater practioners, and theater and music historians. The
objective is&lt;br/&gt;to use digital technology to address a problem
fundamental to performance&lt;br/&gt;scholarship and pedagogy: how to represent
and communicate the phenomenon&lt;br/&gt;of live performance using media. This
problem becomes especially pressing&lt;br/&gt;when the objective is to represent
a performance tradition from the past.&lt;br/&gt;Neither a written description
nor a filmed recreation is capable of conveying&lt;br/&gt;the experience of
attending a live performance, an experience that encompasses&lt;br/&gt;not only
the way the performance on stage looks and sounds from the
perspective&lt;br/&gt;of spectators in different parts of the theatre, but also
spectator's&lt;br/&gt;perceptions of and interactions with one
another.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our proposed solution to this problem is to
recreate historical performances&lt;br/&gt;in a virtual reality environment. The
central objective is to simulate&lt;br/&gt;a feeling of "liveness" in this
environment: the sensation of being&lt;br/&gt;surrounded by human activity
onstage, in the audience and backstage,&lt;br/&gt;and the ability to choose
where to look at any given time (onstage&lt;br/&gt;or off) and to move within
the environment. With respect to the performers&lt;br/&gt;themselves, a critical
concern is to find a way to bring the nuances&lt;br/&gt;of great stage
performances into the virtual environment. To this end,&lt;br/&gt;we propose to
use motion capture technology to capture real-world performances&lt;br/&gt;by
professional, highly skilled actors, singers, dancers, acrobats&lt;br/&gt;and
musicians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key to our project is the depth of the proposed
collaboration between&lt;br/&gt;technology, scholarship, pedagogy and art. This
project is conceived&lt;br/&gt;to make a significant contribution to all four
domains simultaneously,&lt;br/&gt;rather than merely using any one in the
service of the others. The end&lt;br/&gt;result will represent an important
advance in the design and implementation&lt;br/&gt;of virtual environments,
building on recent successes in creating&lt;br/&gt;photo-realistic simulations
of real 3D environments. The scale of this&lt;br/&gt;simulation, and in
particular the complexity and precision of the character&lt;br/&gt;animation,
pose an important technical challenge: how to integrate the
complex&lt;br/&gt;pre-defined motion capture-generated animations of the onstage
performances&lt;br/&gt;with the autonomous behaviors of characters in the
audience and backstage.The&lt;br/&gt;project also constitute an invaluable work
of applied scholarship,&lt;br/&gt;an unprecedented resource for visualizing past
performances and testing&lt;br/&gt;hypotheses about historical performance
practices. It will provide&lt;br/&gt;an unprecedented resource for students to
engage with historical performance&lt;br/&gt;traditions as performance (and not
as literature or film). Finally,&lt;br/&gt;from an artistic perspective, the
Virtual Vaudeville project will test&lt;br/&gt;the potential of virtual
environments to provide truly high-quality&lt;br/&gt;theater experiences to
remote audiences.&lt;br/&gt;~