* 0121930
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The cerebellum and cognitive timing processes
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2002
* Howard Zelaznik, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2002
* USD 15,440.00

In the study of skilled performance, it is fairly well accepted that the
cerebellum provides a timing process that is involved in the production of motor
skills. This project looks at whether different types of timing tasks use the
same cerebellar-timing system. It is expected that discrete tasks with a clear
beginning and end (such as tapping) use a cerebellar timing system, because such
tasks involve an explicit timing process. Other tasks, however, are not expected
to use an explicit timing process. One example is continuous circle drawing. In
these cases, continuous timing processes may not depend upon a normal
functioning cerebellum. Individuals who have brain damage to one side of the
cerebellum will be tested. These patients exhibit a normal, unimpaired hand
which is controlled by the normal side cerebellum, and a movement-damaged hand
controlled by the damaged side of the cerebellum. By comparing performance of
the impaired and unimpaired hand for continuous and discrete tapping and circle
drawing, it can be ascertained whether the cerebellum is important for such
performance. For smooth continuous tasks such as circle drawing, it is expected
that the cerebellum is not crucial for timing performance. However, discrete
tasks should require an intact cerebellum.

This project will provide important new insight into cerebellar functioning and
motor skills.