* 0121861
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Hippocampal Modulation of Auditory Representations
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2002
* Mark Gluck, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2002
* USD 17,985.00

With National Science Foundation support, Mr. Orduna and his advisor Dr. Gluck
will conduct a year long investigation of how auditory discrimination training
affects cortical representations of complex sounds. The natural environment is
full of complex sounds containing a variety of information relevant to behavior.
Learning about sounds or images can lead to changes in perceptual sensitivities
that facilitate the processing of behaviorally relevant events. Although the
neural mechanisms underlying these changes are not well understood, they are
thought to depend on the brain's capacity to adaptively modify its cortical
representations of sensations. Orduna and Gluck will measure
electrophysiological responses of rats and humans to complex sounds before and
after subjects have been trained to discriminate these sounds. Computational
models of cortical and hippocampal processing suggest that the hippocampus
modifies cortical representations to facilitate learning. The investigators will
evaluate the role of the hippocampus in auditory learning by comparing learning-
induced representational changes (measured as changes in evoked responses) in
the auditory cortices of normal and hippocampal-lesioned rats.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The joint use of behavioral and electrophysiological
techniques, in combination with lesion techniques, will facilitate comparisons
between the neural mechanisms underlying auditory learning in humans and other
mammals. This project will illustrate a new way of evaluating current theories
of how the cortex and the hippocampus interact during learning and memory
processes. These scientific results should provide new knowledge about the brain
basis of learning and memory.&lt;br/&gt;