* 0121842
* A Wireless Modular Health Monitoring System for Civil Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2004
* Thomas Lee, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 08/31/2004
* USD 503,620.00

Summary: The objective of this research is to develop an integrated structural
health monitoring system that utilizes advanced sensing, micro-processing,
digital signal processing, wireless communication and damage diagnostic methods.
The current project customizes and implements state-of-the-art miniaturized
sensor units using MEMS technology and advanced wireless data communication
methods that employ up-to-date components and architecture. A structure with
such a distributed "smart" sensor network is thought of as a "Wireless IP Cloud
of Sensors". New micro-accelerometers of high resolution are developed allowing
for measurement of high amplitude vibration (i.e., earthquakes) as well as low
amplitude vibrations (i.e., ambient vibrations) integrated with advanced
wireless communication technologies and embedded systems for structural health
monitoring applications. The research team is collaborating with Sandia National
Laboratory in developing MEM-based accelerometers manufactured simultaneously
along side CMOS circuitry on one die coupling the computation and sensor. The
goal is to change the practices from extensive cabling and high cost labor,
equipment and maintenance to the instrumentation of inexpensive wireless
embedded systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed damage assessment algorithms
are to perform (a) system level screening for quick identification of
deterioration or damage; and (b) global diagnosis for structural performance and
damage location identification. Statistical signal processing, energy
dissipation and filtering methods are utilized that enable the computations to
be performed locally at the sensor unit. A prototype system is to be tested both
in the laboratory and the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significance and Broad
Impact: The technology developed under this proposal will enable practical,
cost-effective, long-term and quick response assessment of civil structures that
estimates the degree of damage or degradation. The information provided by the
system is critical following catastrophic events for reducing fatalities and for
timely closure or continued operation of essential facilities (hospitals, fire
stations, etc.). The system will also enable reliable systematic maintenance to
prevent catastrophic failures under long-term
deterioration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;