* 0121636
* Teachers Domain Collection: Life Sciences, K-12
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Michele Korf, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Theodore W. Hodapp
* 08/31/2003
* USD 1,016,222.00

TeachersDomain.org (w.t.), a digital library collection, is being developed to
harness WGBH's extensive broadcast, video, and interactive programming resources
in the Life Sciences to support standards-based teaching and learning from
elementary through high school. The product is a searchable, Web-based
repository of contextualized multimedia materials that teachers are able to
access easily and productively for their own professional development, as well
as to enrich classroom activities with students. WGBH is expanding this library
from its current focus on the topic of Diversity and Adaptation, to include
resources that span the Life Sciences across the entire K-12 curriculum. These
materials are being organized to reflect alignment with commonly taught
classroom units as well as with the performance standards currently applied at
both state and national levels. These multimedia assets are being metatagged and
presented with extensive contextual information to allow for effective use.
Annotations, background essays, standards correlations, and lesson plans
accompany each archival resource, and features such as personalized resource
bins and community discussion boards enable ease of use and maximum impact. The
initiative grew from WGBH's longstanding commitment to the support of
educational reform efforts nationwide, a commitment perhaps most evident in the
subject area of science. The WGBH archives are rich with high quality,
multimedia assets, especially within the subject area of science. The
overarching intent in TeachersDomain.org is to get these resources out of the
vaults and into the hands of teachers and students in digital form that is
directly targeted to their teaching and learning needs.