* 0121384
* Workshop Series for New Physics Faculty
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2002,12/31/2009
* Bernard Khoury, American Association of Physics Teachers
* Continuing Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 12/31/2009
* USD 773,413.00

Physics (13) This project consists of a series of workshops for new physics
faculty that provide undergraduate teaching enhancement activities in a
concentrated four-day workshop accompanied by a continuing program of follow-up
activities that seek to solidify and expand the gains of the workshop. The
audience is newly-hired physics faculty, usually in the first three years of
their initial tenure-track position. The workshops aim to involve 20-25% of the
entire number of U.S. physics faculty hires at four-year colleges and
universities during the project, and thus the program has a significant impact
on physics teaching throughout the U.S. The project is based on prior workshops.
Those activities are expanded in several ways: (1) The size of the annual
program is being increased from 50 to 70 participants, and faculty from all
4-year colleges and universities are invited. (2) Along with AAPT, the American
Physical Society (APS) is a joint sponsor of the program and plays a significant
role in the follow-up activities. (3) The American Astronomical Society (AAS) is
also sponsoring the program, departments of astronomy are being invited to
nominate participants, and about 10 astronomers are included among the annual
participants. The AAS is also sharing in promoting the follow-up activities. (4)
There is a national steering committee to provide oversight to the program. The
follow-up activities are a particularly important component of this program. By
scheduling followup sessions at national and regional meetings of the AAPT, APS,
and AAS, the participants in these workshops can participate in discussions
relevant to the improvement of teaching and to general problems faced by new
faculty. In this way the project promotes a continuing active interest in these
topics among former participants and also brings into the discussions new
faculty who were not able to attend the Workshops as well as postdocs and
advanced graduate students who are contemplating faculty careers. The program
thus enlists a significant share of the resources of the national physics and
astronomy communities to the advancement of undergraduate teaching.