* 0121662
* ITR/SY: High-Speed Wavelength-Agile Optical Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2007
* Ilesanmi Adesida, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2007
* USD 2,564,000.00

We propose to explore the architecture and device development issues necessary
to develop optical LAN's that are ready to interface with optical MAN's. Our
goal is to develop a clear plan for integration of LAN's and MAN's in order to
improve the degree to which the benefits of high bandwidth in the MAN's are
delivered to end users on the LAN's. The application of architectural techniques
to this problem cannot be effectively pursued without understanding the
capabilities of proposed and available devices, yet the needs of architecture
should strongly guide device development to ensure usefulness and relevance. To
address these issues, we have formed a synergistic partnership between network
architecture and hardware technology groups. At the architectural level, we will
explore issues in the design and evaluation of robust optical LAN architectures
with explicit focus on the means of access to MAN's and on the capabilities
necessary for both LAN nodes and the MAN-LAN interfaces (MLI's). The MLI's will
serve as both hub and head-end for the LAN and will provide a simple interface
between the LAN and the MAN. We will explore the robustness of these
architectures to faults and will quantify the benefits of exploiting wavelength
conversion and tunable sources to improve a network's robustness to failures
with a range of automatic protection algorithms. Using wavelength conversion at
MLI's, we will study the impact of wavelength conversion on robustness and
network routing. Using wavelength conversion to enhance robustness has received
very little attention, whereas routing is the focus of substantial previous
work. We will also explore the effectiveness of optically transparent paths as
limited by noise and insertion loss in the devices, and will study the tradeoffs
between network capacity and robustness given these routing limitations. At the
device level, we will explore devices and subsystems that trade some
functionality for increased simplicity or improved cost-effectiveness. The first
of these elements is a multi-cavity VCSEL, which exploits the underlying physics
to produce wavelength-tunable transmitters at a fraction of the cost of current
tunable sources. These VC-SEL's will fill the gap between inexpensive, non-
tunable VCSEL's available in a small range of wavelengths, and high-end,
carrier-grade lasers. Our proposed tunable VCSEL's are intended to fulfill the
requirements of MAN/LAN environments, which are a hybrid of current core
networks and current LAN's. We also plan to develop optical wavelength
converters based on dual-pump, four-wave mixing. The dual-pump design enhances
both the efficiency and the range of the converter, and can also provide
polarization independence. High efficiency is necessary to reduce or to
eliminate the need for regeneration of optical signals within the MAN-LAN
environment. Only a single wavelength enters the wavelength converter, thus the
filter eliminates the effects of coherent and incoherent crosstalk between
wavelengths that arises through four-wave mixing. SOA-based wavelength
conversion is typically cheaper than other approaches, but suffers from poorer
noise figures stemming from the use of the SOA, which make them less attractive
for long-distance applications in core networks. For the MAN-LAN environment,
SOA's present an attractive and economical alternative that allows ubiquitous
availability of wavelength converters at switching nodes. Third, we will develop
high-speed photodetectors based on indium-phosphide materials. The development
of high-speed photodetectors helps to maintain fairly lean wavelength
requirements in local and metropolitan areas, avoiding the challenges of dense
WDM. While more aggressive scalability is attractive in many ways, a single 80
Gbps wavelength can move a terabyte of data in less than two minutes. A single
wavelength with effective access mecha-nisms can be used as a virtual private
network if appropriately deployed over a LAN/MAN infrastructure. Finally, we
propose to develop tunable 2x2 switch elements based on indium phosphide ring
resonators. Such devices allow a single wavelength to be selected and exchanged
by the switch while all other wavelengths pass through untouched. These switches
serve as building blocks for several important components, including tunable
receivers and low insertion loss, low-crosstalk, high-speed optical
crossconnects. The development of these network elements will guide the types of
systems that the network architecture group examines. At the same time, results
from the network architecture group in terms of maximum system gain for a given
approach (i.e., wavelength conversion, add-drop capability) will influence the
direction of the hardware technology development. We believe that this approach
is the best method for optimizing the architecture of next-generation fiber-
optic WDM systems within the framework of the network element technology. The
research will be conducted by a group of five faculty (S. L. Chuang, K.
Choquette, I. Adesida, and S. Lumetta from the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign, and M. Medard from MIT) in the optoelectronic device and computer
networking areas. This project will foster collaboration between system and
device researchers to realize next-generation, high-performance, wavelength-
agile optical networks.