* 0121416
* ITR/SI:   Cooperative Computing for Distributed Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2006
* Ulrich Kremer, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Gurudatta M. Parulkar
* 09/30/2006
* USD 1,518,752.00

The objective of the proposed work is to develop an integrated computational-
communication a chitecture&lt;br/&gt;for large scale netwo ks of embedded
systems,called cooperative computin .Unlike distributed
comput-&lt;br/&gt;ing,coope ative computing is pe formed ove a dynamic ad-hoc
network with volatile nodes and connections,&lt;br/&gt;and expects statistically
correct executions.E .ective esource management,in pa ticula power and
energy&lt;br/&gt;management,will be c ucial since most devices in the netwo k
will be mobile and will ely on batte y.The&lt;br/&gt;basic idea in coope ative
computing is that nodes coope ate in pe forming a global task in an ad-hoc
manne&lt;br/&gt;using thei local esou ces and state information to att act task
's computation o communication.Caching,&lt;br/&gt;routing,topology discove y,o
any speci .c use -de .ned application,can be implemented as a global
task&lt;br/&gt;over the cooperative computing model.&lt;br/&gt; To effectively
cooperate,the nodes that are involved need to know the esources and constraints
they face&lt;br/&gt;in successfully accomplishing the ta get task.In such a
power and esource constrained environment,the&lt;br/&gt;coope ating nodes must
intelligently make the best decisions to ensu e the quality of esult
(QoR).&lt;br/&gt;With these goals in mind,the p oposed esea ch is to develop a
system a chitectu e to support coope ative&lt;br/&gt;computing ove dynamic netwo
ks of embedded systems.Our resea ch will address the following
issues:&lt;br/&gt;How to de .ne a global task at the application and ope ating
system levels?&lt;br/&gt;How to prog am very large networks of embedded systems
to execute a global task without handling&lt;br/&gt;each node
individually?&lt;br/&gt;How to implement self-outing using peer-to-peer
communication only?&lt;br/&gt;How to measure a pa tially successful
execution?&lt;br/&gt;How to predict the powe dissipation and energy consumption
of individual nodes,and nodes cooper-&lt;br/&gt;ating ac oss the
network?&lt;br/&gt;How to optimize a task to reduce its powe and ene gy budget
running on individual nodes,and across&lt;br/&gt;nodes in network?&lt;br/&gt;
The system a chitectu e for coope ative computing is based on Smart Messages
(SM),which can be&lt;br/&gt;viewed as intelligent ca ie s of data in a netwo
k.Sma t Messages a e collections of code and mobile data&lt;br/&gt;that migrate
th ough the netwo k,a single network hop at a time,executing at each step.Smart
Messages&lt;br/&gt;a e self-outing,namely they a e esponsible fo dete mining
thei own paths th ough the netwo k,utilizing a&lt;br/&gt;minimal set of
facilities p ovided by nodes in the netwo k.An SM may be denied a equest to oute
th ough&lt;br/&gt;a node due to the node 's esou ce limitations,in pa ticula its
emaining ene gy level.We conjectu e that&lt;br/&gt;Smart Messages p ovide a
.exible support for a wide variety of applications,anging from data
collection&lt;br/&gt;and dissemination,content-based outing and object t
acking,to more t aditional dist ibuted computing&lt;br/&gt;applications in which
execution of a task is sp ead across a collection of devices.&lt;br/&gt; As pa t
of this p oposal we plan to implement and extensively evaluate seve al p ototype
implementations&lt;br/&gt;of the Smart Message a chitectu e.Ou testbed will
consist of networks of embedded multicontrollers and&lt;br/&gt;PDAs based on
Bluetooth sho t-range wi eless communication.