* 0121663
* ITR/PE+SY Digital Clay for Shape Input and Display
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2007
* Imme Ebert-Uphoff, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* C.S. George Lee
* 08/31/2007
* USD 2,042,000.00

Shape is a key element in successful communication, interpretation, and
understanding of complex data in virtually every area of engineering, art,
science, and medicine. While in recent years the communication of both form and
complex data have been greatly enhanced by visualization that is based on planar
images, computational power has reached the point where it is possible to
consider real-time interactive 3D physical communication. In this project, the
PI will develop a novel interactive 2D or 3D haptic computer interface that
enables both user-specified display of shapes as output from a computer, and
user-directed input of shapes to a computer. This so-called "digital clay" will
allow users to convey and/or sense multiple-element, parallel information
strands. It is a distributed input/display device, the surface of which can be
shaped by a user and acquired by a computer; alternatively, the clay can be
shaped by the computer for the user to examine. Like ordinary clay, digital clay
will allow an area of moderate size to be touched, reshaped with pressure, and
seen by the user in true 3D form. Unlike ordinary clay, digital clay also
provides parameters to the computer that will represent the shape to the
computer for further analysis, storage, replication, communication and/or
modification; or, will allow the computer to prescribe its shape. This combined
input and output feature of the clay enables two-way communication between the
computer and the user. Some previous implementations of digital-clay-like
devices have focused on reshaping of non-physical volumes of 'virtual clay'
using glove-like or haptic manipulator interfaces to a computer in which the
virtual clay is stored. The PI's approach is different; digital clay comprises
an instrumented, actuated, computer-interfaced physical volume bounded by an
actuatable surface that acts as the haptic interface. This surface is displaced
by rows or arrays of controllable interconnected fluidic-driven actuators, which
together act to convey the surface topography of 3D objects by means of
manipulation of a stereolithographed scaffold internal to the volume of the
clay. Each actuator comprises a discrete fluidically-inflatable cell that is
connected to two common pressurized reservoirs (within a base) through a
dedicated two-way miniature valve integrated with a pressure sensor,
manufactured by MEMS technology existing at Georgia Tech. The position of each
discrete surface element can be altered either by the user or by the host
computer. The simple measurement of volume flow rate combined with suitable
software-based kinematic analysis allows the determination of the entire volume
of the clay, and therefore the coordinates of its surface. A unique feature of
the digital clay is that the force that is necessary to actuate the discretized
surface is derived entirely from the two fluidic reservoirs, thus eliminating
the need for small-scale, electrically-driven actuators that may have limited
torque or linear force. This fluidic approach overcomes the constraints imposed
by actuator energy density limits, and distributed wiring and sensing
requirements, that have heretofore prevented structures such as digital clay
from becoming a reality. Furthermore, the user can activate the device
interactively with the host computer by sensing and overcoming the force that is
exerted by the liquid pressure to concomitantly set (or reset) the shape of the
device to a desired state. In this project the PI will develop and demonstrate
the digital clay hardware, its computer interface, and associated software, and
will further illustrate its efficacy in applications of interest (e.g.,
computer-aided design, medical and bioengineering diagnostics, and
reconfigurable input/output displays). Of particular note is the potential of
digital clay to aid visually impaired persons in receiving/sending haptic
information from/to a computer.&lt;br/&gt;