* 0121431
* ITR/SY: Formal Design and Analysis of Hybrid Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2007
* Rajeev Alur, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2007
* USD 1,100,000.00

Embedded systems, such as controllers in automotive, medical, and avionic
systems, consist of a collection of interacting software modules reacting to and
controlling an analog environment. Engineering disciplines such as control
theory focus on continuous dynamics, and offer foundations for designing robust
control laws for ensuring optimal performance of dynamical systems. Computing
disciplines such as software engineering focus on discrete programs, and offer
structured ways of implementing complex control and analysis tools for
validating distributed software. For networked embedded devices with multiple
modes of operation, the combination of the complexity in both discrete and
continuous aspects leads to fundamental problems that are not yet well
understood, and this makes the programming of reliable embedded systems a
particularly challenging task. A systematic approach to designing embedded
devices requires combining tools from control theory and modern software
engineering, and the emerging theory of hybrid systems---systems with tightly
integrated discrete and continuous dynamics, has the potential to provide the
foundation. Despite the great appeal of hybrid systems as a model, the
applicability of the state-of-the-art analysis and design techniques for hybrid
systems has been limited to examples of small size due to complexity. This ITR
research aims to develop foundations and tools for automatic abstraction and
hierarchical decomposition as a means of simplification and scalability.

To facilitate high-level design of embedded software, modeling concepts such as
hierarchy, modularity, reuse, compositionality, and object-orientation, are
explored to develop a theory of hierarchical hybrid systems with an accompanying
a compositional calculus of refinement. This will be the basis for behavioral
interfaces and descriptions of components at different levels of abstractions.
For rigorously specifying and evaluating design alternatives and correctness
requirements, automated techniques such as model checking are very effective. To
apply these techniques for formal analysis of hybrid systems, this research is
developing automated schemes for constructing abstractions of hybrid models. The
technical directions being pursued include model checking algorithms that
exploit hierarchy, algorithms for extracting finite-state approximations using
predicate abstraction, counter-example guided refinement of abstractions,
property-preserving bisimulation-based reductions of continuous differential
equations, and assume-guarantee reasoning. The results of this research are
being integrated in software tools for modeling and analysis of hybrid systems.
The benefits of the techniques for developing embedded systems with higher
assurance for safety and reliability are evaluated in an experimental testbed of
multiple, autonomous, mobile robots.