* 0121286
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Neural Substrates of Primate Communication: A Comparative Study of Facial and Hypoglossal Nuclei
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2003
* Ralph Holloway, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 12/31/2003
* USD 8,787.00

Primates use diverse sensory channels in their communication among social
partners, ranging from the pungent "urine washing" of ring-tailed lemurs to the
flamboyant "lip flip" gesture of gelada baboons to the complex rhythms of human
speech. These signals are often highly nuanced and produced in a flexible,
context-sensitive manner. Since the nervous system has a central role in the
planning and execution of communicative behavior, one would expect significant
species differences in the brain structures that subserve communication. To
date, however, little is known about species differences in the brain's control
of the orofacial system that is so vital to the production of facial expression
and vocalization. This research project will contribute to our knowledge of the
neural substrates underlying two important transformations in the evolution of
primate communication: (1) the more dominant use of facial expressions among
great apes and humans, and (2) the skilled use of the tongue and lips in the
service of human spoken language. In a sample that includes New World monkeys,
Old World monkeys, apes, and humans, brainstem regions that directly supply the
muscles of facial expression and the tongue will be analyzed using techniques to
reveal their chemical composition and cellular structure. The results of this
study will help to clarify how neural organization determines species-specific
communicative signals, including human speech, and will provide insights into
the evolution of the primate brain