* 0121658
* ITR/AP Methodologies and Tools for Designing and Implementing Large Scale Real-Time Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2008
* Michael Haney, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2008
* USD 4,989,880.00

This proposal requests support for research to develop methodologies and tools
for designing and implementing very large-scale real-time embedded computer
systems that (a) achieve ultra high computational performance through use of
parallel hardware architectures, (b) achieve and maintain functional integrity
via distributed, hierarchical monitoring and control, (c) are required to be
highly available, and (d) are dynamically reconfigurable, maintainable, and
evolvable. The specific application that will drive this research and provide a
test platform for it is the trigger and data acquisition system for BTeV, an
accelerator-based High Energy Physics (HEP) experiment to study matter-
antimatter asymmetries (also known as Charge-Parity violation) in the decays of
particles containing the b-quark. BTeV has been approved by Fermilab management
and is expected to be constructed over the next 5-6 years to run in conjunction
with the Fermilab Tevatron Collider. The data-taking phase of the experiment is
expected to be at least five years. It requires a massively parallel,
heterogeneous cluster of computing elements to reconstruct 15 million particle
interactions (events) per second and to use the reconstruction data to decide
which events to retain for further data analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Creating
usable software for this type of real-time embedded system will require research
into solutions of general problems in the fields of computer science and
engineering. The proponents plan to approach these problems in a way that is
general, and to produce methodologies and tools that can be applied to many
scientific and commercial problems. During this project, the research results
will be carried into the high-school system through projects, which enhance
existing infrastructure for attracting students into science and engineering
disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The classes of systems targeted by this
research include those imbedded in environments, like BTeV, that produce very
large data streams which must be processed in real-time using data-dependent
computation strategies. These systems require ultra high performance (~1012
operations per second), necessitating parallel hardware architectures, which in
the case of BTeV is composed of a mix of thousands of commodity processors,
special purpose processors such as Digital Signal Processors (DSPs), and
specialized hardware such as Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs), all
connected by very high-speed networks. The systems must be dynamically
reconfigurable to allow maximum performance from the available and potentially
changing resources. The systems must be highly available, since the environments
produce the data streams continuously over a long period of time, and
interesting phenomena important to the analysis are rare and could occur at any
time. To achieve the high availability, the systems must be fault tolerant,
self-aware, and fault adaptive, since any malfunction of processing elements,
the interconnection switches, or the front-end sensors (which provide the input
stream) can result in an unrecoverable loss of data. Faults must be corrected in
the shortest possible time, and corrected semi-autonomously (i.e., with as
little human intervention as possible). Hence, distributed and hierarchical
monitoring and control are vital. &lt;br/&gt;