* 0121661
* ITR/SY:  The Aware Home: Sustaining the Quality of Life for an Aging Population
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2007
* Gregory Abowd, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 09/30/2007
* USD 1,647,747.00

This is a standard award. The focus of this project is on development of a
domestic environment that is cognizant of the whereabouts and activities of its
occupants and can support them in their everyday life. While the technology is
applicable to a range of domestic situations, the emphasis in this work will be
on support for aging in place; through collaboration with experts in assistive
care and cognitive aging, the PI and his team will design, demonstrate, and
evaluate a series of domestic services that aim to maintain the quality of life
for an aging population, with the goal of increasing the likelihood of a "stay
at home" alternative to assisted living that satisfies the needs of an aging
individual and his/her distributed family. In particular, the PI will explore
two areas that are key to sustaining quality of life for an independent senior
adult: maintaining familial vigilance, and supporting daily routines. The
intention is to serve as an active partner, aiding the senior occupant without
taking control. This research will lead to advances in three research areas:
human-computer interaction; computational perception; and software engineering.
To achieve the desired goals, the PI will conduct the research and
experimentation in an authentic domestic setting, a novel research facility
called the Residential Laboratory recently completed next to the Georgia Tech
campus. Together with experts in theoretical and practical aspects of aging, the
PI will establish a pattern of research in which informed design of ubiquitous
computing technology can be rapidly deployed, evaluated and evolved in an
authentic setting. Special attention will be paid throughout to issues relating
to privacy and trust implications. The PI will transition the products of this
project to researchers and practitioners interested in performing more large-
scale observations of the social and economic impact of Aware Home
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;