* 0121475
* ITR/IM+AP:  Quality-Scalable Information Flow Systems for Environmental Observation and Forecasting
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2007
* Antonio Baptista, Oregon Health & Science University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2007
* USD 3,936,140.00

Real-time Environmental Observation and Forecasting Systems (EOFS) will
revolutionize the way scientists share information about the environment and
represent an opportunity to break traditional information barriers separating
scientists from society at large. EOFS are already in use, but they tend to be
small-scale, application- and domain- specific, stand-alone systems. There is a
need for evolution towards multi-purpose shared systems designed to adapt
flexibly to evolving needs of information consumers. What is required are large-
scale, shared, heterogeneous distributed systems that make extensive use of
diverse sensor-based inputs, sophisticated numerical simulations, mobile and
embedded real-time system components, wireless and wired communications, high-
performance computers, and high capacity storage systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This ITR medium project has assembled an inter-
disciplinary team, including computer science and environmental science
researchers in addition to a heterogeneous base of pilot users. This group will
collaborate to develop software technology which will enable EOFS to evolve
efficiently, and to deliver quantifiably reliable information about the
environment at the right time and in the right form to the right users. The
project focus is on EOFS for estuarine and coastal regions. These regions are
selected because they are highly variable natural systems subject to intense
human activity and with great social, environmental, economic and cultural
value.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;i.
Developing missing integration concepts and technologies for EOFS, with emphasis
on quality-scalable information processing, storage and access (the computer
science research).&lt;br/&gt;ii. Closing the loop between environmental models
and sensors, and implementing a next generation EOFS based on an existing
prototype for an estuary with multiple and often conflicting uses (the
environmental observation and forecasting systems research);&lt;br/&gt;iii.
Using, evaluating and refining the EOFS prototype for scientific discovery,
natural resources stewardship and emergency response, thus incorporating sound
science in operational and management decisions of critical regional importance
and national significance (the environmental science and management
applications);&lt;br/&gt;iv. Developing pilot multi-level, inter-disciplinary
educational programs that cross-train young people, computer scientists,
environmental scientists and practitioners in the conceptualization, development
and use of environmental information technology (the education impact).
&lt;br/&gt;