* 0121631
* ITR/PE: AVENUE: Adaptable Voice Translation for Minority Languages
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2007
* John Lafferty, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2007
* USD 2,500,001.00

Our primary research goal is to develop a prototype voice-
enabled&lt;br/&gt;translating communicator which will deliver information
services across&lt;br/&gt;the linguistic divide for minority languages in order
allow remote&lt;br/&gt;linguistically-diverse users to communicate directly with
Internet&lt;br/&gt;content and databases, and more importantly to communicate
with others&lt;br/&gt;speaking a different language from their own. The latter
will enable&lt;br/&gt;information, education, and, for example, health services,
to reach&lt;br/&gt;remote minority-language communities. Achieving this goal
requires&lt;br/&gt;major advances in machine learning for translation and in
cross-language&lt;br/&gt;speech-recognition adaptability to wider language
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditional transfer-rule-based MT requires up
to a person-century&lt;br/&gt;to build and perfect a new language pair.
Statistical and&lt;br/&gt;Example-Based MT replaces human coding effort by vast
amounts of&lt;br/&gt;bilingual training data, which are virtually unobtainable
for most&lt;br/&gt;minority languages. Without a radical advance, leading to
an&lt;br/&gt;over-an-order-of-magnitude improvement in development time,
the&lt;br/&gt;only commercially justifiable MT applications involve the
major&lt;br/&gt;European languages, Japanese, Chinese, Korean, Arabic and
perhaps a&lt;br/&gt;couple more relatively-popular languages. The vast majority
of human&lt;br/&gt;languages are currently relegated to the proverbial MT dust
heap.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose new MT approaches based on extended and
new machine&lt;br/&gt;learning methods. The first approach consists of
statistical MT&lt;br/&gt;methods that learn from orders of magnitude less
training data,&lt;br/&gt;and that can more effectively incorporate prior
linguistic information&lt;br/&gt;(including dictionaries, word classes, and
known linguistic&lt;br/&gt;rule classes or constraints) by using the joint
source-channel&lt;br/&gt;modeling approach combined with exponential (maximum
entropy) models.&lt;br/&gt;The second approach is a new method for acquiring
high-quality MT&lt;br/&gt;transfer rules from native informants which decreases
dependence on&lt;br/&gt;human experts and reduces development time.
Semantically-conditioned&lt;br/&gt;transfer rules are generalized via a new
locally-constrained&lt;br/&gt;Seeded Version-Space method based on a controlled
bilingual corpus&lt;br/&gt;and interactive tools to elicit information from
native informants.&lt;br/&gt;The third method builds general phone models across
multiple language&lt;br/&gt;families for speech recognition and adapts the
recognizer to new&lt;br/&gt;languages with minimal new- language training data.
All of these&lt;br/&gt;methods are based on new and existing machine learning
algorithms&lt;br/&gt;that combine prior knowledge with limited amounts of new
data in&lt;br/&gt;order to converge quickly on working machine translation and
speech&lt;br/&gt;recognition and synthesis systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary societal impact will be a significant contribution&lt;br/&gt;to the
global democratization of informa- tion, a process that&lt;br/&gt;requires
bridging current linguistic barriers, especially for&lt;br/&gt;low-density or
economically- disadvantaged languages. Additionally,&lt;br/&gt;preservation and
teaching of endangered languages will be directly&lt;br/&gt;enabled by the new
linguistic and acoustic knowledge coupled with&lt;br/&gt;existing tutorial
software. If successful, Avenue (Adaptable Voice-Enabled&lt;br/&gt;Natural-
translator for Universal Empowerment) will be the prototype&lt;br/&gt;of an MT
system that will empower world-wide access to
multilingual&lt;br/&gt;information.