* 0121905
* A Pilot Project to Investigate Continuous Performance fMRI in Normal Humans
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2003
* John Van Horn, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 09/30/2003
* USD 49,967.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Van Horn will spend a year
developing and validating methods and tools needed for examining continuous
motor-sensory tasks performed while brain activity is monitored by functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Current experimental frameworks for
monitoring brain activity via fMRI during psychological tasks rely principally
upon discretely presented stimulus periods or events. Such approaches are ideal
for the study of perception-based cognitive processes, yet many real-world
behaviors (such as motor acts) are continuous in nature, suggesting a need for
new methodological frameworks designed for use with fMRI. The statistical
approaches designed and applied in this project will be used to extend the
continuous performance framework into a new class of fMRI paradigm. This project
involves the custom design and fabrication of specialized stimulus input devices
for the MR environment that will permit a continuously sampled response domain.
Moreover, it involves computationally intense statistical modeling of data
because the paradigms require measuring concurrent performance variables,
potentially confounding variables (e.g. heart rate, respiration, eye-movements,
etc.), and fMRI acquisition parameters, in order to include these in the
experimental design. To examine the validity of the continuous task methodology,
a variety of tasks will be studied.

The techniques developed in this project will assist in developing new
approaches to studying brain activation paradigms for fMRI. These new approaches
emphasize dynamic aspects of brain-behavior relationships. The work in this
project will facilitate the development of computational models of continuously
performed psychological processes.