* 0121570
* ITR/PE: Universal access for situationally induced impairments: Modeling, prototyping, and evaluation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2008
* Julie Jacko, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,083,020.00

As mobile computing becomes more pervasive, users enjoy increased flexibility in
terms of where and when they record, retrieve, and transmit information; at the
same time, the conditions under which these devices are used are becoming more
variable, less predictable, and in many situations less hospitable. With
increasing frequency, computers are being used when lighting is poor, noise is
unpredictable, or when the user is on the move (e.g., walking, driving a
vehicle). In addition, mobile devices often cause users to interrupt an ongoing
activity in order to perform secondary computer-based tasks: examples include
individuals replying to e-mails during meetings, doctors reviewing operating
room schedules while interacting with patients, and individuals retrieving
directions from their in-vehicle navigation system while driving. The goal of
this research is to address the issues involved in developing effective computer
systems for individuals experiencing such situationally-induced impairments
(SII). Like disability-induced impairments (DII), SII exist when the physical,
cognitive, or perceptual demands placed on the user exceed their abilities.
Unlike DII, SII are temporary, resulting from the environment in which the work
is being performed or the tasks in which the user is engaged. Through this
research, the PI and his team will develop new techniques for identifying and
documenting the factors that contribute to SII, will identify methods for
developing solutions that address the temporary and dynamic nature of SII, and
will compare the interaction strategies of individuals experiencing SII to those
of individuals with comparable DII.&lt;br/&gt;