* 0121954
* Workshop: Basic Research fMRI Neuroimaging, Pittsburgh, PA, FALL 2001
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2002
* Walter Schneider, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2002
* USD 29,957.00

Brain imaging using functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) is a rapidly
growing research discipline which utilizes technology for basic research
investigation that was originally developed for clinical medicine. There are
serious safety challenges related to expanding basic research fMRI. These are
related to the rapid training of many non-medically trained investigators
joining the field; codifying the knowledge of best practices that is not easily
available; providing targeted safety training for non-medical MR researchers;
dealing with special safety issues in research fMRI; addressing differences
between FDA regulations and current practices; assisting Institutional Review
Boards in handling detailed technical oversight; and evaluating liability
exposure of research procedures. A working group of investigators, regulators,
and vendors will identify the problems, and plan methods for effectively
addressing these problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific objectives of the
workshop are: 1) to bring together members of the basic research, clinical,
regulatory (FDA), and vendor communities to identify the risks, precautions, and
good practices that should be applied to basic research fMRI imaging procedures;
2) evaluate potential programs that might be initiated to improve the level of
safety and quality of imaging done by basic researchers; 3) devise model
practices or guidelines for the training of non-medical basic researchers in the
areas of patient screening, operating in a magnet, equipment evaluation, scanner
operation, use of equipment, and pulse sequence selection; 4) create guidelines
for stand-alone MR centers regarding participant safety and responsibility
procedures; 5) review existing regulations and practices to determine how they
relate to basic research MRI neuroimaging and evaluate the advisability of
changes in those regulations; 6) create a plan for production of materials that
could be distributed to improve MR training of new basic researchers for fMRI-
based research and a plan to encourage adoption of safety guidelines for fMRI-
based research; 7) review materials developed following the workshop for
distribution via the worldwide web; and 8) present materials regarding the
recommendations at major society and researcher
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two-day workshop will be held in Pittsburgh,
PA.&lt;br/&gt;