* 0121560
* ITR/SY: Situationally Appropriate Interaction
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2007
* Jie Yang, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2007
* USD 1,086,000.00

We are poised at the threshold of an information rich world with devices and
services able to deliver that information to nearly anyone, at any place, and at
any time. Humans have evolved social mechanisms for smoothly and flexibly
managing interpersonal communications; however, current computational and
communications devices are, almost without exception, utterly unaware of the
social and attentional state of the user. They know little or nothing of the
personal, social, and task situations in which they are used, and they do little
or nothing to account for, and minimize, the human costs they induce. In this
project, the PI and his team will explore situationally appropriate interfaces
that retrieve, generate, and deliver information in a manner that is sensitive
to the situation of the user. These interfaces will allow for communication and
information systems that maneuver, rather than blunder, through the social
world. To accomplish this ambitious goal, the team will pursue a three-part
research plan. First, they will use behavioral theory and research to model
social mechanisms for managing interpersonal communications. The comparatively
unexploited research we will draw on examines the affordances of situations and
consistent patterns of human nonverbal social behavior within situations.
Second, they will extract key situational and user behavior data from these
models via input from new sensing technologies, using noninvasive (e.g., vision-
based) sensing technology to provide information about situations and users.
Third, leveraging knowledge from sensory, perceptual, and cognitive psychology,
as well as from the fields of visual and interaction design, the team will
create displays and interaction designs that are far more situationally
appropriate than today's interfaces. To address the substantial challenges that
this breadth of work presents, the PI has assembled a strong multidisciplinary
team that brings expertise from computer science, social, sensory, perceptual,
and cognitive psychology, and the field of design.&lt;br/&gt;