* 0121403
* ITR/SY: Computational Logic Tools for Research and Education
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2008
* David Dill, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 09/30/2008
* USD 2,160,000.00

Formal logic is an extremely powerful and general conceptual tool
that&lt;br/&gt;can be made even more useful if it can be manipulated
computationally.&lt;br/&gt;Since computational logic is often difficult to
implement and&lt;br/&gt;computationally expensive, progress on automating it has
lagged&lt;br/&gt;somewhat. However, the problems and their solutions are
becoming&lt;br/&gt;better understood and computational power has continued to
advance&lt;br/&gt;exponentially, so the possibility of developing
practical&lt;br/&gt;computational solutions to many interesting logic problems
is now&lt;br/&gt;potentially solvable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are three
themes to the project: computational logic components,&lt;br/&gt;educational
applications, and systems applications. The first theme&lt;br/&gt;encompasses
both the theoretical research and implementation work&lt;br/&gt;necessary to
develop practical software components for manipulating&lt;br/&gt;logical
representations at several levels of abstraction, including&lt;br/&gt;decision
procedures for fragments of first order logic and automated&lt;br/&gt;deduction
for first-order logic. The second theme involves the use
of&lt;br/&gt;computational logic for computer-assisted analysis of designs in
three&lt;br/&gt;application areas of critical importance: networking, hybrid
systems,&lt;br/&gt;and computer security. The third theme is the development and
use in&lt;br/&gt;the classroom of instructional courseware for mathematical
concepts&lt;br/&gt;relevant to computer science. This work is in collaboration
with&lt;br/&gt;Stanford's Educational Program for Gifted Children
(EPGY).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of this work follows from making
computational logic&lt;br/&gt;accessible and available. Computational logic
components will make it&lt;br/&gt;easier to construct sophisticated software
applications, by providing&lt;br/&gt;powerful off-the-shelf building blocks for
solving problems that would&lt;br/&gt;not otherwise be tractable. Improved
analysis tools and techniques&lt;br/&gt;will result in superior system designs
achieved faster and at lower&lt;br/&gt;cost. Instructional software will enhance
the sophistication and&lt;br/&gt;problem-solving abilities of computer science
students.