* 0121638
* ITR/SY: A Distributed Programming Infrastructure for Integrating Smart Sensors
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2009
* Umakishore Ramachandran, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,389,000.00

Real-time, reactive and embedded systems are widely and increasingly used
throughout society (e.g., flight control, railway signaling, vehicle management
systems, medical devices). This trend is likely to continue, as applications
that would have been unthinkable only a few short years ago come into the reach
of ever more complex processors. Many such applications are long lived, interact
with their environment continuously, and are under important real-time
constraints. As these reactive systems permeate our lives, bringing us
everything from intelligent pace-makers to tiny freshness-tracking devices in
groceries, the need for cost-effective, confidence-inspiring software validation
techniques grows proportionately. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on
building new tools for checking a common class of reactive real-time systems
known as interrupt-driven systems. The proposed research has four facets that
complement and support each other. First, this effort will build on preliminary
work in analyzing seven commercial microcontrollers to identify a static timing
analysis that is sufficiently precise for a single interrupt handler. Second,
ways to specify and check timing properties for multiple interrupt handlers will
be investigated. Third, a typed assembly language will be designed with time
bounds in which timing properties can be specified in a modular way, one handler
at a time. Fourth, a timed interrupt-handler calculus will be designed that will
embody the results in a language-independent way and make it tractable to prove
key properties. The new tools will automatically derive a model of the software
by static analysis and type checking, and submit the result to a model checker.
The tools can lead to significantly reduced testing requirements, and provide
support for maintenance throughout the system life-cycle. &lt;br/&gt;