* 0121490
* FSML:  New Housing for Researchers, Faculty, and Students at Highlands Biological Station
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Robert Wyatt, Western Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 08/31/2003
* USD 139,300.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Robert Wyatt of the Highlands Biological
Station, an interinstitutional center of the University of North Carolina
administered by Western Carolina University, to construct new housing for
visiting researchers, faculty, and students. Since its founding in 1927, HBS has
served to facilitate research on the biota and ecosystems of the Southern
Appalachian Mountains. Located in the mountains of southwestern North Carolina
near its borders with Georgia and South Carolina, the region is the wettest in
eastern North America, receiving 80 to 100 inches of precipitation per year.
Because of the varied topography and soils of this unglaciated area, it is a
hotspot for biodiversity, especially of groups such as salamanders, fungi,
spiders, tree species, and land snails. The Station has a long and distinguished
history as a base of operations for biological research, graduate training, and
public outreach. Beginning in the fall of 2001, select undergraduates from the
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill's new Carolina Environmental Program
will spend a semester in residence at HBS.&lt;br/&gt; Currently, HBS can house
up to 38 people at one time, and the Station often operates at capacity during
the summer months. A constraint on the programs in research and education is
lack of suitable space for faculty teaching courses or senior investigators who
wish to bring their families. Moreover, most of the existing housing is not
winterized. NSF support will enable construction of a small complex of four two-
bedroom apartments, completed in two phases. In the summer these units will be
used to house teaching faculty and senior researchers. During the academic year
they will serve as the living quarters for groups of up to 16 students from the
Carolina Environmental Program. Each unit will include about 787 square feet of
living space, with one unit modified to provide handicapped access.&lt;br/&gt;
The availability of this added, flexible housing will enhance our ability to
attract the very best faculty to teach courses and the very best biologists to
establish long-term research programs based at HBS. The new dormitory will also
provide much more suitable, winterized dormitory space for use by teams of
undergraduates who will do their capstone training at HBS in biodiversity and
land preservation. These students will also do internships with local government
and non-government agencies, such as the USDA Forest Service and Highlands Land
Trust. Availability of this new housing will also enhance the ability of HBS to
accommodate speakers in our free, public lecture series at the Highlands Nature
Center and in our annual Conference on Landscaping and Gardening with Native
Plants. Indirectly, this new housing will increase flexibility in scheduling
teacher training workshops, as it will free up existing dormitory space for
other uses, such as teacher housing. Thus, all efforts in research and education
at HBS will benefit directly or indirectly from the availability of new
housing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;