* 0121360
* ITR/AP COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Real Time Optimization for Data Assimilation and Control of Large Scale Dynamic Simulations
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2007
* Matthias Heinkenschloss, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Eun K. Park
* 09/30/2007
* USD 556,000.00

This project will create and apply algorithms and software tools for on-line
simulations that continuously (1) assimilate sensor data from dynamic physical
processes, and (2) generate optimal strategies for their control. A number of
critical industrial, scientific, and societal problems stand to benefit from
this research such as aerodynamics, energy, geophysics, infrastructure,
manufacturing, medicine, chemical process and environmental applications; two of
these will be the focus of the current research. In these and many other cases,
the underlying models have become capable of sufficient fidelity to yield
meaningful predictions, provided unknown parameters (typically initial/boundary
conditions, material coefficients, sources, or geometry) can be estimated
appropriately using observational data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The critical step
is the solution of a large-scale nonlinear optimization problem that is
constrained by the simulation equations, typically PDEs or their reduced order
models. A data assimilation phase will seek to minimize the mismatch between
sensor data and model-based predictions by adjusting unknown parameters of the
PDE simulation, and the optimal control phase will find an optimal control
strategy based on the updated model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite advances in
hardware, networks, parallel PDE solvers, large-scale optimization algorithms,
and real-time ODE optimization, significant algorithmic and software challenges
must be overcome before the ultimate goal of real-time PDE data assimilation and
optimal control can be realized. Needed are fundamentally new PDE optimization
algorithms that must: (1) run sufficiently quickly to permit decision-making at
time scales of interest; (2) scale to the large numbers of variables and
constraints that characterize PDE optimization and processors that characterize
high-end systems; (3) adjust to different solution accuracy requirements; (4)
target time-dependent objectives and constraints; (5) tolerate incomplete,
uncertain, or errant data; (6) be capable of bootstrapping current solutions;
(7) yield meaningful results when terminated prematurely; and (8) be robust in
the face of ill-posedness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To create, apply, and
disseminate the enabling technologies for real-time PDE data assimilation and
optimal control, the project will: (1) Develop algorithms and tools for real-
time data assimilation and optimal control that meet the above specifications
for a class of important applications. (2) Implement and publicly distribute
these algorithms within an object-oriented framework that incorporates problem
structure, interfaces easily with high performance PDE solver libraries fosters
applicability of our tools to a broad range of real-time data assimilation and
optimal control problems, and enables extension of the algorithms without
interfering with applications. (3) Apply these algorithms and tools to two
critical environmental and industrial problems: modeling and control of chemical
vapor deposition (CVD) reactors and of wildland firespread. (4) Interact and
work with other user communities to ensure that the algorithms and software we
produce are useful across a broad range of applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;