* 0121647
* Consruction of Multi Purpose Housing at Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* James Claiborne, Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 08/31/2003
* USD 241,187.00

This award provides support for the construction of a multi-use housing facility
that will diminish overcrowding in the housing provided to students
participating in summer laboratory research, and enhance the ability of the
laboratory to accommodate students, teachers and investigators attending
courses, conferences, and symposia year round. The Laboratory provides access
for visiting students and scientists who study the unique marine ecosystems of
coastal Maine and use cold water marine species for the purpose of investigating
basic biological mechanisms such as osmoregulation, cell division, reproduction
and the function of vertebrate organs. The laboratory also offers educational
programs for students at various levels from high school to postdoctoral. The
ability of MDIBL to accommodate participants in its various activities is
currently limited by the quality and quantity of available housing, in
particular the housing for undergraduate students during the peak summer season,
student/faculty groups taking marine related short courses during the academic
year, and investigators seeking short stays for research during the winter
months. These funds will be used to help construct the second of two housing
units whose design was chosen to maximize flexibility of current and future use,
economy of construction and harmony with the surrounding land and community.
This unit will be insulated and heated to provide much needed accommodations in
the colder months.