* 0121533
* ITR/SY+PE+IM+AP COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:   Computer-linked Auto-Fabricated Models for Education in Molecular Biology
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Richard Riesenfeld, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 09/30/2005
* USD 392,649.00

This is a research project in the design and implementation of novel Human
Computer Interfaces for educational use in structural molecular biology. This
project will explore, define, and assess the role of computer-generated physical
models in teaching scientific content and concepts. The purpose is to enhance
the understanding and communication of the complex world of life's molecular
machinery to a broad community. Using structural data on biological molecules
and their complexes, the participants will prototype novel physical models via
automated design and fabrication technologies and develop replication processes
for broader distribution. The models will be used directly for enhance
visualization and as input/output devices that interactively integrate with
commutation and computer graphics for information retrieval, manipulation, and
simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide new, tangible modes
of interacting with, and understanding of, both the fundamental concepts and the
complex data that are coming from the rapid advances in genomics, proteomics,
and other areas of structural molecular biology. It will enable a broad range of
students to learn, query, and explore in a field of growing scientific and
social importance - the molecular basis of life. Physical models will give both
haptic and visual support of the importance of shape in biological function. Use
of physical models as tangible computer interfaces will revolutionize how
students explore and understand biomolecular structure, interaction, and
function.&lt;br/&gt;