* 0121495
* ITR/SY:    Stochastic Combinatorial Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Pascal Van Hentenryck, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen G. Nash
* 08/31/2006
* USD 1,484,000.00

Optimization is the science that integrates information into a mathematical
model whose solution yields optimal decisions. It has developed into a
scientific discipline with useful applications, which are routinely used in
industry. However, there are many real optimization problems for which solutions
are not known. For example, suppose a snowstorm is approaching Chicago. At its
operations center, an airline is reacting by making plans to cancel and reroute
flights. Substantial information on weather forecasts, plane and crew status,
passenger itineraries, and hotels is available to make an optimal plan. However,
this information is typically not exploited to its fullest extent. Why is this
the case, especially as the airline is a very sophisticated user of optimization
for planning? Because the application is a large-scale stochastic combinatorial
optimization problem for which there is no known algorithm producing good
solutions in reasonable time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to carry
out fundamental research in this relatively new area of science to obtain good
solutions to these problems. It will investigate two complementary areas: (1)
the integration of constraint and integer programming that provide orthogonal
strengths in approaching stochastic combinatorial optimization problems; and (2)
stochastic substructures to design efficient solutions or approximations for
typical instances. This research will advance our knowledge about large-scale
stochastic combinatorial optimization problems and allow for their solutions to
be used in complex and critical operations.