* 0121756
* Nasca Population Nucleation and Residential Agglutination in the Late Intermediate Period
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2001,10/31/2002
* Marc Bermann, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2002
* USD 11,992.00

The movement of population from rural towns to large centers remains one of
&lt;br/&gt;the most common but striking trends in human settlement. Researchers
have &lt;br/&gt;had little trouble in formulating explanations for this
population &lt;br/&gt;nucleation in market societies. However, these market-
based approaches &lt;br/&gt;have proven of little utility in societies - - or
segments of societies - - &lt;br/&gt;not dominated by market institutions.
Because these societies were &lt;br/&gt;generally non-literate and left no
written records, archaeology provides &lt;br/&gt;the only means to study long-
term demographic change in such societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Viviana Siveroni
will investigate chronological settlement trends in a &lt;br/&gt;non-market
population of the prehispanic Andes in the Nasca Valley, Peru. &lt;br/&gt;Recent
archaeological research has revealed massive regional changes &lt;br/&gt;between
AD 550 and AD 950, including: (a) the abandonment of many rural
&lt;br/&gt;homesteads and settlements as people flocked to large centers; (b)
the end &lt;br/&gt;of a long-standing ideology and ceremonial practice
(including that &lt;br/&gt;associated with the famous Nasca "lines"); and (c) an
increase in social &lt;br/&gt;stratification even as political decentralization
grew. Nothing is known &lt;br/&gt;of the changes at the household or community
levels that accompanied these &lt;br/&gt;broad regional changes. Siveroni will
investigate potential changes by &lt;br/&gt;excavating and comparing residential
areas from a rural village (Las &lt;br/&gt;Carretas) dating to early in this
period to those at a center dating to &lt;br/&gt;late in the period (Huayuri).
Her work will explore community religious &lt;br/&gt;practices, social
structure, and political organization, while focusing on &lt;br/&gt;potential
shifts in economic activities. One critical goal of the research &lt;br/&gt;is
to explore the relationship dynamics between population nucleation and
&lt;br/&gt;reorganization of the household economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
importance of this project is that Siveroni will assess several
&lt;br/&gt;theoretical models in which household and communal level processes
are &lt;br/&gt;themselves the cause of regional population nucleation. This
research thus &lt;br/&gt;represents an attempt to link levels of analysis in a
new way. Processes &lt;br/&gt;such as population nucleation must be observed and
studied at the regional &lt;br/&gt;level, but their causes may reside at the
sub-regional level, even the &lt;br/&gt;level of the household or individual
actor. Documenting human motivations &lt;br/&gt;and social processes in a world
not governed by rational market forces is &lt;br/&gt;an important contribution
of this kind of explanatory archaeology; placing &lt;br/&gt;this work squarely
in current debates in locational geography and political
&lt;br/&gt;science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;