* 0121564
* The Dynamics of Stratospheric Warmings and Their Connection to Northern Annular Mode Variability
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* David Ortland, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* Walter A. Robinson
* 12/31/2005
* USD 277,290.00

The project will investigate the dynamical influence of the stratosphere on
tropospheric variability in the middle and high latitudes of the Northern
hemisphere. Interest in stratospheric circulation, including sudden warming, has
recently been rekindled by observational analyses which suggest that a primary
mode of tropospheric variability in polar latitudes--the annular mode--is
influenced by the downward migration of annular anomalies from the stratosphere.
Variations in stratospheric polar vortex have been linked to seasonal anomalies
in the tropospheric zonal-mean zonal winds and circulation patterns such as the
Arctic Oscillation/North Atlantic Oscillation. These patterns have profound
impact on European and North American climate and weather. Drs. Ortland and
Dunkerton will conduct a dynamically oriented analysis of the mechanisms
coupling the troposphere and stratosphere, and the subtropics and midlatitudes.
The PIs will use a quasi-linear primitive equation model to study the
interaction of zonal-mean zonal flow (annular component) and the planetary-scale
Rossby waves. The project will advance the understanding and modeling of
dynamical interactions of the troposphere and stratosphere, and shed light on
the evolution of the annular mode. This research will also be helpful in
understanding the mechanisms producing the observed climate trends.