* 0121695
* ITR/AP: Multiscale Models for Microstructure Simulation and Process Design
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2007
* Duane Johnson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 09/30/2007
* USD 4,000,000.00

This grant is the result of a proposal submitted to the Information Technology
Research (ITR) Initiative. The award is co-funded equally by the Divisions of
Materials Research and Advanced Computation Infrastructure and
Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is an interdisciplinary effort to
simulate the evolution of microstructure during materials processing, including
the effects of microstructure on bulk material properties. The project advances
a set of mutually-informative models that, collectively, span atomistic to
macroscopic length scales and that couple thermal, chemical and mechanical
response. It will lead to improved predictive capabilities for optimizing
existing materials systems, and to the prospect of new engineered materials and
processes. The rich physical basis of the models makes them computationally
intensive, so a closely-coupled program of information technology research is
planned to support applications research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
brings together engineers, materials scientists, computer scientists and
mathematicians. It links two existing NSF-sponsored research centeres at
Illinois: the Center for Process Simulation and Design (CPSD), and the Materials
Computation Center (MCC). This link is strategic, because it reflects the
significant coupling between the meso- and macroscopic phenomena that CPSD
studies and the largely atomistic behavior that MCC investigates. Three
particular applications, listed in order of ascending scale, are (i) coupled
quantum and continuum models of material interfaces; (ii) dendritic
solidification with fluid flow in metallic microstructures; and (iii)
microstructure evolution and process optimization in extrusion and quench
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The target applications are, in many respects,
distinct. Yet, from the perspective of computational science and information
technology, they pose a number of common challenges. These include problems with
moving boundaries and interfaces; coupled and heterogeneous physical models at
highly disparate length scales; and, computational complexity that calls for
massively parallel and adaptive analysis techniques, as well as improved
iterative solution methods. The group structure of this grant allows for sharing
solutions across disciplines and the possibility of investigating more
alternative solutions for each application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The associated
information technology includes: domain-specific abstraction frameworks that
enhance programmer productivity in parallel applications development; run-time
load-balancing strategies for heterogeneous parallel applications exhibiting
dynamic behavior; formulation and analysis of space-time discontinuous Galerkin
methods, space-time mesh generation and 4-D visualization; and, new techniques
for interface tracking and variable-topology shape
optimization.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This grant is the result of a proposal
submitted to the Information Technology Research (ITR) Initiative. The award is
co-funded equally by the Divisions of Materials Research and Advanced
Computation Infrastructure and Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is an
interdisciplinary effort to simulate the evolution of microstructure during
materials processing, including the effects of microstructure on bulk material
properties. The project advances a set of mutually-informative models that,
collectively, span atomistic to macroscopic length scales and that couple
thermal, chemical and mechanical response. It will lead to improved predictive
capabilities for optimizing existing materials systems, and to the prospect of
new engineered materials and processes. The rich physical basis of the models
makes them computationally intensive, so a closely-coupled program of
information technology research is planned to support applications
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project brings together engineers, materials
scientists, computer scientists and mathematicians. It links two existing NSF-
sponsored research centeres at Illinois: the Center for Process Simulation and
Design (CPSD), and the Materials Computation Center (MCC). This link is
strategic, because it reflects the significant coupling between the meso- and
macroscopic phenomena that CPSD studies and the largely atomistic behavior that
MCC investigates. Three particular applications, listed in order of ascending
scale, are (i) coupled quantum and continuum models of material interfaces; (ii)
dendritic solidification with fluid flow in metallic microstructures; and (iii)
microstructure evolution and process optimization in extrusion and quench
processes.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;