* 0121122
* Next-Generation Ultrafast Laser Processing and Micromachining: Integrating Research with Practice
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Jon Longtin, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Alfonso Ortega
* 08/31/2004
* USD 225,959.00

High-power ultrafast lasers offer significant advantages for next-generation
laser materials processing, particularly at small length scales, which makes
them well suited for micromachining and MEMS structures. The extremely high
laser intensities associated with ultrafast lasers result in unique, nonlinear
laser-material interactions that provide innovative new possibilities for laser-
material processing. This proposal presents a unified series of research tasks
that address both fundamental scientific issues while presenting practical
techniques and solutions for real-world applications. The proposed tasks include
1) novel beam delivery techniques for delivering a high-quality, minimal
distortion ultrafast laser beam to a workpiece for processing without the need
for a vacuum chamber, 2) sub-surface machining of transparent materials in which
features can be fabricated underneath the surface of transparent materials for
true three-dimensional micromachining, 3) modeling breakdown and material
removal to predict a given material's response and removal rates from specific
ultrafast laser parameters, and 4) precision processing of novel materials such
as SU-8 for MEMS applications, which presents unique capabilities over
traditional manufacturing. A central focus of the research tasks is to provide
both fundamental understanding while at the same time providing practical
knowledge for industrial and other real-world users. As an educational tool for
both graduate and undergraduate students, the project will provide excellent
training in optics, lasers, and engineering on the microscale (both time and
space). These topics are often only minimally covered, if at all, in traditional
mechanical engineering programs, and this project will provide much needed
training in these areas.