* 0121853
* Interannual Changes of Stratospheric Dynamical and Chemical Structure and Their Relationship to Changes of the Residual Circulation
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2006
* Murry Salby, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 08/31/2006
* USD 444,360.00

The project will investigate the dynamical mechanisms producing interannual
changes in stratospheric circulation and ozone, which also influence the
seasonal climate of the troposphere, notably in winter. Variations in
stratospheric polar vortex have been shown linked to seasonal anomalies in
tropospheric zonal-mean zonal winds and circulation patterns (e.g., North
Atlantic Oscillation/ Arctic Oscillation), which profoundly impact the European
and North American climate and weather. Ozone variations in the lower
stratosphere are also strongly linked with dynamics: The ozone distribution in
the high latitudes is determined by the Brewer-Dobson overturning circulation,
and radiative heating from ozone absorption in the ultraviolet and thermal
bands, in turn, influences the temperature and thermal wind distribution. Drs.
Salby and Callaghan will conduct a dynamically oriented analysis of interannual
variability to ascertain the sensitivity of the stratosphere circulation to
tropospheric forcing (upward fluxes of planetary wave activity) and
stratospheric dynamical structure (Quasi-biennial oscillation phase). The PIs
will use a 3D primitive equation model in isentropic coordinates for the
analysis. The project will advance understanding of the forcing of circulation
and constituent variability in the stratosphere, which will lead to improved
modeling of troposphere-stratosphere interactions and variability on the
seasonal-to-interannual time scales. This research should also significantly
contribute in understanding the causes of observed ozone depletion in the
northern hemisphere.