* 0122124
* Partnership for Advancing Technologies in Housing: Advanced Replacements for Mechanical Fastners in Housing Construction for High Wind Zones
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2001,02/28/2006
* David Dillard, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Perumalsamy N. Balaguru
* 02/28/2006
* USD 155,445.00

NSF PROPOSAL # 0122124, ADVANCED REPLACEMENTS FOR MECHANICAL FASTENERS IN
HOUSING CONSTRUCTION FOR HIGH WIND
ZONES&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adhesives offer several
design benefits over conventional mechanical fasteners including nails and
rivets. The acrylic foam tape is a unique adhesive product that requires no
curing and yet offers substantial property advantages for certain semi-
structural applications. Virginia Tech proposes to implement an innovative
assembly process in the construction industry through the development of
materials, design, and application databases. The assembly process will be based
on generic acrylic foam tapes and the test bed will be shear walls and
diaphragms in light-frame construction for wind-critical areas, a very large
market segment. The assembly process meets PATH (Partnership for Advancing
Technology in Housing) goals of promoting housing affordability, durability, and
wind-damage resistance. PATH's technical areas addressed are "advanced panel
systems" and "whole-house and building process redesign."&lt;br/&gt;The
fundamental research component of the project will generate material data with
emphasis on tape durability. Numerical structural modeling and cyclic tests of
the assemblies will provide a basis for showing the adequacy of the tape to
resist the dynamic loads associated with high wind events. A design methodology
will be developed to enable field engineers to recommend and direct successful
tape applications on construction sites. Shear wall and diaphragm models will be
constructed for testing and demonstration. &lt;br/&gt;Walls and diaphragms will
be designed to take full advantage of load re-distribution capabilities,
increased flexibility and damping, and improved fatigue resistance provided by
the tapes. The advantages of the resilient foam tape in wind critical
applications will be highlighted as meeting the PATH goal of improved disaster
resistance. The application of the tape increases overall system stiffness,
increases the resistance of the roof sheathing to wind uplift from hurricane
loading, and tape sealing reduces water damage, the major property damage under
hurricane conditions. In addition to simplifying the assembly/construction
process, the design may offer enhanced performance including longer life, better
appearance, reduced transportation costs, and environmentally friendly
alternatives over the use of conventional fastening systems. Collaboration with
the National Association of Home Builders (NAHB) through the PATH program will
facilitate timely interactions with end users of technologies developed in the
project and will speed up widespread adoption. A national homebuilder company
will build a demonstration home if laboratory tests show feasibility.
&lt;br/&gt;The output of the project will be materials, joint performance, and
application data on a simple but innovative assembly process. The databases and
demonstration models will be focused on specific applications for wind-critical
areas but will be applicable to a broad range of advanced adhesive tapes for use
in housing construction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;