* 0122466
* ITR Large: MALACH: Multilingual Access to Large spoken ArChives
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2001,03/31/2006
* Douglas Greenberg, Survivors of the Shoah Visual History Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2006
* USD 7,674,664.00

The project proposes to advance the state of the art in
automatic&lt;br/&gt;speech recognition by detecting emotional and highly
accented speech&lt;br/&gt;and differences based on age and gender, and then
optimizing the&lt;br/&gt;acoustic model for those conditions. It will apply
long-term&lt;br/&gt;adaptation techniques to improve robustness, and will
implement&lt;br/&gt;an innovative second-pass decoding technique to improve
accuracy&lt;br/&gt;by using side information such as thesaurus terms
and&lt;br/&gt;human-prepared summaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The techniques to
be developed will dramatically improve the efficiency&lt;br/&gt;of professional
catalogers, leveraging automatic segmentation to&lt;br/&gt;suggest topic
boundaries in interviews, using domain-tuned&lt;br/&gt;classification algorithms
to recommend thesaurus terms, and&lt;br/&gt;providing automated tools to support
generation of event timelines.&lt;br/&gt;Volunteers will help assign metadata
and provide transcripts.&lt;br/&gt;Efforts will be made to automate transferring
capabilities developed&lt;br/&gt;originally for English to other languages.
Access to multilingual&lt;br/&gt;materials will be done by combining knowledge-
based and corpus-based&lt;br/&gt;techniques to extend existing thesauri to new
languages and by supporting&lt;br/&gt;cross-language searching of manually
prepared segment-level&lt;br/&gt;summaries and automatic speech recognition
transcripts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each component will be evaluated and user
studies done to measure&lt;br/&gt;the overall impact on support for cataloging,
search and exploration.&lt;br/&gt;This will produce significant impact, both
through improved access&lt;br/&gt;to our cultural heritage and through the
application of the techniques&lt;br/&gt;to other important
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collection of spoken material used in this
project will be the 116,000&lt;br/&gt;hours held by the Survivors of the Shoah
Visual History Foundation, a&lt;br/&gt;set of already digitized video recordings
of great historical importance.