* 0122226
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Early Postclassic Period Households At Rio Viejo, Oaxaca, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 10/15/2001,09/30/2003
* Rosemary Joyce, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 09/30/2003
* USD 11,857.00

This research examines household social organization and economic activities at
the Early Postclassic (A.D. 800-1100) site of Rio Viejo in coastal Oaxaca,
Mexico, through a meticulous examination of micro-residues. The project not only
serves as one of the first major studies of Early Postclassic period households
in Oaxaca, but should also prove useful for archaeologists working in other
regions and other parts of the world who are interested in applying micro-scale
methods to household research. Household archaeology conventionally uses
architecture, burials, and artifacts to reconstruct domestic activities. But
artifacts present problems for understanding household activities, because they
are normally recovered in trash deposits or fill, potentially far removed from
where they were used. Micro-residues, including microscopic plant remains, fine-
scale changes in soil deposition, and chemical residues of organic debris, in
contrast, are less likely to have traveled from their locations of use. The
techniques of paleoethnobotany, micromorphology, and soil chemistry detect food
processing and cooking activities, which are important because sharing food
often defines membership in household social groups. At Rio Viejo, excavations
of twelve buildings in two neighborhoods of modest, single-roomed houses
revealed similarities in artifacts and architecture that suggest "commoner"
status, yet burial practices and other features differ in each area. The
research will address questions about similarities and differences in the
organization of domestic activities that traditional data alone cannot answer.
Uniformity in artifacts and architecture could mask real differences between the
two areas, and the distribution of food-related activities might better reflect
household divisions than the buildings themselves. Also, since productive
activities in residential settings are linked with larger-scale political and
economic goals, this project will consider how Rio Viejo's Early Postclassic
occupants cooperated economically within a newly reconceived political framework
following the "collapse" of urban centers.