* 0122055
* Partnership for Advancing Technologies in Housing: Microcellular Polymers Processing for Lightweight and Energy Efficient Advanced Panel Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2004
* Vipin Kumar, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 08/31/2004
* USD 149,994.00

PATH: Microcellular Polymers Processing &lt;br/&gt;for Lightweight and Energy
Efficient Advanced Panel
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a
PATH research project to explore the manufacture of thick sheets of
microcellular polymers for load-bearing applications such as advanced panel
systems for house construction. Microcellular Plastics refer to closed-cell
thermoplastic foams with a very large number of very small bubbles. Typically,
the cells are of order of 10 micrometers in diameter, and there are 108 or more
cells per cubic centimeter (cm3) of the foam. The microcellular polymers offer a
number of unique advantages for house construction applications. For example,
the microcellular structure can reduce the density, leading to a reduction in
the weight of the panels. Lighter panels are more cost effective and promote
safety during house construction. In addition, reducing material density leads
to conservation of natural resources by only using what is truly needed.
Further, the microcellular structure can reduce the thermal conductivity and
thus improve the energy efficiency of the panel systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The basic solid-state microcellular process is a two-stage
batch process. In the first stage, the polymer is placed in a pressure vessel
with a high-pressure and non-reacting gas. This step is usually conducted at
room temperature. Over time, the gas diffuses into the polymer, and attains a
uniform concentration throughout the polymer specimen. When the specimen is
removed from the pressure vessel and brought to the atmospheric pressure, a
"supersaturated" specimen that is thermodynamically unstable due to the
excessive gas dissolved into the polymer is produced. In the second stage, the
specimen is heated to what is termed the foaming temperature. This step is
typically carried out in a heated bath with temperature control. The dissolved
gas lowers the glass transition temperature of the polymer and the foaming
temperature needs only to be above the glass transition temperature of the gas-
polymer system in order for the bubbles to nucleate and grow. Since the polymer
is still in a solid state, the foams thus produced are called "solid-state
foams" to distinguish them from the conventional foams that are produced in an
extruder from a polymer melt. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funded research will
explore the feasibility of producing thick microcellular specimens using a
number of polymers, including PVC, a common plastic used in building materials
today; PET, a polymer considered cost-competitive with PVC; and some of the more
recently introduced high-strength polymers such as PEEK and PEI. A number of
gases will be explored as a physical blowing agent. These gases include carbon
dioxide and nitrogen. The research will advance the state-of-the-art of the
emerging microcellular polymers technology by adding the new dimension of load-
bearing applications. It will also provide an excellent opportunity for both
undergraduate and graduate students to learn and grow in an environment of
discovery and scientific
understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;