* 0122076
* Partnership for Advancing Technologies in Housing: An Advanced All Natural Composite Roof For Residential Construction
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2004
* Richard Wool, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 09/30/2004
* USD 150,000.00

An Advanced All Natural Composite Roof For Residential
Construction&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposed
research is to develop a monolithic, all-natural composite roof system for
residential construction. The roof will be fabricated from novel composite
materials made from soybean oil resins and natural fibers. The composite resins
are derived from soy beans, a seasonal crop that is already grown in large
quantities in the U.S.; the natural fibers to be used are derived from seasonal
crops grown specifically for the fiber or are byproducts and waste of other
crops. The roof will be designed to carry all of the loads a conventional roof
is designed for, will have an integral weather protection surface, and will
offer intrinsic insulation. The specific objectives of the proposed project are
to (1) design and optimize the soy-based resin, all-natural composite material
for roof applications; (2) develop and test a weather protection layer that is
integral to the composite roof; and (3) design, analyze, and test the roof
structural system. Organized through the University of Delaware Center for
Composite Materials, the interdisciplinary effort brings together expertise in
chemical engineering, materials science and engineering, and civil engineering.
The research plan is organized into two primary thrusts: (1) materials research
and (2) structural design and testing. The materials research thrust will
comprise (a) tailoring of all-natural resins for the composite roof system, (b)
tailoring of composites for the roof system, and (c) aging, durability and
development of a weather protection surface. The structural design and testing
thrust will address (a) preliminary designs, (b) analysis and testing of small
components, and (c) analysis and testing of large roof components. The all-
natural composite roof system combines a number of unique features that together
will achieve the four PATH goals and bring about a significant advance in
residential construction.&lt;br/&gt;