* 0122759
* US-Spain Cooperative Research:  Designed Interfacial Assembly of Redox Active Enzymes and Recognition Layers for Biosensor Applications
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2004
* Hector Abruna, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne E. Hudson
* 01/31/2004
* USD 18,970.00

0122759&lt;br/&gt;Abruna&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This two-year award for US-Spain
collaboration on enzyme immobilization methodologies giving rise to oriented
layers of enzymes leading to amperometric biosensor applications involves Hector
Abruna and students at Cornell University and Encarnacion Lorenzo at the
Universidad Autonoma of Madrid in Spain. Enzymes represent some of the most
sophisticated catalysts known. Immobilization of active enzymes onto solid
substrates can be used to generate sensors that exploit these features.
Immobilization approaches tend to alter, if not destroy, an enzyme's activity,
there is interest in new enzyme immobilization methodologies that will allow for
the oriented immobilization of the enzyme layer while retaining enzymatic
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The US researchers bring to this collaboration
expertise in electrochemical techniques and in the synthesis and
characterization of transition metal complexes. This is complemented by Spanish
expertise in the preparation and characterization of a variety of sensors and in
their application to the analysis of pesticides in foods and in environmental
samples. This work, coupling diverse aspects of chemistry and biology, will be
of interest and utility in environmental studies and monitoring of pollutants
and in biotechnological applications.&lt;br/&gt;