* 0122791
* Presidential Awards for Excellence In Science, Mathematics and Engineering Mentoring
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2003
* Robert Kaman, University of North Texas Health Science Center at Fort Worth
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn Suiter
* 11/30/2003
* USD 10,000.00

The Office of Outreach of the Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences at the
University of North Texas Health Science Center was established in 1994 to help
to recruit underrepresented minority student into the biomedical sciences. The
implemenatation includes activities from students from elementary and secondary
schools (K-12) through undergraduate and graduate university. The outreach
program works to encourage students to enter science fields. That activity is
supported by an annual mentoring workshop for faculty. Other program elements
include the Adopt-A-School program for support of K-12 students, the Summer
Multicultural Advanced Research Training (SMART) and McNair programs to build
student relationships with faculty mentors. Bridge partner programs connect
institutions to support students in transferring smoothly into doctoral
programs. The program has become the state's leader in the enrollment percentage
of Hispanic and African-American students, with the enrolling undergraduate
class for Fall 2000 at 35 percent Hispanic and African-American students (35
percent white, 24 percent foreign, 6 percent Asian-American). Similarly, the
graduate population of the biomedical program is 1 percent Hispanic and 10
percent African American, compared to national figures for science enrollment at
less than 4 percent of Hispanic and African-American students. The Center
anticipates graduating ten students with Ph.D. degrees in May 2001, of whom half
are African-American or Hispanic.