* 0122373
* FSML:  Improvements in Facilities and Equipment at Mpala Research Centre, Kenya
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Nicholas Georgiadis, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 129,200.00

Improvements in Facilities and Equipment at Mpala Research Centre,
Kenya&lt;br/&gt;Daniel I.Rubenstein, P.I.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
project is to enhance the quality of ecological research in the arid lands of
East Africa by improving the physical infrastructure and the research
capabilities of the Mpala Research Centre. The Centre, whose purpose is to
advance research in the environmental, biological, and conservation sciences,
lies at the heart of the Laikipia ecosystem, a diverse savanna maintaining
prodigious wildlife populations, much of it not formally protected in National
Parks or Reserves. This landscape is prone to severe environmental fluctuations
that produce periodic droughts and floods which challenges the ability of
indigenous peoples, commercial ranchers and the wildlife itself to survive. It
is part of the Centre's mission to shape research programs that will provide
scientific insights that help maintain the ecosystem while enhancing the quality
of life of the people utilizing the ecosystem's resources. Fulfilling this
mission requires melding institutionally driven mission-motivated research with
applications emerging from fundamental research projects initiated by individual
investigators. Improving the ability of scientists from all over the world, but
mostly those from the US whose research is already supported by the National
Science Foundation, to carry out these different types of research requires that
the Centre enhance and enlarge its physical plant and provide additional common
research support facilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular the Centre will
improve its: 1) electrical system to provide uninterrupted electricity to run
laboratory equipment and computers essential for data recording and analysis; 2)
research space so that the large and integrated projects have adequate space for
the teams to function coherently; 3) housing stock to accommodate the Resident
Scientist who serves as the local research coordinator and the newly hired
Geographical Information System specialist who will provide support for the
analysis of spatial problems so important for the understanding of climate
patterns and wildlife as well as livestock movements and population dynamics; 4)
monitoring equipment both on the ground and in the air to provide the long-term
data bases so essential for forecasting changes in environmental conditions,
wildlife numbers and livestock levels so that rational and sustainable programs
of management and conservation can be formulated; and 5) stock of shared and
communal research, communication and computer equipment along with 4 x 4
vehicles for traveling over the rugged terrain. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research
at Mpala Research Centre is intended to advance an informed and integrated
approach to natural resource management and conservation within the Laikipia
savanna ecosystem. In doing so the research provides the scientific background
that is used by commercial ranches and the group ranches composed of indigenous
peoples to better manage their lands, stock and wildlife in economically and
ecologically sensible ways. Policies based on research are helping ensure that
wildlife helps 'pay' for its protection by means of sustainable regimes of
culling and consumption on some lands and ecotourism enterprises on others. In
addition, outreach to these various communities on how to live with predators
and wildlife competitors is helping maintain the dynamics of this harsh
ecosystem. Courses taught with 'hands on' projects to wildlife professionals
from governmental and non-governmental organization as well as student groups
from Kenyan and international Universities are common and are helping transform
the minds of the next generation of environmental leaders along with those who
are making critical decisions today.&lt;br/&gt;