* 0122523
* Physics of Transition Metal Oxides and Related Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2001,10/31/2004
* Elbio Dagotto, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 10/31/2004
* USD 300,000.00

This award supports theoretical research with a computational emphasis, on
colossal magneto resistance materials, high temperature superconductors, and
other correlated transition metal materials. The research has several aims: (1)
A complex mixed-phase paramagnetic-insulating state arises from the competition
between metallic and insulating phases; the idea that this colossal magneto
resistance also arises from this competition will be investigated. (2) Charge
ordering in models for manganites will be analyzed with emphasis on the
unexplored region of intermediate hole densities where correlated polaron
physics has been revealed in recent experiments. The possibility of pseudogap
formation in this region will be explored. (3) Physics common to the cuprates,
manganates and other transition metal oxides in the inhomogeneous states will be
examined. Stripes and superconductivity will be explored in the copper oxides
using advanced methods to search for pairing and models that reproduce known
experimental results reasonably well. These large-scale structures appear to be
part of the common physics in cuprates and manganates. (4) Models for dilute
magnetic semiconductors, Mn-doped GaAs semiconductors, will be studied. It is
anticipated that the electronic properties of these materials will have features
in common with those of the mixed-phases in the manganese oxides.
&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research with a
computational emphasis, on colossal magneto resistance materials, high
temperature superconductors, ruthenates and doped magnetic semiconductors.
Colossal magneto resistance materials show an enormous change in resistivity
with the application of modest magnetic fields and like the doped magnetic
semiconductors, may be important in the emerging field of spintronics. These
transition metal materials with strong electronic correlations can exhibit
exotic electronic states, including large-scale structure or striped phases and
the appearance of a pseudogap in the electronic excitation spectrum. In one
thrust of the research, the PIs will use state of the art Monte-Carlo methods to
investigate whether these phenomena share a common physical basis. The PIs will
also investigate the common features of manganates and materials useful for
spintronics applications, and elucidate the physical origin of the complex phase
diagram of Ca2-x Srx RuO4 which includes paramagnetic, ferromagnetic, and
antiferromagnetic phases.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;