* 0122173
* Scalable Enterprise Systems Phase II: Emergent Organizational Structures in Multi-Agent Scalable Enterprises
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2007
* Jin Wang, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen G. Nash
* 09/30/2007
* USD 740,321.00

This Scalable Enterprise Systems Phase II project's primary goal is to develop
models of emergent enterprises that capture the independent behavior of the
organizations involved, as well as the effects of interactions among individual
organizations, in order to accurately predict dynamics of the emergent
enterprise and performance of the system in the long run. Participants in the
enterprise can use these results to select appropriate operational strategies in
order to improve local performance measures such as profit or cash flow over a
fixed planning horizon. In addition, these models will provide insight into the
mechanisms that result in effective alliances and organizational designs. The
modeling approach has three steps. First, a representation scheme is developed
for capturing characteristics of individual participants that incorporates task
information, organizational relationships, local and system level goals, and
possible changes in the environment. An enterprise is thus a collection of
several of such detailed representations for each organization and the
interactions between these organizations. Second, a micro-macro modeling
approach is developed, where the details of each agent's tasks (represented in
the micro-level simulation framework) are aggregated into a set of interaction
parameters at the macro-level. The macro-level enterprise model is formulated as
an interacting particle system. Finally, the third step involves validation of
the theories developed using field data. Field data will be collected from
different industries that have large number of participants in the supply
network, such as the food industry and the automotive industry, to construct
practical agent representations and to verify the theoretical performance
estimates. Large-scale simulations using a multi-agent simulator will also be
used to empirically estimate the performance of a given organizational
configuration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will allow planners to
estimate a priori the overall enterprise performance under different operating
conditions, and eventually, design optimal emergent societies. Moreover, systems
composed of distributed decision-makers are encountered in various application
domains, such as traffic on highway networks, air traffic management systems,
design teams composed of dispersed designers, distributed sensor networks,
multi-agent systems, etc. The fundamental advances made in this research will
have significant impact on our ability to predict the performance of such
systems, and therefore devise appropriate planning and control
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;