* 0122110
* FSML:  Lodging Expansion at the Kemp Natural Resources Station
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,01/31/2006
* Thomas Steele, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 01/31/2006
* USD 140,000.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Thomas W. Steele of the University of Wisconsin-
Madison to construct a new dormitory at the university's Kemp Natural Resources
Station, Woodruff, WI. Kemp Station is a multi-disciplinary research and
teaching facility located in the ecologically diverse Northern Highland Region
of north central Wisconsin. During the 1990s, Kemp Station experienced a
substantial increase in scientific and educational activity. In 1997, lodging
demands began to exceed available space. This unmet demand has grown each year
so that the Station now turns away some 700 person-nights of lodging requests
annually. The proposed dormitory will address the lodging shortfall, allowing
Kemp Station to better fulfill its mission of environmental research,
instruction and outreach.

Lodging capacity will be expanded via construction of a modern, 150-m2
(1,600-ft2), all-season dormitory. The new building will consist of 6 3-person
suites, bath areas, and large kitchen and living area. The dormitory will be
connected to the Station's research laboratory via a fiber optic cable,
providing users with convenient computer network and Internet access.

Construction of a new dormitory is fundamental to Kemp Station's comprehensive
program of research, instruction and outreach. The Station's research activities
are incredibly diverse. For example, the Station has supported microscopic and
molecular studies of green algae. This work has enhanced our knowledge about the
origins, evolution, and early diversification of land plants. At the other end
of the scale, the Station is currently facilitating landscape-level studies
examining the exchange of carbon dioxide between the atmosphere and temperate
forests. This research has already expanded our knowledge of biosphere-
atmosphere interactions and will ultimately improve our understanding of
ecological responses to climate change. The knowledge gained from these and
other scientific endeavors are used directly in the Station's instructional and
public outreach programs. The Station hosts approximately 15 undergraduate
courses annually, providing today's students with the skills and knowledge
necessary to become tomorrow's natural resource managers. In addition, the
Station's outreach program puts science to work. It strives to increase public
understanding of current environmental issues and promote wise resource
stewardship. Thus, expansion of the lodging facilities at the Kemp Natural
Resources Station will provide the infrastructure necessary to advance
environmental science and education in northern Wisconsin and throughout the
Great Lakes Region.

