* 0122207
* Scalable Enterprise Systems Phase II:  Supply Chain Optimization and Protocol Environment (SCOPE) - A Rapid Prototyping and Modeling Tool for Extended Enterprises
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Joseph Pekny, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 08/31/2006
* USD 621,908.00

The objective of this Phase II Scalable Enterprise Systems project is to develop
a Supply Chain Optimization and Protocol Environment that emulates the behavior
of supply chains involving multiple, independent, goal-seeking entities over
time. Entities will be represented by novel optimization models that capture the
key decision variables and technological constraints, while retaining enough
special structure to allow efficient solution. Interactions among entities will
be described through protocols that specify what goods, money, and information
pass among entities, in what order entities make decisions, how information is
processed by each entity to make its decisions, and how entities respond to
unforeseen events that do not match their plans. The approach will allow users
to represent a range of different modes of interaction among entities in the
supply chain, which, although simplified relative to industrial practice, should
provide insights into many cases of practical interest. By focusing on the
policy level of analysis, it provides sufficient granularity for evaluating
high-value supply chain opportunities, and assessing the associated risks,
unencumbered by the transactional detail of existing modeling systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this project would provide managers with a
tool for rapid prototyping of supply chain proposals that would permit them to
evaluate possibilities without either implementing an untested idea or waiting
for competitors to do it and risking loss of market share. Researchers would be
provided a test bed for assessing how well theoretically derived results
generalize to different modes of operation that strain some of the original
assumptions, and for experimenting with forms of supply chain collaboration too
complex for treatment analytically. Educators will be able to explore realistic
cases with students by varying model parameters and displaying the results in
near real time.