* 0122321
* Mechanism for Antagonistic Signal Transduction Pathways in ren-1 Regulation in Kidney
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2001,12/31/2002
* John C. Fray, University of Massachusetts Medical School
* Standard Grant
* Dona Boggs
* 12/31/2002
* USD 94,688.00

Blood pressure regulation, salt and water balance, and nervous system control
are significantly influenced by the kidney. A hormonal renin (ren-1)-angiotensin
system in the kidney is critical for appropriate regulation, balance, and
control. Ren-1 is upregulated conventionally by a cyclic-AMP signal transduction
pathway, although the signaling intermediates have not been discovered on
account of impoverished technology. Paradoxically, ren-1 is downregulated
unconventionally by a calcium signal transduction pathway, but again the
signaling intermediates have not been discovered. The objective of this project
is to discover and describe the signaling intermediates in the calcium-mediated
downregulation of ren-1 gene expression, using kidneys and ren-1-producing cells
under different stresses to alter the calcium signal transduction pathway. The
approaches are to scan kidneys and ren-1-producing cells using microarray
technology, and to use proteomic tools to discover the cluster of genes
associated with the calcium-signal transduction pathway. This project will
simultaneously screen 2,400 arbitrarily chosen but verified transcripts against
mRNAs from isolated perfused kidneys and ren-1-producing cells in culture to
define a cluster of genes most consistently associated with ren-1 expression.
This cluster will be used to test the hypothesis that ren-1 downregulation is
associated with increased expression of not just 2 signaling intermediates as
currently believed, but with at least 14 other intermediates. These observations
will be important not only because it is the first time the intermediates of an
antagonistic signal transduction system has been measured and described, but
also because it may clarify the paradoxical molecular nature of calcium and
ren-1 in blood pressure regulation and salt and water balance.