* 0122315
* FSML:  Expansion of Laboratory Facilities at the University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee Field Station
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* James Reinartz, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 138,642.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. James Reinartz, Dr. Peter Dunn, Dr. Jeffrey
Karron, Dr. Gretchen Meyer, and Dr. Linda Whittingham at the University of
Wisconsin - Milwaukee to expand the laboratory facilities at the Field Station.
The UWM Field Station is a productive research site and is actively used for
teaching. Since the Field Station was established in 1970, it has produced over
190 scientific publications and 111 graduate student dissertations. In the past
five years alone, the Field Station has been used for 108 research projects by
94 different scientists from 28 institutions. More than 15 different
universities regularly use the Field Station for instruction in a wide variety
of courses, and the Station has averaged between 5 and 6 undergraduate
independent study projects annually in the past five years. In addition, the
Field Station conducts a workshop/short course program each year. These courses
offer college level instruction on focused topics in natural history, and are
available for advanced undergraduate/graduate credit through UWM. In the past
five years, 34 short courses providing instruction to approximately 680 students
have been held at the Station. The Field Station also has an active outreach
program offering many educational opportunities to groups and the general
public. &lt;br/&gt; The UWM Field Station has a six-year plan for a three-phase
facilities improvement project that will accommodate its existing use and a
modest level of projected growth in programs. The planned expansion of
facilities includes: 1) a small addition to the Station's two-story lab/office
building and remodeling of the existing building, 2) a larger, single-story
addition to the lab building, and 3) construction of new sleeping quarters. This
grant will fund the first phase of the project: a 1,280 gross ft 2 addition to
the two-story lab/office building and a remodeling of the existing building.
These first-phase improvements will add two research rooms: a room to house the
biological collections maintained by the Field Station that will also provide
lab space and one 300 ft 2 research lab. This project will also add a 490 ft 2
lab that can be dedicated for teaching use. The research and teaching labs will
include sinks and fume hoods. In addition, the basement of the current
lab/office building is not handicapped-accessible and the building lacks
handicapped-accessible bathrooms; these deficiencies will be remedied in the
remodelling.&lt;br/&gt; This grant will greatly increase the UWM Field Station's
ability to support research use and to maintain its high quality of instruction.
The construction of new research rooms will increase from one to three the
number of lab spaces that can be used by researchers without interruption from
teaching use of the facility. The wide diversity of research conducted at the
site has already contributed greatly to the baseline information available on
the Station's plant and animal communities, soils, hydrology, and geology, as
has the Station's long-term data base development program. Expansion of the
laboratory facilities will allow these productive research projects to continue
with fewer conflicts over space, and will make the site more attractive to
additional researchers. This grant will also add a dedicated teaching lab with a
sink and fume hood, which will allow expansion of the workshop/short course
program and greater use of the station by courses from UWM and other
universities. In sum, new laboratory and teaching space will greatly increase
the Field Station's research productivity and give more students the opportunity
to study natural history and other topics at the Field
Station.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;