* 0122809
* Tribal Colleges and Universities: Science, Mathematics, Engineering and Technology Enhancement
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2007
* James Shanley, Fort Peck Community College
* Cooperative Agreement
* Michael D. Fredenberg
* 08/31/2007
* USD 2,306,562.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;Fort Peck
Community College (FPCC), a tribal college, is located on the
Fort&lt;br/&gt;Peck Reservation in northeastern Montana. FPCC provides academic
and vocational&lt;br/&gt;programs and community service to the 10,000 members of
the Assiniboine and Sioux&lt;br/&gt;tribes and area residents. In 1999-2000,
FPCC had an average enrollment of 233 students.&lt;br/&gt;Approximately 85% of
the students are Native American - nearly all are enrolled&lt;br/&gt;members of
the Sioux and Assiniboine Tribes. In June 2000, there were 30
graduates&lt;br/&gt;with Associate Degrees. Of these, only 4 (13%) were in
science, mathematics,&lt;br/&gt;engineering and technology (SMET)
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;Curriculum Enhancement: Objectives and Anticipated
Outcomes&lt;br/&gt;1-1. By Fall 2003, all entering students will be advised to
enroll in appropriate levels&lt;br/&gt;of SMET courses based on assessment
scores and previous achievement.&lt;br/&gt;1-2. By Fall 2004, instructors will
have integrated technology into 6 introductory&lt;br/&gt;SMET
courses.&lt;br/&gt;1-3. By Fall 2005, instructors will have integrated
technology into 6 advanced SMET&lt;br/&gt;courses.&lt;br/&gt;Faculty
Development: Objectives and Anticipated Outcomes&lt;br/&gt;2-1. Each year, two
SMET instructors will attend one regional or one national&lt;br/&gt;conference
specifically focused on integrating technology into courses
according&lt;br/&gt;to national standards.&lt;br/&gt;2-2. By Spring 2005, all
eight SMET instructors will have completed one semester of&lt;br/&gt;faculty
exchange or sabbatical at another academic institution or
national&lt;br/&gt;laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;2-3. By Fall 2003, each SMET instructor
will have designed and implemented a Web-&lt;br/&gt;based course based on
national standards.&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate Training: Objectives and Anticipated
Outcomes&lt;br/&gt;3-1. By Fall 2003, student enrollment in SMET courses will
increase by 10%.&lt;br/&gt;3-2. By Fall 2004, ten students will be selected for
internship placement in local sites.&lt;br/&gt;3-3. By Spring 2005, five
students will graduate with SMET majors and/or transfers&lt;br/&gt;to four-year
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;3-4. By Spring 2006, five students will enter SMET
careers.&lt;br/&gt;Expected Impact. This project will impact the college and
reservation in several&lt;br/&gt;ways. Implementation of an appropriate system
of assessment and student placement in&lt;br/&gt;beginning SMET classes will
increase the completion rate to 70%. The addition of the&lt;br/&gt;computer
laboratories and wireless communication will increase the FPCC capacity
to&lt;br/&gt;offer additional SMET classes and research and increase enrollment
in advanced SMET&lt;br/&gt;classes by 10%. As a result of the student
internships, the percent of SMET majors&lt;br/&gt;entering math, science and
technology careers is expected to increase by 10%. The&lt;br/&gt;students
assigned to internships will become aware of career opportunities in
math,&lt;br/&gt;science and computer technology especially in the region. The
addition of the Web-based&lt;br/&gt;courses, especially advanced courses, will
further increase enrollment and course&lt;br/&gt;completions. Involvement of the
Advisory Committee will increase potential training and&lt;br/&gt;service
opportunities. FPCC will enter into partnerships with tribal businesses and
private&lt;br/&gt;companies for training and education especially in computer
applications.