* 0122007
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Event-Related Potentials Tracking Reading Experience, Lexical Quality, and Text Comprehension in an Artificial Orthography
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2003
* Charles Perfetti, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Lynne Bernstein
* 08/31/2003
* USD 15,000.00

With National Science Foundation support, Ms. Hart and her advisor Dr. Perfetti
will conduct a year long investigation of the hypothesis that reading
comprehension problems are caused by poor quality lexical representations. Much
research has been undertaken to find the causes of reading comprehension
problems. For example, it is well known that college age readers who have
trouble comprehending what they read have smaller vocabularies, more trouble
making inferences, finding main ideas, and maintaining motivation. While all of
these factors are correlated with reading comprehension, it is plausible that
they are manifestations of a deeper source - that of poor quality lexical
representations. A single word in the mental lexicon is composed of
phonological, orthographic, and semantic information. In order to support good
reading comprehension, these representations must be reliable (one input
connects to one lexical entry) and coherent (e.g. phonology and orthography code
for the same lexical entry). When reliability and coherence break down,
comprehension suffers. In the present project, Hart and Perfetti aim to describe
the lexical basis of comprehension skill by equating skilled and less skilled
comprehenders on reading experience. Subjects learn an artificial language under
conditions where experimenters have control over subjects' experience with the
language and over properties such as word frequency and homophony. At early and
late stages of mastering this language, subjects receive language tests and have
the electrical potentials at the scalp measured (using ERP methods) while
reading the artificial language. The hypothesis being tested predicts that when
tested after little experience, all subjects will behave like less-skilled
comprehenders do in other experiments, and after extensive experience, all
subjects will behave like skilled comprehenders.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
findings from this study are expected to clarify the nature of reading
comprehension problems. Explaining comprehension difficulties at a lexical level
has implications for interventions designed to improve reading
comprehension.&lt;br/&gt;