* 0122317
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Community and Commodity in the Pueblo III World: Exchange and Integration in the Yellow Jacket Community, A.D.1150-1300
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2003
* Michelle Hegmon, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2003
* USD 9,331.00

Under the direction of Dr. Michelle Hegmon, Ms Jannette Mobley-Tanaka will
collect data for her doctoral dissertation. Using ceramic analysis she will
reconstruct social organization in a prehistoric southwest USA Pueblo
community.&lt;br/&gt; Analysis of community interaction has been critical to
archaeologists' understanding of the abandonment of the Mesa Verde region
(southwest Colorado) around AD 1300. Communities - important places on the
landscape - persisted for generations, even as individuals and households
shifted residences frequently, thus these communities were much more than groups
of individuals. Communities also became larger and more densely packed over
time, and eventually controlled access to agricultural lands and served as units
of defense and conflict. This picture, while fascinating, is based almost
exclusively on analyses of the interaction among communities, rather than the
social dynamics within communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Mobley-Tanaka's
research will fill this gap, utilizing data from the large Yellow Jacket
community in southwest Colorado to analyze intra-community interaction.
Archaeologists rarely are able to undertake such detailed analyses, but they are
possible in this case because of (1) many years of research at Yellow Jacket;
(2) deposits that are clearly associated with individual residences; (3) the
identification of three pottery-making kilns at the site. These circumstances
will allow Mobley-Tanaka to determine where households obtained their domestic
goods - information that can be used to trace patterns of consumption and
exchange at the intra-community level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; NSF funds will
support analyses concerning the production and distribution of pottery.
Petrographic analysis will allow identification of where the pottery was made
and thus how it was distributed across the community. These data can answer
questions about the nature of inter-household interaction within the community:
Were households relatively independent or strongly interdependent? Were there
various networks of interacting households? Results regarding intra-community
dynamics will be combined with extant understandings of inter-community
interaction to illuminate the role of communities in the abandonment of the Mesa
Verde region and to better understand the nature of community in the past. They
will also increase understanding of an important aspect of US prehistory and
assist in training a promising young scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;