* 0122220
* NSF/CBMS Regional Conference in the Mathematical Sciences -- Solving Polynomial Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,11/30/2002
* Paulo Lima-Filho, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 11/30/2002
* USD 27,492.00

One of the most fundamental problems in mathematics is that of solving
polynomial equations. Such systems are ubiquitous in applied mathematics,
arising in robotics, coding theory, optimization, mathematical biology, computer
vision, statistics, and numerous other areas. Of course, the study of
polynomial&lt;br/&gt;systems is a beautiful topic in its own right and is the
subject of algebraic geometry, which is&lt;br/&gt;traditionally regarded as a
deep and difficult subject in pure mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent
years, an explosive development in explicit algorithms and practical software
for geometric calculations has revolutionized the area, making many formerly
inaccessable problems tractable, and providing a fertile ground for
experimentation and conjecture. These algorithms have also generated a
surprising interest in algebraic geometry among scientists, engineers, and
applied mathematicians. The&lt;br/&gt;tools of the trade employed in this field
span the spectrum of mathematics, ranging from numerical&lt;br/&gt;methods and
differential equations to algebraic geometry to combinatorics. The purpose of
these lectures is to&lt;br/&gt;provide an overview of recent results and the
``state of the art''; and to discuss the wealth of open questions raised by
these results and suggest new directions ripe for exploration.