* 0122973
* KNEXUS Third Annual Symposium on Economic, Political, and Social Change: Theory and Empirical Evidence
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2002
* Nathan Rosenberg, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* John L. Naman
* 06/30/2002
* USD 50,000.00

ABSTRACT ( 01-22973) ROSENBERG&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;KNEXUS and its
Symposium series reflect a highly innovative, multidisciplinary approach that
addresses change at the level of the economy or society. It blends new
understandings in human cognition; economics, economic history and institutions;
new methods of data analysis; and evolutionary theories of economics and society
to focus on change. Any serious study of change in economies, polities and
societies must acknowledge uncertainty. To do so effectively, however, the
starting point must be an account of human cognition, through which human beings
individually and in larger groupings understand and by means of which they
generate change. This Symposium will address the cognitive foundationos of
change, and the consequent processes of change at social, political and economic
levels. Recent advancements in network analysis offer promise of a theoretical
approach that can yield empirically testable models, and thus the Symposium will
address the role of networks in a theory of social and economic change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed Symposium will bring together scholars from
diverse relevant disciplines (including, but not limited to, economics, economic
history, technology studies, intellectual history, human cognition and
sociology, organization and management studies). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;