* 0122464
* ITR/AP:  The SCEC Community Modeling Environment:  An Information Infrastructure for System-Level Earthquake Research
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2007
* Reagan Moore, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Leonard E. Johnson
* 09/30/2007
* USD 10,030,000.00

0122464&lt;br/&gt;Jordan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is now possible, because of
recent advances in geophysics, to create for the first time, fully three-
dimensional simulations of earthquake fault-rupture and fault-system dynamics.
Such physics-based simulations are crucial to gaining a fundamental
understanding of earthquake phenomena, and they can potentially provide enormous
practical benefits for assessing and mitigating earthquake risks through
improvements in seismic hazard analysis. The Southern California Earthquake
Center (SCEC) has embarked on an ambitious program to develop physics-based
models of earthquake processes and integrate these models into a new scientific
framework for seismic hazard analysis and risk management. This project involves
a collaboration among SCEC, the Information Sciences Institute (ISI), the San
Diego Supercomputer Center (SDSC), the Incorporated Institutions for Seismology
(IRIS), and the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) to develop a "Community Modeling
Environment", which will function as a virtual collaboratory for the purposes of
knowledge quantification and synthesis, hypothesis formulation and testing, data
assimilation and conciliation, and prediction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve
its objectives, the environment must provide a means for describing,
configuring, initiating, and executing complex computational pathways that
result from the composition of various earthquake simulation models. This
entails solving a number of challenging problems in information technology. To
solve these problems, the principal investigators will draw on several distinct
computer science disciplines: 1) Knowledge representation and reasoning
techniques; 2) Grid technologies; 3) Digital library technology; and 4)
Interactive knowledge acquisition techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A central
element of this project will be a Knowledge Transfer, Education and Outreach
program with four primary goals: 1) to transfer the technology developed under
this project to the end users of earthquake information, including engineers,
emergency managers, decision makers, and the general public; 2) to cross-educate
advanced students in the fields of geoscience and computer-science; 3) to make
the general public aware of the benefits of applying advanced information
technology to the problems of earthquake risk; and 4) to use public interest in
earthquake information to attract beginning students into geoscience and
computer science. A specific objective will be to engage young Hispanic
Americans in the intellectual challenges of earthquake information
technology.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;