* 0122013
* Integrating Undergraduate Geoscience Education and Research via a Watershed Management Approach
* GEO,GEO
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Gary Hanson, Louisiana State University Shreveport
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 06/30/2004
* USD 47,476.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrating Undergraduate Geoscience Education and
Research via a Watershed Management Approach&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
enhances undergraduate training in the geoscience component of the
interdisciplinary Environmental Science Program through curriculum
development/revision and expanding student research training opportunities, with
particular focus on watershed management approaches. The geoscience component in
the Louisiana State University at Shreveport (LSUS) Environmental Science
Program is enhanced by the inclusion of a comprehensive watershed and ecosystems
approach in several new and revised undergraduate courses. The focus of the
curricular enhancement and related student research and experiential learning
opportunities is on the Red River watershed and ecosystems in Louisiana. This
project integrates research and education, offering undergraduate students
interdisciplinary curricular education and experiential learning opportunities,
and builds upon collaborative linkages with partner agencies such as USGS. LSUS
students participate in public outreach efforts and in publication and
dissemination of research results via papers and presentations. Dissemination is
aided via a tri-state Red River Public Radio network, headquartered on campus,
and through a new inter-agency working group composed of faculty and government
agency personnel who are developing a broad regional initiative. &lt;br/&gt;