* 0122761
* Collaborative Research: Sorption Reversibility of Hydrophobic Compounds in Geosorbents Investigated with Model Sorbents
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Joseph Pignatello, Connecticut Agricultural Experiment Station
* Continuing grant
* Patrick L. Brezonik
* 08/31/2004
* USD 314,331.00

0122761 Pignatello The objective of this research is to obtain a fundamental
understanding of two kinds of adsorption-desorption hysteresis. These include
thermodynamically irreversible sorption, in which adsorption and desorption
follow different microscopic pathways, and hysteresis due to abiotic surface-
catalyzed chemical transformation of the adsorbate where the products remain
irretrievably bound to the solid. This research will focus on the principle
thermodynamic sorbents of organic compounds in natural settings: macromolecular
organic carbon (humic substances) and micrographitic OC (black carbon). Sorption
experiments will be performed on well-characterized model sorbents, whose
behavior can be better related to mechanism than whole natural geosorbents.
Adsorption and desorption data will be used to compute an irreversibility index
to quantify irreversible sorption hysteresis. Non-reactive test compounds will
be trichloromethane, trichloroethene, benzene, and naphthalene, and the reactive
test compounds will be phenol, catechol, and pyrogallol. An understanding of
hysteresis is crucial to modeling a chemical's fate, defining soil or sediment
quality criteria, developing remediation technologies, and setting standards for
acceptable levels of contamination after remediation. This is a collaborative
research grant between Connecticut Agricultural Experiment Station (BES-0122761)
and Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (BES-0122863). ***