* 0122022
* Partnership for Advancing Technologies in Housing: Rigidified Pneumatic Composites: Use of space technologies to build the next generation of American Homes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2001,02/28/2005
* Achille Messac, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 02/28/2005
* USD 150,000.00

Rigidified Pneumatic Composites: Use of space technologies to build the next
generation of American
Homes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rigidified Pneumatic
Composites (RPC) structures are defined as thin flexible membrane structures
that are pneumatically deployed. After deployment, these structures harden due
to chemical or physical change of the membrane. Because of this change, such
structures no longer require pneumatic pressure to maintain their shape or
provide structural stability. As a result, a structural skin is obtained that
can be used to construct a variety of three-dimensional structures. These
include for example advanced panel systems, simple columns and beams, and
complex truss systems. Current research related to RPC technology is mainly
focusing on space structure design. The potential of this class of structures
for achieving affordable space systems, robust deployment, very small-stowed
volume, and low weight is recognized by an increasing segment of the space
structure design community. Our previous studies have indicated that RPC
technology might also be extremely beneficial for use in residential
construction. RPC technology for example possesses many of the characteristics
of wood light framing in that such structures are low cost, require no special
tools, are extremely resource efficient, and are very versatile in terms of
design flexibility. In addition, RPC technology lends itself very well to low
cost manufacturing and streamlined technology delivery. Applications in
residential construction&lt;br/&gt;however differ significantly from space
applications; no direct displacement is therefore possible. The research and
development objective of this project is therefore to investigate the
application of rigidified pneumatic composite technology specifically for
residential construction. The project proposes to develop and demonstrate a
design methodology that allows for rational comparison of Rigidified Pneumatic
Composite (RPC) systems with alternate RPC designs and building systems. The
long-term objectives of this grant are to develop commercially viable and
environmentally conscious housing technologies that utilize state-of-the-art
materials and manufacturing processes. The proposed research is expected to lead
to the development of houses that are safer to construct, less expensive to
build, operate, and maintain, and will use significantly less resources relative
to wood light. &lt;br/&gt;