* 0122992
* Engineering and Computer Technology Opportunity Program
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2001,09/30/2005
* Lynn Rudig, Western Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 09/30/2005
* USD 400,000.00

This project is providing scholarships to students who enroll in one of the
following associate degree programs: Mechanical Design Technology, Electrical
Engineering Technology, Bio-Medical Electronics, Electromechanical Technology,
Electronics Technology, Programmer/Analyst, Microcomputer Specialist and Network
Specialist programs. The objectives of the project are:&lt;br/&gt;(1) Over the
course of four years, to award approximately 160 scholarships, 15% of which are
awarded to minority students and 40% to women.&lt;br/&gt;(2) To have 75% of
Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics (CSEM) scholars participate in at
least one student support service.&lt;br/&gt;(3) To assure that 97% of the
graduates in the CSEM scholarship program obtain employment related to their
program or continue on to a four-year college.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recruitment
of students for the project includes (a) incorporation of an interactive web
page to motivate women towards occupations in mechanical design and electronics;
(b) provision to the pre-college minority student program information about the
mechanical design, computer science and electronics programs and the
scholarships available; (c) distribution of brochures advertising the project
and scholarships; (d) direct mailings about the scholarships to program
students; (e) classroom presentations and distribution to college counselors and
instructors, high school counselors and high school math and science instructors
information and scholarship brochures; (f) visits to the high school math and
science classes by college program instructors to recruit students and
distribute CSEMS brochures; and (g) distribution of brochures and scholarship
applications to high school students visiting the college on
fieldtrips.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support and career placement services include
the college's Academic Success Center, case management, specialized tutoring and
retention services for students; technical support in the electronics, math, or
computer labs; designated counselor/instructor/scholar appointment; scholar
study groups; scholar mentorship program; computer science peer tutoring
program; internships; and special recognition at the annual Foundation
Scholarship Dinner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;