* 0122227
* Scalable Enterprise Systems Phase II: Discrete Event System Specification (DEVS) as a Formal Modeling and Simulation Framework for Scaleable Enterprise Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2001,12/31/2004
* Bernard Zeigler, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 12/31/2004
* USD 416,420.00

This Scalable Enterprise Systems Phase II project will develop the Discrete
Event System Specification (DEVS) Formal Framework for Scalable Enterprise
Design and extend earlier-developed DEVS-based modeling and simulation
environments to support several real world test cases. As the Internet expands
toward 1 billion nodes forming a highly interconnected and computationally
powerful medium, and companies increase specialization and horizontal layered
organization, new complexity and dynamics are emerging. Scalability, the ability
to avoid performance degradation and system breakdown as the scale of activity
greatly increases, is one of the urgent global problems that needs to be
addressed. This research will seek to enhance scalability at three inter-related
levels of abstraction: the Enterprise Architecture level, the Information
Technology Infrastructure level, and the Modeling and Simulation level. Earlier
research developed a theoretical foundation for architecting a major
responsibility of enterprise systems -- to ensure that the right information
about the enterprise is available to decision makers at the right time. Having
extended the DEVS formalism to express time-critical behaviors in enterprise
data management, the researcher proposes to implement the extended DEVS
functionality by suitably extending the distributed real-time execution
environment previously developed in NSF-sponsored research. This environment
will be tested by two diverse applications: a small scale but complete and real
factory automation test bed and a large-scale web-hosting service for
e-business. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Integrated Manufacturing Technology
Initiative (IMTI) sponsored by the primary governmental funding agencies (NIST,
DOE, NSF, and DARPA) states that modeling and simulation are emerging as key
technologies to support manufacturing in the 21st century. This research will
attempt to fill in some of the gap between the current state of the art and the
IMTI vision of the future. In this vision enterprise processes, equipment and
systems are linked via a robust communications infrastructure that delivers the
right information at the right time; and integrated enterprise management
systems that ensure that decisions to be made in real-time and on the basis of
enterprise-wide impact. Achieving scalability in M&amp;S and IT infrastructure
will enable a wide array of M&amp;S studies and implementations, as well as
supporting the scalability of the future M&amp;S-based networked, extended and
distributed enterprise systems envisioned by IMTI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;