* 0122189
* Expansion and Renovation of the Darling Marine Center Library
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Kevin Eckelbarger, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 139,440.00

This award provides partial funding for expansion and modernization of the
library at The Darling Marine Center. The library currently contains more
marine-related holdings than any other library in Maine, and is an important
resource for researchers and students interested in the biology of the Gulf of
Maine and the Maine coast. Because of current space limitations, a third of the
library's holdings are stored in other buildings and attic spaces. The library
is not wheelchair accessible, has no significant study space, and provides only
limited access to electronic databases. The proposed changes include: 1)
construction of a 1,500 sq. ft. addition to the main floor of the Library, 2)
the reallocation and renovation of 1,650 sq. ft. of existing space on the main
floor and second floor, thus providing a total of total of 3,150 sq. ft. of
additional space for library use, and 3) the purchase of computers, interactive
videoconferencing hardware, and related equipment that will facilitate access to
electronic information and data stored electronically. The planned increase in
amount and quality of library space, and improvements in communications
equipment available to library users, will significantly improve the ability of
this important regional resource to serve the needs of resident and visiting
faculty, students and other users.