* 0122950
* Department of A Scholarship Program for Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Students: An Industry-Academia Partnership Approach
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Hank Javan, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/2004
* USD 171,869.00

Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;A Scholarship Program for Computer Science,
Engineering, and Mathematics Students:&lt;br/&gt;An Industry-Academia
Partnership Approach&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program provides 25 undergraduate
students $3125 per academic year provided the students are within two years of
graduation. The program is managed to especially encourage applications from
underrepresented groups and transfer students. All engineering majors as well as
computer science and mathematics majors are eligible for scholarships. The
program strengthens existing resources, as well as partnerships with community
colleges and industry. The primary goal of the program is to supplement existing
resources within the University to facilitate a life-altering, environmental
change for financially disadvantaged, upper-division undergraduate CSEM students
with academic potential. The goal is achieved by providing twenty-five, two-year
scholarships supplemented with summer industry or research internships between
the junior and senior years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program has the following
supporting objectives, each with specific, measurable outcomes, which are
analyzed and serve as feedback to continually improve the program:&lt;br/&gt;1)
Increase the graduation rate of CSEM students particularly minority and female
students&lt;br/&gt;2) Decrease the average time to degree completion for CSEM
students&lt;br/&gt;3) Decrease the number of CSEM students working in non-
intellectually engaging jobs by increasing opportunities for students to work on
a faculty member's funded research or through approved co-op or summer
internships with industry partners of the program&lt;br/&gt;4) Improve
employment placement in highly sought-after positions&lt;br/&gt;5) Increase the
number of CSEM graduates who enroll in graduate school&lt;br/&gt;The objectives
are achieved through a unique combination of student environment modifications,
scholarships, retention and intervention, professional development and research
activities, industrial collaborations, and academic support while leveraging and
not replacing existing resources.&lt;br/&gt;