* 0122214
* Scalable Enterprise Systems Phase II: Agent Based Scalable Enterprise System for Enterprise Co-design
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2004
* Alok Chaturvedi, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 09/30/2004
* USD 498,354.00

The objective of this Scalable Enterprise Systems award is the creation of an
agent-based framework for the simulation of product design, marketing and
supply-chain as collaborative processes. This project will develop the enabling
theories and technologies needed to support its realization. The framework will
use computational agents modeling the human behavior, artificial agents modeling
synthetic economies, and constructive agents to address strategic, tactical and
operational decision-making problems in simulating product life cycle. These
agents use both analytic models and adaptive algorithms such as generic
algorithms, fuzzy logic, and neural networks. The agents will compete to provide
solutions in these simulations using innovative market metaphors such as
auctions and recommendation systems. The research tasks include requirements
analysis, preliminary functional analysis, methodology development, initial
prototyping, testing, and specifications for the framework.

If successful, this research will allow organizations to become aligned to and
focused on to changing markets and changing customer values. The proposed
collaborative design framework will test strategies necessary to ensure that the
product delivery process, the product development process, and marketing
initiatives are aligned to address the multiple dimensions of customer values
simultaneously. The results will apply in the modeling of the supply chain for
convergence technologies and the development of business models for electronic
bandwidth exchange. The prototype will be used to support teaching in several
courses in Economics and Management.