* 0122778
* Presidential Awards for Excellence In Science, Mathematics and Engineering Mentoring
* EHR,DUE
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2004
* Albert Rosa, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn Suiter
* 11/30/2004
* USD 10,000.00

The Department of Engineering at the University of Denver established, "The
Making of an Engineer," as an engineering experience course for high-school
students fourteen years ago. The summer program works to engage the interest of
capable "second tier" students in engineering fields, and the follow up program
supports them in their academic and career development. The program provides a
good balance of research activities, group work and individual exploration with
faculty and student role models, all based on a central element: a three-week
college-level course in problem solving.

The quality and outcomes of a well-articulated quantitative and qualitative
evaluation program are impressive. The program surveys indicate that eighty-two
percent of the student participants chose to attend college, with sixty-one
percent majoring in engineering. The program in 2000 included 68 participants,
of which forty-four (sixty-five percent) were members of groups underrepresented
in science and engineering: three were African-American, ten were American
Indians, and thirty-one were Hispanic/Latino. The strategy of recruiting capable
students from diverse regions across the United States and its protectorates,
including Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and American Samoa, makes it a truly
exceptional approach reflecting awareness of the need to broaden opportunities
in SMET fields beyond identifying those traditionally participating. The program
components reflect incorporation of the recommendations from research literature
on best practices in human resource development. The program has become well
integrated into the heart of the institution, now needing no additional staff
beyond those who are tutors and mentors.