* 0122371
* Planning Activities: Development of a Strategic Plan for the Trinity College Field Station at Church Farm
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2001,01/31/2004
* Joan Morrison, Trinity College
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 01/31/2004
* USD 25,000.00

&lt;br/&gt; A grant has been awarded to Drs. Scott Smedley, Joan Morrison, Craig
Schneider, and Mr. Michael O'Donnell at Trinity College, Hartford, Connecticut
to develop a strategic plan for the College's newly acquired field station. The
Trinity College Field Station (TCFS) at Church Farm, readily accessible from the
College's urban campus, is a rural site of 256 acres (102 ha) in northeastern
Connecticut, consisting of diverse terrestrial and aquatic habitats. TCFS's
three-fold mission is to promote the area's use for research in the natural
sciences, educational endeavors with an environmental emphasis, and conservation
of open space. A comprehensive strategic plan is crucial to fulfilling TCFS's
mission.&lt;br/&gt; Development of the strategic plan will occur over eighteen
months beginning in September 2001. The planning process will be directed by the
TCFS Advisory Committee, which includes, in addition to the project directors,
other Trinity faculty, administrators, and a representative of the local land
trust. A survey of environmental researchers and educators in the Northeast will
identify external stakeholders. Site visits to other field stations will permit
examination of their infrastructure, programs, and management, with the aim of
adopting successful models. Three planning workshops will provide additional
opportunities to consult with relevant experts. The first two, with outside
participants drawn largely from regional field stations, will focus on TCFS's
research and educational programs, respectively. The final workshop, with
outside participants drawn nationally, will focus on the integration of these
two programs and will consider inherent operational issues. Findings from the
surveys, site visits, and workshops will all contribute to the strategic plan
document, which will guide Trinity's administration towards development of a
first-rate field station, particularly in these important early years. Given
that TCFS currently lacks physical structures for its research and educational
programs, the strategic plan will be critical to Trinity's efforts to design,
finance, construct, and manage a facility.&lt;br/&gt; Besides providing
opportunities for field research and environmental education previously
unavailable to Trinity, the field station is significant in several other
respects. Located within the National Parks Service's Quinebaug and Shetucket
Rivers National Heritage Corridor, TCFS is well positioned to study this rare
rural remnant within the Boston-Washington megalopolis. Occupied by Europeans
since 1715, TCFS is among few field stations with such a long recorded land-use
history and can thus contribute to our understanding of how previous human
activities have influenced today's environment. Finally, Trinity College hopes
that TCFS can benefit other educational institutions. Southern New England has
one of the highest concentrations of colleges and universities in the nation,
yet most lack a field station. Through Trinity's sponsorship of the Learning
Corridor (a new complex of K-12 schools serving Trinity's inner-city
neighborhood) and through its consortial affiliation with Hartford-area colleges
and universities, the College has excellent opportunities to engage minority
students in research and education at TCFS.&lt;br/&gt;