* 0122193
* Scalable Enterprise Systems Phase II:Exploratory Research on Flexible Production Networks: SEEK - Scalable Extraction of Enterprise Knowledge
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2007
* R. Raymond Issa, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 08/31/2007
* USD 661,090.00

ABSTRACT

Proposal: CMS-0122193 PI: Joachim Hammer Institution: University of Florida
Date: July 21, 2001

ABSTRACT CMS0122193 - "Flexible Production Networks Phase II: SEEK - Scalable
Extraction of Enterprise Knowledge"

This grant provides funding to support development of new theory and
technologies to allow the seamless, rapid interconnection of diverse legacy
systems with enterprise decision support tools to allow extraction of data and
knowledge across those legacy systems. Such a capability is critically important
to allow rapid configuration of computing systems that support extended
enterprise collaboration. The application domain is the flexible production
network. Flexible production networks (FPNs) consist of firms that operate in a
project oriented, customized production environment. Most construction (totaling
approximately 8% of GNP) and growing parts of manufacturing industry operate in
this form. Characterized by rapid assembly and disassembly of business networks
based on project needs, FPNs are particularly well-suited users for the proposed
research.

We call our technology SEEK - Scalable Extraction of Enterprise Knowledge.
Knowledge extraction is difficult because data resident in the firm does not map
directly to the input needed by a decision support system. Existing approaches
do not support SEEK's fundamental capabilities: (1) rapid connection to legacy
data and applications with little programmatic setup; and (2) linking source
knowledge with decision support tools not natively available to the source. Our
novel approach to provide these capabilities is to use encoded domain knowledge
about the types of information that would be stored in applications to enable
semiautomatic connection to those applications. Our approach is application
independent, supporting extraction of legacy data from both structured and
unstructured sources. This approach is inherently more scalable and robust than
building application specific tools. Successful conclusion of our research will
significantly increase the speed and reduce the amount of human input necessary
to instantiate an extended enterprise computing platform with heterogeneous
sources.