* 0122772
* CEDAR: Studies of Trapped, High Frequency Acoustic-Gravity Waves near the Mesopause
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Richard Walterscheid, Aerospace Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Robert B. Kerr
* 12/31/2005
* USD 225,000.00

Two sets of related measurements are proposed that build upon the PI's previous
work in studying small-scale, fast atmospheric acoustic-gravity waves. During
the past year and a half, a new Aerospace built infrared (1.5 - 1.7 um
wavelength) airglow imager has operated at the Starfire Optical Site in New
Mexico. It is now proposed to move this new fast imager to Maui to take
advantage of the placement of the lidar at that site. Previous work has shown
the existence of acoustic waves in time series spectra from a Hawaii based IR
spectrograph. The emphasis here will be on studying the as yet poorly explored
short period (&lt; 5 minute observed period) acoustic-gravity waves, and the
very small scale (a few km horizontal wavelength) instabilities. These results
will complement the studies of the longer period gravity waves undertaken by
other investigators using their imaging instruments at
Maui.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further, there is strong experimental evidence that
small-scale waves seen in airglow images are ducted from a source region in the
troposphere that could be located a thousand kilometers or more from the
observation site. Previous data suggest that the waves seen over Adelaide,
Australia around summer solstice are ducted from a source region of strong
convective activity well to the north perhaps as far away as the north coast.
The PIs propose work in wave sources and propagation enabled by a unique
capability for imaging and by the fortuitous nature of the climate and
topography of Australia. Specifically, they propose to obtain data from two
airglow imagers; one located at Adelaide and another at Alice Springs, Australia
about 1500 km to the north. These will be part of a four imager chain, to begin
operating in late 2001, that extends from the northern to the southern coast of
Australia as part of the Darwin Wave Experiment (DAWEX) in late 2001.