* 0122364
* The Sevilleta Research Field Station:  Development of a Long-term Sample Processing Laboratory and Storage Facility.
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* James Gosz, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 79,562.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Robert R. Parmenter and Dr. James R. Gosz at
the University of New Mexico for a renovation project at the Sevilleta Research
Field Station, located on the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service's Sevilleta
National Wildlife Refuge in central New Mexico. The Sevilleta Research Field
Station provides field support to a large number of scientists and students
studying the ecology, geology, anthropology, and climatology of the Middle Rio
Grande Valley. The research and training use of the field station has increased
dramatically in the 1990's, and demand for laboratory space at the field station
has outstripped available facilities; in addition, new long-term initiatives for
collecting and storing dried/preserved samples of soils, plant materials, and
arthropods, will require expanded laboratory and long-term storage space. With
this NSF grant, and with cost share from the University of New Mexico, the UNM
scientists will implement a three-part plan in which they will build a new
sample storage building and renovate the station's current shop/storage building
into laboratory space. The plan includes: (1) moving the station's shop
operations into a new, shared shop facility being constructed by FWS, thereby
enhancing shop capabilities and creating new lab space, (2) constructing a new
storage building for existing field equipment and long-term storage of field
samples, and (3) renovating the old shop/storage building into a sample
processing laboratory, complete with laboratory benches, casework and increased
drying-oven capacities for processing soil and vegetation samples. These
improvements will result in a net gain of 1,500 square feet of laboratory space,
and nearly double the station's available storage and shop space. The net result
will be more usable work space for visiting researchers and students, and a more
efficient use of combined building space with FWS. The improved facilities will
allow increases in both the quantity and efficiency of research activities in
the Middle Rio Grande Valley conducted at the Sevilleta Research Field Station,
and therefore will contribute to a large spectrum of databases on the ecology of
this region in the American Southwest.

