* 0122581
* ITR/SY+IM+AP: Center for Applied Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2007
* John Lafferty, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 08/31/2007
* USD 6,684,274.00

Algorithms are the basic procedures by which computers solve problems. With the
explosion in the use and connectivity of computers, and in the sizes of the data
sets being used, the performance of algorithms is becoming increasingly
important. Being able to solve a problem ten times faster, for example, could
mean designing a drug next year instead of several years later, or reducing the
cost of developing a new space structure by allowing faster and more extensive
computer simulations. Over the past 30 years there have been significant
advances in the basic theory of algorithms. These advances have led to a "core
knowledge" concerning algorithms and algorithmic techniques that has now been
applied across an amazing diversity of fields and applications---surely more
broadly than calculus is now applied. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The problem,
however, is that there is a large gap between ongoing theoretical research, and
the current use of algorithms in applications. It often takes more than ten
years for the core ideas in a new algorithm to make it into an application, and
ongoing theoretical research often does not properly address the needs of the
applications. The purpose of the Center is to bridge this gap so that efficient
and effective algorithms can be deployed more rapidly. This will be achieved
through (1) a set of Problem Oriented Explorations (PROBEs), (2) developing an
extensive set of web resources on algorithms, and (3) educational activities
including holding workshops for educating teachers. The PROBEs will bring
together algorithm designers and domain experts to rapidly deploy new
algorithmic ideas within a specific domain. &lt;br/&gt;