* 0122815
* Presidential Awards for Excellence In Science, Mathematics and Engineering Mentoring
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2003
* Earlene Armstrong, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn Suiter
* 11/30/2003
* USD 10,000.00

Dr. Earlene Armstrong has clearly encouraged young minority students during her
twenty years on faculty at University of Maryland at College Park. She has
served as the primary advisor to undergraduate students in the Department of
Entomology, formally advising more than one hundred students each year.
Armstrong has served as the director of the Prefreshman Academic Enrichment
Program, which prepares and retains "at risk" students during their first year
at Maryland, focusing on strengthening their skills in mathematics and science.
Armstrong is noted for taking a personal interest in working with students, and
for helping the student to develop important practical skills, such as good time
management and study habits. As a result, the program's students earn higher
grades, have a retention rate of eighty-seven percent and a fifty-five percent
retention rate in the sciences. Those mentoring relationships remain active long
after the students graduate from the
university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Armstrong's success with her students is
reflected in honors she has received, such as the Faculty Minority Achievement
Award from the University of Maryland President's Commission on Ethnic Minority
Issues, the Outstanding Advisor of the Year Award from the University's Parents'
Association.&lt;br/&gt;