* 0122082
* Scalable Enterprise Systems Phase II:  Real-Time Promising for Authority Domains Operating in a Build-to-Order Mode
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Pakize Pulat, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 07/31/2005
* USD 517,784.00

This Scalable Enterprise Systems Phase II grant funds an investigation of
scalable techniques for real-time order promising by discrete build-to-order
environments facing dynamic order arrivals. The algorithms to be developed in
this project for calculating due dates accurately consider current time-phased
availability of resources and materials, prior order commitments, and the
current system state. The presence of various alternates (resource paths or
material sources) creates combinatorial complexity. To increase performance, the
promising algorithms will integrate (1) theoretically sound heuristic techniques
developed through research, (2) scalable optimal algorithms such as shortest
path, and (3) computational technology. One of the heuristics to be examined is
based on a novel, even controversial, idea-- for the purposes of promising, the
time when a resource will be available to process an operation can be estimated
with sufficient accuracy by considering only a partially ordered task plan.
Current support for this principle is based on practical experience but little
scientific evidence. A key tenet of this project is that the results be highly
scalable. Consequently, joint research occurring at the intersection of
Industrial Engineering and Computer Science is both necessary and synergistic in
this project since the algorithmic aspects of promising and advanced
computational approaches for technological realization are intertwined when
research is performed in a large-scale systems context. Algorithms will be
implemented in an object-oriented, event-driven, memory-resident, multi-threaded
architecture for detailed study and empirical evaluation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most important short-term customer service
decisions is making accurate promises in response to requests from customers or
business partners. Surprisingly, very little research has been done in this
area. While a vast body of literature exists on scheduling to meet prescribed
due dates, very little work addresses how due dates that are tight yet
achievable may be assigned. Results of this research will increase the accuracy
and speed with which these due date promises can be made, which in turn will
have a very significant impact on revenues, operating expenses, and customer
satisfaction. This research is directly applicable to manufacturers that
increasingly are selling built-to-order products direct to customers via the
Internet and to a future where collaborative commerce freely occurs among
dynamically recombinant business partners.&lt;br/&gt;