* 0122889
* Department of Building Technical and Scientific Competency in the American Workforce
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Ralph Grove, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen C. Cooper
* 05/31/2007
* USD 395,342.00

Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;This project provides 29 scholarships per year to
talented low-income students in computer science and mathematics. The project
encourages community college (CC) graduates with AS degrees to continue their
education through the BS degree. The scholarships are used as a recruiting tool
to attract students to computer science and mathematics. Four categories of
scholarships are offered for CS and Mathematics students: (1) four-year
scholarships for incoming first-year students (offered during year one of the
project), (2) two-year scholarships for CC transfer students (offered during the
first three years of the project), &lt;br/&gt;(3) two-year scholarships for CS
graduate students (offered during the first three years of the project), and (4)
one-year scholarships (offered in the first and last years of the
project).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scholarship recipients are selected on the basis
of financial need, according to established guidelines, and according to
ability, based upon GPA, standard test scores, demonstrated professional
ability, and overall class ranking. For retention, existing student support
programs are used and expanded, including supplemental instruction, tutoring,
internship placement, and career placement. Students also have access to clubs
and organizations that offer mutual support, including: chapters of ACM, IEEE,
and MAA; Upsilon Pi Epsilon (CS) and Pi Mu Epsilon (mathematics) honor
societies; an active mathematics club; and a local student-led Unix users
group.&lt;br/&gt;