* 0122062
* Partnership for Advancing Technologies in Housing: Moisture Control - Convective Drying in Residential Wall Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2003
* Eric Burnett, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Peter Chang
* 08/31/2003
* USD 149,770.00

Moisture Control in Walls&lt;br/&gt;Moisture constitutes a hazard for buildings
and their occupants. There are at least two good reasons to ensure that the
presence and movement of moisture across the enclosure of buildings is
controlled, especially the exterior walls of houses; first, to avoid the health
hazards (mold, etc.) and, second, to avoid deterioration of the materials within
the wall. To control moisture requires knowledge of how wetting, storage, and
drying occurs and some idea of the performance thresholds for the materials
involved. For many building professionals and educational institutions, this is
a new science. &lt;br/&gt;This project is directed at understanding, modeling,
and evaluating the potential for ventilation and convective drying within
various wall systems. Houses with pitched roofs commonly make use of the
circulation of air to remove moisture from the attic space; hence the familiar
vented roof with both soffit and ridge vents for letting cold, dry air in and
warm, moist air out in the winter. The contribution of convection to the drying
of walls needs to be much better understood.. This project will contribute to
improving the durability and the safety of wall systems in houses, leading to
reduced maintenance and repair costs. The project meets more than one of the
stated PATH goals.&lt;br/&gt;The most important involves computer modeling and
the investigation of a number of design and development issues. Practical
concerns are sizing the flow chamber, assessing the contribution the of
sheathing membranes (house wrap, building paper); venting strategies and how
best to transfer the technology to the various target audiences: namely the
researchers, the design professionals and manufacturers, and the house builder
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An applied R and D project awarded to Eric
Burnett of the PHRC by NSF, under the PATH program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;