* 0122177
* VIII Latin American Congress on Probability and Mathematical Statistics:  Mathematical Sciences at the Interface
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/2001,12/31/2002
* Alicia Carriquiry, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diaz
* 12/31/2002
* USD 31,070.00

0122177&lt;br/&gt;Carriquiry&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Latin American
Congress on Probability and Mathematical Statistics (Congreso Latinoamericano de
Probabilidad y Estadistica Matematica, (CLAPEM), will take place during November
12-16,2001 in La Habana, Cuba and will be hosted by the Universidad de la
Habana. Organizers are Dr. Alicia Carriquiry, Iowa State University and Dr.
Andrea Rotnizky, Harvard School of Public Health. Applied probability and
statistics have only recently become important areas of research to areas of
inquiry such as biology, engineering, and economics, and only recently has Latin
America begun serious interaction with scientists in other disciplines. The goal
of this activity is to provide opportunity to young Latin American and US
researchers to establish long-term cooperation, and to encourage young Latin
American scientists to pursue graduate studies in the
US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activity will include short courses, talks, and
posters. The short courses will provide the young scientists the opportunity to
be taught by international leaders in this area, while the poster sessions will
give them an excellent venue to present their work and to interact with more
senior conference participants. It will most likely play a significant role in
the development of the scientific enterprise in Latin America. &lt;br/&gt;