* 0122293
* Efficient Algorithms for Lossless Data and Image Compression
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2003
* Yoram Bresler, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2003
* USD 82,940.00

Proposal 122293 U of Ill Urbana-Champaign PI: Bresler, Yoram

In spite of the focus in recent years on lossy compression of audio, images, and
video, lossless data compression remains crucial in applications such as text
files, facsimiles, software executables, and medical imaging. Universal source
coding algorithms, which deal with sources whose statistics are unknown, are of
particular importance. Universal coding methods are designed for universal
performance over a broad class of possible sources. In these methods the source
parameters are estimated, either implicitly or explicitly, and the sequence
itself is encoded accordingly. Therefore the coding length for universal methods
is g eater than the entropy; the extra coding length, called the redundancy
satisfies a fundamental lower bound by Rissanen.

The focus of research in universal data compression has been on reducing
redundancies. In this sense, context tree weighting (CTW) has achieved the
ultimate goal for the important class of tree sources, because it has
essentially achieved Rissanen 's bound. However, in addition to low
redundancies, a universal coding method must be computationally fast, and
consume little memory. Neither of the two leading methods, CTW or PPM, a
compression method that has been fine-tuned by various heuristics for practical
use, are particularly strong performers in these respects. Therefore, the main
goal of the proposed research is to develop algorithms featuring fast
computation and low memory use, while providing compression near Rissanen 's
bound.

Like some of the most efficient high-performance universal compression
algorithms to-date, the proposed approach is based on the Burrows Wheeler
transform (BWT). The BWT is an invertible transform whose output contains
segments in which symbols are approximately independent identically distributed.
Owing to this similarity to piecewise i.i.d. (PIID), compressing the BWT output
using PIID methods yields good compression results. However, such methods cannot
achieve universal coding redundancies close to Rissanen 's bound because they
require (whether implicitly or Explicitly) extra bits to encode the positions of
transitions between segments in the BWT output. Recognizing this hidden
overhead, this project proposes to take a fresh look at BWT based-methods and
the relationship to the fundamental redundancy bounds. The project will explore
ways to close the gap between traditional BWT-based methods and Rissanen 's
bound while retaining the computational efficiency of the BWT. A particular
challenge will be to apply this approach to lossless image compression.

The resulting algorithms will have linear complexity, and be better than any
current algorithm with comparable asymptotic compression performance, in terms
of computation and/or memory use. Some versions of these algorithms will also
have simple structure, admitting fast hardware implementations. Furthermore,
this research will reveal the role of context modeling in universal lossless
image compression. Since near-Rissanen redundancies with linear complexity are
hard to beat, we expect a shift in the universal coding literature from
compression improvement to implementation and practicality.