* 0122249
* Infrastructure Improvement for the Crater Mountain Biological Research Station, Papua New Guinea
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2007
* Andrew Mack, Wildlife Conservation Society
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2007
* USD 133,220.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Andrew L. Mack at the Wildlife Conservation
Society (WCS) for upgrading infrastructure of the Crater Mountain Biological
Research Station (CMBRS). The stations is located in Papua New Guinea (PNG), the
young democracy occupying the eastern half of the island of New Guinea, the
world's second largest island after Greenland. The island is home to over 5% of
Earth's biodiversity and is one of three remaining tropical rainforest
wilderness areas on our planet. Despite the unique biota PNG is one of the
least-studied and poorest-known major ecoregions. The CMBRS and the WCS programs
undertaken there are dedicated to furthering our knowledge of this critically
important ecoregion and providing outstanding education opportunities for
biology students in a pristine rainforest wilderness. CMBRS has been the premier
rainforest research destination in PNG for over a decade-- nearly 100
researchers have worked here resulting in over 50
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite substantial efforts by WCS to
maintain the station, the degradation from the tropical climate and twenty feet
of annual rainfall is taking its toll on the station. It has become necessary to
rebuild the station and upgrade its facilities to meet the increasing demands of
visiting scientists and students. A new facility constructed of welded steel and
vinyl siding will replace the present all-wood structure. This new facility will
have an expected lifespan of over forty years. The materials will be pre-
fabricated in PNG by a company that supplies mining camps and delivered to the
remote CMBRS site by helicopter. The grant will also upgrade the current solar-
powered electrical service and enable improved, modern computing facilities in
this remote field site. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The station is in the heart of
PNG's second largest (260,000 hectares) and one of the most successful
conservation areas. CMBRS provides scientific guidance for the conservation
project, providing data for viable management planning. The station also serves
as a unique educational facility; enabling university students from the US and
other nations access to pristine tropical forests and its diverse and endemic
biota. Student training programs at CMBRS immerse US undergraduate students in
an intensive research-training program where they focus on biological field
studies and natural history for at least three months. The station and WCS also
oversee a wide range of training programs for PNG nationals who otherwise have
little access to field-based research in the nation's rainforests. The education
and research programs at CMBRS have significantly improved our knowledge of this
unique ecosystem and promise to have even greater impact after the
infrastructure improvements allow more work to be accomplished
there.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;