* 0122599
* ITR/SI: Societal Scale Information Systems: Technologies, Design and Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2007
* James Demmel, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2007
* USD 7,506,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ITR/SI: Societal Scale Information Systems:
Technologies, design and applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;James Demmel,
University of California, Berkeley&lt;br/&gt;0122599&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br
/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Information technology (IT) is transforming society
at an accelerating pace, but critical research is needed to realize IT's
potential for solving complex societal problems, including energy, disaster
response and education. We are establishing the Center for Information
Technology Research in the Interest of Society (CITRIS) to sponsor
collaborative, IT-focused research to find solutions to grand-challenge societal
problems affecting the quality of life of individuals and organizations. CITRIS
is a multi-campus center, including UC Berkeley, UC Davis, UC Santa Cruz and UC
Merced, with many industrial partners. CITRIS's driving applications include (1)
boosting efficiency of energy production and consumption, and (2) saving lives
and property and establishing emergency response IT infrastructure in the wake
of disasters, among others. The solutions to these applications share a need for
highly-distributed, reliable, and secure information systems that can evolve and
adapt to radical changes in their environment, delivering networked information
services and up-to-date sensor network data stores over ad-hoc, flexible and
fault tolerant networks that adapt to the people and organizations that need
them. We call such systems Societal-Scale Information Systems. Our research and
outreach partner is UC Merced, a new research campus to be constructed, with a
special mission to expand participation of underrepresented, first generation
college-going, low income and rural students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;