* 0122242
* FSML: Construction of Duplex-Unit Housing for Visiting Researchers at the Konza Prairie Biological Station
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* David Hartnett, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 08/31/2003
* USD 111,766.00

Abstract - 0122242 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to Dr. David
Hartnett at Kansas State University to construct a duplex-unit housing facility
at the Konza Prairie Biological Station (KPBS) in Kansas to expand housing
accommodations for visiting research scientists and students. KPBS is a 8,600
acre tallgrass prairie preserve and research station managed by Kansas State
University for basic biological research, long-term ecological research on
grassland ecosystems, science education, and conservation. The station has
become recognized internationally as the premier grasslands research station in
the United States and has attracted scores of researchers and students from
institutions throughout the U.S. and several foreign countries. The construction
of this additional facility will meet the increasing needs for accommodating
visiting scientists and will enhance the research capacity and support
facilities at the station.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A 1,750 square-foot duplex
housing unit will be constructed at the KPBS near Manhattan, Kansas. Each of two
self-contained living units will contain two multiple-occupancy bedrooms, living
area, and completely equipped kitchen, laundry, and bath facilities. The
building will be constructed at the station headquarters site adjacent to the
KPBS research laboratories, library and other facilities. The addition of this
housing facility will double the lodging capacity at KPBS and will complement
current dormitory-style accommodations by providing private, self-contained
housing units suitable for longer-term residency by visiting
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; KPBS is a center for important research on
global climate change, conservation of biodiversity, rangeland management,
agriculture, and water quality. The station is conducting research on important
global environmental issues in grassland ecosystems including exotic species
invasions, the role of grasslands in global carbon cycling and sequestration,
and loss of grassland due to regional expansion of woody vegetation. New
approaches in remote sensing and other technologies are also being developed to
address these important research questions. In addition, KPBS serves as a
regional center for K-12, university, and adult community education programs in
ecology focused on both regional and global problems. Expansion of on-site
housing accommodations at KPBS will aid in attracting leading scientists to help
address these issues. This expansion of station facilities and support
infrastructure at KPBS will significantly enhance these important on-going and
new research programs and on-site undergraduate and graduate training and public
education programs. &lt;br/&gt;