* 0122881
* Symposium:  Crossroads of Plant, Animal, and Microbial Ecology, to be held August 10, 2001, Madison, WI
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2002
* Vincent Gutschick, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 07/31/2002
* USD 4,500.00

While both plant ecophysiology and animal ecophysiology have enjoyed strong
growth over the past decades, the fields have developed differently, accompanied
by an increasing gap between plant and animal ecophysiology. Plant physiological
ecology has increasingly developed links to ecosystem science by scaling up
physiological process, whereas animal ecophysiologists have developed more
strongly in the realm of evolutionary physiology. Despite this, both communities
study fundamentally similar ecophysiological processes. Researchers and
professional society members in the Ecological Society of America (one of the
principal societies for plant ecophysiology) and in Society for Integrative and
Comparative Biology (the principal society for animal ecophysiology), recognize
the problem. They also recognize the gains to both fields that will accrue from
increased sharing of both methods and foci.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This symposium
focuses on commonalities and differences in plant, animal, and microbial
ecophysiology, exploring the benefits of increased cross-talk among different
communities of researchers. It will be held at the annual meeting of the
Ecological Society of America in Madison, WI, in August 2001. In addition to
reaching participants at this large, widely attended meeting, results from the
symposium will be published in the journal, BioScience.&lt;br/&gt;