* 0122282
* Planning Grant for the Lake Louise Field Station
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* David Bechler, Valdosta State University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 08/31/2003
* USD 6,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to Drs. David L. Bechler and John B.
Pascarella at Valdosta State University, Valdosta, Georgia, to bring in
consultants for the purpose of assessment and improvement of the Lake Louis
Field Station. In December 1995, the field station was acquired from Mars Hill
College. The station, which is relatively undeveloped, is unique in that within
its 173.1 acres there exists a 14-acre sinkhole lake feeding the Floridian
Aquifer, extensive wetlands, a mixed deciduous forest, and remnants of an upland
pine forest. The station lies 8 km south of the City of Valdosta, and 20 km
north of the Florida State line. Residential movement out of Valdosta has
resulted in some housing development around the property. Currently, the station
is being used as a natural laboratory for field based science classes and
research. VSU wishes to develop a comprehensive five-year plan and mission
statement that will allow the university to gain maximum benefit from the
station while preserving as much of its original natural environment as
possible.&lt;br/&gt; In order to best utilize the Lake Louise Field Station, VSU
proposes to bring in independent consultants to examine the station and produce
a report advising the university on the best way to utilize the station for
teaching, research, and public outreach. Specifically, they wish to have the
consultants examine and advise them on the following key points: (1) How to best
utilize existing natural habitats without damaging them. (2) The applicability
of converting the upland pinelands from slash pines to its original longleaf
pines. (3) The advisability of purchasing additional land to expand specific
habitat types and serve as a buffer around the station. (4) Applicability,
structural layout, and best location of a proposed classroom/laboratory complex
for teaching and research. (5) The practicality and feasibility of the current
five-year mission statement for the field stations use and
development.&lt;br/&gt; Development of the station is important for several
reasons. The station is the only field station in the southern half of the state
owned by a state educational institution that is available for teaching,
research and public outreach. Its location close to the City of Valdosta and
major roads in the southern portion of the state make it easily accessable for
VSU as well as local school districts and community organizations. Most
importantly is its value as an educational center for the citizens of South
Georgia. Many of VSU's 8,820 students are first generation college students. The
citizenry of South Georgia has for generations viewed the environment as
something to exploit, but not necessarily preserve and renew. By expanding the
facilities at the station so that it can be more readily used for teaching,
research and public outreach, VSU will be better able to fulfill its mission of
public education and service to the South Georgia
community&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;