* 0122208
* NSF/CBMS Regional Conference in the Mathematical Sciences - Mathematical Methods in Nonlinear Wave Propagation - May 13-17, 2002
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2002,05/31/2003
* Guoqing Tang, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 05/31/2003
* USD 27,500.00

The Mathematics Department at North Carolina A&amp;T State University will host
an NSF/CBMS Regional Research Conference, May 20-24, 2002, on "Mathematical
Methods in nonlinear wave propagation". The proceedings of the five-day
conference will be anchored by ten lectures delivered by Professor J. Kenneth
Shaw on the following topics: Overview of fiber optics; Mathematical models;
Pulse propagation in fibers; Mathematical modeling and simulation; Optical
solitons; Phase modulation and solitons; Optimization Problems; Planar
waveguides and Elliptical core fibers; Pulse design in fibers; Retrospective,
review and&lt;br/&gt;research directions. In addition to these lectures, there
shall be semi-structured discussion&lt;br/&gt;sessions led by other leading
research mathematicians and engineers in nonlinear mathematics&lt;br/&gt;and
fiber optics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chosen topic, motivated by the study of
the propagation of pulses through nonlinear optical fibers, underlies a fertile
and briskly active interdisciplinary area, rendering it particularly timely in
applied mathematics research. By providing a focal point to an otherwise diverse
set of specialized mathematical areas, the topic creates opportunities for
collaboration amongst mathematicians of different specialties, while at the same
time laying a foundation for interdisciplinary collaboration. This conference is
in particular intended as an effort to introduce new researchers to this
exciting field, with a focus on HBCU/MI faculty, whose activities are normally
confined to teaching. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While participation is mainly
expected from within North Carolina and the Southeastern-Atlantic region, other
participants are expected from the wider mathematical sciences community. An
intended outcome of the conference is that it will act as an incubator for
mathematical and interdisciplinary collaborative activities among established
and new researchers, thus serving to stimulate research activity in applied
mathematics at minority serving institutions.