* 0122165
* Partnership for Advancing Technologies in Housing: Designing Panelized Systems to Minimize Impact on Indoor Air Quality in Tightly-Sealed Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2001,02/28/2006
* John Little, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Perumalsamy N. Balaguru
* 02/28/2006
* USD 150,000.00

Designing Panelized Systems to Minimize Impact on Indoor Air
Quality&lt;br/&gt;in Tightly-Sealed Buildings&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;John C.
Little&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of Structural Insulated Panels (SIPs) to
create very tight building envelopes will help achieve PATH's goals of
simultaneously reducing the environmental impact and improving the energy
efficiency of new and existing homes. Typically, SIPs use oriented strand board
and rigid foam in a multi-layered, sandwich-like structure. Although
environmental advantages make these panelized systems very attractive, the
tighter building envelope construction may degrade indoor air quality. For
example, formaldehyde, other aldehydes, and terpene hydrocarbons are commonly
found in new manufactured and site-built houses, and these compounds are
associated with strong sensory irritation. The release of these contaminants
must therefore be taken into account when designing homes constructed with SIPs.
A diffusion model that predicts emissions from single-layer materials has
recently been developed and successfully validated. A logical and very promising
extension of this approach is to apply the model to predict emissions from
multi-layer systems like SIPs. This research will characterize emissions from
the individual layers used in the fabrication of SIPs; independently measure the
model parameters for the different material layers; validate the single-layer
model by comparing predicted emissions to observations obtained in experimental
chamber studies; extend the single-layer model to a composite multi-layer model
with boundary conditions appropriate for SIPs construction; validate the multi-
layer emissions model for SIPs, with and without the presence of an installed
barrier material; and use the multi-layer model to optimize the position and
properties of barrier materials that can be used to significantly reduce
emissions from other advanced panel systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
builds on an existing and successful partnership with Alfred Hodgson, of the
Environmental Energy Technologies Division at Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory, and forges a new collaboration with Dr. Daniel Dolan, Professor and
Director of the Center for Integrated Systems in Housing at Virginia Tech,
thereby ensuring rapid translation of fundamental research into practical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;