* 0122045
* Partnership for Advancing Technology in Housing: Extruded Fiber-Reinforced Cement Composites for Residential Construction
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2003
* Surendra Shah, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Chang
* 08/31/2003
* USD 150,000.00

EXTRUDED FIBER-REINFORCED CEMENT COMPOSITES FOR RESIDENTIAL
CONSTRUCTION&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Concrete can be
stronger, more durable, more fire-resistant, and perform more consistently than
wood, making it a good material for residential construction. However, plain
concrete is relatively brittle and heavy. Those drawbacks can be overcome with
special processing techniques and fiber reinforcement. Recently extrusion
technology has been adapted for the production of high-performance, fiber-
reinforced composites at Northwestern University's ACBM Center. In this process,
a highly viscous mixture of cement paste and micro-fibers is forced through a
die of desired cross-section. Extruded compositions are stronger, more ductile
and more impervious to water than conventional concrete.&lt;br/&gt; The
objective of this proposed research is to develop extruded, high-performance
composites suitable for residential construction, particularly advanced panel
systems. The composites will be designed to accomplish the PATH goals of
improved durability, reduced maintenance costs, and reduced risk of life,
injury, and property destruction from natural hazards. Different cross-sections,
with a focus on cellular construction, will be developed for the production of
lightweight elements and advanced panel systems. Collaboration with the Chicago
Board of Housing and suppliers to the construction industry will provide avenues
to introduce these products to builders and contractors. &lt;br/&gt;