* 0122069
* Partnership for Advancing Technologies in Housing: Engineered Wood Frame Wall Panel System Integrating Prefabricated Truss Technology
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2004
* Robert Emerson, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 08/31/2004
* USD 89,822.00

NSF Proposal 0122069&lt;br/&gt;Engineered Wood Frame Wall Panel System
Integrating Prefabricated Truss Technology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Robert N.
Emerson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An engineered wood
frame wall panel system will be investigated that integrates prefabricated metal
plate connected truss technology with conventional wood frame wall construction.
The wall panel system will appear and handle like conventional walls and be
readily adaptable to current construction techniques and applications. However,
the engineered wall panel system will be more affordable, durable, safer, and
have less environmental impact than conventional site built wood frame
construction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conventional wood frame walls are designed by
prescriptive guidelines. They are typically constructed of dimension lumber
framework connected together with nails and then sheathed with structural panels
(plywood &amp; oriented strand board), insulation panels, or finishing panels
(drywall). An engineered wood frame wall panel system will be developed using
conventional materials but the dimension lumber framework will be connected with
toothed metal plate connectors instead of nails. These moment resistant
connections will transform the framework into moment resistant frames that will
increase resistance to lateral loads. In addition to the increased structural
performance the innovative wall system will gain the benefits of engineered and
prefabricated construction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The prefabricated metal plate
connected truss industry employs computer-aided design to rapidly engineer
custom roof and floor trusses for residential and light-commercial construction.
These trusses are then constructed at a factory, shipped to the job site and
erected into place. The whole process lends itself to improved efficiency,
worker safety, and environmental friendliness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current
prefabricated metal plate connected truss technology will be integrated into a
wall panel system that will originally use conventional building materials but
will be readily adaptable to new materials. The design and behavior of the
engineered wall panel system will be investigated for the proposed research. The
technical research will consist of the following phases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1.
Integrating the toothed metal plate connector design process into moment
resistant frame design.&lt;br/&gt;2. Behavior and comparison testing between
conventional framework and moment resistant framework. &lt;br/&gt;3. Developing
design methodology for combining the lateral resistance provided by moment
resistant frames with that provided by the conventional sheathing
effect.&lt;br/&gt;