* 0122796
* Presidential Awards for Excellence In Science, Mathematics and Engineering Mentoring
* EHR,DUE
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2003
* Jack Crane, New Haven Public Schools
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn Suiter
* 11/30/2003
* USD 0.00

The Olin-Yale-Bayer New Haven Public School Science program of the New Haven
Public Schools demonstrates an ability to assemble scientists from diverse
disciplines to work with students and teachers on K-12 science projects. The
program began six years ago as a partnership among seven schools -- it now
encompasses more than forty schools in New Haven. It is a comprehensive program
with multiple components that align goals with outcomes. Students learn the
scientific method and associated skills by interacting with scientists; the
scientists train participating teachers. Students are provided with authentic
research opportunities, where teamwork is promoted and self-esteem is enhanced
as a result. Older students are able to get academic course credit for their
work. This program serves a significant number of minority students. As a result
of program activities, student test scores in science have risen. The program
has produced a network of mentors that are provided with training and support.
More than 130 volunteer mentors participated in the 2000-2001 program. In the
2001 Connecticut science fair, thirty-four projects were based from this program
-- those projects involved eleven mentors and forty-eight students (58%
minority), seven of whom were medallists and ten of whom received special
awards.