* 0122090
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  A Diachronic Analysis of the Valley of Oaxaca Economy from the Classic through the Postclassic
* SBE,BCS
* 11/15/2001,04/30/2004
* T. Douglas Price, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2004
* USD 11,453.00

Under the direction of Dr. T. Douglas Price, Mr. Lane Fargher will collect data
for his doctoral dissertation. The research problem is the nature of the
household economy in prehispanic Mexico. He will continue work on a study of
economic activities at a series of prehispanic settlements located in the Valley
of Oaxaca, Oaxaca, Mexico. These sites include San Juan Guelavla, a 32.8 hectare
site that was occupied between AD 700 and AD 950, and Santa Cecilia Jalieza, a
26.6 hectare site that was occupied between AD 250 and AD 500. These sites are
important because they are both located in areas that have limited agricultural
potential, making non-agricultural activities (handicraft production; i.e.,
pottery production, stone tool production, basketry, or cloth production)
important for the survival of site occupants. In order to understand how site
inhabitants supported themselves economically a combination of archaeological
survey and microscopic analysis of artifacts collected during survey will be
used at each site. This information will be refined through the use of ceramic
and lithic petrography to identify the source of raw materials used in
handicraft production and, in the case of ceramics, to collect information on
mass production of vessels. Currently some scholars argue that prehispanic
households, in Mexico, were self-sufficient (i.e. households produced everything
needed for survival within the house), while others argue that the prehispanic
economy was specialized (i.e. households intentionally overproduced a limited
number of handicrafts that were exchanged for other items required by the
household, including food). However, known examples of specialization are
relatively few in number. As a result, the degree to which specialized economies
supplanted self-sufficient households, and how households organized handicraft
production in relation to agricultural production between AD 300 and AD 1521
remains unknown. Mr. Fargher's research will provide important new data relating
to the nature of the prehispanic economy of Mexico. This research is also
important because it will provide data on small and medium sized settlements
which have generally been ignored by Oaxacan archaeologists working on issues
related to the later prehispanic era. Finally, as modern population expands in
the Valley of Oaxaca, archaeological sites are destroyed by construction and
looted as people attempt to support themselves. Therefore, Mr. Fargher's
research will help preserve the cultural heritage of Mexico and save important
scientific information.

