* 0122281
* Research Starter Grant:  The Morphological Consequences of Competition in Plethodon Salamanders
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Dean Adams, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 08/31/2003
* USD 35,000.00

Competition among closely related species is thought to be an important factor
driving species distributions. Though competition among salamanders in the genus
Plethodon appears to be common, the consequences of competition on morphology
are less well understood. In this project, hypotheses about morphological change
will be tested in two well-characterized species pairs. Several methods will be
used to quantify morphology, including linear distance measurements and
landmark-based geometric morphometric methods. For P. jordani and P. teyahalee,
it is hypothesized that morphological differences are more extreme in the Smoky
Mountains than in the Balsam Mountains. This hypothesis is based on knowledge of
ecological and behavioral interactions of these species in the two mountain
ranges. For P. cinereus and P. shenandoah, it is hypothesized that an extinct
population of P. shenandoah and a nearby population of P. cinereus are more
morphologically similar than populations in other regions where both species
coexist. This hypothesis is based on knowledge of behavioral and aggressive
interactions. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Results from this project will help us
understand how interspecific competition affects morphological variability in
Plethodon, which has important consequences for how organisms interact with
their environment. On a larger scale, results from this project will provide a
better understanding of the relative importance of competition as a driving
force behind community assemblages, and help us understand the influence of
competition on the geographic distribution of organisms.&lt;br/&gt;