* 0122857
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Reevaluating the Social Complexity of the Palenque Culture:  Archaeological and Ethnohistorical Survey in Eastern Venuzela
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2001,10/31/2003
* William Isbell, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2003
* USD 11,910.00

Under the direction of Dr. William H. Isbell, Mr. Rodrigo Nararrete will conduct
archaeological and ethnohistorical research in Venezuela, collecting data for
his doctoral dissertation. His primary objective is to gain a better
understanding of the nature and development of complex human societies, focusing
on a perplexing Native American example. Cultures of the Caribbean region have
long been recognized as superb examples of what anthropologists call
"chiefdoms," political systems intermediate between simple bands or tribes, and
complex state governments. Indeed, it is believed that the "chiefdom" represents
humanity's first experiment with complex social organization. Consequently, if
we are to understand the evolution of social complexity, chiefdoms must be
studied and comprehended, and the Caribbean offers an exceptional laboratory
using archaeology and ethnohistory.

Venezuela's Unare River Basin is an important area that probably provided an
avenue of migration between riverine Amazonian lowlands and the Caribbean Coast.
It could shed light on debates about differences in social complexity between
the Amazonian and the Caribbean culture areas, but early descriptions of the
cultures occupying Venezuela's Unare River are curiously contradictory.
Sixteenth and early seventeenth century chroniclers describe complex Carib
societies. But eighteenth century chronicles describe only simple cultures like
the Cariban Karinas. How is this to be understood? Should these descriptions be
considered historically accurate, fostering questions about the conditions in
which societies experience cultural collapse. Alternatively, do these
descriptions reflect changes in the way Europeans viewed and described the
"other," as well, perhaps, as changes in the political goals that colored
European perceptions and accounts?

The way to definitively resolve this is to compare ethnohistorical accounts with
archaeological information. Navarrete has completed a study of the chronicles.
Funded by NSF he will conduct the first systematic archaeological survey in the
Unare Depression, employing a transects-and-shovel-test-pits strategy
appropriate for heavily vegetated environment. The survey is designed to reveal
material correlates of social complexity as well as materials correlates of
cultural simplification. The results will reveal the history of social
complexity in the Unare Basin, and their implications for the ways changes in
European philosophy and politics influenced conceptualizations of natives and
their social conditions. The dissertation will also establish valuable
foundations for more comprehensive archaeological investigations of the
Venezuelan past.

