* 0122787
* Presidential Awards for Excellence In Science, Mathematics and Engineering Mentoring
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2003
* Christopher Castro, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn Suiter
* 11/30/2003
* USD 0.00

The Significant Opportunities in Atmospheric Research (SOARS) program of the
University Corporation for Atmospheric Research (UCAR), was established in 1996
and provides summer internship experiences to minorities and women to enhance
the professional development of students from underrepresented groups in
atmospheric and related sciences. Participants complete a research project and
report their findings to the UCAR community. SOARS also provides up to two years
of support for graduate education at UCAR-affiliated universities. Since 1996,
SOARS has included 61 student participants, of whom 70.5% are female, 29.5% are
male; the underrepresented ethnic groups include African-American (38%,),
Chicano/Hispanic/Latino (34%), and American Indian (16%), with additional
participants who are Euro-American (8%) and Asian-American (3%). The program
provides mentoring and support of students during critical transitions - from
11th and 12th grades through graduate degrees and has achieved a retention rate
of 80%.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SOARS attributes its success to a highly structured
mentoring program. During the summer program, SOARS participants work with
mentors in well-defined and well-documented relationships that include support
in selecting and engaging in a research program, attending scientific seminars
at the National Corporation for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) and local research
institutions, a program in science writing, and presenting the outcomes of their
research at a colloquium. During the academic year, mentoring continues through
advisory contact and through financial support. Advisors provide guidance on
academic and personal development, graduate school applications, and education
and career opportunities. Financial support includes up to 50% of costs for two
years of graduate school and for travel to professional society meetings to give
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SOARS demonstrates long institutional
commitment with broad-based participation from more than 40 UCAR universities.
&lt;br/&gt;