* 0122355
* FSML: Development of Living Quarters for the Edward J. Meeman Biological Field Station
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Scott Franklin, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 08/31/2005
* USD 181,921.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Jack Grubaugh at the University of Memphis to
construct living quarters at the Meeman Biological Field Station (MBFS) in
Shelby County, Tennessee. The primary missions of the field station are to: 1)
provide a unique, field-oriented curriculum to urban undergraduate students, and
2) serve as a focal point for ecological studies of the lower Mississippi River,
its floodplains and tributaries. While use of the station as both a teaching and
research venue has increased over the past five years, development of these
missions has been hampered by the lack of living quarters to house students,
instructors, and visiting researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will
support the first phase of a two-phase plan to provide critically needed living
quarters at MBFS. This first phase includes the construction of a dormitory to
accommodate approximately 24 students, instructors, and researchers. In
addition, a kitchen area and a multi-purpose dining and meeting facility will be
constructed in this first phase of the project. Thus, the first phase will
provide fully functional living quarters to support station use. The second
phase of construction will focus on the development of additional student and
faculty housing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will greatly enhance the
teaching and research missions of MBFS. The living quarters will allow
University of Memphis faculty to increase the number of field courses taught at
the station and to offer courses on a year-round basis. Furthermore, housing
will eliminate the need for time-consuming daily commutes from Memphis in order
to conduct on-site research or to launch research efforts on the river and
floodplains of the lower Mississippi Alluvial Valley.&lt;br/&gt;