* 0122518
* Exploring Savanna Chimpanzee Ecology and Prospects for Long-term Research in Senegal
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2002
* Jill Pruetz, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 07/31/2002
* USD 16,688.00

This high risk project is designed to assess the feasibility of habituating a
new population of chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes verus) to the presence of human
researchers in southeastern Senegal. This population of savanna chimpanzees
inhabits perhaps the hottest, driest, and most open habitat used by chimpanzees
today - a habitat similar to the one in which early humans are thought to have
evolved. A long-term goal of the project is to examine savanna chimpanzee
behavior and ecology in comparison to chimpanzees at forested sites. In Senegal,
humans and chimpanzees co-exist in some areas, and chimpanzees here are used to
human presence. In addition to monitoring the process of habituating chimpanzees
to the presence of human researchers, another immediate goal is to understand
the success of the chimpanzee population in areas inhabited by humans. The
findings can be applied to the conservation of chimpanzees elsewhere. As human
populations continue to increase across Africa, understanding how humans and
chimpanzees can peacefully co-exist will be a major contribution to conservation
biology. Understanding the ecology of savanna chimpanzees can help shed light on
the behavioral ecology of humans who used similar environments, and this project
initiates the difficult habituation process necessary to study these endangered
primates.&lt;br/&gt;