* 0122848
* Presidential Awards for Excellence In Science, Mathematics and Engineering Mentoring
* EHR,DUE
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2003
* Bharati Mehrotra, Tougaloo College
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn Suiter
* 11/30/2003
* USD 10,000.00

Dr. Bharati Mehrotra has an exemplary record of mentoring and encouraging
African-American students through college and into graduate or professional
schools in the sciences that spans thirty years of her academic career at
Tougaloo College. She has served as chair of the Department of Biology for more
than twenty years, she is credited with improving the curriculum and increasing
the enrollment of biology majors. Mehrotra has been the director of the Minority
Access to Research Career (MARC) program since 1977. More than one hundred
twenty-eight students have completed the program; twenty-eight have completed
graduate school in the sciences, with fifty percent of the remainder en route to
doctorates or medical degrees. As director of MARC, Mehrotra has worked to
develop a supportive learning environment by bringing experts to campus and
visiting research universities, motivating talented students to complete their
degrees. She goes yet farther, establishing linkages with graduate institutions
to facilitate her students' access to post-graduate opportunities. She maintains
contact with those she has mentored long after they have graduated, and her
students attest to a large number of successes directly related to her
mentorship. She was particularly commended for implementing these activities
while rigorously pursuing an active and credible research program, all under
challenging circumstances of limited institutional resources.