* 0122828
* Presidential Awards for Excellence In Science, Mathematics and Engineering Mentoring
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2003
* Melvin Webb, Clark Atlanta University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn Suiter
* 11/30/2003
* USD 10,000.00

Dr. Melvin Webb began developing mentoring activities in 1979 with the Saturday
Science Academy program in Atlanta, which provided educational enhancement in
science, mathematics, computer application and communication skills for
elementary-school students, and a Summer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics
Institute for high-school students. His efforts to increase the participation of
women and minorities span more than twenty-two years. The Saturday Science
Academy enrolled more than 5,000 local students between 1979 and 1996, and posed
as a national model for similar programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Webb's
activities have progressed based on solid planning developing funds and
implementation strategies that have had profound effects on minority success in
SMET. From his faculty post in the Biology Department at Clark Atlanta
University, Dr. Webb subsequently began to develop programs supporting
undergraduate students. He led the effort to develop a multi-departmental honors
program through which students could earn both a BS and an MS in five years;
this became the Program for Research Integration and Support for Matriculation
to the Doctorate (PRISM-D). The first cohort of students was in 1990-91. Thus
far six cohorts have graduated and 131of the 145 participants have earned BS
degrees (90.3 percent), and 80 of the 131 BS degree recipients have earned MS
degrees in the sciences (61 percent). Several students have earned doctorate
degrees or are in graduate or professional schools. Dr. Webb has published and
presented numerous papers detailing his success at local, regional and national
levels, providing dissemination of the mentoring models that pose as successful
practices in SMET education. Also noteworthy is the network of K-12 schools,
government and industry participants partnering in the programs that Dr. Webb
has built.&lt;br/&gt;