* 0122285
* Rural Systemic Initiatives in Science, Mathematics,and Technology Education - RSI: Southern Colorado Rural Systemic Initiative
* EDU,ESR
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2002
* Joy Werner, Adams State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert A. Mena
* 09/30/2002
* USD 183,700.00

The SCRSI is an outshoot of the UCAN-RSI. Unsuccessfully attempted as an
implementation award last year, it has been redesigned and reconsidered as a
developmental. Anchored at Adams State College in rural Southern Colorado, the
SCRSI plans to improve science, mathematics and technology education through a
partnership of 18 school districts, two Boards of Cooperative Educational
Service Centers (BOCES), two Regional Assistance Centers (RAC) 2 junior colleges
and 2 four-year colleges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The school districts encompass
47 K-12 schools in an economically disadvantaged area with approximately 12,000
students. Over 75% of the students in the schools are Hispanic. The 47 schools
are members of three coalitions, the San Luis Valley, the Arkansas Valley and
the South Central Coalitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are four major
components to the SCRSI:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Creation of an infrastructure
for managing the project and completing the scope-of-work throughout the
established consortium. &lt;br/&gt;Action: Establish site-based leadership
teams, Coalition leadership teams and project leadership
teams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Completion of a site analysis of individual
schools to identify strengths and weaknesses in order to direct future
implementation strategies.&lt;br/&gt;Action: Complete matrices on full
implementation and assessment at each school, conduct teacher surveys and school
walk-throughs, compile and analyze student data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3.
Establishment of strong collaboration across schools, partnerships and networks
across all levels of the region.&lt;br/&gt;Action: Conduct team meetings and
three strategic planning meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4. Development of the
implementation plan supported by all partners including specific partnership
commitments.&lt;br/&gt;Action: Submit a report and propose an implementation
plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;