* 0122638
* Microstructure Evolution in Solids with External Constraints and Defects
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2001,07/31/2006
* Long-Qing Chen, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2006
* USD 270,000.00

This award supports theoretical and computational research and education to
study the evolution of microsctructure in solids. The main scientific objective
of this proposal is to understand the effect of external constraints on phase
transformations and microstructure evolution, and the mutual interactions
between phase and defect microstructures. The PI will investigate two specific
problems using the phase-field approach in combination with mesoscale elasticity
theory. The first problem is concerned with phase transformations and domain
structure evolution in ferroelectric thin films constrained by a substrate. A
phase-field model will be developed for ferroelectric domain evolution in
single-crystal films. The model will include long-range elastic and electric
dipole-dipole interactions, and the appropriate mechanical and electrical
boundary conditions. The initial focus will be on a number of important oxides,
PbTiO3, BaTiO3, PbZrxTi1-xO3, for which there have been extensive experimental
measurements and theoretical thermodynamic analyses. The PI will systematically
investigate the effect of substrate constraints and film thickness on
transformation temperatures, volume fractions, and the size of each orientation
domain. The focus will be on the temporal evolution of ferroelectric domain
structures during nucleation, growth and coarsening, as well as during the
domain-wall motion and polarization switching under an electric field. The
effect of internal defects, both immobile and diffusive, on domain-wall mobility
and ferroelectric/dielectric responses will be studied. The second problem
involves the mutual interactions between phase and dislocation microstructures
in advanced alloys. Based on recent advances in phase-field modeling of
dislocations, a comprehensive model for the simultaneous temporal evolution of
phase and dislocation microstructures will be developed, incorporating both
elastic anisotropy and elastic inhomogeneity. The PI will study the local phase
equilibria, solute segregation kinetics, and nucleation and growth processes
around both static and moving dislocations, by varying the solute-solvent size
mismatch, elastic inhomogeneity, and the relative solute diffusivity and
dislocation mobility. A major effort will be devoted to modeling the influence
of solute segregation and second-phase precipitates on the dynamics of both
isolated and an ensemble of dislocations under applied stresses. In particular,
for a given strain rate, the effect of solute concentration, solute diffusivity,
precipitate size and shape, precipitate-precipitate spacing, lattice mismatch,
and elastic inhomogeneity, on the critical yield stress of an alloy will be
systematically studied. Financial support for two graduate students is
requested. The PI will interact closely with experimentalists for validation of
theoretical predictions. He also plans collaborations with other theorists to
link electronic structure calculations and mesoscale phase-field simulations for
modeling phase transformations and microstructure evolution.&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will impact graduate education in materials, as phase-field
simulations of phase transformations and microstructure evolution are being
incorporated into a graduate course as part of an educational program on
thermodynamics and kinetics. User-friendly software with graphical interfaces
will be developed and distributed to other institutions for educational
purposes. The proposed project will also result in new computational tools that
can potentially be applied to industrially important materials problems as
evidenced by the existing collaborations between the PI and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research and education to study the structure of materials on
length scales between the atomic and the macroscopic, the microstructure, its
role in phase transformations, and its evolution in the presence of external
constraints and internal defects. This is a difficult fundamental problem which
directly impacts materials processing. The PI will use phase field methods and
focus on evolution of domains in ferroelectric materials and the mutual
interactions between phase and dislocation microstructures in advanced alloys.
Dislocations play an important role in diffusion processes and phase
transformations of solids. Ferroelectric materials have applications in sensors
and optical components&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;