* 0122353
* FSML: Strengthening the Research and Educational Capabilities of the Virgin Islands Environmental Resource Station
* BIO,DBI
* 10/15/2001,03/31/2003
* Richard Nemeth, University of The Virgin Islands
* Standard Grant
* Poston Muriel
* 03/31/2003
* USD 25,000.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Richard S. Nemeth at University of the Virgin
Islands (UVI) to develop a plan for the renovation of the Virgin Islands
Environmental Resource Station (VIERS) located on St. John, US Virgin Islands.
Although VIERS has provided 35 years of continuous service as a learning center
for environmental education and research, the outdated laboratory facilities
currently limit the use of this facility. Nestled within the pristine
environment of the Virgin Islands National Park, VIERS offers a wealth of
biological diversity and tremendous potential as a modernized field station. The
primary goal of modernizing the VIERS facility will be to stimulate teaching,
research, and outreach activities, which, in turn, will facilitate the exchange
of information and ideas between visiting scientists, educators, students and
the surrounding Virgin Islands' community. During this planning effort, UVI
intends to gather information from expert sources and incorporate the best
features of a variety of marine labs into the VIERS facility.

A local planning committee will be established and will focus on assessing
criteria in five core areas: (1) integrating goals with the Virgin Islands
National Park vision, (2) defining the basic functionality of a modern marine
facility, (3) determining needs of research scientists, (4) determining needs of
educational institutions, (5) developing facility infrastructure including
housing, education and research space, and (6) integrating information
technology for data processing and communication. The planning committee will
assemble a team of marine lab directors or individuals intimately involved in
the management of such facilities. Information will be solicited from past,
present and potential future researchers from institutes of higher education and
government on basic and specialized research equipment and information
technology requirements. Faculty leading college courses at VIERS will be
interviewed for ways to improve the educational resources. Researchers and
educators who cannot be interviewed on site will be consulted via a written
survey. Architects will provide plans for facility design to maximize the
efficiency of structures and ensure that they are integrated into the natural
surroundings. The final step will be to complete and submit a grant proposal for
funding from the NSF Field Stations and Marine Laboratories Improvement Program
for upgrading the VIERS facility.

The University of the Virgin Islands' Center for Marine and Environmental
Studies (CMES) has launched an initiative to strengthen UVI's marine science
program with the goal of expanding the opportunities in education and research
for the culturally diverse student body at UVI. Improving the facilities at
VIERS will facilitate teaching and research and, through community interaction
with VIERS' outreach activities, will increase public interest and involvement
in their natural resources. Because of the close proximity of all representative
terrestrial and coastal marine environments, VIERS provides significant
opportunities for both researchers and educators.