* 0122835
* Presidential Awards for Excellence In Science, Mathematics and Engineering Mentoring
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2003
* Theodore Williams, College of Wooster
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn Suiter
* 11/30/2003
* USD 10,000.00

Dr. Theodore Williams began mentoring undergraduate students in the late 1950's
at Wooster College (Ohio) as a member of the chemistry department faculty. The
independent study program he implemented has resulted in thirty-four individuals
earning doctorates in SMET. A summer research program for undergraduate students
has resulted in seven medical doctors and another seventeen doctorate degrees.
In addition, Williams has developed and implemented programs for junior high
school girls in science (100 students participate annually), a targeted career
development program, high-school student mentoring (about 25 students annually)
and provided science workshops to elementary schools. He has also served as the
research advisor for many students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Williams adopted a
very personal style of advising in the early part of his career, as was feasible
with the small number of minority students at Wooster College. His method of
advising has changed with his increased expertise and with changing
circumstances, including an increased number of minority
students.&lt;br/&gt;Williams mentions that he has "continually honed his
mentoring skills with improved approaches for the student in the 21st century."
The professions and commentary of his former students clearly demonstrate the
very positive interactions that have occurred between Williams and his mentees,
such as the famous "walk around the campus" talks that changed their
lives.&lt;br/&gt;