* 0122968
* Planning Grant for Restructuring Math Delivery Systems at Fort Belknap College
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2001,10/31/2002
* Mary Taylor, Aaniiih Nakoda College
* Standard Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 10/31/2002
* USD 49,999.00

Planning Grant for Restructuring Math Delivery Systems at Fort Belknap College
&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a comprehensive plan for
increasing student success in &lt;br/&gt;mathematics at Fort Belknap College
(FBC). The college will achieve this goal through the &lt;br/&gt;successful
completion of three specific project objectives. During the one-year planning
&lt;br/&gt;period, project personnel will: (1)perform a thorough self-assessment
of the current math curriculum in place at FBC; (2)conduct an in-depth review of
alternative instructional methods, curricula and delivery systems that have
proven successful with minority students (and, specifically, American Indians)
across the country; and (3)develop a comprehensive planning document for
designing and implementing a math program that addresses specific local and
institutional needs, while incorporating best practices from model programs. The
results of these planning efforts will provide the basis for developing an
implementation/design proposal to be submitted under NSF's 2003 TCUP
solicitation. Ms. Mary John Taylor, Dean of Academic Affairs, and Ms. Billie Jo
Foote, Math/Science Instructor, will serve as co-principal investigators for the
project. Fort Belknap College is requesting $50,000 to carry out this project
over a 12-month period. &lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NO.: 0122968&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL
INVESTIGATOR: Taylor, Mary&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION NAME: Fort Belknap
College&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Planning Grant for Restructuring Math Delivery Systems
at Fort Belknap College&lt;br/&gt;NSF RECEIVED DATE: 04/30/2001&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;