* 0122965
* Stone Child College SMET Planning Grant Application
* EHR,HRD
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2002
* Edward Stamper, Stone Child College
* Standard Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 09/30/2002
* USD 50,000.00

Stone Child College NSF 01-61 Planning Grant Application Stone Child College
National Science Foundation Tribal Colleges and Universities Program NSF 01-61
Project Summary PROJECT TITLE: SCC-SMET Institutional Planning Grant Project
FUNDING SOURCE National Science Foundation PROJECT LOCATION Stone Child College,
Rocky Boy's Indian Reservation, Montana LENGTH OF PROPOSED PROJECT January 1,
2002 - December 31, 2002 SHORT DESCRIPTION OF THE POPULATION TO BE SERVED BY THE
PROJECT The proposal will serve primarily American Indian students currently
attending or projected to attend Stone Child College. PROJECT OBJECTIVES The
overall goal of our project is to ``to measurably increase'' the number of
graduates in SMET and related fields at SCC by providing a high quality learning
environment capable of meeting or exceeding the instruction received at four-
year institutions. SCC is adamant in our belief that in order to attract more
students into these disciplines, our instructional methodologies, as well as
advanced teaching devices, are the key to induce student curiosity and eventual
enrollment into SMET fields. By developing a five-year plan based on research,
we believe we can successfully pursue other resources for the implementation of
our SMET plan. Therefore, SCC has developed the following major objective which
will guide us during this initial 12-month planning process: Major Project
Objective During the project period of January 1, 2002 through December 31,
2002, SCC will develop a researched-based five-year institutional plan to
enhance our SMET program as measured by internal and external evaluation results
and the plan being formally adopted by the SCC Board of Regents prior to the end
of the project period. COLLABORATIVE PARTNERS Stone Child College will
coordinate this project with our Packard Foundation project, DoD project, MSEIP
projects, as well as other proposed projects SCC has currently written and are
awaiting approval/disapproval. TOTAL FUNDS REQUESTED $50,000. (NSF funds)
PROPOSAL NO.: 0122965 PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Stamper, Edward INSTITUTION NAME:
Stone Child College TITLE: Stone Child College SMET Planning Grant Application
NSF RECEIVED DATE: 04/30/2001

