* 0122303
*  FSML: Research and Facilities Planning Workshops at the Angelo Coast Range Reserve, Mendocino, California, 2002-2003
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2003
* Mary Power, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 11/30/2003
* USD 24,482.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. Power and Luby at the University of
California, Berkeley, to conduct two planning workshops at the University's
Angelo Coast Range Reserve, located in Mendocino County, California. These
workshops will supply the campus with expert assessments of the facilities at
the reserve for conducting research in how ecosystems function, how habitats
become degraded, and how best to conduct research within the framework of
governmental rules and regulations that protects endangered species. These
workshops will allow the campus to plan the future of the Reserve in a careful
and informed manner, just as a new, $1.2 million "Center for Environmental
Science" is built there, with support from the Goldman fund. In order to ensure
the success of the reserve's research initiatives, experts in three specific
research areas will be invited to Angelo to participate in the two different
planning workshops. Experts will evaluate reserve facilities, and assess whether
or not they are adequate to support research in river and watershed studies,
tree canopy biology, and sediment/habitat degradation studies. Researchers for
the UC Berkeley campus would also attend. Both groups would make presentations,
examine the facilities, meet campus administrators, and participate in
facilitated discussions. The central question asked of the group would be the
following: "Given the current facilities, and the specific research directions
that have been proposed, are the facilities at Angelo adequate, and if not, what
do you recommend be done to improve them?" In the end, the visiting experts
would submit a written report in which they offered an assessment of the
adequacy of the facilities for implementing these research initiatives and
recommendations for improvements. The Angelo Coast Range Reserve contains the
largest tract of unlogged coastal conifer forest remaining in the state of
California, as well as the entire watersheds of two salmon-bearing tributaries
of a major river. As natural reserves become more and more isolated in the
andscape, with pressure from development, they increasingly serve as "lifeboat"
refuges for certain species. Understanding how ecosystems function, change, and
become degraded is important for protecting and managing these species, as well
as for species residing in more threatened settings outside the borders of
reserves. Funding for the planning workshops will therefore support efforts to
continue the global influence of scientific studies conducted at Angelo, and
involve researchers, educators, and government representatives in efforts to
investigate pressing environmental threats.

