* 0122834
* Presidential Awards for Excellence In Science, Mathematics and Engineering Mentoring
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2003
* Clinton Dixon, Fort Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn Suiter
* 11/30/2003
* USD 10,000.00

Dr. Clinton Dixon has been actively engaged in mentoring students at Fort Valley
State University since he joined the faculty in 1972. He has focused on
developing and maintaining support from early contact with pre-college students
through to their graduate degrees and careers, and was noted for his high
standards, personal involvement, and extending himself outside the classroom. In
1995, Dixon established the program, "Increasing Minority Admissions and
Enrollment in Health Professions," which has provided mentoring and program
support to Georgia's African-American youth. In six years, that program has
involved more than four hundred thirty-one high-school students in activities
that focused on their preparation for college through Scholastic Aptitude Test
preparation workshops, rigorous academic curricular activities, computer
literacy sessions, and field trips/site visits. At least twenty-seven
participants have enrolled in graduate degree programs. More recently, the
program has been extended to include middle-school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dixon's activities with college students feature peer
mentoring, with students assisting in taking science activities to middle
schools, and assisting in judging science fairs. Undergraduates also present
papers in national scientific meetings and participate in monthly seminars that
support their transition to graduate and professional
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dixon was also commended for disseminating his
mentorship model to his faculty at FVSU, who have also developed skills in
working well with students and supporting their development, as they award-
winning scientists.&lt;br/&gt;