* 0122395
* FSML:  Renovation and Expansion of Salt Water Life Support Systems at Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Kim Holland, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 06/30/2005
* USD 103,899.00

Dr Kim Holland of the Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology (HIMB), University of
Hawaii, has received a grant from the National Science Foundation to renovate
and expand the salt water life support system at HIMB's Coconut Island
laboratory. HIMB is a leading tropical marine biology research facility, and a
reliable supply of high quality seawater is central to its research and
education missions. The existing seawater pumping and distribution system is
several decades old and does not serve many of the newer buildings at the lab.
This grant will also help underwrite the construction of a new large seawater
tank that will be used to hold large marine fish such as sharks and tuna.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current inefficient maze of saltwater feeder pipes
will be dismantled and replaced by an entirely new distribution system which
will be more efficient and environmentally friendly. The new system will feature
dual parallel pipes to all use locations and will be constructed so that the
pipes can be automatically cleaned without disruption of supply. The more
frequent cleaning possible in this new system will eliminate the discharge of
heavily silt-laden effluent. Similarly, the installation of modern pumps and
pump controls will allow a better supply of seawater while reducing the amount
of electricity consumed. A forty-foot by twenty-foot reinforced fiberglass tank
will be constructed on an existing concrete pad. This tank will be fed by the
new seawater system and will hold seawater to a depth of five feet. The tank
will be surrounded by a catwalk that will be used for experimental observations
and service access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Hawaii has identified
marine science as an area of excellence to be emphasized as the university
enters the twenty-first century. This emphasis is reflected in the recent
construction of new laboratory facilities and funding for four additional
faculty positions. The renovation and expansion of Coconut Island's seawater
system will be crucial to the success of the university's initiative. Because of
its location, HIMB can play a leading role in areas such as coral reef biology
and the study of large tropical species such as sharks and tunas. HIMB is a
major destination for scientists from all around the world who wish to work on
these topics. This NSF grant will greatly assist HIMB in providing modern
facilities for its faculty and visitors.&lt;br/&gt;