* 0122783
* Presidential Awards for Excellence In Science, Mathematics and Engineering Mentoring
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2003
* Halley Merrell, American Chemical Society (ACS)
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn Suiter
* 11/30/2003
* USD 10,000.00

The American Chemical Society (ACS) has supported the increased participation of
minorities in the chemical sciences through programs for minorities and
economically disadvantaged students since 1968.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through
Project SEED (Summer Educational Experiences for the Disadvantaged), the Society
encourages about 200 to 300 economically disadvantaged minority high-school
students each year to enter careers in science through summer experiences in
research. Over the past thirty-three years, more than 6,000 students nation-wide
- 86% underrepresented ethnic minorities - had opportunities to establish
mentoring relationships with chemists at colleges, in industry and in government
through summer research experiences, with 55% subsequently selecting college
majors in the sciences. ACS's local sections work to recruit both students and
mentors for SEED, where the mentoring activity includes guidance on a research
project for 8-10 weeks, reporting on project findings, and professional
development including attending scientific lectures, visiting local industries
and universities, and providing assistance with college applications. A 1996
survey showed that 70% of the program participants majored in a science in
college following their SEED experience, with 63% earning BS degrees, 13%
earning MS degrees,7% earning doctoral degrees, and 9% earning other degrees.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ACS also provides financial support for economically
disadvantaged minority students (and has done so since 1995) through a multi-
million dollar scholarship program to assist students in achieving degrees in
the chemical sciences. More than 900 students have received support, of whom 56%
are female, 44% are male; their ethnic groups include African-American (56%,),
Hispanic/Latino (38.5%), and American Indian (5.5%). Those graduated thus far
total 276, of whom 56% are female, 44% are male; their ethnicity are African-
American (52%,), Hispanic/Latino (43%), and American Indian (5%); with 43%
enrolled in graduate programs and 34% employed in the chemical science
workforce. Program graduates become part of the Scholars Program Alumni Network,
which provides ongoing information about ACS and the scholars program, and
provides alumni with opportunities to serve as mentors to current
scholars.&lt;br/&gt;