* 0122517
* Conifer Microsatellite Workshop: A Conference of Evolution, Ecology and Genomics: June 4-7 at Texas A&amp;M University
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2002
* Claire Williams, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 06/30/2002
* USD 8,500.00

0122517&lt;br/&gt;Williams&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Conifer Microsatellite
Workshop at Texas A&amp;M lab is part of an effort to transfer pine
microsatellite technology to other labs. The June 4-7 2001 workshop will train
investigators, postdocs and graduate students from government, universities and
industry. The workshop has the following components: lectures, lab and
computational training, a seminar series on case study applications, a
roundtable discussion on direction of ecological and evolutionary genomics and a
handbook of lab protocols and computational resources. As part of the lab
training, the participants will test whether Pinus taeda microsatellites are
useful in other conifer species. Instructional quality will be evaluated by the
Center of Teaching Excellence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microsatellites and other
sequence-based genomics tools facilitate cross-disciplinary research in
evolution, ecological genetics and functional genomics(EEFG). The emerging EEFG
paradigm is powerful for the conifer research community because 1) conifers are
the oldest extant seed plants, thus EEFG research can make significant
inferences to land plant evolution and 2) conifers have highly duplicated,
leviathan genomes in need of novel approaches for studying genome organization
and function. Nuclear microsatellites from conserved parts of the conifer genome
is one of the first specialized tools to be developed for EEFG research in
conifers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;