* 0122393
* Equipment to Enhance Genomics Research at the Hollings Marine Laboratory
* NONE,NONE
* 10/15/2001,09/30/2003
* Eric Lacy, Medical University of South Carolina
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 09/30/2003
* USD 99,795.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Eric R. Lacy at the Medical University of South
Carolina to fund equipment for studying the genetic responses of marine
organisms to environmental stress. Increased pressure on the coastal environment
has focused attention on how marine organisms respond to this stress. It has
long been known that animals defend themselves against environmental insults
through hundreds if not thousands of molecular and cellular responses. Until
recently scientists had to laboriously measure each response of individual
animals to various environmental challenges to try to understand which
physiological systems (e.g., immune, respiratory, reproductive) were protected
and which had failed. With the advent of molecular genetics, scientists have new
tools to look at genes and determine which ones are turned off and turned on
when the animals are environmentally stressed.

However, there are tens of thousands of genes and examining them manually, a few
at a time, would take years to get the answers needed. The gene arrayer and
reader obtained from this grant will be used by the Marine Genome Project in
Charleston, SC, to simultaneously examine thousands of genes from shrimp,
oysters, dolphins, stingrays, corals, and algae. The experimental goals of this
group are to use "functional genomics" (changes in gene expression correlated
with changes in marine environmental stress) to: 1) find early genetic markers
of stress in marine organisms, 2) use the genetic information to diagnose and
predict the particular stress or infection the animal may have, 3) identify new
genes that might protect these marine animals from infection and stress, and 4)
detect interactions among genes. Expressed genes are isolated from target
tissues in the animals before, during and after stress. Then a comparison is
made for each animal to see which genes are turned on and which are turned off
under each of these conditions.

The results of these studies will show which genes are important in an animal's
defense mechanisms. These findings have broad implications for environmental and
human health because the two are intimately linked. For example, early genetic
changes in an organism may predict changes occurring in the environment that
cannot be monitored in any other way. This information also should help
selective marine animal breeding programs for aquatic food suppliers.
Furthermore, the information from this study should assist scientists in better
understanding the mechanisms of the current world-wide decline of coral reefs.
The equipment purchased under this award will reside in the newly constructed
Hollings Marine Lab, an inter-institutional lab that houses all partners of the
Marine Genome Project and the College of Charleston. Students at all levels
(high school, undergraduate and graduate) will be trained to use this equipment
through internships.