* 0122520
* ITR/SI+AP: A Mobile Sensor Web for Polar Ice Sheet Measurements
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2007
* S. Prasad Gogineni, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Palais
* 09/30/2007
* USD 5,526,493.00

0122520&lt;br/&gt;Gogineni&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sea level has been rising over
the last century. Although the immediate impact of sea level rise may be less
severe than other effects of global climate change, the long-term consequences
can be much more devastating since nearly 60% of the world population lives in
coastal regions. Scientists have postulated that excess water is being released
from polar ice sheets due to long-term, global climate change, but there are
insufficient data to confirm these theories. Understanding the interactions
between the ice sheets, oceans and atmosphere is essential to quantifying the
role of ice sheets in sea level rise. Toward that end, this research project
involves the innovative application of information technology in the development
and deployment of intelligent radar sensors for measuring key glaciological
parameters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Radar instrumentation will consist of a
synthetic aperture radar (SAR) that can operate in bistatic or monostatic mode.
One important application of the SAR will be in the determination of basal
conditions, particularly the presence and distribution of basal water. Basal
water lubricates the ice/bed interface, enhancing flow, and increasing the
amount of ice discharged into the ocean. Another application of the SAR will be
to measure ice thickness and map internal layers in both shallow and deep ice.
Information on near-surface internal layers will be used to estimate the
average, recent accumulation rate, while the deeper layers provide a history of
past accumulation and flow rates. A tracked vehicle and an automated snowmobile
will be used to test and demonstrate the utility of an intelligent radar in
glaciological investigations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The system will be developed
to collect, process and analyze data in real time and in conjunction with a
priori information derived from archived sources. The combined real time and
archived information will be used onboard the vehicles to select and generate an
optimum sensor configuration. This project thus involves innovative research in
intelligent systems, sounding radars and ice sheet modeling. In addition it has
a very strong public outreach and education program, which include near-real-
time image broadcasts via the world wide web&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;