* 0122799
* Automorphic L-functions, Boundary Distributions, and the Trace Formula
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2004
* Stephen Miller, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2004
* USD 69,190.00

The research of the PI (Miller) focuses on the analytic theory
of&lt;br/&gt;automorphic forms. The proposed research concentrates on two
analytic&lt;br/&gt;tools in the subject. The first is the trace formula. The PI
hopes to&lt;br/&gt;sharpen Arthur's trace formula for GL(n) so that it can be
applied to&lt;br/&gt;analytic questions in the same fashion that Selberg's
original trace&lt;br/&gt;formula for GL(2) has been. One of the expected
applications is to&lt;br/&gt;counting various types of automorphic forms, for
example a general Weyl&lt;br/&gt;law for arithmetic quotients of reductive Lie
groups. The second tool is&lt;br/&gt;that of automorphic L-functions. The PI and
his coworker Wilfried Schmid&lt;br/&gt;(Harvard University) are engaged in a
research program to study&lt;br/&gt;automorphic forms using the boundary
distributions of eigenfunctions on&lt;br/&gt;symmetric spaces. These boundary
techniques allow new constructions of&lt;br/&gt;L-functions, and offer a new way
to investigate many problems in&lt;br/&gt;automorphic forms. The proposed
research involves developing this&lt;br/&gt;technique and its
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of automorphic forms slices across
many important areas of&lt;br/&gt;modern mathematical research, including number
theory, representation&lt;br/&gt;theory, geometry, analysis, and mathematical
physics. Through&lt;br/&gt;L-functions, Langlands has conjectured many deep and
interesting&lt;br/&gt;structural relationships between automorphic forms which
have implications&lt;br/&gt;in the above areas. As an example, the work of Wiles
et al demonstrates&lt;br/&gt;the link between certain automorphic forms and the
ancient problem of&lt;br/&gt;solving equations between squares and cubes. The
proposed research aims&lt;br/&gt;to apply and develop new tools for automorphic
forms and L-functions from&lt;br/&gt;analysis, which is the branch of
mathematics expanding calculus, and&lt;br/&gt;representation theory, the
concrete study of symmetry. Current&lt;br/&gt;applications of automorphic forms
and L-functions are manifest in&lt;br/&gt;constructing the sophisticated codes
which enable high-speed and secure&lt;br/&gt;transactions over the internet.
&lt;br/&gt;