* 0123885
* MgII Absorbers at High Redshift Using J-Band High Resolution Spectroscopy on the Hobby-Eberly Telescope
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* Christopher Churchill, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 07/31/2003
* USD 57,974.00

ABSTRACT &lt;br/&gt;AST 0123885&lt;br/&gt;Churchill &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
is a Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) project to modify and test an
infrared camera and spectrograph (the JCAM) which will be used to obtain spectra
on the Hobby-Eberly Telescope (HET) at the McDonald Observatory of the
University of Texas. This data will then be used to test the suitability of the
modified equipment for measuring spectra of very faint Quasars in the wavelength
range of 0.95 to 1.35 millimicrons which corresponds to redshifts of z= 2.4 to
3.8 In the MgII, 2796 - 2803 Angstrom absorption line. The potential scientific
impact of obtaining this data for Quasar research is very high. There is a risk
that this potentially very important data may not be obtainable with the HET.
Extrapolating from the present performance of the telescope in the visual, it is
clear that the proposed, modified spectrograph is expected to be useful for
obtaining data on sources brighter than V=17 mag. However, the quasars at this
redshift range lie in the magnitude range V=18 to 19 mag. Simulations show that
the absorption lines in the quasars are detectable against the night sky
background for 18th mag objects with an image disk of 1.5 arc seconds but the
HET does not at present have the long-term, on-target stability necessary to
maintain image sizes of 1.3 to 1.5 arc seconds. Although a telescope upgrade may
provide the necessary image quality, the only meaningful way to determine the
limiting capabilities of this instrument is to conduct actual tests. Funding for
this project was provided by the NSF program for Extragalactic Astronomy &amp;
Cosmology (AST/EXC).&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;