* 0123445
* Coalescence and Phase Separation During Spinodal Decomposition of Solvent Mixtures Far From Critical Point
* NONE,NONE
* 12/15/2001,05/31/2005
* Reuel Shinnar, CUNY City College
* Continuing grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 05/31/2005
* USD 307,369.00

Abstract CTS-0123445 Shinnar, Reuel CUNY City College

The PI's main achievement so far has been to show, both experimentally and
theoretically, that phase separation of low-viscosity liquid mixture is driven
by the convection induced by a non-equilibrium force due to gradients of
chemical potential and that this force can act over distances of a few
centimeters. While the investigation has produced novel and unexpected results,
much work is required to achieve the ultimate goal and model the flow of liquid
mixtures during phase transition in the presence of surface-active compounds. As
has been stressed, the results so far have opened a new and till now unknown
area of research which they do not expect to exhaust within the time frame of
the proposed investigation. What the PI's would like to do, instead, is to focus
on the most needed areas, to enhance the understanding of the dynamics of phase
separation and increase the applicability of its unique properties to the
solution of practical problems. In fact, they expect that coalescence can be
eventually retarded increasing the amount of surfactants and of thickeners,
thereby increasing the viscosity of the mixtures, or when quenching the mixture
into its metastable region. Therefore, they intend to determine the thresholds
of the surfactant concentration and of the mixture viscosity and composition
beyond which surfactants start to slow down significantly the separation
process, just as they do in the absence of phase transition. In addition, the
PI's want to study how mixing, which is necessary to rapidly cool the system,
can counteract the effect of phase transition, causing the formation of stable
emulsions.

As in the past, the experimental work will be accompanied by modeling and
simulation, in such a way that these two activities will interact and compliment
with each other. The results should not only lead to a better understanding of
spinodal decomposition and nucleation, but will also be of great value to any
industrial applications of this approach to phase separation. In particular, the
PI's want to focus on the following areas of research, to be addressed both
experimentally and numerically.