* 0123478
* Ultra-High-Capacity Optical Communications and Networking:  Surface-Tension-Driven Liquid Space Optical Switching (SLISOS) Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2004
* Jung-Hoon Lee, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Filbert J. Bartoli
* 09/30/2004
* USD 347,871.00

This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation NSF 01-65 on "Ultra-
High Capacity Optical Communications and Networking." This proposal deals with
an innovative liquid space optical switching (LISOS) method based on surface-
tension-driven microfluidics. The final goal of this research targets ultra high
capacity, e.g., 1024x1024, optical cross connect switching systems. Some of the
featured aspects of performance include fast switching time (~ 100s), low
insertion loss (~ 0.2 dB), low crosstalk (~ 40dB), low power consumption (~ 10W
per switch), inherent latching function (i.e., no continuous power), and
reversible switching action. This technology will enable next generation ultra
high-speed optical communication at a very low cost.&lt;br/&gt;As the signal
traffic for optical fiber communication rapidly increases, all-optical switching
technology without opto-electronic conversion is considered the ultimate goal.
The conventional switching scheme using optical-electrical-optical signal
conversion simply cannot follow the high signal rate (e.g., GHz - THz range)
requirement for next generation network communication. The use of micromachined
mirrors for the direct switching of light signals, which eliminates the signal
conversion process, has been a major alternative to the conventional approach.
However, the extension of the micromirror approach to ultra high capacity
optical cross connect is facing the fundamental limits in loss characteristics
and manufacturing costs (labor and time). The use of thermal-bubble-actuated
index matching liquid has been recently proposed as an alternative to the
micromirror-based approach. The actuation characteristic, however, is not
desirable due to large, continuous power requirement. Furthermore, the thermal
stability requirement of the liquid restricts the choices of optically optimum
working liquids.&lt;br/&gt;In this research, surface tension - a dominant force
in microscale fluid motion - is proposed as an actuation mechanism for LISOS.
The novel electrical and mechanical control of surface tension (Electrowetting
and Mechanical Wetting) are used as microactuation mechanisms with extremely low
power consumption, reliable operation, and high speed actuation. The proposed
team, combining microfluidics technology with the photonics capability, will
design, fabricate, and test a surface-tension-driven LISOS system (SLISOS)
suitable to the high volume, high speed requirement of the emerging optical
communication requirements with the aforementioned performance.&lt;br/&gt;