* 0123321
* Presidential Awards for Excellence In Science, Mathematics and Engineering Mentoring
* EHR,DUE
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2003
* Judith Gwathmey, Institute for Cardiovascular Diseases and Muscle Research
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn Suiter
* 11/30/2003
* USD 10,000.00

Dr. Judith K. Gwathmey has given exceedingly personal attention to her mentees
from the time she identifies them. She is said to frequently identify a "diamond
in the rough," who she supports through their formal education and into their
careers. Gwathmey currently heads the Institute for Cardiovascular Diseases and
Muscle Research Institute, and holds a faculty position at Boston University
School of Medicine, as well as adjunct or lecturer positions with Harvard
Medical School, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and Tufts University
School of Veterinary Medicine. Along with her active research, teaching, and
consulting activities, she is an active mentor, described as personally generous
with time and financial resources to support her mentees. Gwathmey has provided
students with financial support for tuition and books from her personal income.

Her direct, "hands-on" mentoring style provides students with research
opportunities, guidance on presenting research outcomes, and lessons in how to
compete successfully in academic science. Those she has mentored include high-
school students through doctoral students and faculty; fifty-six persons
mentored. She has demonstrated a keen interest in students from underrepresented
groups, and has employed a diverse, multi-national staff in her laboratory.
Although her efforts are not aligned with the programs of a traditional
education institution, she has had broad success with many individuals who are
likely to replicate her mentoring in their own careers.