* 0123409
* Ultra-High-Capacity Optical Communications and Networking: Signal Processing for High-Data-Rate Optical Communications Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Tulay Adali, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 12/31/2005
* USD 250,000.00

Proposal #0123409&lt;br/&gt;Adali, Tulay&lt;br/&gt;U of Maryland-Baltimore
County&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within the last fifteen years, the maximum data rate
that a backbone communications line can handle has grown by five orders of
magnitude. A key enabling technology for this impressive growth has been
the&lt;br/&gt;advent of commercial wavelength-division-multiplexed systems that
has allowed systems designers to fill the available bandwidth far more
efficiently than in the past. Recently, the physical impairments&lt;br/&gt;in
the optical fiber transmission lines have become the major factors limiting the
obtainable data rates. The chromatic dispersion, fiber nonlinearities,
polarization effects, and amplified spontaneous&lt;br/&gt;emission noise from
the amplifiers, all interact limiting the data rates and/or transmission
distances. Polarization mode dispersion (PMD), in particular, introduces
intersymbol and intercarrier interference and is the primary limitation in
increasing transmission rates and distances in installed terrestrial fiber
systems. Though it has been noted that signal processing approaches hold great
promise for mitigating PMD &lt;br/&gt;and other impairments in optical
communications systems, the area is still in its infancy, and the current
activity in the area is limited to ``off-the-shelf'' techniques that do not take
into account characteristics of the optical domain, thus unable to truly take
advantage of the possibilities that signal processing
offer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By bringing in expertise from two complementary
research areas: signal processing for communications and optical communications,
this research develops effective electrical domain (post-detection)
&lt;br/&gt;approaches for optical communications by taking into account the
physical properties of the optical transmission medium. The investigators
introduce a new class of receiver structures for &lt;br/&gt;optical
communications that exploit polarization diversity and study their performance
by accurate modeling of the physical phenomena and using efficient simulation
techniques that they have developed.&lt;br/&gt;The two research groups have
expertise in both areas relevant to the proposed work: (1) theoretical and
computational study and modeling of optical communication systems and (2)
development of error&lt;br/&gt;compensation/mitigation techniques for
communications. Their collaboration within the last couple of years has
demonstrated the potential of solutions developed with this approach for
significant &lt;br/&gt;performance gains in optical communications systems. An
important additional benefit of the project is establishing meaningful
communication between the two research communities and the emphasis
&lt;br/&gt;on the importance of their full collaboration. The research also
offers the potential for a more unified view of communications
systems.&lt;br/&gt;