* 0123453
* Ultra-High-Capacity Optical Communications and Networking: Ultra High Modulation Rate GaN Quantum Cascade Lasers for C, L and S Bands
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2004
* William Schaff, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Filbert J. Bartoli
* 08/31/2004
* USD 300,000.00

This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation NSF 01-65 on "Ultra-
High Capacity Optical Communications and Networking." The objective of the
proposed research is conversion of ultra-high bitrates of electrical data to
optical signals. The goal of the proposed research is demonstration of GaN
unipolar lasers operating at C-, L- and S-band wavelengths, exhibiting a direct
modulation bandwidth between 100-250 GHz. This goal will be pursued by
elimination of the principle source of speed limitation in conventional bipolar
structures exhibiting ten's of GHz bandwidth. Until recently, all semiconductor
lasers utilized both holes and electrons for stimulated emission. The low field
transport of holes in the active region of such lasers limits the direct
modulation bandwidth. A unipolar laser which can be modulated at speeds limited
only by very fast high field electron transport and parasitic RC time constants
is proposed. Quantum cascade lasers and LEDs made from GaN-based semiconductor
materials will be designed, fabricated and characterized. This form of laser
utilizes only n-type, and undoped, material to inject electrons into an upper
confined quantum well state followed by an optical transition to a lower energy
state. The proposed technology could also see application to 100-250 GHz
bandwidth modulators and detectors. These lasers will also be valuable as high
power IR lasers for such applications as 1480nm pump lasers. High temperature
operation of GaN has been demonstrated in FETs where channel temperatures of 300
C are possible due to the wide bandgap and good thermal conductivity of GaN.
Superior chemical stability will permit much higher optical output powers
without laser mirror degradation compared to the arsenide-phosphide laser
materials. These broad bandwidth lasers would dramatically reduce number of
active and passive elements required for achieving a desired system capacity. In
optical architectures where 2N or N2 elements are required, moving from 20
Gbit/second today to 120 Gbit/sec with GaN quantum cascade lasers could reduce
optical systems parts count by figures between 12 and 36.

