* 0123156
* Physical Properties of Strongly Correlated Quantum Liquids
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2001,10/31/2004
* Xiao-Gang Wen, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 10/31/2004
* USD 213,000.00

This award supports theoretical research on strongly correlated electron
systems, focusing on high temperature superconductors and quantum Hall systems.
Research focuses on three areas: (1) The PI takes the view that underdoped high
temperature superconductors have a non-fermi liquid metallic state that exhibits
spin-charge separation. Research will focus on holon dynamics and the properties
of a non-condensing quantum degenerate holon gas. The transition to the
superconducting state will be studied with the aim of understanding how the
superconducting transition is related to spin-charge recombination and how
coherent quasiparticles can grow out of incoherent spinons and holons. The
transition to the striped phase will also be studied; this is expected not to be
a usual CDW transition. (2) The PI plans to develop a more complete theory of
fractional quantum Hall states, with an aim to elucidate the mathematical
structure of topological order. The chiral operator product algebra will be
examined to see if it could form the basis of a general theory of topological
order. It is expected that a deeper understanding of topological order will
enable the calculation of the physical properties of non-Abelian fractional
quantum Hall states and so enable their identification in experiments. (3) The
PI plans to study continuous phase transitions between topological orders.
Continuous phase transitions can occur between clean fractional quantum Hall
states as long as these states contain neutral quasiparticles. The properties of
the critical point depend on the topological orders of the two states involved
and so, provide a useful way to study topological order experimentally. The PI
plans to find general effective theories for continuous topological phase
transitions and to understand the close relation between the topological order
and the critical theory. The PI will also explore how neutral gapless
excitations at the critical point interact with surface acoustic phonons and
other experimental probes. %%% This award supports theoretical research on
strongly correlated electron systems with a particular focus on high temperature
superconductors and quantum Hall systems. The PI plans to use advanced
theoretical methods to understand the nature of a proposed exotic metallic state
of the high temperature superconductors and the nature of the phase transition
from this state to the superconducting state. The metallic state is unlike that
of an ordinary metal and the transition to superconductivity may differ
qualitatively from that which occurs in well-understood superconductors. The PI
will also study fractional quantum Hall states that exhibit internal order. A
kind of continuous phase transition can occur between two such states with the
same symmetry. The PI intends to develop a more comprehensive theory of these
states and the phase transitions that can occur among them. This research
contributes to fundamental understanding of strongly correlated electron
materials. ***