* 0123208
* Mathematics, Computer Science and Technology Pipeline Scholarship Program
* EHR,DUE
* 11/15/2001,10/31/2008
* Judith Tavel, SUNY College at Purchase
* Standard Grant
* Bert Holmes
* 10/31/2008
* USD 400,000.00

Purchase College, State University of New York (SUNY) is unlike many
institutions of higher education in the U.S. because it has outstanding
Mathematics/Computer Science and New Media technology undergraduate research
programs that serve a combined total of 60% economically disadvantaged students,
30% minority students, 29% women, and 5% disabled. These programs successfully
place graduates in the high technology workforce or graduate school. They also
maintain strong partnerships with other local colleges and high technology
industry. Due to these strengths, Purchase has established a consortium with
Dutchess Community College (DCC), Orange County Community College (OCCC),
Rockland Community College (RCC), Westchester Community College (WCC), IBM,
Modem Media, and seven successful Purchase programs that serve economically
disadvantaged and underrepresented minority students. The Consortium, with
Purchase as its leader, is developing and implementing a Mathematics, Computer
Science and Technology Pipeline Scholarship Program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific objectives of the Program are:&lt;br/&gt;1. To recruit 30 academically
talented, economically disadvantaged, underrepresented minority, women, and
disabled students into AA, AS, AAS, and BA degree programs in mathematics,
computer science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;2. To provide research opportunities
and academic and financial support for 100% of program participants to increase
their retention to degree achievement.&lt;br/&gt;3. To assist 100% of degree
recipients with job/graduate school placement in the fields of mathematics,
computer science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;4. To increase collaborative
arrangements among associate and baccalaureate degree-granting institutions and
the local high technology industry.&lt;br/&gt;5. To assess, document, and
disseminate the effectiveness of 100% of the proposed activities implemented
through this model Pipeline Scholarship Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Program will be managed by Principle Investigator (PI) Dr. Peter Ohring, in
cooperation with six Co-PIs and a Steering Committee consisting of
representatives from each of the five Consortium institutions and local high
technology industry. The PI will oversee publicity, student recruitment and
selection, monitoring of student progress, financial administration, and Program
assessment. The Co-PIs will coordinate student support programs and services.
Concluding the four-year grant cycle, a total of 120 students will receive AA,
AS, AAS, or BA degrees, and be placed in the mathematics, computer science, and
technology workforce or graduate programs.