* 0123141
* Centennial Scholars: Access to "Learn by Doing" Polytechnic Education NSF Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarships Program
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Mei-Ling Liu, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Bevlee Watford
* 06/30/2006
* USD 399,367.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary.&lt;br/&gt;The Centennial Scholars Project
is allowing students with high academic potential and financial need to benefit
from a laboratory-intensive curriculum providing hands-on education,
partnerships with industry, and access to senior faculty in small classes.
Twenty-nine scholarships of $3,125 each are being awarded annually to students
majoring in mathematics, industrial and manufacturing engineering, mechanical
engineering, or computer science. The majority of the scholarships are two-year
awards for freshmen; these scholarships are automatically renewed providing the
students maintain eligibility. A special emphasis is placed on assisting the
scholars in overcoming points of unusually high attrition (normally the first
five quarters of enrollment for freshmen and the first year for transfer
students) more successfully than a demographically comparable group. The support
services available include mentoring by alumni with industry experience,
supplemental instruction in mathematics and physics, prioritized access to
academic enrichment resources, and opportunities for hands-on research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NO.:&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL
INVESTIGATOR:&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION NAME:&lt;br/&gt;TITLE:&lt;br/&gt;NSF
RECEIVED DATE:&lt;br/&gt;0123141&lt;br/&gt;Patton, Linda&lt;br/&gt;California
Polytechnic State University Foundation&lt;br/&gt;Centennial Scholars: Access to
"Learn by Doing" Polytechnic Education NSF Computer Science, Engineering, and
Mathematics Scholarships Program&lt;br/&gt;05/01/2001