* 0123561
* The Physics of Everyday Life: Java Applets and Interactive Lecture Demonstrations for Non-science Students
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Carl Wieman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 08/31/2005
* USD 325,802.00

The project aims to address the problem that physics, or more specifically
physics courses, are widely held to be difficult, unpleasant, and irrelevant,
even though physics provides the foundation of much of modern technology. The
objective of this work is to change the curriculum and method of presentation of
undergraduate physics courses to make them popular, engaging, and more effective
at providing widespread understanding of physics concepts as they apply to the
world around us. The approach that is being taken to achieve this goal is to
first develop a novel introductory course for non-science students that will
build on the unique curriculum put forth in the new textbook "How things work;
the physics of everyday life". Interactive Java applets and interactive lecture
demonstrations (ILDs) are being developed that cover the topics in this text,
and thereby provide novel presentation formats to go with this novel curriculum.
Applets and ILDs are two of the innovations that science education research has
shown contribute substantially to student conceptual learning. Through the use
of readily available technology these can also be easily and inexpensively
implemented in the standard large lecture course format. The physics for
nonscientists course is specifically targeted because it has the capability of
reaching large numbers of students, but the institutional and disciplinary
barriers to introducing such radical changes in it are uniquely low compared to
other physics courses. However, demonstrated success in this course is likely to
result in similar changes being adopted in the rest of the undergraduate physics
curriculum, and the applets and ILDs being developed can be used equally well in
a variety of courses. The development of these applets and ILDs heavily utilize
the same skills that have made the PI a highly successful experimental
physicist, and their effectiveness is being assessed using standard techniques
of education research. The Wiley publishing company will vigorously pursue the
implementation and distribution of these
innovations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;