* 0123857
* AWARE: Research Experience for Undergraduates in Organic Chemistry in Bangkok, Thailand
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Rebecca Braslau, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Richard H. Nader
* 08/31/2005
* USD 239,240.00

Braslau&lt;br/&gt;0123857&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a three-year project
submitted by Dr. Rebecca Braslau of the University of California at Santa Cruz,
for establishing a Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site focusing on
organic chemistry in Bangkok, Thailand. This site will be an American Workforce
and Research Education Program (AWARE)-REU site including the following
collaborative institutes in Thailand: Chulalongkorn University,Mahidol
University, and Chulabhorn Research Institute. The program will support a ten-
week, summer international REU for 6-8 upper division U.S. undergraduates in
Bangkok, Thailand. The U.S. participants will be matched to research faculty at
three of the Thailand's best universities and will be able to select from among
research projects in supramoledular chemistry, novel organic polymers, natural
product isolation and synthesis, bioorganic chemistry and synthethic organic
chemistry methodology. Thailand is an important country in Southeast Asia that
few young Americans have a chance to visit. Exposure to Thailand and its
research establishsment and especially the personal relationships that result
will constitute an extraordinary educational experience. This presents a strong
AWARE-REU opportunity. This proposal addresses an important educational need in
AWARE and could provide an excellent experience for U.S. undergraduates in
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;