* 0123421
* Ultra-High-Capacity Optical Communications and Networking: "Smart RF/Photonic Antennas" for Ultra-High Capacity Wireless Communications
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Bhaskar Rao, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2005
* USD 606,250.00

The need for more bandwidth and capacity in wireless systems currently is the
main culprit for the&lt;br/&gt;great interest in the development of wireless
communications systems operating at millimeter wave&lt;br/&gt;frequencies and
higher. The future needs of broad-band interactive services (1Gb/s) demand
the&lt;br/&gt;application of optical fiber feed networks for distribution of the
radio signals to and from the antennas at&lt;br/&gt;the various base stations.
Fiber-optic technologies have reached the stage where insertions into
various&lt;br/&gt;commercial RF systems are being considered. Today, there are
three main steps in the evolution of&lt;br/&gt;RF/Photonics systems for wireless
communications. The first step has been in the direction of
using&lt;br/&gt;photonics to slowly replace conventional RF components, such as,
the coax that is used to interconnect&lt;br/&gt;the antenna to the electronics.
Optical fibers, in contrast to coaxial cable, provide a more ideal medium
for&lt;br/&gt;broadband RF communication systems. The light weight property of
fibers, and its immunity from other&lt;br/&gt;signal interference make them very
critical in the development of future RF distribution systems.
The&lt;br/&gt;second, and more challenging step, is in the seamless integration
of photonics and RF wireless circuits.&lt;br/&gt;The challenge in this step is
to use photonics and RF circuits as complementary systems and blend
them&lt;br/&gt;together. Finally, the third step is towards the development of
optically coupled antennas. In this step the&lt;br/&gt;aim is to eliminate the
need of local oscillators, mixers, amplifiers and a host of other parts by
directly&lt;br/&gt;feeding an antenna through a fiber at millimeter wave
frequencies.&lt;br/&gt; Here, it is proposed that an array of RF
modulator/photodetectors be integrated directly to an array&lt;br/&gt;of
antennas. This new RF/photonic antenna array system, with the appropriate space-
time processing and&lt;br/&gt;coding, will form a iosmart antennaln that can
enhance network coverage, capacity, and quality. It is&lt;br/&gt;envisioned that
a large number of such RF/Photonic antenna elements could be networked together
into a&lt;br/&gt;star configuration, feeding in and out of a radio
hub.&lt;br/&gt; As a transmitter, the proposed optoelectronic device operates as
a photodiode, while as a receiver&lt;br/&gt;the device operates as an optical
modulator. It has already been demonstrated that this dual function of
a&lt;br/&gt;semiconductor electroabsorption modulator and photodiode in the same
device for duplex operation, can&lt;br/&gt;occur, using bias control as a
transmit/receive mode control. For full duplex operation,
two&lt;br/&gt;modulator/photodiode devices need to be incorporated in the each
transceiver element.&lt;br/&gt; We propose to directly drive a coplanar
waveguide (CPW)-fed slot antenna by converting optical&lt;br/&gt;power into
microwave power and vice versa using these RF modulator/photodetectors. As a
transmitter,&lt;br/&gt;the CPW line is connected to the active surface of the
photodetector, from which the microwave power&lt;br/&gt;propagates to feed the
radiating slot. The photodetector is fed via an optical fiber from beneath. When
the&lt;br/&gt;device functions as an optical modulator, the receive function can
also be achieved. Preliminary results&lt;br/&gt;for a single antenna show that a
very good bandwidth and radiation patterns can be achieved.&lt;br/&gt; It should
be noted that these elements can be interconnected via the fiber to achieve
summation,&lt;br/&gt;mixing and other signal processing functions, at the
antenna site or at a remote site. Some preliminary&lt;br/&gt;results have been
achieved in the area of multiple functionality for the optoelectronic
components, such as&lt;br/&gt;modulation, photodetection, self-biasing and RF
frequency mixing. They have shown properties, such as&lt;br/&gt;high bandwidth
and high power, that are desirable for the antenna applications. A main emphasis
here is&lt;br/&gt;to further investigate the material and device designs for the
optoelectronic component that can&lt;br/&gt;incorporate into the smart antenna
architecture.&lt;br/&gt; The proposed approach will have significant impacts on
wireless communication systems by&lt;br/&gt;providing higher system bandwidth
capacity and enhancing their reliability. It may lead to a new type
of&lt;br/&gt;long distance, broadband network infrastructure that supports
transparent transport of optical signals.&lt;br/&gt; Our team is formed to
provide the expertise in the four key elements for this proposed
research.&lt;br/&gt;Our project will provide a good opportunity to train
graduate and undergraduate students in one of the&lt;br/&gt;most exciting
interdisciplinary areas in science (RF, photonics, signal processing and
communications).&lt;br/&gt;The interactions between the researchers at the
different institutions will be aided by the close&lt;br/&gt;collaboration that
exists between the members of the group.