* 0123571
* ADVANCE Institutional Transformation Award
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2007
* Terrence McDonald, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jessie Dearo
* 12/31/2007
* USD 3,946,508.00

The goal of this project is to contribute to the development of a national
science and engineering academic workforce that includes the full participation
of women at all levels of faculty and academic leadership, particularly at the
senior academic ranks, through the transformation of institutional practices,
policies, climate and culture. The University of Michigan proposes to undertake
three different types of interventions to improve the opportunities and
circumstances of tenure-track women faculty in basic science&lt;br/&gt;and
engineering fields. These include: (1) a campus climate initiative, which will
focus on activities (e.g., workshops, focus groups, climate surveys,
consultation on increasing pools of female applicants in searches) that have
been identified, or will be created, and made available to any interested
science or engineering unit (a department or college) throughout the University;
(2) a gender equity resource fund, which will provide new types of direct
support to individuals; and (3) a departmental transformation initiative, which
will permit a sequenced program of activities to be developed and tailored to a
small number of units on a competitive basis. This sequenced program (including
internal review or self-study, goal-setting, and a series of targeted activities
addressing recruitment, retention and/or climate issues) will enable a
sustained, committed intervention within a single department, as well as provide
a model of change for other institutional units. &lt;br/&gt;All three sets of
programs will be evaluated by independent researchers. Evaluations will be
conducted throughout the course of the Award, using both qualitative and
quantitative methods. Results of early evaluations will be used to
revise&lt;br/&gt;Programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multi-level program is
designed to improve the campus environment for women&lt;br/&gt;faculty in
science and engineering at the University of Michigan, and as a result to
increase the successful recruitment, retention and promotion of tenure-track
women faculty in basic science fields. The presence and success of these women
faculty will in turn affect the expectations and attitudes of the many women and
men who are graduate and undergraduate students in science and engineering
fields. Many of these individuals will go on to have science and engineering
careers themselves; because UM trains so many students, it is anticipated that
the impact of this program will reach well beyond this university. Creation of a
more equitable climate at UM will affect other campuses through the next
generation of science and engineering faculty who will themselves train
students, as well as non-academic work settings in which scientists
and&lt;br/&gt;engineers trained at UM are employed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is supported by the NSF ADVANCE Program.&lt;br/&gt;The overall mission
of the ADVANCE Program is to increase the participation of women in the
scientific and engineering workforce through the increased representation and
advancement of women in academic science and engineering careers.&lt;br/&gt;