* 0123331
* Presidential Awards for Excellence In Science, Mathematics and Engineering Mentoring
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2001,05/31/2005
* Gail Binder, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn Suiter
* 05/31/2005
* USD 12,000.00

The Department of Science and Engineering Support (DSES) of the National
Technical Institution for the Deaf (NTID) has provided access and educational
serves to hearing disabled/impaired students at the Rochester Institute of
Technology (RIT) for more than thirty years. Each year the program serves100
students who receive degrees in science, mathematics, and engineering, and 10-15
underprepared high-school students in a pre-baccalaureate program, as well as
150-200 students who are matriculating in other majors and taking
science/mathematics as part of their curricular
requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NTID DSES provides mentoring through
advising/counseling, tutoring, instruction, note-taking and interpretive
services, and as a liaison with host colleges as advocates for students. Those
activities are deemed as critical for this population of students who are
otherwise ignored or invisible in mainstream
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Also, it is especially beneficial to the greater
population of students who are not hearing impaired, to be mentored in relating
to the hearing impaired. This is a positive effect for global society. Programs
and networks within the NTID are well planned, carefully documented, and provide
a trusted base for participants.&lt;br/&gt;