* 0123980
* Adaptive Middleware Services for Situation-Aware Communication in Ubiquitous Computing Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Stephen Yau, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Wu
* 08/31/2005
* USD 736,000.00

A major trend in distributed computing is toward environments consisting of
numerous wearable, handheld and embedded devices. Rapid growth in inexpensive,
short range, and low-power wireless communications and hardware, are now
enabling experimentation with ubiquitous computing environments. In order for
ubiquitous environments to work well, it is essential that devices be able to
detect their current context, that they must be aware of relationships between
the users and the devices, and handle ad-hoc groups and their
communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal plans to take an integrated
hardware and software approach to developing essential services to support a
wide variety of distributed applications in heterogeneous environments. The
services include investigation of:&lt;br/&gt;situation-aware inter-object
communications&lt;br/&gt;group management service to establish device
communities&lt;br/&gt;feasibility of using cellular automata computational model
to design a scalable dissemination service&lt;br/&gt;a service that will use the
concept of context-sensitivity to perform trade-offs between transparent and QoS
assisted adaptations.&lt;br/&gt;The proposal will develop a Reconfigurable and
Context-Sensitive Middleware, which will be open-source, open-schematic and open
standard middleware based on top of Bluetooth standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;