* 0123328
* Presidential Awards for Excellence In Science, Mathematics and Engineering Mentoring
* EHR,DUE
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2003
* Robert Willis, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn Suiter
* 11/30/2003
* USD 10,000.00

The Maryland Mathematics, Engineering, Science Achievement (MESA) Program was
founded in 1976 by the Applied Physics Laboratory of the Johns Hopkins
University. MESA works to create a superior education process that enables
American students of African, Latino, and Native American heritage to achieve
and contribute their full potential in mathematics, engineering, science, and
technology. The program has shown steady growth since its inception and number
and the percent of participants going on to enroll in college has steadily
increased. Maryland MESA currently includes partnerships with colleges and
universities, business and industry, government, community organizations,
parents, and more than 143 schools in 15 counties across Maryland. MESA
activities are multi-faceted and include academic tutorials, Saturday academies,
field trips, communications skills training, science and engineering projects,
and advisor workshops.

The program's success is reflected in the 84% of the program graduates who go on
to college, and the 79% who pursue degrees in science, mathematics, or
engineering. In the most recent program year, 1999-2000, more than 2,200
elementary, middle- and high-school students participated, of whom 1,332 (58%)
are female, 957 (42%) male; with the ethnic distribution of 1,720 (75%) African
Americans, 33 Latinos (1.5%), and 11 (.5%) Native Americans, as well as 376
(16.5%) Caucasians, 123 (5.5%) Asian Americans, and 26 (1%) others. Maryland
MESA students also earn higher scores on the SAT than the national and state
averages.