* 0123450
* Ultra-High-Capacity Optical Communications and Networking: III-nitride Wide Bandgap Semiconductors for Optical Communications
* ENG,ECCS
* 11/01/2001,10/31/2005
* Rongqing Hui, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 10/31/2005
* USD 400,000.00

This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation NSF 01-65 on "Ultra-
High Capacity Optical Communications and Networking." III-nitride optoelectronic
devices offer benefits including UV/blue emission, the ability to operate at
very high temperatures and power levels. Large band offsets of GaN/AlGaN or
InGaN/AlGaN heterostructures allowing novel quantum well devices, and high
emission efficiencies. But the research in III-nitrides has been so far focused
on their applications in the blue/UV optoelectronic devices. We propose a
combined effort to develop novel photonic components and photonic integrated
circuits based on III-nitride wide band gap semiconductors for fiber-optical
communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-speed optical switches and wavelength
routers are indispensable in future all-optical networks. Presently opto-
mechnical switches and thermal tuning of silica-based array waveguide gratings
(AWG) are not fast enough to perform optical packet switching. On the other
hand, InP--based AWGs have high optical loss and temperature sensitivity due to
high refractive index of the material and small waveguide
size.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The refractive index of GaN is about 2.2 in infrared,
which is much better matched to the index of optical fiber (1.5) than InP (3.2).
The index-controllable nature of Al Ga N and In Ga N alloys makes them an ideal
candidate for optical waveguide devices. These together may allow the creation
of photonic devices with unprecedented properties and functions. Since
Il1-nitrides are semiconductor materials, carrier injection can be used to
modulate the refractive index and change the phase delay of the
waveguide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another objective of this research is to make
electrically pumped waveguide optical amplifiers in the optical communication
windows. Currently, InGaAsP-based semiconductor optical amplifiers have sub-
nanosecond carrier lifetime and they are not suitable for WDM optical systems
because of the fast cross-gain saturation. Er-doped fiber amplifiers (EDFA) are
suitable for WDM applications; however, optoelectronic integration is not
possible with EDFAs because of the fiber length. III-nitride semiconductors
appear to be able to host erbium ions. Electrical pumping on InGaN/GaN
heterostructures generates photons at the wavelength of approximately 400 nm,
which can be used to optically excite the erbium ions. Since erbium has much
higher absorption efficiency in the short wavelengths than the currently used
pumping wavelengths of either 980 nm or 1480 nm, the amplifier may potentially
be made very short.&lt;br/&gt;