* 0123469
* Ultra-High-Capacity Optical Communications and Networking: Integrated Guided Wave Devices for Terabit per Second Optical Communications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2004
* Bruce Wessels, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Filbert J. Bartoli
* 08/31/2004
* USD 269,998.00

This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation NSF 01-65 on "Ultra-
High Capacity Optical Communications and Networking." Future systems for optical
signal processing and communications will require large scale integration of
photonic devices. Ferroelectric oxides have long been recognized as highly non-
linear optical materials with significant advantages, especially when used as
optical waveguides. In the form of high-index-contrast, thin film structures,
high-density integrated optics can be potentially achieved. The intrinsic
confinement of the electromagnetic field in the thin film guide leads to high
power densities and strong optical nonlinearities. Their utilization in thin
film waveguide structures, however, has been limited because of difficulties in
preparing low loss materials with bulk-like non-linear optical properties.
Recent advances in the epitaxy of ferroelectrics, however, indicate that thin-
film guided -wave devices are now realizable. In the proposed program epitaxial
ferroelectric oxide thin film waveguide structures for microphotonic devices and
integrated optical systems will be investigated. The proposed work builds upon
our demonstration of low loss epitaxial ferroelectric thin films prepared by
metalorganic vapor phase epitaxy (MOVPE) and the demonstration of large band
width guided wave electro-optic modulators. MOVPE enables the preparation of
ferroelectric oxides with high electro-optic coefficients that are not available
as large single crystals. Specific systems to be investigated include BaTiO3,
and other ferroelectrics. Thin film guided wave electro-optic devices will be
fabricated including Mach-Zehnder electro-optic modulators and beam steering
devices. Thin film modulators with bandwidths of 20-100 GHz will be designed and
fabricated. By using highly nonlinear ferroelectric thin films, significant
improvements in bandwidth, and operating voltage are anticipated compared to
conventional bulk ferroelectric devices. The feasibility of integrating
epitaxial ferroelectrics with silicon will be investigated. Metalorganic
molecular beam epitaxy (MOMBE) will be used to form low index, epitaxial buffer
layers that act as a stable interfacial layer between the ferroelectric oxide
and the silicon substrate. Devices will be fabricated using both conventional
and e-beam lithography. Potential applications for microphotonic devices and
systems are in terabit per second optical communications, local area networks,
and optical interconnects.