* 0123805
* U.S.-Japan Dissertation Enhancement:  Speciation with Hybridization: The case of Japanese Hexagrammids
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/2001,11/30/2002
* Karen Crow, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 11/30/2002
* USD 12,081.00

0123805&lt;br/&gt;Bernardi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a one-year
collaborative research project between Professor Giacomo Bernardi and Karen Crow
at the University of California, Santa Cruz and Professor Hiroyuki Munehara of
Hokkaido University in Japan as well as Professor Andrey Balanov of the Russian
Academy of Sciences in Vladivostok. The researchers will undertake a study of
the involvement of speciation with hybridization of the Japanese Hexagrammids.
Reinforcement is the build up of assortative mating resulting from natural
selection against hybrids upon secondary contact of allopatric species. It has
been theorized that reinforcement could be an important force driving
speciation. Evidence for reinforcement in laboratory experiments has been
difficult to generate, and studies in natural settings have been lacking,
especially in marine systems. However, theoretical and empirical support has
grown in the last five years and additional studies need to be done to further
test these predictions. Fishes of the genus Hexagrammos meet criteria theorized
to favor speciation by reinforcement. The research will involve testing whether
assortative mating is being built up in conjunction with reduced fitness of
hybrids to determine if reinforcement is an important force maintaining species
boundaries in this system. The main focus of the proposed research is to
determine the role of hybridization in processes of speciation within the genus
Hexagrammos. The specific goals are to: 1) characterize the relative proportions
of hybrids occurring in nature at three sites in the Northern Sea of Japan; 2)
measure post-zygotic reproductive isolation between parental species by
estimating differential costs in fitness associated with larvae produced from
hybrid, specific and F1-hybrid backcrosses; and 3) estimate pre-zygotic
reproductive isolation by comparing differences in assortative mate selection in
parental species from both sympatric and allopatric
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project brings together the efforts of
three international laboratories that have complementary expertise and research
capabilities. The process of reinforcement of premating isolation is of great
interest in evolutionary biology. Results of this research are likely to provide
a major contribution to our understanding of speciation processes, particularly
in the area of reinforcement as a mechanism for speciation. The project advances
international human resources through the participation of a graduate student.
Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our base
of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and cooperation. The
researchers plan to publish results of the research in scientific journals and
report on the findings at scientific meetings.&lt;br/&gt;