* 0123319
* Presidential Awards for Excellence In Science, Mathematics and Engineering Mentoring
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2004
* Carol Muller, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn Suiter
* 11/30/2004
* USD 10,000.00

Mentor Net is an innovative program that uses the Internet as a vehicle to do
large-scale mentoring, especially of women. During the 2000-2001 program year,
two thousand students were matched with one thousand nine hundred and thirteen
mentors representing six hundred and ninety companies; seventy affiliated
colleges and universities participated. The large network of mentors from
industry and government laboratories it has developed provide those mentored
with a better understanding of a field, occupation, or organization, including
cultural factors, typical professional and personal rewards, likely challenges,
and strategies for success. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This program is particularly
beneficial in its support of undergraduate and graduate women students who are
currently enrolled in engineering or science programs in higher education. The
program is successful in the retention of women in mathematics, science, and
engineering majors and careers. Involving a large and increasing number of
diverse companies is a key benefit. There is also a strong emphasis on the
evaluation of the program, which works to continually improve the MentorNet
operation, and also documents the program's impressive statistics in supporting
the retention of diverse students in science, engineering, and technology. The
training and feedback mechanism for mentors makes this program even more
effective, ensuring that the mentors know how to interact with the students
successfully.&lt;br/&gt;