* 0123405
* Ultra-High-Capacity Optical Communications and Networking: Optical CDMA with Femtosecond Pulses for Ultra-High-Capacity Communications and Networking
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2001,10/31/2005
* Rene Cruz, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 10/31/2005
* USD 468,250.00

In this proposal, three researchers from the University of California, San
Diego (UCSD), specializing in the fields of optics, communications, and computer
networks, are collaborating on the Ultra-High-Capacity Optical Communications
and Networking initiative. It is felt by many researchers that the most
efficient and economical way to utilize optical transmission technology for
large scale networking is to use wavelength division multiplexing (WDM) in a
circuit switched mode, overlaid with packet switching implemented with
electronics. While this may indeed be the case, it is important to investigate
alternative approaches that have great potential. The UCSD team has been
investigating novel techniques of information transmission via optical fiber,
where code division multiple access (CDMA) using ultrashort laser pulses is
employed. Compact, low cost fiber-based ultrashort pulse sources are currently
being developed, making the technology suitable for future practical networks.
When an ultrashort pulse is encoded for CDMA, the pulse spreads out in time and
resembles a noise burst that is transmitted on the optical fiber. At the
receiving node, a decoder is applied to the received signals from multiple
users, which matches only the encoding of the desired transmitter. The matching
signal component is transformed back to an ultrashort pulse form that can be
detected over the remaining interference from other users with nonlinear optical
techniques. A novel high resolution pulse synthesis and detection technique for
ultrashort pulses developed at UCSD enable various data transmission formats to
be considered, such as ultrafast packet transmission with on/off keying, pulse
position modulation, and amplitude modulation. The CDMA scheme enables large
scale, asynchronous, concurrent access to the transmission resources. With a
suitable architecture, this can be exploited to simplify network control, and
increase reliability and flexibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The objective of
this proposal is to conduct basic research by investigating theoretically and
verifying&lt;br/&gt;experimentally data modulation schemes for efficient
information transmission in conjunction with CDMA encoded ultrashort pulses in
an optical fiber network. Efficient modulation formats will result in aggregate
transmission rates exceeding 10's of terabits/second, with individual user rates
on the order of 1-10 gigabits/second. The specific objectives of this proposal
include modeling of the optical CDMA for ultrashort Gaussian pulses, complete
statistical analysis of the transmitted waveforms, investigation of various
optical CDMA codes that support thousands of users with minimal interference,
bit error rate analysis of received optical signals for various modulation
schemes, modeling and characterization of the distortions induced by the fiber
channel, adaptive equalization techniques for reducing dispersion and other
fiber distortions, computer simulations of the modulation schemes, and
experimental evaluation of the communication system: transmitter, optical
channel, and receiver. The various phases of the proposed project complement
each other. Combined together, they provide for in-depth knowledge of the
theoretical and experimental issues of communicating with CDMA encoded
ultrashort pulses. These findings will be shared with the scientific community,
enhancing not only the knowledge base of other researchers in the field, but
also of the students conducting the research. We shall demonstrate a prototype
optical network with several users employing the modulation format that will
carry over 10 terabits per second of information, when scaled up to the full
number of users.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; The potential impact of the work will be
in the proof that optical CDMA encoding of ultrashort pulses is
a&lt;br/&gt;realizable and desirable alternative to WDM. Currently, WDM is the
preferred multiplexing method due to its&lt;br/&gt;simplicity and low cost.
While WDM does increase the transmitted bandwidth significantly, it still does
not fully utilize the available optical bandwidth due to both the need for guard
bands between channels and the under utilization of channels. In contrast, CDMA
encoded ultrashort pulses share the entire bandwidth without the need for guard
bands, leading to efficient utilization of transmission resources. Using CDMA
can also provide a highly flexible and robust infrastructure, upon which packet
switching can be overlaid. The CDMA format also provides a degree of security,
as no data can be extracted without knowledge of the codes employed.