* 0123147
* Hutlee Umyuarchdelee
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2001,09/30/2007
* Julie Maier, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jody Chase
* 09/30/2007
* USD 2,026,592.00

The Hutlee/Umyuarchdelee proposal (Athabascan/Yupik words for leader, boss, a
&lt;br/&gt;good thinker)is a five-year project based on a hybrid of models with
proven success &lt;br/&gt;in educating minoritystudents. The project will
include academic enhancement for &lt;br/&gt;gatekeeper math and sciencecourses
integrating active learning pedagogies, intensive &lt;br/&gt;sessions, and
relevant ways of learningfor Native students. To sustain student success
&lt;br/&gt;the project will provide faculty "sponsorship," vigilant student
support skills, &lt;br/&gt;incorporate a "Master Learner" curriculum to
strengthen students-social contexts, &lt;br/&gt;and integrate job shadowing and
internships with industry and
Native&lt;br/&gt;organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Interior-Aleutians
Campus and Bristol Bay Campus service area comprises 235,000
&lt;br/&gt;squaremiles and 74% Native population. Less than .5% of the students
enrolling through &lt;br/&gt;these two campuses are full time students.
Recruiting students from 90 (of Alaska's&lt;br/&gt;220) villages, this project
proposes to enroll five cohorts in a two-year village-based&lt;br/&gt;program.
Through course work and intensive weeklong sessions during the semester
as&lt;br/&gt;well as intensive math summer sessions, student cohorts will build
an academic learning&lt;br/&gt;community. This learning community will carry on
after students complete project&lt;br/&gt;coursework and transition to urban-
based four-year SMET degree programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Strategic goals of
this project are:&lt;br/&gt;* To increase Alaska Native participation and
success in SMET degree gatekeeper courses.&lt;br/&gt;* To significantly increase
the number of Alaska Native students who pursue baccalaureate&lt;br/&gt; degrees
in SMET disciplines or enter SMET careers.&lt;br/&gt;* To develop a
collaborative program among the University of Alaska Campuses,
industry,&lt;br/&gt; and Tribal organizations to strengthen SMET academic
infrastructure for Alaska Native&lt;br/&gt; students.&lt;br/&gt;* To provide
faculty and students with the tools and education to actively use technology
in&lt;br/&gt; academic courses.&lt;br/&gt;The Hutlee/Umyuarchdelee method of
delivering gatekeeper math and science courses will&lt;br/&gt;include curricular
enhancements that employ active learning pedagogies and include a
holistic&lt;br/&gt;pedagogical philosophy. Methods of curricular enhancements
are:&lt;br/&gt;* Additional faculty contact time extending math courses from
three to five days by adding&lt;br/&gt; math labs which integrate methods for
active learning such as hands-on manipulatives.&lt;br/&gt;* Six and eight weeks
summer math intensives with relevant industry internships.&lt;br/&gt;* Weeklong
semester-based intensive sessions that integrate academics, problem
solving,&lt;br/&gt; and Master Learner curricular activities.&lt;br/&gt;*
Building a student cohort academic learning
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential impacts of the Hutlee/Umyuarchdelee
project are:&lt;br/&gt;* To develop SMET knowledgeable Alaska Native
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;* To develop SMET knowledgeable Alaska Native leaders who
will participate in making&lt;br/&gt; decisions about tribal lands that will
forever change the lifestyles, economics, and&lt;br/&gt; existence of rural
Alaskan communities.&lt;br/&gt;* To develop curricula and a delivery model which
will impact not only students and&lt;br/&gt; communities affected though this
program, extend to other SMET students in different&lt;br/&gt; geographical
areas.