* 0123961
* Deploying and Supporting a National Middleware Infrastructure:  Toward a National GRIDS Center
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Carl Kesselman, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jennifer Schopf
* 08/31/2005
* USD 4,598,209.00

The proposal focuses on the deployment and support of the NSF Middleware
Initiative (NMI) and is designed to serve as the Service Provider for the NMI
program. The NMI program will expedite the development of middleware functions
and services to support the national research and scientific community, and will
also accelerate the deployment and use of new and emerging applications across
the Internet. The purpose of the NMI program is to enable members of the
advanced networking community to collaborate in developing and assembling common
network services and resources (middleware) to optimize the network for
applications and to share limited resources for the common good of all
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal has three primary goals;&lt;br/&gt;-
Provide production-quality software releases, support, training, and outreach,
with the goals of ensuring that early adopter user communities are successful
and that new user communities are trained in the use of the
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Leverage the PI's long history in running
production facilities to develop tools and procedures to ensure that the
resulting software is acceptable, deployable and supportable on a wide variety
of end systems, including production environments at campus and
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Provide dedicated operations capability
providing 24x7 support for infrastructure elements, monitoring of grid
infrastructure, and capture and analysis of grid usage data. In doing so, NMI
will enable the construction of a national scale infrastructure that can be used
by application communities such as NEES and GriPhyN, or discipline-specific
communities, or research communities, to explore the use of the middleware
infrastructure on full scale, meaningful applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
program will will build on widely used research middleware, such as the Globus
Toolkit, the de facto standard for Grid environments, Condor, and Storage
Resource Broker, heavily leveraging open (e.g., IETF and W3C standard)
protocols. The results of the project will rely on open protocols and open
source implementations. In undertaking these activities, NCSA will work closely
with major U.S. projects including the NSF PACIs, which will help reach out to
other user communities, and with UCAID, which has committed to working to
address the challenging and important problem of integration with campus
infrastructures and the larger education and research communities. NCSA will
work aggressively to support interoperability, transition relevant technologies
to standards, and develop strong industrial relationships.&lt;br/&gt;