* 0123121
* The Fond du Lac Tribal Technology and Science Infrastructure Project
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Ted Wetherbee, Fond du Lac Tribal and Community College
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jody Chase
* 08/31/2006
* USD 2,456,041.00

This project was developed as a result of a technology and science planning
process that&lt;br/&gt;Fond du Lac Tribal and Community College (FDLTCC)
initiated in 2000 and is still&lt;br/&gt;continuing. This planning effort
involved a large number of college and community&lt;br/&gt;stakeholder groups
and provided both the underlying concepts for this proposal as well as
the&lt;br/&gt;outline for specific curriculum programs and hardware/software
infrastructure needs.&lt;br/&gt;The project proposed has several interrelated
elements. High performance computing assets,&lt;br/&gt;including Internet2
hookup, cluster installation, and visualization panels, are put into place
to&lt;br/&gt;support both curriculum and research agendas. The research agenda
is centered in ongoing&lt;br/&gt;research efforts at the college in
environmental science, soil mapping, computational science,&lt;br/&gt;and
information technology (IT). The research effort is designed to provide students
with&lt;br/&gt;experience in research, experience with the collaborative
research environment, and&lt;br/&gt;experimential activities related to what
they are studying. The grant also proposes to build a&lt;br/&gt;partnership with
the University of Minnesota's Laboratory for Computational Science
and&lt;br/&gt;Engineering, both to provide help with constructing the high
performance infrastructure, as&lt;br/&gt;well as a research agenda that will
involve students in computational science, physics, and&lt;br/&gt;other SMET-
related curriculum areas. Other collaborative efforts will be implemented
with&lt;br/&gt;current partners involved in FDLTCC research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the proposed project's heart are curriculum
development and implementation activities&lt;br/&gt;designed to not only build
on the enhanced research projects, but to also initiate new
SMET&lt;br/&gt;degrees. Research with FDLTCC's target student population has
indicated that these degrees&lt;br/&gt;and a one-year certificate program will
increase the number of Native American students&lt;br/&gt;majoring in SMET-
related programs. These degrees are all designed to launch a
new&lt;br/&gt;curriculum track design, which provides a core of Information
Technology courses that&lt;br/&gt;students can use to build either baccalaureate
or associate degrees in a number of
different&lt;br/&gt;disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The degrees and
certificate initiated through the project will include: A GIS/GPS
certificate&lt;br/&gt;which can be earned in conjunction with the environmental
science, computer science, and&lt;br/&gt;law enforcement associate degrees; a
baccalaureate in computer science with the IT core; an&lt;br/&gt;associate
degree in E-Crime and Computer Security that can be earned with the IT core,
the&lt;br/&gt;GIS/GPS certificate, and the college's current Minnesota Transfer
or Law Enforcement&lt;br/&gt;associate degrees in order to complete the
requirements for a baccalaureate. The new IT core&lt;br/&gt;will also be
available to baccalaureate students in Elementary Education at FDLTCC. By
the&lt;br/&gt;end of the grant, enrollment in these curriculum areas will
support continuation of each&lt;br/&gt;program based on the timetable described
in the grant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The last two elements of the grant include
the plan to develop an associate degree online for&lt;br/&gt;students located at
FDLTCC's Augsburg Offsite program that serves the Native
American&lt;br/&gt;community in St. Paul/Minneapolis. This effort will also use
the high performance&lt;br/&gt;computing resources built through the project.
SMET related faculty and staff development&lt;br/&gt;activities are also
included designed to increase IT sophistication at FDLTCC as well as
to&lt;br/&gt;increase the number of MS and Ph.D.-qualified faculty in SMET-
related areas.