* 0123490
* NSF/NEPCoP Fellows Program:  Supporting Student Research and Career Development in Conservation Biology: Starter Grant
* EHR,DGE
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2003
* Elizabeth Farnsworth, Native Plant Trust, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn L. Piper
* 09/30/2003
* USD 49,910.00

I propose to initiate an innovative, collaborative small grants program that
fosters basic research by undergraduate and graduate students on fundamental
questions related to plant conservation biology. With a third year of funding
following on my NSF Post-doctoral Fellowship in Science, Mathematics,
Engineering, and Technology Education, I will forge partnerships between my host
institution, the New England Wild Flower Society (NEWFS), and academic centers
in New England to establish a student research program addressing the ecology of
rare plants, called the NSF/NEPCoP Fellows Program. During fall 2001, I will
solicit research proposals from advanced undergraduate and beginning graduate
students from academic institutions in New England. I will fund six field
research studies selected via peer-review and will advise these studies during
summer, 2002. I will assist students in empirical design, data interpretation,
and publication. Results from these studies will be published as appropriate in
scientific journals, and promulgated to relevant conservation organizations to
facilitate management of rare plant populations. &lt;br/&gt;This program
will:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enable students to hone both strong empirical
research skills and clear communication skills that will enhance their.
Professional development and broaden their opportunities for employment; yield
valuable new data to advance the science of conservation biology; fund
opportunities for research in conservation biology not currently covered by
grant sources; provide. Critically needed data on species biology to NEWFS and
other conservation organizations to promote scientifically-based. Conservation
efforts; serve as a self-sustaining model for collaboration among academic and
extramural institutions to strengthen data collection efforts and to train a new
generation of conservation biologists.&lt;br/&gt;