* 0123214
* Northwest Indian College TCUP Project
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2007
* Rissa Wabaunsee, Northwest Indian College
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jody Chase
* 08/31/2007
* USD 2,341,054.00

The mission of Northwest Indian College (NWIC) is to provide post-
secondary&lt;br/&gt;educational opportunities for Native Americans that is
sensitive to their worldviews,&lt;br/&gt;background, and academic needs and
goals, and prepare them for the challenges of &lt;br/&gt;leadership in their
tribal communities. In addition to providing effective opportunities
&lt;br/&gt;for students to develop academic competence, the NWIC mission is to
infuse students &lt;br/&gt;with clear communication skills, critical thinking
skills, and a developed sense of&lt;br/&gt;civic responsibility.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Northwest Indian College Division of Math and Science
is proposing implementation &lt;br/&gt;of a SMET learning community educational
plan that begins with entering freshman and&lt;br/&gt;supports them through to
the completion of an AA or AS degree. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first-year goal
of this program would be to generate student interest and growth
&lt;br/&gt;toward further education in math and science. Building on this
foundation, the overall&lt;br/&gt;goal would be to have these students then
obtain associates and baccalaureate degrees &lt;br/&gt;in science or math-
related fields. The first year would be a "developmental year"
for&lt;br/&gt;students whose test scores indicate that this is necessary. (Note:
The majority of &lt;br/&gt;students entering NWIC would have test scores
reflecting this need. It is often&lt;br/&gt;the lack of a growth or preparation
period that contributes to student failure&lt;br/&gt;in math and
science.)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the first year, the plan would be as
follows:&lt;br/&gt;* Each eligible student would enter into an integrated
academic group or cohort.&lt;br/&gt;* A testing specialist would evaluate math
and science competencies for each student.&lt;br/&gt;* All students would be
enrolled in the following courses: Public Speaking, Introduction
to&lt;br/&gt;Computers, Native American History/Philosophy, and Introduction to
Successful Learning&lt;br/&gt;during fall quarter and throughout their first (or
developmental) year. These courses,&lt;br/&gt;which are required for graduation
from Northwest Indian College, would be fully&lt;br/&gt;integrated among each
other while also being integrated with introductory science and&lt;br/&gt;math
courses in which students are placed according to their initial test
scores.&lt;br/&gt;Example: The cohort would be assigned a relevant science topic
such as iswater quality.lo&lt;br/&gt;Individually and as a group, students would
research the topic, using math to compute&lt;br/&gt;statistics, the Internet to
find background material and group discussions to enhance&lt;br/&gt;individual
research. Students would give oral and written presentations using
the&lt;br/&gt;principles discussed in the cohort instruction. (Note: A somewhat
different form of this&lt;br/&gt;schedule and approach has been used
successfully with our NSF funded Tribal&lt;br/&gt;Environmental and Natural
Resource Management program (TENRM). The result has&lt;br/&gt;been much higher
than average retention and completion for students lacking
needed&lt;br/&gt;skills.)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By combining required courses
where NWIC students typically do well (i.e. Speech),
with&lt;br/&gt;developmental science and math courses, students will be more
likely to successfully&lt;br/&gt;complete essential coursework for
graduation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Northwest Indian College students have
demonstrated they must be immersed in their&lt;br/&gt;culture, history, and
philosophy if they are to effectively understand and build upon &lt;br/&gt;their
role inthe Native communities. The college knows they must also develop
the&lt;br/&gt;science and math skills necessary to help their culture survive
and intends to meet&lt;br/&gt;these needs by offering introductory science and
math courses fully integrated with &lt;br/&gt;curriculum related to Native
culture, history, and philosophy. As they build increased &lt;br/&gt;self-esteem
while finding success in the classroom, students will recognize their
&lt;br/&gt;capacity to do science and math. They will then feel comfortable
pursuing further &lt;br/&gt;science and math-related courses as they eventually
enter baccalaureate programs and&lt;br/&gt;the SMET workforce.