* 0123960
* Conference on Specificity and Crosstalk in Plant Signal Transduction being held on January 22 - 27 2002: in Tahoe City, California.
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/2001,01/31/2003
* Julian Schroeder, Keystone Symposia on Molecular and Cellular Biology
* Continuing Grant
* Ronald M. Weiner
* 01/31/2003
* USD 13,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Signal transduction networks are essential in eukaryotes, allowing
cells to perceive and&lt;br/&gt;respond to continuous changes in extracellular
conditions. Multiple signaling pathways&lt;br/&gt;co-exist in individual cells
controlling essential responses, including hormone
signaling,&lt;br/&gt;mitogenesis and apoptosis. Understanding the molecular
mechanisms by which signaling&lt;br/&gt;pathways cross talk with one another or
by which specificity is conferred within a complex&lt;br/&gt;signaling network
is an area of present intensive research in eukaryotic biology. It
has&lt;br/&gt;long been recognized that most aspects of plant growth and
development are regulated by&lt;br/&gt;networks of signaling mechanisms rather
than linear signal transduction pathways.&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, most plant
cells express receptors for the six major classes of plant&lt;br/&gt;hormones
and additional light and pathogen responsive receptors and need to process
each&lt;br/&gt;pathway, while also making use of cross talk among these
pathways. Recent&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary studies using new genetic,
biochemical and genomic approaches have led&lt;br/&gt;to rapid and accelerating
progress in understanding mechanisms that mediate cross talk
and&lt;br/&gt;specificity in plant signal
transduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hormones, light, pathogens and stress stimuli
trigger signal transduction cascades that&lt;br/&gt;are essential for growth,
development and survival of plants. The Keystone Symposium
on&lt;br/&gt;Specificity and Cross Talk in Plant Signal Transduction will be
focused on presentations&lt;br/&gt;on newly recognized reception and
transduction mechanisms in these responses. The&lt;br/&gt;organizers have set up
important avenues that will ensure diversity among presenters at&lt;br/&gt;the
conference and are requesting funds, that will enable travel support for
graduate&lt;br/&gt;students, post doctoral associates and selected speakers,
towards achieving the goal of&lt;br/&gt;diversity and multidisciplinarity. The
goal of the meeting will be to highlight major&lt;br/&gt;advances in this
rapidly moving field and to synthesize an integrated understanding
of&lt;br/&gt;which mechanisms mediate cross talk among pathways and which
mechanisms allow specific&lt;br/&gt;modulation of plant growth and developmental
responses. Understanding of these mechanisms&lt;br/&gt;is essential for
manipulation of plant growth and development and for developing
new&lt;br/&gt;biotechnological applications, that will ultimately benefit human
health.