* 0123495
* Ultra-High-Capacity Optical Communications and Networking: Data processing modules using high-nonlinearity fiber for advanced optical networking
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2001,03/31/2005
* William Kath, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 03/31/2005
* USD 350,002.00

The high demand likely to be placed on the capacity of telecommunication
networks in the near future urges&lt;br/&gt;conversion of hybrid electro-optical
signal processing to all-optical processing, exploiting the largest bandwidth
available in the optical domain. One way of catering to this demand is by
multiplexing in time as&lt;br/&gt;well as wavelength domains. Using picosecond-
duration optical pulses, which could be soliton-like over&lt;br/&gt;portions of
the network, one can first perform multiplexing in the time domain (i.e., time-
division multiplexing, or TDM) for local to metropolitan-area network
applications and then in the wavelength domain (wavelength-division
multiplexing, or WDM) for wide area coverage. This scenario leads one to
conclude that the key issue to be addressed is how to take advantage of the
powerful digital-processing techniques in the pure-optical domain, that minimize
the detrimental effects of noise at a very fundamental level. The idea is that,
for digitally encoded data [1's (0's) represented by the presence (absence) of
pulses], instead of using linear amplifiers which act on signals in an analog
fashion and inevitably introduce 3 dB of noise one can employ digital-switching
amplifiers or optical regenerators. At the same time, pure-optical digital
switching is potentially much more reliable and faster than electro-optical
switching. Furthermore, optical switching will also be needed to implement other
networking functions, such as demultiplexing to process at very high speed the
header of a data packet used for addressing to different users on the
network.&lt;br/&gt; Our preliminary experiments show that the parametric
nonlinearity of optical fibers can be exploited&lt;br/&gt;to perform
functionalities that will be needed in packet-switched all-optical networks,
such as fiber-optic&lt;br/&gt;cache-memory buffers, picosecond-pulse all-optical
regenerators, all-optical limiters, and tunable clock re-covery modules. These
devices take advantage of the ultrafast parametric nonlinearity of glass fiber
and&lt;br/&gt;hence are capable of operating at speeds in excess of 100 Gb/s.
Moreover, they will be essential for deploying&lt;br/&gt;packet-switched,
ultrahigh-speed time-division and wavelength-division multiplexed all-optical
networks.&lt;br/&gt; In all of our experiments thus far, standard dispersion-
shifted fiber (DSF) has been used. Fiber lengths&lt;br/&gt;on the order of 100's
of meters are required for used with ps-duration pulses of a few watts peak
power to&lt;br/&gt;achieve the data processing functions. Here we propose to
explore the use of high-nonlinearity fiber, such&lt;br/&gt;as microstructure
fiber (MF, which is only now becoming commercially available), to perform
essential&lt;br/&gt;functions in high-speed all-optical processing. Because of
their strongly guiding behavior, the MFs can&lt;br/&gt;be wound into very tight
loops, suggesting that they could potentially fit into a compact modular
switching&lt;br/&gt;package. Specifically, we propose to utilize the high-
nonlinearity microstructure fibers to develop all-optical data processing
modules. These include a cache storage buffer based upon parametric
amplification that will be capable of operating in the 10's of Gb/s range. With
use of the high-nonlinearity fiber, the average pump power requirement can be
met with commercially-available watt-class optical amplifiers. We will carry out
experiments to explore various ways of reading, writing, and erasing the stored
data patterns.&lt;br/&gt;Our work has shown that the ultrafast parametric
nonlinearity can be exploited either to provide broadband&lt;br/&gt;tunable gain
or dynamic gain modulation for clock-recovery. We propose to combine the two to
demonstrate&lt;br/&gt;optical phase-lock loops, which in principle can be
extremely fast as they rely on the Kerr nonlinearity&lt;br/&gt;for envelope-
phase discrimination. Simultaneous to the above experimental studies we will
also develop&lt;br/&gt;numerical models of the various optical systems. This
will provide a design tool to determine the parameter&lt;br/&gt;values allowing
the most efficient operation of the experimental setups. We have previously
demonstrated&lt;br/&gt;the possibility of stably propagating sub-picosecond
pulses in fiber lines in which conjugating gain is used&lt;br/&gt;to compensate
the linear loss. We propose to assemble a re-circulating loop experiment in
which linear loss&lt;br/&gt;will be compensated by a pair of non-degenerate
parametric (conjugating) amplifiers. The location of the&lt;br/&gt;two
amplifiers will be chosen based upon further theoretical/numerical results. We
will experimentally and&lt;br/&gt;theoretically study the stability properties
of the sub-picosecond pulses by making various signal and
noise&lt;br/&gt;measurements, and will compare the experimental results directly
with numerical simulations.