* 0123124
* Building the Technology Workforce in Indiana: Undergraduate Scholarships in Information Technology, Computer Science, and Electronic and Computer Technology
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Richard Easton, Indiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen C. Cooper
* 12/31/2006
* USD 399,142.00

Summary Building the Technology Workforce in Indiana: Undergraduate Scholarships
in Information Technology, Computer Science, and Electronic and Computer
Technology

This project provides thirty-two scholarships to academically talented low-
income students enrolled in a newly created Information Technology degree
program, or in existing and highly regarded programs in Computer Science, and
Electronic and Computer Technology. As part of the program, scholars are
embraced in a unique First Year learning community designed to provide academic
and social support to ensure their continued success toward their degree and in
the university environment. Faculty advisor/mentors build relationships with the
scholars, providing critical support as they monitor and guide. Internships with
high tech industry partners offer scholars valuable career related experiences.
Placement of graduating scholars in the workplace is facilitated through
workshops and individual assistance. The program incorporates a wide range of
student support services aimed to improve scholarship, retention to graduation,
and successful employment in appropriate high technology careers.

PROPOSAL NO.: PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: INSTITUTION NAME: TITLE: NSF RECEIVED
DATE: 0123124 Easton, Richard Indiana State University Building the Technology
Workforce in Indiana: NSF Undergraduate Scholarships in Information Technology,
Computer Science, MIS, and Electronic and Compu 05/01/2001