* 0123864
* Ultra-High-Capacity Optical Communications and Networking: Nano-Photonic Integration of Ultra-fast WDM Optical Communications Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2004
* Evelyn Hu, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Filbert J. Bartoli
* 09/30/2004
* USD 510,000.00

This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation NSF 01-65 on "Ultra-
High Capacity Optical Communications and Networking." Ultra-fast optical packet
communications, with packet bit rates exceeding 160 Gbps, is a key next step in
the evolution of ultra-high capacity optical networks. Ultra high bit rate
packet communications is a regime difficult to implement electronically.
Photonic technologies hold promise to realize these high bandwidth systems, but
integration of photonic technologies severely limits the ability to realize high
density circuits comparable to that of electronics. New technologies are
required to bring photonics through the same level of integration that
electronics experienced in the 1960s and 70s. This program will address nano-
photonic integration of the building blocks for ultra-high capacity optical
communications systems and networks with smaller, integrable components. The
research objectives are to investigate nano-technologies that extend optical
scaling to bit rates in excess of 160 Gbps and hundreds to thousands of
wavelengths. The proposed project will also address how the physics and
materials of nano-photonic devices and the nonlinear dynamics and control are
coupled to each other and to the systems requirements. This interdisciplinary
approach is carried across the research and educational/training aspects of this
program. The design, performance, processing, fabrication and integration of
these technologies must be understood and a new generation of scientists and
engineers to lead and support this new technology base must be trained. This
proposal brings together researchers from multiple fields under the common goal
of nano-photonic integration for ultra-high speed WDM optical communications
systems. New critical problems will be solved by integrating research in optical
networks and communications with nano-photonic devices and materials and
nonlinear dynamics and controls. The educational objectives involve integrating
student education that incorporates material growth, device fabrication, control
theory and systems. Students will take joint, team-based responsibility for
mentoring undergraduate students - giving those students a truly unique
perspective on a real, exciting and technologically critical problem. We expect
that this dynamic, multidisciplinary research program will attract a diverse set
of graduate students from underrepresented groups, and these large scale
photonic integration investigations will help train a new generation of
scientists and engineers that will be needed over the next five to ten years to
support future ultra-high capacity optical communications networks. The
potential impact of this type of research can be as fundamental as that which
occurred in the electronics industry in the late 1950s through the early 1970s.