* 0123382
* Antarctic Penisula Climate Variability: A Historical and Paleoenvironmental Perspective
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2002
* Eugene Domack, Hamilton College
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 06/30/2002
* USD 25,000.00

This award, provided by the Office of Polar Programs (OPP) of the National
Science Foundation (NSF), provides support, along with matching funds from the
Environmental Studies Program at Hamilton College, for a workshop to be held at
Hamilton College in September of 2001. The workshop will involve scientists from
several other countries, in addition to the United States, who are actively
involved in environmental research in the region. In addition, the workshop will
take an interdisciplinary approach to understanding the environmental changes
taking place in the region of the Antarctic Peninsula. The past several decades
have demonstrated severe and rapid changes in the ecosystems and physical
environment of the Antarctic Peninsula and the region stands out in the most
recent IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change) report as the strongest
regional "hot spot" for increased temperature trends. Global climate models that
incorporate greenhouse gases and sulfate aerosols demonstrate a striking
correspondence to the observed temperature trends. The workshop will address
this correspondence and will place historical data into the context of
geological and glaciological records of climate change over the last 12,000
years. Oceanographic and atmospheric linkages will be discussed and examined for
decadal to millennial time scales. The results will be published in a bound
volume of the Antarctic Research Series, pending approval by the editorial
committee.