* 0123392
* CEDAR Postdoc: An Arecibo Observational Study of Seasonal Metal Layer Dynamics and Irregularities Associated with Mid-Latitude Sporadic E
* GEO,AGS
* 11/15/2001,06/30/2004
* Timothy Kane, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Robert B. Kerr
* 06/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

A two-year, systematic observational study of the seasonal variations in mid-
latitude metal layer dynamics is proposed at the Arecibo Observatory. The
occurrence and behavior of various metal layers (Na, Fe, K, Ca) will be
investigated using the Arecibo lidars and the incoherent scatter radar during
summer, winter and equinox periods. Such a study will provide a comprehensive
view of metal layer dynamics as a function of season allowing us to explore the
coupling between neutral dynamics, chemistry and the plasma. Past studies at
Arecibo have concentrated on case studies of metal species at particular times
of year, but the PI proposes a systematic year-round study utilizing the
complete capabilities of the Arecibo lidars. In addition, observations during
summer Es maximum coupled with observations at other times of year will provide
insight into the relationship between metal layer dynamics and the formation of
Es and associated plasma irregularities. Past observations at Arecibo have shown
that sporadic ionization layers are often associated with sporadic metal layers,
such as sodium, but the relationship between such layers when instabilities are
present has not been explored in detail. The proposed study represents an
exciting opportunity to establish a baseline for the understanding of metal
layer morphology and dynamics at mid-latitudes. It will also produce important
insights into Es formation and associated irregularities.