* 0123244
* Planning Grant For Assessment And Improvement Of Alaska's Tribally-controlled College's Science, Mathematics, Engineering And Technology Programs
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2001,11/30/2002
* Edna MacLean, Ilisagvik College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 11/30/2002
* USD 49,989.00

Ilisagvik College in Barrow, Alaska is the lead college in the Consortium for
Alaska &lt;br/&gt;Native Higher Education, Inc. (CANHE), a non-profit group of
Alaska Native organizations&lt;br/&gt;creating and supporting new Alaska Native-
serving colleges in Alaska. CANHE was&lt;br/&gt;established, in part, because
only 4% of Alaska Natives (1990) have achieved &lt;br/&gt;baccalaureate degrees.
Alaska Natives are poorly represented as students in &lt;br/&gt;Science,
Mathematics, Engineering, and Technology (SMET) programs in
Alaska's&lt;br/&gt;universities and colleges, as teachers in the Alaska schools,
and in the occupations&lt;br/&gt;requiring these skills. Data on Alaska Native
higher education achievement is not&lt;br/&gt;well collected. It is obvious to
Alaska natives, however, that different techniques&lt;br/&gt;must be used to
attract and retain Native and rural students in SMET programs
than&lt;br/&gt;those used for years by the state university. Ilisagvik will
serve as the lead and &lt;br/&gt;mentor institution for the planning and
assessment effort over the10 months of &lt;br/&gt;the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ilisagvik will engage a project manager to conduct
the assessment. A CANHE member&lt;br/&gt;task force will create a mission
statement defining the planning goals, priorities&lt;br/&gt;and project
milestones. An external advisory board will be chaired by Dr.
Edna&lt;br/&gt;MacLean, the president of Ilisagvik College, and will review the
planning effort and&lt;br/&gt;evaluate the progress. The task force and manager
will gather data from each of the&lt;br/&gt;six members and examine their
missions, their long-term goals and priorities. The&lt;br/&gt;regional needs and
strengths will become part of the CANHE SMET master plan which&lt;br/&gt;will
include the colleges' resources, governance, culture, technology requirements,
&lt;br/&gt;and funding strategies. The plan will include assessment of faculty
needed and the&lt;br/&gt;skills available for staff instruction, and inventory
the technology requirements&lt;br/&gt;and the infrastructure support needed in
each region. Beyond the specific benefits&lt;br/&gt;of the assessment to
Ilisagvik College, the benefits will multiply by involving all&lt;br/&gt;the
CANHE members in the process and the ultimate implementation of the
plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The group will design practical cost-effective
methods to create, expand and &lt;br/&gt;collaboratively improve SMET programs
for the dispersed potential student body &lt;br/&gt;including collaboration with
other regions, some centralizing support activities,&lt;br/&gt; and integrating
incentives to be involved for faculty and students. Given the vast
&lt;br/&gt;roadless distances between communities, the primitive state of rural
Alaska&lt;br/&gt;telecommunications and information infrastructure and the high
cost of such&lt;br/&gt;services when available, there are numerous problems of
distance delivery to&lt;br/&gt;be identified, understood and resolved.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ilisagvik developed a new Information Technology A.A.S.
curriculum and acquired &lt;br/&gt;some of the infrastructure to carry out the
classes through previous funding from &lt;br/&gt;NSF, the American Association
of Community Colleges, the M. J. Murdock Foundation, &lt;br/&gt;and the
Microsoft Corporation. Other programs are being developed by CANHE members.
&lt;br/&gt;These assets can be shared across the state to improve SMET delivery.
Collectively &lt;br/&gt;the colleges can register a greater number of students
for these courses from the &lt;br/&gt;multi-regional Native student body and
deliver them with a smaller number of&lt;br/&gt;faculty also taking
administrative advantages of cross-registration benefits.&lt;br/&gt;The data,
assessment, and draft plan will be reviewed with the board
and&lt;br/&gt;organizational leadership of each regional colleges prior to
adoption to affirm, &lt;br/&gt;and modified if required, so that it addresses
the needs, direction and resources &lt;br/&gt;of each
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;