* 0123732
* SGER: Identification of ancient Sin Nombre Hantavirus in the Prehistoric Southwest
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2001,12/31/2003
* Dennis O'Rourke, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 12/31/2003
* USD 25,571.00

Sin Nombre Hantavirus (SNV) is a highly virulent, rodent-borne virus that causes
the often fatal Hantavirus Pulmonary Syndrome (HPS) in humans. The highest
frequencies of this disease are found in the US Southwest. The rodent vector of
the pathogen is the common deer mouse, Peromyscus maniculatus. The antiquity of
the virus, and the high frequency of HPS in the Southwest, raise questions about
its role in human prehistory in the region. Prehistoric populations of the
region were sedentary, high population density maize agriculturalists. Grain
storage and processing practices of the time would have increased human-mouse
contact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This exploratory project will use established
ancient DNA methods to attempt to recover diagnostic nucleic acids of Sin Nombre
Virus from archaeologically recovered remains of P. maniculatus in the US
Southwest. Samples are expected to be 1,000-2,000 years old and will be directly
dated using carbon-14. In addition to ancient DNA methods, immunohistochemical
and immunoflorescent methods for the detection of antigens and antibodies
specific to SNV will be attempted. The purpose of the project is to document the
presence of SNV as a potential disease vector during Southwestern prehistory.
Demonstration of SNV presence as a disease vector in antiquity has a variety of
implications for prehistoric population dynamics in the region.&lt;br/&gt;