* 0123848
* Scholarships for Information Technology, Engineering Technology, and Mathematics Students at  Suffolk County Community College
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2001,08/31/2007
* Iordan Michev, Suffolk Community College
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 08/31/2007
* USD 413,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This comprehensive scholarship program is promoting the success of 30
Information Technology, Engineering &amp; Technology, and Mathematics students
(ITETM) each year. The students demonstrate academic potential and talent and
are enrolled in a ITETM program leading to an Associate
degree.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ITETM Project has the following objectives and
goals:&lt;br/&gt;(1) To increase the number of educated, skilled employees in
technical areas of local and national need;&lt;br/&gt;(2) To improve educational
opportunities for talented NSF-CSEMS students from special populations, such as
low-income, disabled, educationally disadvantaged or
underrepresented;&lt;br/&gt;(3) To increase student retention rates for degree
achievement and transfer; and&lt;br/&gt;(4) To strengthen partnerships between
the college, area high schools and colleges, and local high technology
industries.&lt;br/&gt;(5) To expand research experiences for students in ITETM
disciplines by forming and strengthening partnerships with high tech industries
on Long Island.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ITETM Project is being evaluated in
terms of:&lt;br/&gt;(1) student retention, graduation and transfer (to four-year
colleges) rates and/or attainment of employment in computer science,
engineering, and other technology areas;&lt;br/&gt;(2) success rates in passing
specific industry certification exams; and&lt;br/&gt;(3) satisfaction of local
industry and communities with the results of the
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;