* 0123581
* ADVANCE Leadership Award
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Rhonda Hughes, Bryn Mawr College
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 12/31/2004
* USD 187,000.00

This award is to continue the work of Bryn Mawr College in the promotion and
support of the next generation of women in the mathematical sciences. The award
supports the outreach, mentoring, and research projects of Professor Rhonda
Hughes of the Department of Mathematics. This effort builds on previous efforts
of the Principal Investigator and the College, aims to further identify and
replicate effective structures that promote the successful advancement of women
mathematical scientists, so that they might eventually assume positions of
leadership in the science, engineering, and mathematics community. A significant
portion of the work involves collaboration with Professor Sylvia Bozeman of
Spelman College, as well as cooperation between Spelman and Bryn Mawr
Colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activity involves four major
components:(1)The EDGE Publication&lt;br/&gt;Program, which would provide for
the broad dissemination of information about successful strategies for
increasing the retention of women in graduate programs in
mathematics,&lt;br/&gt;and supporting the advancement of their careers;(2)The
Capacity Building Program for&lt;br/&gt;Women, which would establish a three-
tiered mentoring program in order to increase the&lt;br/&gt;capacity of women to
advance to positions of leadership in the academic community;(3)&lt;br/&gt;The
EDGE Symposium 2003,which would provide a forum for identifying and
disseminating information about institutional and individual paradigms that
contribute to this&lt;br/&gt;advancement, and include an EDGE Reunion and
mentoring workshops; and (4)The Re-&lt;br/&gt;search Program of the Principal
Investigator, which would enable the Principal Investigator&lt;br/&gt;to
intensify her research program in functional analysis and operator theory, and
permit&lt;br/&gt;the increased involvement of undergraduate and graduate
students in timely areas of mathematical research, with the long-range goal of
their pursuing careers in the
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported
by the National Institutes of Health through the NSF ADVANCE Program. The
overall mission of the ADVANCE Program is to increase the participation of women
in the scientific and engineering workforce through the increased representation
and advancement of women in academic science and engineering careers.&lt;br/&gt;