* 0123904
* Instructional Materials for Nanoscale Science and Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Arthur Ellis, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Nancy L. Pruitt
* 08/31/2005
* USD 305,000.00

This project aims to create and disseminate instructional materials on nanoscale
science and technology for use in undergraduate science and engineering
curricula. A text, demonstrations, and laboratory experiments are being
developed around the themes of nanoparticles, nanoporous materials, and
nanoarchitectures. Examples of nanoparticles include colloidal metals,
ferrofluids, semiconductor quantum dots, and artificial atoms. Nanoporous
materials include aerogels, dendrimers, micelles, and zeolites.
Nanoarchitectures focuses on nanotubes, amorphous metals and quasicrystals,
giant magnetoresistance (GMR) structures, LEDs/diode lasers, self-assembly, and
surface reconstruction. Collectively, these products illustrate the importance
of surface effects, the limitations of scaling laws, and the onset of quantum
effects as nanoscale dimensions are approached. They also demonstrate the tools
and techniques required for nanoscale studies, including scanning probe
microscopies, lithographic and contact printing techniques, and mechanical,
electrical, optical, and magnetic characterization of materials and devices. The
project is being conducted with assistance from experts from academia, industry,
and national laboratories, and with resources from the University of Wisconsin-
Madison NSF-supported Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC)
on Nanostructured Materials and Interfaces. The inherently interdisciplinary
themes of nanoscale science and technology will be adapted for use in a variety
of science, mathematics, engineering and echnology (SMET) classes through a pair
of workshops. The first workshop aims to acquaint leading individuals from
various SMET disciplines with the materials being developed so as to customize
them for use across disciplines. The second workshop aims to introduce
publishers and textbook writers to the materials. In addition to publications,
products, and presentations, dissemination involves partnerships with
www.SMETE.ORG, a Core Integration project of the NSF National Science,
Mathematics, Engineering, and Technology Education Digital Library (NSDL); and
with the University of Wisconsin System, through its Department of Defense-
supported Academic Advanced Distributed Learning Collaborative Laboratory. A
collection of web-based learning objects is being created from the instructional
materials that will be readily accessible, adaptable, and affordable. Field
testing is an integral part of the project and includes volunteers from the full
spectrum of post-secondary institutions. Evaluation of the project is being
conducted using a variety of tools and techniques. Project participants include
undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctorals, who have the opportunity
to contribute to this integration of cutting-edge research and education. The
project aims to enhance science literacy and help attract a diverse group of
talented undergraduates to technical careers and to teaching careers.