* 0123659
* ADVANCE Leadership Award
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2001,12/31/2002
* Gretchen Hofmann, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 12/31/2002
* USD 185,175.00

The primary goal of this proposal is to create a self-sustaining mentoring
program&lt;br/&gt;for women in the Department of Biology at Arizona State
University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SWIS will be based on a vertical integration
scheme where faculty, postdoctoral fellows, graduate students and undergraduates
work together in a mentoring network to foster the advancement
of&lt;br/&gt;women in biological research careers. The project is based upon two
key observations.&lt;br/&gt;First, in the Biology Department, they have numerous
unconnected resources that have not&lt;br/&gt;been used to the full advantage of
mentoring women, particularly at the graduate and&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate level.
With this proposal, they plan to consolidate resources in
the&lt;br/&gt;Department and connect pre-existing resources in such a way that
new opportunities for&lt;br/&gt;growth and mentoring will be created. Second,
although the ASU Biology women&lt;br/&gt;faculty are leaders in their field and
have been extremely successful at mentoring&lt;br/&gt;individual students, no
one faculty member has sufficient time and energy to create a&lt;br/&gt;self-
sustaining organization such as the proposed SWIS
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SWIS program has 2 components: the development
of a mentoring network&lt;br/&gt;through a seminar series and invited seminar
speakers, and the development of a&lt;br/&gt;mentoring workshop focused on
issues pertaining to the successful recruiting and&lt;br/&gt;retaining of women
in science careers. The former is seen as a mechanism to
concentrate&lt;br/&gt;the efforts of individual women in the Biology Department,
and the later as a mechanism&lt;br/&gt;to promote permanent cultural
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the National
Institutes of Health through the NSF ADVANCE Program. The overall mission of the
ADVANCE Program is to increase the participation of women in the scientific and
engineering workforce through the increased representation and advancement of
women in academic science and engineering careers.&lt;br/&gt;