* 0123419
* SGER:  Applications of Field-Theory Solitons in Nonlinear Optics
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Govind Agrawal, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 08/31/2002
* USD 67,970.00

This project will explore new connections between fundamental concepts in
quantum theory, developed&lt;br/&gt;for use in nuclear physics, with areas of
practical application in optical communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On the
theoretical side, the proposal will extend recent research on three-dimensional
topological solitons or "skyrmions". Existing theories describe the electron
either as a kind of pure point of infinite energy (which leads to many well-
known mathematical problems) or as a vibration of a string or membrane in an
11-dimensional space (which leads to rather intractable computations). In
nuclear physics, skyrmion models have made it possible to describe basic
particles as stable whirlpools of force in three dimensions, whirlpools whose
properties can be computed and predicted more easily than those of vibrating
strings. As part of this proposal, a leading expert in skyrmions will try to
apply this approach to develop a new theory of how the electron behaves. The
behavior of the electron is fundamental to all of electronics.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; On the application side, the proposal will also use skyrmion
mathematics and concepts to try to develop&lt;br/&gt;"optical bullets" for high-
speed optical communications. Simpler one-dimensional soliton mathematics
have&lt;br/&gt;been used already in optical communications, but the success so
far - while significant - has been limited by the severe approximations used in
that mathematics. It is hoped that the use of more complete and exact three-
dimensional theory will lead to more powerful and more reliable design of new
optical communication systems. Furthermore, because optical experiments and
technology depend on the details of the interaction between light and electrons,
it is hoped that new experiments on these interactions, designed around the
concept of skyrmion, will enrich both the applications side and the theoretical
side, together.