* 0123884
* Fostering Effective Multidisciplinary Student Teams Through Engineering Projects in Community Service
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2007
* Leah Jamieson, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 08/31/2007
* USD 305,000.00

Over the past ten years, it has become widely recognized that engineering
students need skills that go beyond their technical strengths: skills in
communication, project planning, and teamwork, as well as an awareness of the
customer in an engineering design project, of ethical and professional issues,
and of the social and global context in which their engineering is employed. A
key component of this broader education is experience in collaborating with
people from many disciplines. At the same time that engineering students are
faced with the need to learn "soft skills," students from essentially all other
disciplines are faced with a need to understand and appreciate technology. A
powerful vehicle for enhancing the technical fluency of non-technical students
is participation on design-oriented project teams with students from technical
disciplines. The PI is leading a faculty team from education, organizational
psychology, organizational communication, and engineering to address the issue
of fostering effective multidisciplinary student teams. The EPICS (Engineering
Projects in Community Service) program provides the framework for the proposed
work. EPICS students earn academic credit for long-term, multidisciplinary,
team-based projects that solve technology-based problems faced by not-for-profit
community service agencies, K-12 schools, museums, and municipal organizations.
Founded at Purdue in 1995, EPICS programs are in progress at six universities
and planned at two more, with over 500 students participating on over 50 project
teams paired with community partners. Although EPICS projects are engineering-
centered, effective real-world solutions rarely depend on a single discipline.
The quality of the teams' solutions and the breadth of the students' educational
experience will therefore be profoundly affected if the institutional and
educational challenges to creating well-functioning multidisciplinary teams can
be addressed. Outcomes of the project are anticipated in three areas:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student learning outcomes: The project is developing
vehicles to enhance students' ability to work effectively on multidisciplinary
teams. As a result of their experience, students should be able to: identify and
articulate areas of contribution from their discipline; apply their disciplinary
knowledge to advance the team's goals; respect the contributions of individuals
from other disciplines; describe how different disciplines add to the
effectiveness of the team; enjoy the interactions with other disciplines in
accomplishing the team's objectives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EPICS / Program
outcomes: The increased effectiveness of the student teams enhances the ability
of the teams to meet their community partner's needs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pedagogical Methods outcomes: The project is developing a
body of experience that draws on research and practice from several fields, and
recasting the findings to apply them to the specific problems faced by teams of
undergraduates in an academic setting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By developing
structures and processes that transform EPICS into a truly multidisciplinary
program, the potential impact extends beyond the student, program, and
pedagogical outcomes. EPICS provides a framework for the in-context integration
of faculty research and undergraduate education by the faculty from the many
disciplines who will advise teams, bringing the full spectrum of research into
the classroom. The collaboration of Engineering, Science, Education, and Liberal
Arts has the potential to break down institutional barriers, transforming the
way we think about the university. The partnership between student teams and the
community gives both students and the people with whom they work a new view of
the university, with the potential to transform the image of science and
engineering.