* 0123899
* On-line Resources for Teaching With Peer Instruction
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Eric Mazur, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy L. Pruitt
* 08/31/2005
* USD 305,000.00

In recent years, problems in science education in American high schools,
colleges, and universities have been widely publicized and have aroused great
concern. In particular, the traditional lecture approach, common in college and
university introductory science courses, often fails to help students master key
concepts. Students may learn to follow recipe-like algorithms for solving
problems, but they lack understanding of some of the most basic ideas. A number
of strategies have been developed to improve the teaching of these courses,
several of which can be used in a variety of disciplines. Over the past ten
years, we have established that one effective way to improve student learning in
undergraduate science courses is to incorporate cooperative learning exercises
into otherwise traditional lectures, using a strategy called "Peer
Instruction"(PI). Use of PI has spread rapidly around the world; many faculty
tell us that they have found PI both successful in improving their students'
learning and easy to implement and adapt to their particular contexts. Peer
Instruction is used widely in physics, chemistry, and astronomy, and
implementation is beginning in biology, engineering, and mathematics. The goals
of this project are to make Peer Instruction easier to implement for
instructors, and to reinforce active learning habits for students in Peer
Instruction-taught classes, through development of web-based electronic
resources. Specifically,the project is developing Internet utilities that allow
instructors to download class-ready materials and to automate production of a
course web site for courses taught using Peer Instruction. A self-test and self-
study facility for students is also being developed. These resources aim to
lower the threshold to implementing Peer Instruction or similar techniques to
promote cooperative learning.