* 0123278
* Workshop on Future Directions in Solid State Chemistry; Davis, CA; October 12-14, 2001
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2001,12/31/2004
* Robert Cava, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* David Nelson
* 12/31/2004
* USD 37,650.00

The 2001 Workshop on Future Directions in Solid State Chemistry will deal with
the present status and likely future challenges and opportunities, especially in
interdisciplinary research areas. The Solid State Chemistry Workshop which will
take place at the University of California Davis from October 12-14, 2001. This
is the second NSF sponsored Solid-State Chemistry workshop. Discussions at the
first workshop (Journal of Solid State Chemistry 149, 3-8, 2000) centered on
future opportunities and challenges at the core of the solid-state chemistry
discipline. This second workshop will address the challenges and future
opportunities at the interfaces of solid-state chemistry with other disciplines
in both the biological and physical sciences. %%% With a focus on the
integration of research with education in interdisciplinary areas, the 2001
Workshop on Solid State Chemistry will have a very broad impact. It is a
particularly timely venture given that most of the important issues in
contemporary materials science and education are clearly multidisciplinary.
Eight topical areas focused on the integration of research and educaion are at
the interfaces between solid-state chemistry and (1) nanoscale science, (2)
biology, (3) theory and condensed matter physics, (4) molecular and
macromolecular materials, (5) earth, planetary, and environmental science, (6)
interdisciplinary and graduate education, (7) energy storage and conversion, and
(8) national facilities. Publication of the results of the discussions is
anticipated for the benefit of the whole materials science community.