* 0123497
* Ultra-High-Capacity Optical Communications and Networking: Optoelectronic Integrated Packaging Technology for High Date Rate Optical Communications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2006
* Rhonda Franklin, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Rongqing Hui
* 08/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation NSF 01-65 on "Ultra-
High Capacity Optical Communications and Networking." Advanced data and telecom
communication systems will require development and integration of diverse
hardware technologies (e.g. fiber optics, integrated optics, electronics, and
MEMs) to achieve reliable functionality and to satisfy large capacity and high
data rate throughput. In the past, the best designs have shown great promise in
the research lab, but have demonstrated degraded response once packaged.
Optoelectronic device design is complex and has been simplified by de-coupling
the electronic design from the optical aspect of design. At high data rates,
unresolved electrical issues can result in significant optical response
degradation. In the future both mechanical and electrical issues must be linked
together in device and package design to offer an improved performance of
packaged devices with reduced design cycle time and cost. Hence, successful
development of high data rate systems above 50 Gbps will require development of
approaches to offer transparent package integration in optoelectronic
(OE)&lt;br/&gt;design.&lt;br/&gt;A key issue for high-speed optoelectronic
design is development of optics-centered electronic design methods. Such co-
design methods are now possible, given the current knowledge in high-speed
electronic design. This research seeks to investigate the development of "co-
design" methods for the design and integration of high speed electronic
interconnects into device and optoelectronic packages. The impact of this
research could provide revolutionary package design methods for photonic
technology that could lead to the development of the first "integrated"
optoelectronic package design techniques. Two objectives are sought during this
research period. Objective 1 seeks to investigate the design of high speed
electrical interconnects with high isolation for optoelectronic devices.
Objective 2 seeks to investigate the development of co-design approaches for
transparent optoelectronic package integration. &lt;br/&gt;Focusing on two
topics - interconnects and packaging, we propose to investigate the use of
silicon micromachining techniques as a vehicle for combining optical microbench
packaging technology with high performance interconnect design to form novel
high speed integrated packages. We will achieve our objectives by working on the
following research problems: The first is an interconnect study for isolated and
high-density designs used to package lasers into the silicon optical microbench
technology. The second is a packaged traveling wave electrode study for use in
optical modulator applications. The third is integration study for heterogeneous
packaging of Si microbench technology in low temperature co-fired ceramic (LTCC)
substrate boards to provide signal transfer between high frequency connectors
and the silicon micro-bench. This research project will provide important
experience and knowledge for training the next generation of high frequency
engineers in co-design methods for optics with high data rate electronic
interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;