* 0123484
* Ultra-High-Capacity Optical Communications and Networking: Advanced Raman Gain for Next Generation Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2001,12/31/2005
* George Stegeman, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Leda Lunardi
* 12/31/2005
* USD 575,306.00

0123484 &lt;br/&gt;Stegeman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was submitted in
response to the solicitation NSF 01-65 on "Ultra-High Capacity Optical
Communications and Networking." The continuously growing demand for
communications channels in short and long distance networks necessitates an
expansion of the available spectral region near the loss minimum of silica-based
fibers. Dramatic reduction of the "water" absorption peak at 1400 nm opened up
the available communications window from 1270 to 1650 nm, corresponding to about
50 THz. Such a large bandwidth rules out existing erbium doped fibers and
semiconductor lasers leaving Raman gain as the prime amplification mechanism.
However, the Raman bandwidth in silica fibers is only 10 THz, and gain
coefficients in silica glass are small. As a solution the PIs propose to
investigate new materials for signal amplification by Raman gain for local
networks, intermediate distance networks and long-haul fiber transmission. New
Raman gain media will be considered in both bulk and fiber form, the first for
local area networks and specialized applications, and the second for longer
distance transmission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New glass, molecular and polymeric
materials will be fabricated, and characterized by spontaneous Raman scattering,
Raman gain measurements. and the evaluation of the Raman gain materials in a
fiber network environment. A selection of those will be fabricated into fibers
and the Raman gain evaluated in network scenarios. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs
propose to explore new classes of oxide and non-oxide glasses to optimize the
structure-property relations that give the best properties for Raman gain. These
will include chalcogenide glasses with varying As, S, and Se content, and heavy
metal halides such as the "TeX" glasses. Oxide glasses of interest are
phosphates, heavy metal oxides, and borophosphates which exhibit spectrally
broad Raman bands. A variety of organic species will be examined, mostly in
polymer form. The diversity of functional groups in organic media can cover the
fully desired 50 THz bandwidth, and more, for Raman gain. Polymer blends and
composites will be prepared that contain specifically designed molecules that
cover this spectral range and their Raman signal strength measured. Families of
interest will include polythiophenes and related polymers that have previously
shown strong Raman scattering. Also investigated will be the fluorenyl family of
chromophores which possess high thermal and photochemical stability. Inorganic
and organic components can be combined in virtually any ratio to obtain hybrid
sol-gel nano-composites extremely versatile in their composition, processing
characteristics, and properties. Thus through judicious selection of the organic
component, particular optical properties can be realized such as extended Raman
bandwidth and gain coefficient.&lt;br/&gt;