* 0123682
* ADVANCE Institutional Transformation Award
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2001,06/30/2009
* Herbert Killackey, University of California-Irvine
* Cooperative Agreement
* Beth Mitchneck
* 06/30/2009
* USD 3,453,391.00

The goal of this project is to contribute to the development of a national
science and engineering academic workforce that includes the full participation
of women in all levels of faculty and academic administration, particularly at
the senior academic ranks through the transformation of institutional practices,
policies, climate and culture. The central administration of UCI is committed to
diversity and equity and realizes that to maintain and increase its competitive
edge the problems contributing to the low representation of women in academic
science and engineering need to be addressed. This sense of urgency is
compounded by the impending growth of the campus as a result of 'Tidal Wave II'.
With the influx of new students comes a rare opportunity to hire up to 50 new
faculty, which added to the turnover in hiring, results in a projection of more
than 80 new hires a year for the next decade. UCI intends to seize this
opportunity to transform UCI into a diverse campus with flexible approaches and
innovative solutions to problems that affect both science and the training of
the workforce of the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UCI's goals are: to increase
the recruitment of women into Science, Mathematics, Engineering and Technology
(SMET) disciplines, provide a network of support and guidance through to tenure,
monitor progress by collecting and analyzing data about the objective and
subjective aspects of equity, promote networking and mentoring activities for
tenured women to ensure that they develop to their fullest potential, including
facilitating nominations for awards at the local, national and international
levels. To accomplish these goals, UCI will appoint a senior faculty member as
an Equity Advisor in each of the 8 SMET schools, to tailor an equity program for
that school that meets its particular needs. Their involvement in recruiting
will include assisting search committees to develop diverse candidate pools
containing highly qualified women. They will also set up a mentoring program for
junior faculty based on a successful UCI model. To increase awareness among
administrators and search committees of the ways in which our judgment of
individuals is altered by their gender, UCI will make use of workshops
successfully implemented in the corporate world by one of the faculty. To
encourage networking among women scientists, UCI will organize a series of
scientific conferences, focused on different scientific disciplines, at which
women scientists will be invited to speak about their research. Workshops will
allow an exploration of the issues standing in the way of full participation of
women in academia, and all faculty, students, and postdoctoral fellows will be
invited to participate. Finally, to provide a tangible demonstration of the
value of activities that promote gender equity, UCI will establish two ADVANCE
Chairs, to be awarded to tenured faculty in the sciences with both excellent
academic credentials as well as demonstrated commitment to gender equity. These
Chairs will be continued after the period of the grant by funds raised from
private donations. To evaluate the success of these strategies, UCI's annual
self-assessment surveys will be complemented by two assessments by external
evaluators to be conducted in years three and five.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is supported by the NSF ADVANCE Program. The overall mission of the
ADVANCE Program is to increase the participation of women in the scientific and
engineering workforce through the increased representation and advancement of
women in academic science and engineering careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;