* 0123441
* Ultra-High-Capacity Optical Communications and Networking: Towards 100 Tb/s Communication on a Single Optical Fiber
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Michael Marhic, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2005
* USD 449,933.00

We propose to develop technologies which will enable communication on a
single&lt;br/&gt;optical fiber at rates in excess of 100 Tb/s within a few
years. To accomplish this in the&lt;br/&gt;low-loss window of silica fibers
(1200-1700 nm), there will be a need for novel very&lt;br/&gt;wideband devices,
particularly optical amplifiers. In addition, modulation techniques
with&lt;br/&gt;spectral efficiencies well in excess of unity will be needed. Our
research activities will be&lt;br/&gt;centered in these two areas.&lt;br/&gt; We
will investigate modulation techniques, and associated detection
schemes,&lt;br/&gt;suitable to obtain a spectral efficiency of 4 b/s/Hz by the
end of the project. The&lt;br/&gt;techniques will be designed to be resistant to
impairments due to PMD and fiber&lt;br/&gt;nonlinearities. In particular, we
will investigate novel techniques using appropriate&lt;br/&gt;combinations of
PSK, QAM, and polarization-based techniques. Coherent detection
will&lt;br/&gt;be utilized where indicated to boost spectral
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;We will investigate fiber optical parametric amplifiers
(OPAs) and discrete&lt;br/&gt;Raman amplifiers made from novel highly-nonlinear
fibers. These fibers will have&lt;br/&gt;nonlinearity coefficients exceeding
those of today's most nonlinear fibers by several&lt;br/&gt;orders of magnitude.
These fibers will enable the development of novel nonlinear&lt;br/&gt;amplifiers
, with gain bandwidth of a single device covering most of the 1200-1700
nm&lt;br/&gt;window. These devices will also use shorter fibers and lower pump
powers than their&lt;br/&gt;current versions, and may thus lead to practical
applications in a relatively short time.