* 0123797
* Mesoscale Modeling of Tropical Paleoclimate
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Kerry Cook, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2006
* USD 260,595.00

This award will serve to develop and apply a mesoscale modeling system for
studying past variability in tropical climates of Africa and South America
during the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM). The modeling system consists of two
models. A mesoscale climate model (MCM) will simulate climate on space scales of
tens of kilometers. A general circulation model (GCM) will generate lateral
boundary conditions on wind, temperature, and moisture for the mesoscale model.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Simulations of the dry climates of the present day and LGM
(~21,000 years ago) over northern Africa will be contrasted with simulations for
the African Humid Period, approximately 6,000 years ago when Sahelian and
Saharan Africa supported numerous lakes and extensive vegetation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will address the following
questions:&lt;br/&gt;-What are the individual and combined roles of insolation,
changes in land surface conditions, regional SST differences, and differences in
large-scale climate (i.e., MCM lateral boundary conditions) in causing
differences in surface wetness over northern Africa among the present day,
African Humid Period and the LGM?&lt;br/&gt;-Are the differences in wetness
associated with changes in precipitation only, or do changes in evaporation
and/or water table levels play an important role?&lt;br/&gt;-What mechanisms are
involved in changing the atmospheric column water vapor budget? &lt;br/&gt;-Are
any important mechanisms nonlinear in a way that helps explain the speed with
which the climate can change in this region? What are the implications for
future climate change (global warming)?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Simulations with
various combinations of lateral and surface boundary conditions, as well as
other forcing functions such as insolation and atmospheric composition, will
identify the important factors and physical mechanisms that lead to the wet
conditions and the rapid climate change that is hypothesized to have occurred in
Amazonia during the Holocene. The mesoscale modeling system will also be used to
study South American climate of the LGM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
address the following questions:&lt;br/&gt;-What was the distribution of drying
and cooling during the LGM in the Amazon Basin and what mechanisms are
associated with the differences from the present day climate?&lt;br/&gt;-What
differences in aridity in the Central Andes are simulated with the MCM, and what
mechanisms account for differences from the present day?&lt;br/&gt;-How are the
simulated differences in both regions related to global-scale climate conditions
and how are they linked?&lt;br/&gt;-Does the model support the idea that there
are different aridity trends in different areas of the high Central Andes? If
so, are these trends providing information about inter-hemispheric symmetry or
asymmetry of climate change during the last glacial cycle?