* 0123973
* Designing and Building a National Middleware Infrastructure: Towards a National GRIDS Center
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Randal Butler, University of Southern California
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jennifer Schopf
* 08/31/2005
* USD 4,708,150.00

The proposal focuses on designing and building the NSF Middleware Initiative
(NMI), and will be one of two System Integrators. The NMI program will expedite
the development of middleware functions and services to support the national
research and scientific community, and will also accelerate the deployment and
use of new and emerging applications across the Internet. The purpose of the NMI
program is to enable members of the advanced networking community to collaborate
in developing and assembling common network services and resources (middleware)
to optimize the network for applications and to share limited resources for the
common good of all users. The proposal will be based on an open extensible
architecture by building on the success of the GRID activities (primarily
Globus) and other middleware technologies. The project would enhance and extend
this architecture to the larger research community and has three primary
goals;&lt;br/&gt;Define an integrated, modular, and extensible Grid architecture
addressing a large fraction of current and projected future middleware
requirements for the scientific and engineering communities, as well as the
larger academic communities. &lt;br/&gt;Instantiate the NMI architecture,
creating robust, tested, packaged, and documented middleware solutions that
address a significant fraction of these requirements, and that involve community
extensions over the next several years to address other
requirements.&lt;br/&gt;Work with middleware research community and to evolve
the architecture and to integrate selected components into the NMI middleware
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;In constructing the NMI, ISI will build on widely used
research middleware, such as the Globus Toolkit, the de facto standard for Grid
environments, Condor, and Storage Resource Broker, heavily leveraging open
(e.g., IETF and W3C standard) protocols, as well as middleware which is being
developed by independent researchers and communities. The results of the project
will rely on open protocols, open source implementations and interoperability.
In undertaking these activities, ISI will work closely with major U.S. projects
including the NSF PACIs, which will help us to reach out to other user
communities, and UCAID, which has committed to working with ISI to address the
challenging and important problem of integration with campus infrastructures and
the broader academic science and research communities. ISI will also work with
other international users communities as identified by NSF, will help transition
relevant technologies to standards and products, and will develop industrial
relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;