* 0123690
* ADVANCE Institutional Transformation Award
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2002,04/30/2009
* Kenneth Paap, New Mexico State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Beth Mitchneck
* 04/30/2009
* USD 3,747,075.00

The goal of this project is to contribute to the development of a national
science and engineering academic workforce that includes the full participation
of women in all levels of faculty and academic administration, particularly at
the senior academic ranks, through the transformation of institutional
practices, policies, climate and culture. New Mexico State University proposes a
five year program to increase by 20 percent (net) the overall number of women in
faculty science, math, and engineering tenure-track positions. NMSU is a public,
land-grant university with a research focus, diverse student body, and
commitment to minority participation in science, mathematics, and engineering
(SME). NMSU's program of institutional transformation seeks to create an
environment which supports the advancement of women SME faculty to leadership
positions in the professoriate and in academic administration. Under this
program, a Committee on the Status of Women in SME will form the central
administrative unit to bring about these&lt;br/&gt;changes. The Committee will
include the associate deans of the Colleges of&lt;br/&gt;Agriculture and Home
Economics, Arts and Sciences, Engineering, and the Graduate School, department
heads and senior faculty from departments within these colleges, and key
advisory personnel with experience in diversity issues in higher
education.&lt;br/&gt;The NMSU Committee on the Status of Women in SME
will:&lt;br/&gt;(1) conduct a self-study of the current status of women in SME
faculty&lt;br/&gt;positions at NMSU and institutionalize an annual review of the
status of&lt;br/&gt;women faculty at NMSU to insure gains made toward equity
under this&lt;br/&gt;program continue after the grant period;&lt;br/&gt;(2)
distribute research, travel, and start-up funds with the goal of recruiting and
retaining women SME faculty;&lt;br/&gt;(3) establish an endowment and long-term
funding campaign to provide&lt;br/&gt;financial resources to sustain ADVANCE
initiatives after the grant period&lt;br/&gt;ends;&lt;br/&gt;(4) coordinate
Faculty Development and Visiting Scholar programs;&lt;br/&gt;(5) serve as
consultants to SME Departmental Faculty Search Committees;&lt;br/&gt;(6)
disseminate programmatic results within NMSU and at
professional&lt;br/&gt;conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a Hispanic serving
institution, NMSU will also encourage participation in SME fields among under-
represented ethnic groups. This project is supported by the NSF ADVANCE Program.
The overall mission of the ADVANCE Program is to increase the participation of
women in the scientific and engineering workforce through the increased
representation and advancement of women in academic science and engineering
careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;