* 0123533
* Intermountain/Southwest Conference on Industrial and Interdisciplinary Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2004
* Dieter Armbruster, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2004
* USD 23,310.00

0123533&lt;br/&gt;Stone&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support the first
three years of the &lt;br/&gt;Intermountain/Southwest Conference on Industrial
and Interdisciplinary &lt;br/&gt;Mathematics to be held at Utah State
University, Colorado State &lt;br/&gt;University, and Arizona State University.
The conference series, which &lt;br/&gt;will rotate among these institutions on
an annual basis, would provide &lt;br/&gt;both a venue for the presentation of
problems in industrial and &lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary mathematics and a forum
for the discussion of ways to &lt;br/&gt;broaden the traditional curriculum in
order to prepare mathematicians for &lt;br/&gt;industrial and interdisciplinary
positions. The conferences would bring &lt;br/&gt;together researchers from both
academia and industry, enabling cross-&lt;br/&gt;fertilization between the
programs in the Intermountain/Southwest &lt;br/&gt;region, and providing a venue
for the students to present their work and &lt;br/&gt;interact with other
students, faculty, and representatives from industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
first of these annual meetings will be held at Utah State University
&lt;br/&gt;in Logan, UT in February 2002. The two-day meeting will include
&lt;br/&gt;sessions for invited talks by researchers from academia and industry,
a &lt;br/&gt;round-table discussion involving faculty and industry
representatives, &lt;br/&gt;sessions of shorter contributed talks and/or poster
sessions, a special &lt;br/&gt;session involving only graduate students, and an
informational session &lt;br/&gt;for undergraduates. The round-table discussion
would focus on (a) &lt;br/&gt;integrating the needs of local industry into the
mathematics curriculum &lt;br/&gt;and (b) current research activities in the
region. For the first meeting, &lt;br/&gt;representatives from the Boeing
Company have already agreed to attend &lt;br/&gt;and individuals at Motorola,
Intel, IBM, and Hewlett Packard have been &lt;br/&gt;approached. Participation
is also expected by faculty members from &lt;br/&gt;departments of physics,
electrical and computer engineering, computer &lt;br/&gt;science, and industrial
engineering. Faculty and students from other &lt;br/&gt;universities in the
region and from broader areas will be invited to
&lt;br/&gt;attend.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference series will be jointly
supported by the Applied &lt;br/&gt;Mathematics Program and the Infrastructure
Program of the Division of &lt;br/&gt;Mathematical Sciences and by the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities &lt;br/&gt;of the Directorate for Mathematical and
Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;