* 0123519
* Ultra-High-Capacity Optical Communications and Networking: "Integrated photonic crystal/quantum dot chip for wavelength division multiplexed fiber optic transceivers"
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Dennis Deppe, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 12/31/2005
* USD 350,000.00

This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation NSF 01-65 on "Ultra-
High Capacity Optical Communications and Networking." Semiconductor fabrication
technology has advanced to a state where revolutionary new devices can now be
fabricated that bring new functionality and applications to fiber optic
interconnects. Two of these new technologies, photonic crystals and self-
organized quantum dots (QDs), enable a synergistic match of nanostructured
materials that are particularly interesting. Photonic crystal defects enable
ultra-small semiconductor microcavities with 3-dimensional mode confinement that
intrinsically sets the wavelength of the light source. They also provide a
mechanism for routing light signals on chip in sharp bends between elements, for
example to multiplex the outputs of several laser sources into a single optical
output. Because of these unique features, photonic crystals enable a new type of
monolithicaliy integrated chip technology ideally suited for wavelength division
multiplexing (WDM). This new chip technology offers revolutionary advances for
low cost, high performance, ultra-small form factor transceivers for ultra-high
bandwidth fiber optic communication. Such a WDM chip technology can easily
provide single fiber bandwidth in excess of 100
GB/sec.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Here we propose to demonstrate the multi-wavelength
source for such a chip. We propose to design, and demonstrate a nanophotonic WDM
source that is a multi-wavelength laser array in which each element of the array
consists of coupled photonic crystal defect cavities emitting at a single
wavelength with quantum dot active regions. This work relies on the design and
nanofabrication of photonic crystals for the optical mode definition and the
ability to define the output wavelength of an array element. It also relies on
quantum dots for reducing or eliminating surface recombination and for
eliminating the laser chirp. This WDM source is to be electrically pumped. Our
program emphasizes the following technological
developments&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) electrically pumped photonic crystal
lasers&lt;br/&gt;2) high efficiency photonic crystal lasers with quantum dot
active regions and sampled- grating photonic crystal reflectors&lt;br/&gt;3)
edge-emitting multi-wavelength photonic crystal/quantum dot laser
arrays&lt;br/&gt;