* 0123730
* Selective Just-In-Time (JIT) Information Propagation in Large Network-Centric Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Sharma Chakravarthy, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2005
* USD 239,999.00

Efficient and effective change detection and notification is becoming
increasingly important for environments such as WWW and distributed
heterogeneous systems. Change detection for structured data has been studied
extensively. Change detection and notification for unstructured data in the form
of html and XML documents is the goal of this project. The objectives of this
proposal are to investigate the specification, management, and propagation of
changes as requested by a user in a timely manner, and meeting the quality of
service requirements. The user is allowed to specify the kind of changes to
documents s/he is interested in, at different levels of granularity. They also
specify how they need to be notified (email, mobile host, PDA, etc.) when the
requested information becomes available. Quality of service (QoS) information
such as timing constraints, aggregated vs. individual changes is part of the
user specification. User specifications are translated into a set of rules that
are used for extracting documents, monitoring changes, and propagation of
relevant information. Special attention is paid to scalability issues, as it is
an important aspect of the solution. The ability to selectively monitor and be
informed of changes (push) augments the current strategy of pulling information
periodically and checking for interesting changes. By disseminating the
resulting prototype and the results over the Internet, scientists can benefit
from it. Through integration of research into courses taught at UTA and into
student research, this project will impact education at UTA and other
universities.