* 0123149
* Sustained Economic Growth of the Oglala Lakota Nation through Development of the Technological Infrastructure
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2007
* John Haas, Oglala Lakota College
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jody Chase
* 08/31/2007
* USD 2,833,000.00

Oglala Lakota College (OLC) is a tribally controlled and community governed
four-year&lt;br/&gt;academic institution with 1300 students located in ten
college centers across the&lt;br/&gt;Pine Ridge Reservation in South Dakota
(SD). The student base is approximately 90%&lt;br/&gt;American Indian. As one of
six NSF-designated Model Institutions for Excellence &lt;br/&gt;(MIE), OLC has
developed the infrastructure to offer Science, Engineering, Math
and&lt;br/&gt;Technology (SMET) degrees and increase the number of Native
Americans continuing &lt;br/&gt;on to graduate school. We currently have general
collaboration agreements with the &lt;br/&gt;SD School of Mines &amp; Technology
(SDSM&amp;T) and SD State University. Since 1995, the &lt;br/&gt;MIE Program at
OLC has developed five new accredited degrees in the SMET
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Presently the Oglala Lakota Nation is forced to
outsource all analytical work to off-&lt;br/&gt;reservation labs due to the lack
of qualified facilities and expertise. Our long-term &lt;br/&gt;goal is to train
a pool of highly skilled scientists and lab technicians who will
serve&lt;br/&gt;their communities as self-employed entrepreneurs or hired
employees. Also, one of &lt;br/&gt;the major shortcomings of our SMET programs
is the lack of lab facilities with modern &lt;br/&gt;analytical equipment. This
creates a disadvantage for our students at every level of &lt;br/&gt;their
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose a multifaceted approach to develop the
technological infrastructure of our&lt;br/&gt;institution and the reservation as
a whole. We will build a research center housing &lt;br/&gt;several federal and
state certified labs that will provide us with the capacity to
conduct&lt;br/&gt;research and routine analytical work in the areas of
chemistry, environmental science, and &lt;br/&gt;biology. Collaboration
agreements with three faculty members at SDSM&amp;T and Black
Hills&lt;br/&gt;State University in these areas are procured for this proposal.
We will actively seek &lt;br/&gt;partnerships with tribal agencies to provide
research and analytic services. This insures&lt;br/&gt;that a significant
portion of the funding allocated by tribal agencies would be re-
infused&lt;br/&gt;into the reservation economy. This would also sustain the
project beyond NSF funding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our faculty and students will
be trained on the equipment by the collaborators and&lt;br/&gt;through
industrial short courses, workshops and seminars. Both collaborators and
&lt;br/&gt;faculty will initiate research projects involving our students
utilizing the new equipment. &lt;br/&gt;We will strengthen our curriculum by
developing new analytical lab classes and by&lt;br/&gt;enhancing existing
sciencecourses. Finally, students and faculty will reach out to
&lt;br/&gt;reservation communities to help them address their concerns about
economic &lt;br/&gt;development and the environment. Students and faculty will
also teach SMET&lt;br/&gt;classes at reservation schools and will open up the
labs for teachers and students &lt;br/&gt;to stimulate scientific knowledge and
curiosity .