* 0123666
* ADVANCE Institutional Transformation Award
* EHR,HRD
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Jo Handelsman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jessie Dearo
* 06/30/2007
* USD 3,748,973.00

The goal of this project is to contribute to the development of a national
science and engineering academic workforce that includes the full participation
of women at all levels of faculty and academic leadership, particularly at the
senior academic ranks, through the transformation of institutional practices,
policies, climate and culture. This proposal presents a comprehensive, multi-
layered approach addressing the institutional barriers inhibiting the progress
of women in science and engineering. The research questions to be addressed are
1) what are the climate-related factors, barriers, attitudes, and experiences of
women in science and engineering at UW-Madison, 2) to what extent are the
current programs and the proposed initiatives successful in addressing these
factors, 3) to what extent can the eventual institutional transformation model
be replicated and extended to other campuses. A National Women in Science and
Engineering Leadership Institute (WISELI) will be established to centralize
collected data, monitor the success of the proposed efforts, implement a
longitudinal data system, and ensure dissemination of best practices. In
addition to establishing WISELI as a visible entity with campus-wide
endorsement, new initiatives will include national workshops for academic women
as well as chairs and deans; establishing 10 professorships/chairs to support
the advancement of women in science and engineering in the Chancellor's
endowment goals; awarding Life Cycle Research Grants at vulnerable career
junctures; sponsoring Celebrating Women in Science and Engineering Seminar
Series. Existing programs such as the Chancellor's Climate Initiative, dual-
career hiring programs, the Women Faculty Mentoring Program, the Committee on
Women, Sexual Harassment Information Sessions, and Gender Pay Equity studies
will be evaluated for effectiveness and modified as needed for women in science
and engineering. While the proposed project focuses on sustainable institutional
change, it incorporates interventions to foster networking, mentoring, and role
modeling for women graduate and postdoctoral trainees with the goal of filling
the academic pipeline. Evaluation, directed by the Learning through Evaluation,
Adaptation, and Dissemination (LEAD) Center, will be on-going and will inform
development and redirection of initiatives in an iterative process of
implementation, evaluation, and modification. Complementing the evaluation, an
ethnographic study and linguistic discourse analysis will be conducted by a
cultural anthropologist and linguist, respectively. The Chancellor has committed
to making the program sustainable beyond the funding period by continuing
support for a research position dedicated to the institutional study of the
status of women, the endowed professorships, and planned efforts to raise funds
to make WISELI a permanent element of the campus. The UW-Madison has all of the
scientific, historical, administrative, and cultural ingredients to make it an
ideal campus to develop and study innovative initiatives for true institutional
change for women in science, both locally and as a model for other
campuses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall mission of the ADVANCE Program is to
increase the participation of women in the scientific and engineering workforce
through the increased representation and advancement of women in academic
science and engineering careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;