* 0123654
* ADVANCE Institutional Transformation Award
* EHR,HRD
* 10/01/2001,03/31/2009
* Idalia Ramos, University of Puerto Rico at Humacao
* Cooperative Agreement
* Beth Mitchneck
* 03/31/2009
* USD 3,108,958.00

The goal of this project is to contribute to the development of a national
science and engineering academic workforce that includes the full participation
of women in all levels of faculty and academic administration, particularly at
the senior academic ranks, through the transformation of institutional
practices, policies, climate and culture. The Unviersity of Puerto Rico, Hamacao
proposes to implement a five year program to increase the participation and
advancement of women in the natural and social sciences. The University of
Puerto Rico (UPR), Humacao Campus is an undergraduate institution with
approximately 4,300 students; 99% of Puerto Rican origin and 65% women. For
years UPR has had one of the highest rates of recruitment and graduation of
undergraduate women in science, mathematics, and engineering in the United
States. At the Humacao campus, 68% of the students in the Biology and Chemistry
programs and 50% in Mathematics are women. In Physics, the only program with a
minority of women the number has increased to 26% after the efforts of the last
7 years. Although the number of women in science is high compared to
universities in the US mainland, women are still underrepresented in the faculty
and do not advance to the highest academic ranks at the same rate of male
faculty. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project includes the following
activities: &lt;br/&gt;Investigate the causes and consequences of the
participation of women in science in the UPR-Humacao to develop strategies that
can be used in UPR and elsewhere.&lt;br/&gt;Identify problems that inhibit the
advancement of women faculty and determine how they might differ between
universities in Puerto Rico and other US universities. &lt;br/&gt;Set-up a
coordinated campus effort to revise procedures, and to define and implement
policies and practices for the recruitment, retention and advancement of faculty
to increase the participation and advancement of women faculty.&lt;br/&gt;Set-up
training for new faculty on career transitions, including on gender related
issues and how to advance in academic positions..&lt;br/&gt;Set-up training for
administrators on approaches to improving gender equality and
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;Increase the recruitment of women in Physics and
Electronics and Computational&lt;br/&gt;Mathematics by providing scholarships
for graduate studies (with funds from UPR-H) to talented
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UPR-H will carry out an assessment and evaluation
program on the proposed activities throughout the project to develop short and
longterm interventions, and to measure the effectiveness of the proposed
approach. The program will serve as a model for other Hispanic universities,
both in Puerto Rico and elsewhere in the US. This project is supported by the
NSF ADVANCE Program. The overall mission of the ADVANCE Program is to increase
the participation of women in the scientific and engineering workforce through
the increased representation and advancement of women in academic science and
engineering careers.&lt;br/&gt;