* 0123257
* SGER: Testing Chemostratigraphic Correlation in Terrestrial Sediments: Hell Creek Formation, Northeastern Montana
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,02/28/2002
* Nan Crystal Arens, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 02/28/2002
* USD 17,442.00

Abstract

The survival of many environ- mentally sensitive vertebrate lineages (Archibald
and Bryant 1990) belies the hypothesized severity of the K/T boundary event.
Testing alternative hypotheses of extinction and survival across the K/T
boundary requires a more detailed understanding of environmental change and
biotic response preceding the bolide impact. To develop this context, we need an
integrated picture of change in the flora, fauna and physical environment in the
latest Cretaceous. Such an integration has not yet been possible because fossil
floras and faunas are preserved in different depositional environments at
different localities within an outcrop belt. To unite these records, a method
for detailed correlation among localities is needed.

I propose to develop the framework for carbon isotope chemostratigraphic
correlation of fossil localities within the Hell Creek Formation (mostly latest
Maastrichtian) in northeastern Montana.

The proposed work will test the following hypotheses essential to the
development of the chemostratigraphic framework: o Secular variation in the
carbon isotope signature of land plant organic carbon in the Hell Creek
Formation exceeds that expected by random variation and spatially averaged plant
vital effects. o Features of the secular carbon isotope curve are recognized at
different localities and can act as stratigraphic tie points to correlate within
the Hell Creek Formation.

I will test the first hypothesis by examining the curve for quantitative
variation that exceeds that expected by random variation and plant vital effects
(Arens et al.2000).I will then test the second hypothesis by correlating among
individual localities, and to the marine record,using features of the reference
curve. If successful, this approach could be widely applied in rocks younger
than the Devonian, when vascular plants colonized land. It will allow fossil
collections from various localities to be more precisely integrated, opening a
new spectrum of questions to terrestrial paleoecologists.