* 0123182
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Involvement of Clathrin-Coated Vesicles in Preprophase Band Formation in Plants
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2004
* L. Andrew Staehelin, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 03/31/2004
* USD 3,400.00

0123182&lt;br/&gt;Staehelin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a two-year
collaborative research project between Professor Andrew Staehelin of the
University of Colorado, Boulder and Professor Yoshinobu Mineyuki of Hiroshima
University in Japan. The researchers will undertake a study of the involvement
of clathrin-coated vesicles in preprophase band formation in plants. This is
part of a larger ongoing research effort to produce a 3-D structural database of
the cytokinetic apparatus of plant cells at a resolution of 6nm. To produce this
database, cells and tissues will be high-pressure frozen and freeze-substituted,
and then reconstructed from dual-axis tomograms. The preprophase band (PPB) of
cortical MTs, the focus of this study, defines a plasma membrane zone that
becomes depleted of cortical actin filaments and serves as the site where the
cell plate links up with the parental wall. Preliminary studies have shown that
ultra rapid freezing/freeze-substitution techniques can not only provide
exceptionally clear images of cortical MTs and MFs in the PPB zone, including
images depicting the dynamic state of individual MTs, but also that forming PPB
regions contain increased numbers of clathrin-coated pits and vesicles,
suggestive of an increased amount of endocytosis and membrane recycling.
Although clathrin-coated pits have been seen previously in electron micrographs
of PPBs, the idea of endocytosis being an important element of PPB formation has
not been investigated to date. However, based on the initial findings,
endocytosis could play an important role in PPB formation. The researchers'
goals are: 1) to determine if the number of clathrin-coated pits and vesicles
increases in the plasma membrane zones involved in PPB narrowing and formation;
2) to determine the spatial relationship between these pits and vesicles to MTs
and MFs; and 3) to show that these clathrin-coated pits and vesicles are
involved in endocytosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project brings together the
efforts of two laboratories that have complementary expertise and research
capabilities. Results of the research could determine how PPBs are formed and
what drives the narrowing of the cortical tubule array into a PPB. Through the
exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our base of basic
knowledge and promote international understanding and cooperation. The
researchers plan to publish results of the research in scientific journals and
report on the findings at scientific meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;