* 0123913
* Multinational Project-Based Education:  An Alliance for Integration of Research, Education, and Service
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2001,10/31/2005
* Gretchen Kalonji, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Nancy L. Pruitt
* 10/31/2005
* USD 303,970.00

The focus of this project is on the development of multinational student/faculty
project-based approaches to integrating research and education. Most major
practical problems, such as environment, public health and the access to
technology, are inherently interdisciplinary and are shared across national
boundaries. Internationally, we also face the challenge of transforming higher
education itself to become more accessible and more responsive to the needs of
our communities. Faculty at the University of Washington have been working on
models for coupling collaborative multinational research addressing common
scientific and engineering challenges to mutual assistance in the reform of our
institutions. The essence of this approach is to tap into the rich and vibrant
spectrum of international research and service activities, which are at the very
heart of faculty interests and enthusiasms, while simultaneously creating
opportunities that can be embedded in the core of undergraduate curricula. The
current project builds on work to date in this promising arena by creating a
small alliance of universities, both within the US and worldwide, which will
collaborate on further refining, scaling-up, and institutionalizing this
approach to integrating international research, education and service. There are
several design features to this multinational project-based strategy.
Prioritized projects : 1) Are embedded in genuine faculty research interests on
all sides; 2) Can take place within curricular structures that affect large
numbers of undergraduate students on all sides, rather than the fortunate few;
3) Contribute to the solution of practical regional problems, and 4) Invoke deep
partnerships with other allies, including industry, state and local government,
and non-profit organizations. A collaboration on first-year engineering design
with Tohoku University, in Sendai, Japan, has been created and is currently in
its third year. A four-year collaborative project on environmental challenges
facing two regions with Sichuan University, in Chengdu, China has been launched.
To further catalyze a fundamental re-formulation of international education and
research, this project is supporting two major activities. The first is to help
seed the creation of a small alliance of institutions, each of which shares the
vision of strategically coupling undergraduate education reform to the solution
of complex regional problems. This is particularly important in increasing the
range of diversity of institutions that are able to participate. The second is
to disseminate the lessons learned by the core group concerning the pragmatics
of multinational collaborations that integrate education and research. The
University of Washington has made a major commitment to the success of this
project, including faculty release time, staff support and cash, totalling
approximately 50% of the amount requested from the National Science Foundation.