* 0123016
* Dissertation Research:  The Ceramics of Piedras Negras, Guatemala
* SBE,BCS
* 12/15/2001,11/30/2002
* T. Patrick Culbert, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2002
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. T. Patrick Culbert, Mr. Arturo Munoz will collect
data for his dissertation. For the last four years Mr. Munoz has been a member
of the archaeological team excavating the ruins of the Classic Maya city of
Piedras Negras, Guatemala. Piedras Negras is located in a remote corner of the
Peten rainforest and is renowned for the excellent quality of its sculpture and
for the unusually complete sequence of dated stelae erected by the cities rulers
between A.D. 650 and 800. Piedras Negras is particularly notable because of the
heavy emphasis on resist decoration on locally made ceramics. This technique,
virtually unknown in other parts of the Maya Lowlands, dominates the Late
Classic polychrome ceramic tradition at Piedras Negras. Because of the unusually
complete historical record for the site as well as the excellent provenance data
available as a result of the recent excavations it is possible to track the
development and spread of resist decorated ceramics with a rare degree of
precision. Resist decorated ceramic appear first in elite contexts. They are
carefully decorated and well fired. Later, more crudely executed resist types
become common and are recovered from all levels of settlement. These
observations lead to several hypotheses amenable to testing utilizing a variety
of quantitative measures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In general terms, this research
is a diachronic study of changing ceramic styles, framing the development of
resist-decorated ceramics first as a result of particular historical and social
circumstances at Piedras Negras and second, and more broadly, as a result if
general processes linking crafting and the possession of cultural goods to
processes of political legitimation. With very few exceptions, Americanist
archaeologists rarely consider the social component of technological change,
becoming what have been described as "somnambulists" adopting the position that
technological change unfolds automatically according to its own inevitable logic
and independently of social and cultural processes. As a result, most
archaeological research focusing on technological change has emphasized the
effects of increased efficiency on mitigating changing environmental or other
conditions. If this research is successful, it will present a model for
understanding processes of technological change emphasizing the importance
social processes in determining not only the content of emerging technologies,
but also their success or failure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For a variety of reasons
the Usumacinta Basin is one of the most understudied part so the Maya Lowlands.
This research will provide some of the very first detailed data for the region,
and will provide key information on one of the preeminent Lowland Maya sites.
This research will not only be a valuable reference for future archaeologists
working in the area, it will also interest any member of Guatemalan society
curious about their country's ancient past. Finally, this research will assist
in the training of a promising young scientist.&lt;br/&gt;