* 0123325
* Presidential Awards for Excellence In Science, Mathematics and Engineering Mentoring
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2005
* Therese Markow, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* David L. Temple Jr.
* 11/30/2005
* USD 10,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Therese Markow has worked to involve significant numbers of
undergraduate and graduate students in active research, including co-authoring
scientific papers with undergraduate students at Arizona State University, where
she held a faculty position in the biological sciences. She initiated the
Minority Access to Research Careers program at ASU in 1993. The program works to
improve support for students from underrepresented groups who may enter research
careers in bioscience. ASU MARC participants receive a wide range of support.
The program has helped many minority students pursue research careers in the
general biological sciences, with particular focus on and success among Native
American students; more than twenty-eight undergraduate students, twenty-one
graduate students, and nine post-doctoral students were mentored.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Markow was especially noted by her students for
conveying her passion and integrity as a scientist. Her international research
record and partnership with her students in research publication are meaningful
reflections of her dedication. Although Dr. Markow is now Regents Professor of
Ecology and Evolutionary Biology at the University of Arizona, the ASU MARC
program continues.&lt;br/&gt;