* 0123399
* Ultra-High-Capacity Optical Communications and Networking: Application of Intelligent Signalling and Control of Dynamically Switched Optical Networks
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Jason Leigh, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2005
* USD 645,984.00

At the end of this decade, national and international-scale scientific
collaborative applications will need intelligent signaling and dynamic control
of very-high-performance optical networks. The software proposed here will allow
scientific applications to directly control an advanced, all-optical, IP-over-
wavelength metropolitan-scale network, based on Dense Wave Division Multiplexing
(DWDM) and photonic switching.&lt;br/&gt;Optical networking technology is
rapidly migrating from ultra-expensive long-haul implementations to regional-
and metro-area networks. The trend is to provide a general infrastructure with a
wide range of common services. However, the flexibility inherent in these new
technologies provides the research community with an opportunity to move beyond
general requirements and support large-scale e-science applications that require
advanced networking capabilities. We propose a software development effort that
will lead to 21st-century applications over 1000-fiber, 1000-wavelength photonic
networks.&lt;br/&gt;These evolving, extreme applications requiring optical
networks include high-energy physics, astrophysics, climate modeling,
oceanographic modeling, architectural design, molecular modeling, industrial
design, advanced photon source experimentation, materials science, and
industrial engineering. Underlying such applications are cross-cutting support
technologies, such as advanced digital video, remote access to scientific
instruments, specialized visualization displays, data-mining, cluster
supercomputing and high-performance distributed computational systems. To enable
the full potential of such applications, it is not sufficient to simply provide
high-performance networks; these applications need intelligent, dynamic controls
to adjust network resources. The proposed software development efforts will
leverage the significant potential of a newly installed metro optical testbed
for application-level dynamic control of resource discovery, allocation and
adjustment. Efforts at many levels are required to make such flexibility
available in service provisioning, infrastructure and service resource
management:&lt;br/&gt;Research into the behavior of advanced scientific
applications, not just on extremely high-performance&lt;br/&gt;optical network,
but on one that can be dynamically adjusted at a granular
level&lt;br/&gt;Identify application-level networking requirements, investigate
management techniques for optical&lt;br/&gt;networks, and study new service
provisioning models related to application needs&lt;br/&gt;Research new methods
for application signaling&lt;br/&gt;Investigate interconnections between
application signaling and IP-based control-plane methods, such
as&lt;br/&gt;through GMPLS Test deployment of those techniques on an advanced
testbed and analyze results&lt;br/&gt;Experiment with multiple-service
provisioning to ensure gateways to traditional networks and
protocols&lt;br/&gt;Develop a system for performance metrics, monitoring and
analysis&lt;br/&gt;Create a testbed for StarLight, the next-generation,
optically based STAR TAP, and for other advanced&lt;br/&gt;research
networks.&lt;br/&gt;The testbed for this project is an a four-node optical
network, OMNInet, initially linking a core node on&lt;br/&gt;Northwestern
University's Chicago campus with a node at the University of Illinois at
Chicago, the Canadian&lt;br/&gt;Network for the Advancement of Research,
Industry and Education (CANARIE) CA*net4 node at its Chicago Point of Presence
and a node at Northwestern's Evanston campus. The sites are separated by
distances of 5 to 20 miles, connected by dedicated technology trial-fiber
service provided by SBC/Ameritech. Each node includes a Nortel Networks WDM
photonic switch, an Optical Fiber Amplifier (OFA) and high performance
router/switches. These sites will also have access to Nortel and SBC/Ameritech
testing personnel, expertise, and equipment. Participants in this project, led
by the Electronic Visualization Laboratory (EVL) at the University of Illinois
at Chicago, include the International Center for Advanced Internet Research at
Northwestern University, CANARIE, Argonne National Laboratory, MREN
(Metropolitan Area Research and Education Network), Nortel and Ameritech.