* 0123512
* Ultra-High-Capacity Optical Communications and Networking: Vertically-Integrated Primitives for a Bufferless, Temporally- and Spectrally-Efficient All-Optical Packet-Switched Netwo
* ENG,ECCS
* 11/01/2001,10/31/2005
* Venkatachalam Anantharam, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 10/31/2005
* USD 465,000.00

0123512 Chang-Hasnain

This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation NSF 01-65 on "Ultra-
High Capacity Optical Communications and Networking." It is well accepted that
future, high-speed, highly efficient optical networks must migrate from being
circuit switched to ultimately packet switched. One of the key functions for any
efficient packet-based network is the ability to avoid contention and blocking
by using local buffers at the switching nodes. However, after more than 20 years
of research, there has been scant progress in developing a practical all-optical
buffer. The PIs propose to research the fundamental building blocks (i.e.,
"primitives") across different disciplines that will truly enable a bufferless
packet-switched all-optical network. This research will be vertically
integrated, to investigate unique fundamental primitives including devices,
systems, and network architectures. The PIs will investigate the key
functionalities, opportunities, and limitations when combining these primitives
across these diverse disciplines.

The PIs will demonstrate a new repetition/statistical algorithm code at the
packet level in which packets are replicated at the transmitter array and sent
along different network paths that will minimize the packet latency and packet
loss, as well as reduce the complexity of each switching node inside the core
network. This algorithm will accommodate and adjust to the transmission and
device limitations that exist at the physical layer. Implementing this scheme
will require unique >30-nm-wide wavelength-tunable laser devices that can be
tuned in a few ns, a novel 3-dimensional fast (ns) high-port-count optical
switch, the transmission and reception of packets that are statistical
multicast, and all-optical synchronization and packet-header recognition at a
switching node.

Given the statistical multicasting that is needed to achieve a bufferless
network the PI's algorithm design will attempt to conserve the use of the
available spectral, temporal, and spatial domains. They will solve unique
problems by enabling ultra-wide-wavelength-tunable lasers and by limiting the
nonlinear interactions (i.e., Brillouin, FWM) when channel wavelength spacings
decrease to below a fraction of the channel information bandwidth. It is not
uncommon to have efficiencies as low as 5% for peak rate allocation of bursty
video streams. Statistical multiplexing will give an order of magnitude gain
over circuit switching even for long-lived data streams. Therefore, their new
algorithms and experimental implementations will result in overall deflection
loss probability much lower than can otherwise be achieved. This integrated
research will take into account that each device and systems limitation will
impact the network routing algorithm, and switching and routing efficiencies
will drive the device and transmission requirements.