* 0123753
* Collaboration to Integrate Research and Education in Marine and Environmental Science and Biotechnology
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2009
* Joseph Richardson, Savannah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,547,186.00

This award provides funding to initiate a master's level graduate program in
Marine Sciences and further develop an educational partnership between Savannah
State University (SSU), a Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU),
and Skidaway Insitute of Oceanography (SkIO), an oceanographic research
institution. This program will greatly expand the opportunities for minority
students to conduct marine research at a graduate level while attending an HBCU.
SSU and SkIO have collaborated for the past three years to develop a highly
successful program in marine science for undergraduate students. The existing
program includes opportunities for SSU undergraduates to complete research
internships at SkIO and for SkIO faculty to teach at SSU. Both institutions have
benefited greatly from this program, which was initiated with funding from
NSF/HRD. In recognition of the growth and success of the undergraduate program,
the University System of Georgia (USG) approved a new M.S. degree program in
marine science at SSU. USG will provide new faculty lines and funds for
construction of a new building in support of this program. This award provides
funding to initiate the M.S. program while additional state resources are
brought on-line and while funds for graduate students are sought via traditional
research awards. The program could provide an important model for successful
collaborations that will increase minority participation in science.

Joint funding for this program will be provided by NSF's IGERT program and the
Office of Naval Research (ONR).

The intellectual merit of this program lies in the development of a
collaborative graduate education program between an HBCU and a major marine
science research institution. Such collaboration will be unique to this field
and may provide a model for such efforts, both in geosciences and other
scientific fields. Two important societal impacts should be realized from this
award. First, a unique graduate program in marine sciences will be established
and should become institutionalized within five years. Second, if this program
is able to attract minority students who either would not have attended graduate
school or who would have gone into other fields, it should greatly increase the
number of minority students receiving Master's degrees in ocean sciences. The
link to the IGERT program strengthens the possibility that ultimately these
students may choose to continue in the field of geosciences for a PhD. Since the
percentage of minority students who receive Master's degrees in the "physical
sciences"* is about 2.8% (NSF Publication #00-327, Table 4-6), and the number of
students who receive PhD's in ocean or marine sciences is typically one or two
per year (NSF Publication #00-327, Table 4-12), this program could have a very
important impact on diversity of ocean sciences graduates within a five to ten
year time-frame.