* 0123300
* Silicon Run Implantation Video
* EHR,DUE
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2005
* Ruth Carranza, Film Arts Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 03/31/2005
* USD 110,000.00

The Silicon Run Series consists of topical videos on semiconductor
manufacturing. This format, which includes overviews as well as process specific
videos, has proven invaluable to instructors who often must teach courses to
students at different levels of technical understanding. The Silicon Run series
currently consists of the following videos:

Introductory: Overview Silicon Run Lite 30 min.

Intermediate: Overview Silicon Run I - 2nd Edition 40 min. Silicon Run II 35
min.

Advanced: Process-Specific: Silicon Run Deposition 31 min. Silicon Run
Lithography 31 min. Silicon Run Etch 37 min. Silicon Run Ion Implantation (to be
produced)

The objective of Silicon Run Ion Implantation is to complete the Series with a
30 minute video production featuring the process whereby impurities, known as
dopants, are introduced into silicon wafers to alter the electrical conductivity
of specific regions. As with the rest of the Series, this video is designed for
undergraduate electrical engineering and engineering technology courses and for
industry's semiconductor technician training programs. Educators who use the
Series to supplement their courses are specifically requesting the production of
this last video to ensure they have in-depth coverage of all four semiconductor
processes. To them, the videos provide their students what they themselves can
not; an intimate close-up view inside an IC fabrication facility. Industry's
restrictive policies, due to clean room procedures and competitive issues, make
manufacturing sites unavailable to the public and even to in-house employees.
This inaccessibility has proven an educational challenge which the Silicon Run
Series has addressed through its videos. The production of quality educational
videos is the method being employed to visually document state-of-the-art ion
implantation and make it relevant to semiconductor education and technician
training programs. This requires the participation of professors and industrial
trainers to ensure content accuracy; corporate sponsors to provide funding and
access to industrial locations: and media artists to capture the process in a
professional video format that can be edit into an engaging storyline.
Animation, microscopic filming, and special effects are used to enhance
understanding. The production of Ion Implantation will complete the Silicon Run
Series so it can serve these programs as an educational tool that provides a
realistic look at semiconductor manufacturing.