* 0123367
* Ultra-High-Capacity Optical Communications and Networking: High-Performance Electrooptic Tunable Filters for Dense Wavelength Division Multiplexing
* ENG,ECCS
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2005
* Ohannes Eknoyan, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 11/30/2005
* USD 300,000.00

0123367&lt;br/&gt;Eknoyan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was submitted in
response to the solicitation NSF 01-65 on "Ultra-High Capacity Optical
Communications and Networking." The goal of this project is to demonstrate
unprecedented tuning range and speed in electrooptic tunable filters for dense
wavelength division multiplexing (WDM) using recently developed design
principles and fabrication methods. The filters, which will be produced on
LiNb03 substrates, are expected to provide a combination of faster tuning (&lt;
50 ns) and wider tuning range (&gt; 10 THz) than has previously been achieved in
any tunable filter technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optical frequency selection
in the proposed filters is based upon phase-matched polarization mode conversion
by a spatially periodic strain perturbation in a single mode optical waveguide.
Tuning is accomplished by an applied electric field which alters the waveguide
birefringence, and hence the phase-match frequency at which near-complete
polarization conversion occurs. The devices are inherently polarization
independent because the TE TM and TM TE coupling are reciprocal
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Innovations from the research at Texas A&amp;M
which will be incorporated into these devices include: (1) The use of spatially
periodic strips of SiO2 to induce polarization coupling of light via the strain-
optic effect. The SiO2 is deposited at an elevated temperature on the LiNb03
substrates and patterned at room temperature, so that longitudinal strain
results from thermal expansion mismatch. (2) A new filter design which
eliminates the need for polarizing beam splitters and thus gives an extra degree
of freedom in the fabrication process. (3) The use of a sparse, apodized strain
grating to achieve polarization coupling. This gives an etalon-like periodicity
to the filter response, with nulls which are almost evenly spaced in frequency.
This design technique should make it possible to extend the spectral range by an
order of magnitude over previous EOTF designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary
laboratory work directed towards the optimization of LiNb03 circuit elements has
prepared the way for the proposed research. Phase-matched polarization coupling
with &gt; 99.3% efficiency for both TE TM and TM TE conversion has been achieved
in straight waveguides at a wavelength of 1537 nm, and electrooptic tuning of
the peak conversion wavelength over a range &gt; 15 nm (2 THz) was also
demonstrated. Response speed for polarization conversion was measured to be 52
ns. Both polarizing beam splitters with splitting ratios &gt; 25 dB and non-
polarizing beam splitters suitable for EOTF application have been produced and
characterized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under this project, four-port spectral
slicing filters, two-port bandpass filters, and four-port add-drop filters with
50 GHz and 100 GHz channel spacing will be fabricated on LiNb03 substrates.
Spectral and temporal response of the filters and their tuning range will be
characterized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;