* 0123501
* Ultra-High-Capacity Optical Communications and Networking: Advanced GaAs-based Waveguide Integration for 1.3/1.55 micron Wavelength Division Multiplexing
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Douglas Hall, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2005
* USD 300,000.00

This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation NSF 01-65 on "Ultra-
High Capacity Optical Communications and Networking." The present state-of-the-
art in wavelength-division multiplexing (WDM), ~100 signal transmission channels
in the fiber C-band (1525-1565 nm), employs only a small fraction of available
fiber bandwidth. While erbium-doped fiber amplifiers (EDFAs) for the L-band
(1565-1605 nm) are presently being developed and deployed, there is a widely-
recognized need to develop systems for other portions of silica glass fiber's
low-loss transmission "spectral window" (1200-1700 nm). Present C-band systems
utilize various approaches for hybrid integration of both active InP-based
optoelectronic devices (photon laser sources, amplifiers, and detectors) and
passive InP or silica-on-silicon planar lightwave circuits (or PLCs, for
multiplexing, demultiplexing, and add/drop functions). Greater functional and/or
monolithic integration of the active and passive components used in WDM systems
will reduce their costs and accelerate
deployment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers have recently demonstrated GalnNAs
quantum well heterostructure semiconductor lasers operating at 1310 nm (cw, 300
K) and 1520 nm (pulsed, 300 K). These devices overcome the performance
limitations inherent to lnP-based heterostructures due to weak carrier
confinement by low potential barriers. This exciting development also has
enabled GaAs-based heterostructures to access optical fiber communication system
wavelengths for the first time. The potential for complex lightwave circuitry
with monolithic integration of active and passive components for optical
communications is much greater than exists in the InP material system due to the
much larger range of material parameters afforded by GaAs-based 111-V alloys. In
particular, the compatibility with A1GaAs and InAlP alloys, which can be
converted through wet thermal oxidation to insulating and transparent low
refractive index oxides, provides a significant advantage for advanced waveguide
integration techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the development of
new approaches for the fabrication of GaAs-based photonic integrated circuits
for WDM applications in optical communications will be explored. Wet thermal
oxidation of A1GaAs and InA1P alloys will be applied to low-loss waveguide
fabrication for both active and passive waveguide devices. Novel structure
designs and processing approaches will be combined to realize fully-oxidized
A1GaAs heterostructures as broadband passive ridge waveguides for monolithic
integration with active components. Rare-earth doping of native oxide waveguides
will be explored using both Pr3+- and Er3+-doping for 1.3 um and 1.55 um band
amplifiers, respectively. Phased-array (PHASAR) based WDM devices will be
designed, fabricated and characterized in native-oxide based waveguides. This
will lead to curriculum enhancement in the Department of Electrical Engineering
at the University of Notre Dame.&lt;br/&gt;