* 0123493
* ADVANCE Leadership Award
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2006
* Alice Smith, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 09/30/2006
* USD 175,000.00

The proposed activity aims to improve the recruitment and retention of women
in&lt;br/&gt;engineering academia and to enhance career development of women
engineering&lt;br/&gt;academics by addressing publications in refereed scholarly
journals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a CD ROM that
demystifies the journal publication process.&lt;br/&gt;The CD ROM will contain
both text material and digital video. An overview of how the&lt;br/&gt;system
works and the differences, both in procedure and in impact, of journal
articles,&lt;br/&gt;journal short papers, journal notes, refereed proceedings
and book chapters will be&lt;br/&gt;documented in clear and general terms. How
the editorial board of a journal operates&lt;br/&gt;from editor-in-chief down to
individual reviewers will be explained with suggestions on&lt;br/&gt;how to
become involved with a journal in an editorial capacity. Then, a set of
best&lt;br/&gt;practices case studies that follow engineering papers from first
submittal through&lt;br/&gt;publication will be included. These will take the
user through the review and revision&lt;br/&gt;process step by step and at least
one case study will involve a rejected paper that is&lt;br/&gt;successfully
transformed for another journal. The video clips will provide comments
and&lt;br/&gt;discussion by article authors, journal editors and reviewers,
using women engineering&lt;br/&gt;academics where possible. While the focus is
on journal papers, this CD ROM will&lt;br/&gt;assist the users in developing
other peer reviewed publications including proposals.&lt;br/&gt;Dissemination
will be in two phases and will be aligned with assessment
efforts&lt;br/&gt;involving surveys and interviews. This project will benefit a
large number of women&lt;br/&gt;academics and potential academics by addressing
an issue vital to scholarly success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported by the NSF ADVANCE Program. The overall mission of the ADVANCE Program
is to increase the participation of women in the scientific and engineering
workforce through the increased representation and advancement of women in
academic science and engineering careers. &lt;br/&gt;