* 0123238
* ADVANCE Leadership Award
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Geraldine Richmond, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Laura Kramer
* 12/31/2005
* USD 185,000.00

This Leadership Award is to recognize and support the role of Prof. Richmond
in&lt;br/&gt; increasing the participation and advancement of women in the
chemical sciences&lt;br/&gt;through her leadership role in COACh. The funds will
allow her to maintain her very active&lt;br/&gt;research program at the
University of Oregon while providing her with more time to direct
the&lt;br/&gt;COACh activities at a level appropriate for the demands and needs
of women chemists, chemical&lt;br/&gt;engineers, and the chemical community in
this country. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past twenty years the number of
women getting undergraduate degrees in&lt;br/&gt;chemistry, entering graduate
school in chemistry and obtaining doctorate degrees in chemistry&lt;br/&gt;has
been increasing. Women currently receive ca. 41% of the bachelor's degrees and
almost one-third of the Ph.Ds granted in this field. Unfortunately, this
increased number of women in the&lt;br/&gt;pipeline is not resulting in the
significant changes in the chemical workforce that many had&lt;br/&gt;predicted.
This is particularly noticeable in the academic workforce. Women make
up&lt;br/&gt;approximately 16% of chemistry faculty in four-year colleges and
less than 10% of the chemistry&lt;br/&gt;faculty at doctoral granting
institutions. Given the profound role of academic institutions
in&lt;br/&gt;shaping the workforce in the chemical sciences and the expectations
of future, efforts to enhance&lt;br/&gt;the numbers, success, and visibility of
women chemists in academia are essential to improving&lt;br/&gt;the
participation of women in the broader chemical sciences workforce. With the
anticipated&lt;br/&gt;high turn-over in faculty positions in the coming decade,
it is imperative that swift action be&lt;br/&gt;taken to assure that
underrepresented groups are actively recruited and promoted into
these&lt;br/&gt;vacated positions to produce a more balanced representation of
gender and race in academia in&lt;br/&gt;the chemical sciences. COACh was
developed in response to these concerns. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported by the NSF ADVANCE Program. The overall mission of the ADVANCE Program
is to increase the participation of women in the scientific and engineering
workforce through the increased representation and advancement of women in
academic science and engineering careers.&lt;br/&gt;