* 0123518
* Novel Dispersion-Division-Multiplexing Technique for Enabling Double the Spectral Efficiency in Transmission and Routing of Photonic and Microwave Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2001,10/31/2005
* Alan Willner, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 10/31/2005
* USD 269,999.00

It has long been a comfortable fallacy that the optical fiber has infinite
bandwidth, and, therefore,&lt;br/&gt;we have bandwidth to burn. With the
explosion of multiple-channel communications through the
use&lt;br/&gt;wavelength-division-multiplexing (WDM), available bandwidth now
takes center stage. When&lt;br/&gt;comparing optical communications with other
types of communications, we lag far behind in terms of&lt;br/&gt;spectral
efficiency (i.e., bits/Hz) and we are not even close to the Shannon capacity
limit. In fact, higher&lt;br/&gt;spectral efficiency is probably the area of
least creative activity within the field, and yet it holds the&lt;br/&gt;promise
for revolutionary increases in future systems capacity.&lt;br/&gt; One of the
technical areas within optical communications that has shown the most
bandwidth&lt;br/&gt;waste and has many future potential applications is
subcarrier multiplexing (SCM) of many lower-speed&lt;br/&gt;channels on a single
wavelength carrier. In SCM, half the data bandwidth is wasted since
either:&lt;br/&gt;(i) transmitting double-sideband signals will, in essence,
duplicate the data being sent given that each&lt;br/&gt;sideband carries the
full information needed for reception, or (ii) transmitting single-sideband
signals&lt;br/&gt;requires that the mirror frequencies on the other side of the
carrier wave (i.e., where the second sideband&lt;br/&gt;would have been located)
remain unoccupied by any other data signals.&lt;br/&gt; Subcarrier multiplexing
has many advantages for future optical communications
systems,&lt;br/&gt;including: (a) the transmission of many lower-speed digital
data signals on a single high-capacity&lt;br/&gt;wavelength, (b) the
transmission of many analog-modulated signals, (c) the transmission medium
for&lt;br/&gt;networks that accommodate wireless microwave-based optical
signals, and (d) the transmission of control&lt;br/&gt;labels for efficient
routing in packet-switched networks.&lt;br/&gt; We propose implementing a new
multiplexing scheme that enables double the spectral efficiency&lt;br/&gt;for
optical systems that use subcarrier multiplexing. The scheme is called
dispersion-division-multiplexing&lt;br/&gt;(DDM) and relies on placing two data
channels simultaneously in the same frequency space&lt;br/&gt;away from an
optical carrrier. For example, one double-sideband data channel is
transmitted&lt;br/&gt;conventionally, and a second double-sideband channel is
transmitted in the shadow of the first&lt;br/&gt;channel. Shadowing occurs due
to the chromatic dispersion of the optical fiber. Due to dispersion,
each&lt;br/&gt;of the two double sidebands of a single channel will travel at
slightly different speeds. These sidebands&lt;br/&gt;will periodically be out-
of-phase will each other relative to the optical carrier wave, thereby
canceling&lt;br/&gt;each other and inducing RF power fading (i.e., a nearly
complete disappearing of the given channel's&lt;br/&gt;power at a receiver). One
channel would be faded when the other channel would be in-phase and
have&lt;br/&gt;full power. By using a tunable dispersion-inducing element, a
receiver can change the relative phase&lt;br/&gt;between each cannel's two
sidebands and thus recover either of the two frequency-co-located
channels.&lt;br/&gt; Our research program will investigate unique
functionalities, opportunities, and limitations when&lt;br/&gt;using spectrally-
efficient dispersion-division-multiplexing that could bear significant fruit in
the 5-10&lt;br/&gt;year time frame. The key fundamental features of our systems
and networking research program are as&lt;br/&gt;follows. We will:&lt;br/&gt;(a)
demonstrate highly-spectrally-efficient DDM for many WDM channels,&lt;br/&gt;(b)
demonstrate the utility of DDM for interconnecting nodes in a wireless-based
photonic&lt;br/&gt;network,&lt;br/&gt;(c) demonstrate SCM label swapping and
routing in a WDM photonic network, and&lt;br/&gt;(d) investigate the fundamental
limitations of generating, transmitting, and receiving DDM&lt;br/&gt;channels
when considering SNR, extinction ratio, and data bandwidth.&lt;br/&gt;TABLE OF
CONTENTS