* 0124765
* Multifunctional Nanostructured Catalysts for Aqueous Medium Organic Synthesis (TSE01-B)
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Chao-Jun Li, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 04/30/2005
* USD 357,266.00

This project addresses the design, synthesis, characterization, processing and
applications of novel multifunctional heterogeneous catalysts for
environmentally benign and high efficiency organic transformations in aqueous
media. It emphasizes metallic, organometallic-complex, and multifunctional
catalysts capable of catalyzing multiple reactions simultaneously, examining the
activity and selectivity of the catalysts for industrially important organic
reactions, and engineering the structures and catalytic chemistry to achieve
optimal performance through a fundamental understanding of catalytic reactions.
This multidisciplinary project involving chemistry, chemical engineering,
materials science, and environmental science provides a strong opportunity to
integrate research with education to address important industrial issues such as
how to reduce volatile and toxic organic pollutants in the environment.

The development of new catalysts and methodologies for efficient and
environmentally benign transformations of volatile organic pollutants will help
achieve sustainable long-term economic growth while maintaining a cleaner
industrial environment. Students trained in the synthesis, characterization,
processing, optimization and recovery of catalysts will be highly competitive in
both the academic and industrial job market. This Technology for a Sustainable
Environment project is part of the National Science Foundation / Environmental
Protection Administration partnership program. It is being jointly supported by
the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities and the Division of Materials
Research.

