* 0124733
* Collaborative SBI Research:  Carbon Cycling in the Chukchi and Beaufort Seas--Field and Modeling Studies
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2006
* David Kirchman, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 12/31/2006
* USD 448,846.00

The Western Arctic is profoundly influenced by the northward flux of nutrient
and&lt;br/&gt;organic-rich, low salinity Pacific Ocean water that enters the
basin through the Bering Strait and&lt;br/&gt;across the Chukchi shelf and
slope. This flow, a key component of the global ocean
circulation,&lt;br/&gt;transports freshwater from the Pacific to the Atlantic
via the Arctic Ocean while also sustaining&lt;br/&gt;some of the most productive
ecosystems in the world, the Bering and Chukchi Seas. Net&lt;br/&gt;transport,
sea ice cover and sea surface temperatures are well known to vary greatly
over&lt;br/&gt;seasonal and interannual time scales, but the experimental,
observational, and modeling bases to&lt;br/&gt;evaluate the response of Arctic
ecosystems to these changes, and to global change in general,
are&lt;br/&gt;largely lacking. This interdisciplinary project will provide the
observational and theoretical framework&lt;br/&gt;to evaluate carbon fluxes in
the Chukchi and Beaufort Seas in response to variable
environmental&lt;br/&gt;forcing. A main goal of this project is to determine the
impact of decadal-scale environmental&lt;br/&gt;regime shifts in the northern
high latitudes on carbon cycling in the western Arctic Ocean. Carbon import from
the Bering Sea, local production and transformation, and export from the Chukchi
and Beaufort shelves to the basin will be examined. This project will focus on
understanding the influence of physical and biological processes on fluxes of
carbon and other key elements (e.g. N, O, Si) in the water column and benthos of
the shelves and slope, and subsequent exchange with the basin. This project
has&lt;br/&gt;been integrated with other research programs and related resources
in the SBI program. The ultimate goal of this study is to obtain a more complete
understanding of shelf-basin exchange processes and biogeochemical cycles, and
to establish benchmarks useful for assessing future global change of this
sentinel ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;