* 0124262
* Mapping Aquifer Heterogeneity: Integrated Analysis of Electrical Resistance Tomography, Tracer Tests, and Hydraulic Data
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2007
* Steven Gorelick, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 01/31/2007
* USD 402,004.00

0124262&lt;br/&gt;Gorelick&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurately characterizing flow
and solute transport in groundwater systems is a critical problem in hydrology.
In order to predict the fate and long-term transport of contaminants, an
accurate depiction of the spatial variability of the hydraulic conductivity
field is essential. Hydraulic conductivity measurements are generally too sparse
to obtain a high-resolution image of the subsurface. Given the large volume of
data required to develop an accurate model of subsurface flow, and the cost of
direct sampling, the use of geophysical methods can contribute significantly to
information about the subsurface.&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this research is two-
fold. First is the use of electrical resistance topography (ERT) as a tool to
map subsurface relative flow paths and flow barriers in detail. Second is the
establishment of a systematic procedure capable of delineating hydraulic
conductivity through integrated analysis of multiple data types. By analyzing
these data together in a simulation-inversion framework, we intend to provide
images of aquifer properties consistent with all data inversion framework, we
intend to provide images of aquifer properties consistent with all data types.
We plan to develop a multiple data type simulation-framework, and test it using
results from laboratory-scale experiments collected in 6 x 8 x 6 foot sand tank
at the Lamont Doherty Earth Observatory at Columbia University (funded
independently by NSF) and field-scale demonstration at the Massachusetts
Military Reservation on Cape Cod, Massachusetts. This work will quantify the
worth of different types of data, and their combination, to develop high-
resolution maps of aquifer properties. It will also improve the understanding of
the relationship between electrical resistance and hydraulic conductivity. Both
of these results will be valuable to physical hydrogeologist, contaminant
hydrogeologists, and geophysicists.&lt;br/&gt;