* 0124760
* 2001 Technology for a Sustainable Environment: An Environmentally Sustainable Approach to Crude Oil Production and Processing: Compressed Gas Demulsification
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Ruben Carbonell, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/2005
* USD 201,000.00

Abstract CTS-0124760 Kilpatrick, P North Carolina State U

The management of emulsions during the production, transportation, and
processing of crude petroleum fluids is one of the most persistent challenges
which faces the petroleum industry. Annually, tens of millions of tons of
emulsions are produced during production of petroleum and this figure is likely
to rise annually with the increased production of heavy oils. A substantial
percentage of these emulsions are stabilized by elastic films of adsorbed
asphaltenes. It is common to treat these emulsions with chemical demulsifiers,
typically nonionic polymers containing substantial proportions of ethylene oxide
(EO) and propylene oxide (PO). Other methods employed to a lesser extent include
thermal pressurization and rapid depressurization, electrostatic droplet
shattering and coalescence, and ultrasonication of emulsions. Among the most
effective chemical demulsifiers are oxyalkylated phenol resins, phenol-
formaldehyde glycidyl ethers, and other polymers based on EO, PO, phenol, and
formaldehyde. There is considerable concern in that many of these demulsifier
chemicals persist in the environment, are nonbiodegradable, and may have adverse
human health effects, including being suspected endocrine disruptors. Moreover,
the costs associated with demulsifiers in particularly heavy and troublesome
fields can be substantial.

This project describes a novel method for demulsifying water-petroleum emulsions
using compressed gases; the specific example which has been reduced to practice
is the use of compressed carbon dioxide (CO2). The project describes the further
development of this method and the possible use of mixed compressed gases,
including methane (CH4), ethane (C2H6), propane (C3H8), and CO2. The method is
based on the alteration of the solvent properties of petroleum for asphaltenes
upon dissolution of dissolved gas. It is well known that dissolution of
appreciable amounts of propane in petroleum fluids can precipitate asphaltenes,
a process known as propane de-asphalting. CO2 is also highly effective and the
precipitation is of sufficient magnitude to demulsify extremely stable petroleum
emulsions. Should the method be plausible with compressed gases commonly found
in contact and coproduced with petroleum - e.g. CH4, C2H6, C3H8, and CO2 - the
possibility exists for demulsifying produced emulsions at the source and,
perhaps, perform preliminary unit operations on the crude, such as downhole
deasphalting. The impact of such a technology, if successfully reduced to
economical practice, would be difficult to overestimate. Based on the somewhat
reduced scope due to the revised budget reductions, the mixed gas
demulsifications will be performed with methane (CH4) and CO2 only.

