* 0124616
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research:  Primes and Knots
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Takashi Ono, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 08/31/2004
* USD 27,050.00

0124616&lt;br/&gt;Morava&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the
participation of American scientists in a U.S.-Japan seminar on primes and knots
to be held at the Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, Maryland from March
15-22, 2003. The co-organizers are professors Jack Morava of the Johns Hopkins
University and Professor Toshitake Kohno at the University of Tokyo in Japan.
The theory of primes and the theory of knots are perhaps the most venerated
branches of algebra and of topology, and in many ways, they are both still the
most accessible. However, it is only relatively recently that researchers have
begun to perceive deep relations between them, via analogies between the Galois
groups of number fields and the fundamental groups of link complements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The topic has the advantage of being approachable from
many directions and on many levels. The theory of knots and the theory of primes
are both intuitively accessible, and the participants expect this seminar to
foster the development of a common language between researchers in these areas.
A prime resembles a knot, and the ideal generated by an algebraic integer is
like the boundary of an embedded surface. In both subjects, relations between
abelian constructions such as Alexander invariants are relatively well-
understood, and much current research centers on deeper nonabelian questions;
for example, it is now known that {5, 41, 61} is the first set of Borromean
primes (in which no two are nontrivially linked, but all three are). Seminar
organizers have made a special effort to involve younger researchers and
graduate students as both participants and observers. The exchange of ideas and
data with Japanese experts in this field will enable U.S. participants to
advance their own work, and will set the stage for future collaborative
projects. Dissemination of information on the seminar will be available on the
World Wide Web.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;