* 0124872
* Investigation of the Rate of Shelf-Basin Interaction in the Western Arctic Using Radium Isotopes: SBI Phase II
* GEO,OPP
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2008
* David Kadko, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 12/31/2008
* USD 545,133.00

The largely landlocked Arctic Ocean receives input from the Pacific and Atlantic
Ocean and from rivers draining the surrounding continents. These inflows are
important sources of salt, heat, nutrients, sediment and organisms for the
central basin. With the exception of a portion of the Atlantic Ocean
contribution, these inputs must cross continental shelves where they are
modified significantly by benthic, water column, and air-ice-ocean interactions.
As a consequence of the cross-shelf transports, there are significant
biogeochemical exchanges between the shelves and the central basin. However, we
currently lack the information to quantify these exchanges. In order to address
this lack, this project proposes as part of the western Arctic Shelf-Basin
Interaction (SBI) Phase II program to apply an isotopic water mass tracer
technique to assess the pathways and rates of exchange between the western
Arctic shelves and the interior Arctic Ocean basin. The proposed technique uses
the measured concentrations in the water column of the two naturally occurring
radioisotopes 228Ra and 226Ra. Because 228Ra, which has a half life of 5.77
years, is derived solely from shelf sediments, it provides unambiguous evidence
of the presence of shelf water. Its relative concentration in shelf and basin
waters can therefore provide quantitative information on shelf-basin water
transports. This technique is mature and has been used in shelf-basin exchange
investigations in other regions. Results of a pilot research project carried out
during the SBI Phase I program have demonstrated utility of this tracer
technique in the western Arctic Ocean. For the proposed research, tracer data
collected from vessels along transects through the study region will be analyzed
within the context of nearshore and offshore field and modeling studies that
focus on understanding cross-shelf transport. An emphasis will be placed on the
role of mesoscale eddies in this transport. Where appropriate, the shorter-lived
224Ra with its 3.64-day half life will be measured at sea to supplement the
dataset. Radium tracer data will also be collected whenever possible from other
platforms such as moored arrays provided by other SBI investigators.