* 0124873
* Exploratory Research-Scalable Token-Based Authentication:  Architectures and Mechanisms
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Gail-Joon Ahn, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Gregory R. Andrews
* 08/31/2003
* USD 34,451.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The information revolution has led organizations
worldwide to rely heavily on numerous databases to conduct their daily business.
Because databases usually exist in broad, highly dynamic network-based
environments, formally accessing the resources in a secure manner poses a
difficult challenge. Specially, the healthcare industry has recently tried to
transit from their old and disparate business models based on ink and paper to a
new and consolidated ones based on digitalized information since last a few
years for their customers' and stakeholders' needs. &lt;br/&gt;In addition, the
proposed rules of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
(HIPAA), circulated by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS)
through the Health Care Financial Administration (HCFA) strongly require the
services of security and privacy. Along with this movement, a secure solution
for the complex environment like healthcare industry has been highly demanded.
Recently, the President's Information Technology Advisory Committee (PITAC) has
issued a report about how security can be deployed to modernize the nation's
healthcare systems. Nobody has taken a leadership role and demanded investment
in information technology. Without active leadership it will be difficult, if
not possible, to get the highly decentralized healthcare industry to come up
with a standard secure information system.&lt;br/&gt;This motivates us to
propose a scalable application that can serve as a security tool to the complex
environment like healthcare industry. The problem we seek to address in this
research is to provide authentication of individual identity in the context of
accessing critical information including secure transmission of data across the
Internet. These problems have technical solutions that are well known, but the
solutions in general are strongly biased toward a single individual interacting
with a single application. When an individual needs to access more than one
application, or even the same application at a different location or
institution, he or she needs another set of electronic keys. In a collaborative
and research environment, individuals must collect and maintain a key set of
electronic access mechanisms that quickly becomes cumbersome and difficult to
manage. For this reason, we focus on token-based solution.&lt;br/&gt;In this
research, we propose scalable token-based authentication architectures &amp;
mechanisms and demonstrate how we can implement them using commercial-off-the-
self technologies. Our approach focuses on vendor-neutral specifications
including the feasibility of the construction of password, certificate and
signature-based authentication mechanisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;