* 0124767
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Time-Averaging in Mixed Brachiopod- Mollusk Assemblages along a Depth Gradient across a Modern Tropical Shelf
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Glenn Goodfriend, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 12/31/2004
* USD 54,337.00

The limits to temporal resolution imposed by processes of time-averaging (i.e.,
age mixing of fossils that determines the temporal resolution of the fossil
record) have broad implications for interpretation of the fossil record in a
wide variety of types of studies. Almost no information on time-averaging is
currently available for brachiopods, the predominant organism comprising
Paleozoic and many later marine shell assemblages. We propose to use a
combination of amino acid racemization and radiocarbon dating to document time-
averaging in surficial accumulations of mixed brachiopod-mollusk shells on the
southern Brazilian shelf. The resulting data will provide quantitative estimates
of age structures of dated shells of brachiopods and mollusks from seven sites
along a depth gradient. The study is expected to produce (1) the first
quantitative estimates of time-averaging for brachiopod shell accumulations, (2)
the first comparative data on time-averaging for two groups of biomineralized
organisms (brachiopods vs. mollusks), and (3) the first estimates of time-
averaging along an onshore-offshore bathymetric gradient. By adding taxonomic
and environmental dimensions to the current knowledge of time-averaging, this
study will provide a significant contribution to our understanding of the
temporal resolution of the fossil record.