* 0124618
* 2001 TSE: NSF/EPA Partnership for Environmental Research: Source-Based Pollution Prevention through Depolymerization of Poly(ethylene terephthalate) with Carbon Dioxide
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/2001,09/30/2007
* George Roberts, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 09/30/2007
* USD 361,680.00

Source-Based Pollution Prevention through Depolymerization of Poly (ethylene
terephthalate) with Supercritical Carbon Dioxide

Technical Description: This research represents a new approach to pollution
prevention through elimination of waste polymer that is generated during the
manufacture of poly (ethylene terephthalate) (PET). A one-step process will be
investigated to depolymerize PET and recover purified monomeric and oligimeric
units for repolymerization. The key features of the process are: 1) use of a
twin-screw extruder to continuously create the fresh surface that is required
for a depolymerizing agent (methanol or ethylene glycol) to penetrate into
polymer; 2) use of supercritical carbon dioxide (scCO2) as a processing aid.
Molten polymer is contacted with a mixture of scCO2 and either methanol or
ethylene glycol in a twin-screw extruder. The methanol or ethylene glycol causes
the PET to depolymerize as it passes through the extruder. The scCO2 plasticizes
the PET, facilitating penetration of the methanol/ethylene glycol into the
polymer. The scCO2 also reduces the viscosity of the melt and enhances chain
mobility, improving the overall reaction rate. Finally, the scCO2 extracts
organic contaminants from the polymer. The scCO2 containing dissolved
contaminants,unreacted ethylene glycol or methanol, and some of the monomers
produced is removed in a vent on the extruder. The potential advantages of this
process are: (1) elimination of the solvents and processing steps that otherwise
are required for separation of monomers and oligomers from contaminants; (2)
much higher depolymerization rates; (3) integration of multiple processes, i.e.,
depolymerization and extraction, into a single step. The process parameters will
be studied include the depolymerizing gent, the depolymerizing agent/polymer
ratio, pressure, temperature, CO2/polymer ratio, and average residence time in
the extruder.

Broader Significance: Approximately 100 million pounds of waste PET is generated
annually in U.S. manufacturing facilities. While some of this waste is used in
low-value products such as fillers, a large portion remains unusable. Successful
development of this new technology could help to solve a serious waste disposal
problem and increase the competitiveness of U.S. PET manufacturers. A
fundamental understanding of the depolymerization of PET could provide a basis
for several technology extensions. First is the application to post-consumer
waste PET, the annual volume of which is about 30 times the volume of in-plant
waste. Second, this new process should be applicable to other step-growth
polymers such as poly (bisphenol A carbonate) and various nylons.

