* 0124441
* TSE: High Temperature Micromolding of Aluminum Parts
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Michael Khonsari, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Lynn Realff
* 08/31/2005
* USD 373,827.00

This award is made under the NSF/EPA Partnership for Environmental Research TSE
2001. The research objective of this effort is to demonstrate the technical
feasibility of mass replication of high-aspect-ratio metallic miroparts by
fabricating aluminum cross-flow heat exchanges. Currently a major technical
barrier to mass replication of aluminum parts by high temperature micromolding
is the undesirable interaction between the hot/molten aluminum and micromold.
This leads to soldering and consequently the inability to separate the mold from
the molded aluminum part. The approach to be taken is to uniformly coat highly
nonplanar micromolds in a manner that it makes it possible to eject the aluminum
part from the miromold after molding operation. This will be achieved by using
plasma-assisted, vapor-phase deposition technology to deposit conformal coatings
with uniform chemical and mechanical properties onto the surfaces of high-
aspect-ratio micromolds. Mircomolds are fabricated using the deep X-ray
lithography/electrodeposition based microfabrication technique at the Center for
Advanced Microstructures and Devices at Louisiana State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will allow
modification of the near-surface properties of the micromold to enable easy and
repeated mold/part separation, hence removing a major existing technical barrier
in mass replication of aluminum parts by high temperature micromolding. This
will lead to increased end-use energy savings and efficiencies associated with
the creation of compact heat exchangers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;