* 0124415
* 2001 TSE: NSF/EPA Partnership for Environmental Research: Design for product-embedded disassembly using reversible integral attachments (TSE01-H)
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2002,04/30/2007
* Kazuhiro Saitou, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Clark C. K. Liu
* 04/30/2007
* USD 392,056.00

0124415 Saitou The goal of the proposed research is to develop a general method
for designing products with embedded disassembly processes that can be invoked
by "pressing a disassembly button". This will be achieved by developing a new
class of reversible integral attachments (RIAs) that can be detached by the
application of localized heat. Design methodologies will be developed that will
facilitate: (1) the identification of the components to be recovered, and (2)
the embedding of RIAs into the product to facilitate the most efficient access
to the components of interest upon product disassembly. Specific research tasks
include: (1) extension of existing approaches toward determining recovery
targets to include environmental validation metrics with the intent of
considering both environmental and financial factors during design for
disassembly, (2) development of a design method for a new class of RIAs that can
be detached by application of localized heat, based on the structural topology
optimization algorithm, and (3) development of a systematic procedure to
generate the design specifications (attachment location, engagement type,
removal direction, heating spot location) for RIAs using computer aided design
technology in order to realize the most efficient access to components, based on
the overall product geometry and the desired disassembly sequence. ***