* 0124333
* TSE: Elucidating the Role of Water on Heteropolyacid-Catalyzed Hydrocarbon Reactions (TSE01-C)
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Matthew Neurock, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
*  John R Regalbuto
* 08/31/2006
* USD 361,194.00

The proposal focuses on determining the mechanisms of reactions catalyzed by
heteropolyacids. A goal of the work is to understand the role of trace amounts
of water in enhancing the performance of these catalysts. The experimental tasks
will focus on catalyst characterization and the computational one will make use
of DFT calculations to characterize reaction mechanisms. The effects of water
treatments on catalyst activity will be examined during hydrocarbon
isomerization and alkylation reactions over supported heteropolyacids. Other
important goals are to develop stable solid acid alkylation catalysts that are
active at low temperatures and to identify factors controlling acid site density
and strength in solid acid catalysts. Computational efforts will be aimed at
understanding plausible mechanisms for hydrocarbon activation, which can lead to
isomerization and alkylation, over tungsten heteropolyacids. The role of water
on the structure of the working catalyst and the relationships between the
degree of hydration and the activity of these materials will be investigated.
This work has the potential to lead to the development of improved solid acid
catalysts, which can replace environmentally less desirable liquid acid based
processes.