* 0124249
* Isostatic Compensation of a Paleozoic Orogen: Wide-angle Reflection Studies of the Blue Ridge Province, Southern Appalachians
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Robert Hawman, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2004
* USD 97,044.00

The main goal of this research project is to place constraints on the mechanism
of isostatic compensation for topographic and intracrustal loads beneath a
portion of the southern Appalachians. Although it is frequently asserted that
the Appalachians possess no crustal root, the Moho beneath the highest
elevations in the Blue Ridge and Valley &amp; Ridge provinces remains poorly
imaged.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent studies in the Sierra Nevada and other young
mountain belts indicate that they are supported by density heterogeneities
within the upper mantle rather than by thickening of the crust. This suggests
that a significant amount of interaction can occur between the crustal and
mantle components of the lithosphere during mountain building. Seismic profiles
across older mountain belts, however, indicate a variety of mechanisms for
isostatic compensation. Profiles across some Archean-age orogenic belts in the
Baltic and and Canadian shields reveal significant relief on the Moho,
suggesting crustal roots may persist for over 1.5 billion years. In contrast,
seismic profiles across many Paleozoic orogens show a relatively flat Moho,
presumably in reponse to subsequent collapse, extension, and erosion. A notable
exception is the Ural Mountains, a late Paleozoic orogen that escaped major
extension, leaving the collisional architecture largely intact. Extensive
seismic profiling across the southern Urals indicates a crustal root anywhere
from 6 to 15 km thick. The root appears to be much thicker than required for
compensation of the existing topography. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In spite of
extensive seismic profiling, very little is known about the crustal velocity
structure or the configuration of the Moho beneath the southern Appalachians.
New seismic refraction/wide-angle reflection profiles are being used to model
the transition in crustal seismic-wave velocity structure from accreted crust
beneath the Carolina Terrane to North American craton beneath the Blue Ridge. In
particular, the new data are being used to: 1) image the Moho by taking
advantage of elevated reflection coefficients near the critical angle; 2) map
variations in averaged P- and S-wave velocities to constrain variations in the
bulk composition of basement rocks across the study area; 3) test models for
elastic bending of the continental lithosphere by incorporating the new
estimates for relief on the Moho; 4) isolate the crustal contribution to the
observed gravity by modeling the gravity field predicted by seismically
determined variations in composition (density structure) and crustal thickness
(this places constraints on any density variations within the uppermost mantle
that help to support topographic and intracrustal loads); and 5) determine the
extent to which the original deep structure of this orogen survived the effects
of subsequent collapse and extension. The results are being used to assess the
long-term stability of individual terranes/crustal blocks within Paleozoic
orogens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experiments are targeting the regional gravity
low associated with the Blue Ridge province. Both instantaneous blasts at
dimension-stone quarries and delay-fired blasts at crushed-stone quarries are
being used as seismic sources. The use of quarry blasts, a valuable but largely
untapped energy source for refraction/wide-angle reflection profiling,
eliminates the high costs of drilling and explosives normally associated with
crustal-scale, active-source experiments. The new experiments are helping to
link the crustal images and velocity estimates from previous studies in the
Carolina Terrane and associated East Coast gravity high, the Tennessee Valley
&amp; Ridge, and the Inner Piedmont and associated gravity gradient. The
combined results provide high-frequency control on crustal velocity structure
across an important part of the orogen, allowing future passive-source
experiments to focus on related structures within the uppermost mantle.