* 0124600
* Topological Aspects of Chow Quotients and  Moduli Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2005
* Yi Hu, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 06/30/2005
* USD 93,000.00

DMS-0104600&lt;br/&gt;Yi Hu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator proposes to
give topological constructions of&lt;br/&gt;the Chow quotient by introducing
moduli spaces of stable orbits&lt;br/&gt;with prescribed momentum charges and
moduli spaces of stable&lt;br/&gt;action-manifolds, respectively. The
introductions of stable &lt;br/&gt;orbits and stable action-manifolds follow
closely the idea of investigator's earlier work on stable degeneration of
polygons. &lt;br/&gt;Note that just like a stable polygon is a collection of
ordinary polygons, a stable orbit is a collection of ordinary orbits. The
connections from stable orbits and stable action-manifolds to the corresponding
Chow cycles are to be established by moment map. &lt;br/&gt;Next, he also
attempts to interpret the Uhlenbeck compactification &lt;br/&gt;as a topological
analogy of a Chow quotient. In the same vein, &lt;br/&gt;the investigator
proposes a moduli problem for stable tuples of homogeneous polynomials of a
fixed total degree in two variables.&lt;br/&gt;The investigator anticipates that
the resulting moduli space is &lt;br/&gt;the smooth compactification of the
variety of holomorphic maps &lt;br/&gt;from one-dimensional projective space to
n-dimensional projective &lt;br/&gt;space as constructed in his earlier work on
blowups along &lt;br/&gt;arrangements of subvarieties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal deals with the fruitful interaction between &lt;br/&gt;topology and
algebraic geometry. Algebraic Geometry as a field &lt;br/&gt;is both old and
new. It is old because of its long history, &lt;br/&gt;it is new because it is
still vigorously developing as one of &lt;br/&gt;the main stream mathematics. It
has numerous beautiful connections &lt;br/&gt;and applications to other
subjects. Roughly speaking, Algebraic Geometry studies spaces which are locally
the set of solutions&lt;br/&gt;of some polynomial equations. Topology is another
amazing &lt;br/&gt;mathematical achievement of this century and is the study of
&lt;br/&gt;flexible geometrical properties of spaces. One of central
&lt;br/&gt;problems in algebraic geometry is the classification of spaces
&lt;br/&gt;in algebraic geometry. A key idea here is to treat every type of
&lt;br/&gt;spaces as a point in a "master set" which is technically called
&lt;br/&gt;a moduli space. This paper focus on the topological and
&lt;br/&gt;geometrical aspects of moduli spaces. The proposal
consists&lt;br/&gt;of some new ideas and methods which are substantially based
&lt;br/&gt;upon investigator's earlier papers, among
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;