* 0124868
* Collaborative Research: Transports and Transformations of Carbon and Nitrogen in the Western Arctic Ocean: A Contribution to the SBI Project
* GEO,OPP
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2007
* Nicholas Bates, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 12/31/2007
* USD 449,548.00

This project contributes to Western Arctic Shelf-Basin Interactions (SBI) by
focussing on a) biogeochemical modifications of Pacific water over the Beaufort
and Chukchi shelf and slope regions,&lt;br/&gt;with emphasis on carbon and
nitrogen; and b) comparative analysis of the findings over the broad Chukchi
shelf and narrow Beaufort shelf and adjacent slopes to facilitate integration of
the Western Arctic into a Pan-Arctic perspective. The project will evaluate the
processes of carbon and nitrogen transport, exchanges and transformations in the
regions of interest. Specific objectives are: a) determination of mass transport
and fate of carbon and nitrogen associated with the volume transports calculated
by SBI collaborators; b) interpretation of carbon and nitrogen spatial
distributions and temporal variability relative to biological&lt;br/&gt;and
physical conditions; c) evaluation of partitioning of organic matter between
dissolved and particulate phases; d) determination of net community production
and it's fate; e) determination of C:N stoichiometry as a complement to
biological studies, particularly in relation to community structure and seasonal
progression of intense phytoplankton blooms in the Chukchi and Beaufort Seas;
and f) evaluation of the contribution of dissolved and particulate organic
material to apparent oxygen utilization development in the Arctic halocline and
export from the shelf.&lt;br/&gt;