* 0124901
* Salinity, Florivory, and the Evolutionary Ecology of Iris Hexagona
* BIO,DEB
* 11/15/2001,10/31/2005
* Susan Mopper, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 10/31/2005
* USD 308,000.00

The adaptation of natural communities to changing environments is of growing
practical concern. Rising sea levels and increased salinity are impacting
coastal ecosystems, interactions between plants and animals, and community
structure. We will investigate how Iris hexagona, a native freshwater species,
responds to rising salinity, spatial isolation, and flower consumption by deer.
Previous results indicate that salinity stress reduces biomass, but increases
seed production. In contrast, large-scale flower consumption by deer eliminates
seed production and stimulates vegetative growth. This interdisciplinary project
combines field experiments, phytochemistry, molecular genetics, and predictive
modeling. Field experiments will examine how interactions between salinity and
deer influence growth, sexual and clonal reproduction, and belowground dynamics
of I. hexagona populations. Phytochemical analyses will investigate
physiological responses to salinity stress, including phytohormone, nutrients
and minerals, proteins, and volatile floral compounds. Genetic analyses will
reveal variation within and between freshwater and saltmarsh I. hexagona
populations. Quantitative modeling will integrate our findings to predict plant
population growth and the evolution of salinity-tolerance. This project can help
advance our understanding of how coastal ecosystems and their natural
communities respond to global climate change.