* 0124920
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Studies of Model C-H Bond and  Si-H Bond Activation Processes on the Surfaces of Large[RG]n and [CH4]n Clusters
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2005
* William Breckenridge, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 02/28/2005
* USD 18,000.00

0124920&lt;br/&gt;Breckenridge&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year award for
US-France collaboration in experimental physical chemistry involves researchers
and students at the University of Utah and the Center for Atomic Energy (CEN) in
Saclay, France. The principal investigators, William H. Breckenridge in the US,
and Benoit Soep and Jean-Michel Mestdagh in France, lead this collaboration.
They will study reactions of excited atoms and metal oxides produced at the
surface in order to activate C-H (carbon-hydrogen) bonds. Activation of C-H
bonds is important in a wide variety of technological processes such as
hydrocarbon cracking, synthesis of chemicals from natural gas, hydrogenation,
and organic synthesis. Many of these processes are either extremely complex
chemically or occur under conditions which make it difficult to characterize and
identify the processes responsible for bond breaking. The collaboration and
comparison of experimental results will elucidate the bond-breaking process and
understanding of how C-H activation occurs in these technological systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experiments will be performed at the University of Utah
and in Saclay, France. The French group will conduct photosensitized C-H bond
activation "surface" model experiments. These are complemented by metal
oxide/methane experiments at the University of Utah. The collaboration and
comparison of experimental results will elucidate the bond-breaking process and
advance understanding of how C-H activation occurs in these technological
systems. Graduate students will benefit through advanced training and
participation in the collaborative experiments performed by an international
team.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award represents the US side of parallel
proposals to the NSF and the CNRS. NSF will cover travel funds and living
expenses for the US investigator and his students. The CNRS will support visits
by French researchers and students to the United States. &lt;br/&gt;