* 0124049
* Collaborative Research: Millennial Scale Fluctuations of Dry Valleys Lakes:  Implications for Regional Climate Variability and the Interhemispheric (a)Synchrony of Climate Change
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2008
* Glenn Berger, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Palais
* 08/31/2008
* USD 135,254.00

0124049 Berger

This award supports a project to add to the understanding of what drives glacial
cycles. Most researchers agree that Milankovitch seasonal forcing paces the ice
ages but how these insolation changes are leveraged into abrupt global climate
change remains unknown. A current popular view is that the climate of Antarctica
and the Southern Ocean leads that of the rest of the world by a couple thousand
years at Termination I and by even greater margins during previous terminations.
This project will integrate the geomorphological record of glacial history with
a series of cores taken from the lake bottoms in the Dry Valleys of the McMurdo
Sound region of Antarctica. Using a modified Livingstone corer, transects of
long cores will be obtained from Lakes Fryxell, Bonney, Joyce, and Vanda. A
multiparameter approach will be employed which is designed to extract the
greatest possible amount of former water-level, glaciological, and
paleoenvironmental data from Dry Valleys lakes. Estimates of hydrologic changes
will come from different proxies, including grain size, stratigraphy, evaporite
mineralogy, stable isotope and trace element chemistry, and diatom assemblage
analysis. The chronology, necessary to integrate the cores with the
geomorphological record, as well as for comparisons with Antarctic ice-core and
glacial records, will come from Uranium-Thorium, Uranium-Helium, and Carbon-14
dating of carbonates, as well as luminescence sediment dating. Evaluation of the
link between lake-level and climate will come from hydrological and energy-
balance modelling. Combination of the more continuous lake-core sequences with
the spatially extensive geomorphological record will result in an integrated
Antarctic lake-level and paleoclimate dataset that extends back at least 30,000
years. This record will be compared to Dry Valleys glacier records and to the
Antarctic ice cores to address questions of regional climate variability, and
then to other Southern Hemisphere and Northern Hemisphere records to assess
interhemispheric synchrony or asynchrony of climate change.

