* 0124471
* Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowships and Supporting Activities: NSF Minority Post-Doctoral Research Fellowship Starter Grant
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2002
* Rachel Morello-Frosch, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 07/31/2002
* USD 10,000.00

This starter-grant is for 2:1 matching (institutional:NSF) for start up
equipment costs for a researcher who has completed two years of an NSF post-
doctoral fellowship and now has a tenure-track position at San Francisco State
University. The equipment costs support an analysis of how social fragmentation,
characterized by racial, class, and economic inequality, are related to spatial
inequalities in pollution exposures and associated health risks. The research
will address the question of how racial and economic segregation relate to
disparities in exposures to environmental hazards and associated health impacts
among diverse communities and whether communities characterized by high levels
of segregation and socioeconomic inequality experience higher levels of
environmental health risks overall. These questions will be examined at both the
regional and state levels, using the Los Angeles Air Basin and California as a
geographic area of analysis. Study results from this research in California will
have implications for the development of public health interventions and policy
initiatives for community and economic development.Indices of social and racial
stratification (such as race, class, and income segregation, rapid demographic
change and indicators of economic inequality, such as the Gini coefficient) for
regions and counties in California will be derived using variables from the 1990
and 2000 US Census. Using conventional environmental health risk assessment
methods, air toxics exposures and health risks indicators will be calculated by
combining modeled air toxics concentration estimates with cancer and non-cancer
toxicity information. Multivariate regression analysis will be used to assess
the relationship between environmental health risks (dependent variables) and
social stratification indicators (independent variables) while controlling for
important covariates such as population density, land use, political power and
civic participation. Furthermore, a theoretical framework will be developed for
understanding how inequality diminishes social capital and social cohesion which
in turn can increase community vulnerability to the placement of environmental
hazards and exposures to pollution.