* 0124241
* 2001 SIGART/AAAI Doctoral Consortium to be held August 4-10, 2001,in Settle,Washington.
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2002
* Marie Bienkowski, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2002
* USD 18,218.00



WORKSHOP: 2001 SIGART / AAAI Doctoral Consortium



This is a standard award to support the 6th SIGART / AAAI Doctoral Consortium,
to be held as a workshop during the 17th International Joint Conference on
Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI'01), August 4-10 in Seattle. The Doctoral
Consortium will provide a unique opportunity for a group of PhD students to
discuss and explore their research interests and career objectives together with
a panel of established researchers. The event is similar in spirit to that
funded by NSF last year, and has once again attracted a diverse group of student
participants who reflect a wide range of topic areas and methodologies within
artificial intelligence, and who have settled on their thesis directions but who
still have significant research left to do. Selection was based on clarity and
completeness of the submission packet, stage of research, advisor's letter, and
other evidence of promise such as published papers or technical reports; a
complete list of the 14 participants' names and affiliations may be found at
http://www.acm.org/sigart/DCparticipants.html. Abstracts of the participants'
presentations will be published in the issue of SIGART "Intelligence" that
follows the consortium. The request for NSF support is higher this year than
last, because Microsoft corporation chose not to cosponsor the event this time.
Doctoral Consortium co-chairs are the PI and Marie desJardins, University of
Maryland at Baltimore County; the organizing committee also included Janyce M.
Wiebe, University of Pittsburgh; Mary P. Harper, Purdue University; Vibhu O.
Mittal, Just Research and CMU; and Evangelos Milios, Dalhousie University.
Panelists for the 2-day event will include: Robert St. Amant, North Carolina
State University; Maria Gini, University of Minnesota; Craig Knoblock, ISI &
USC; Gerhard Lakemeyer, Aachen University of Technology; Evangelos Milios,
Dalhousie University; Shlomo Zilberstein, University of Massachusetts at
Amherst; Stuart Shapiro, SUNY Buffalo; Foster Provost, NYU; and Rebecca Bruce,
University of North Carolina at Asheville.