* 0124562
* Empirical Analysis of Japanese Foreign Direct Investment on US Service Industries
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Kasaundra Tomlin, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* LAURA RAZZOLINI
* 08/31/2002
* USD 20,000.00

Most research on foreign direct investment (FDI) examines the manufacturing
sector yet the service sector has been growing significantly over the last
decade. For example, in the late 1980s, the average annual inflow of foreign
acquisitions in services amounted to $22 billion, nearly three times the yearly
amount in the first half of the decade and at a rate comparable with investments
in manufacturing. Between 1983 and 1988, the worldwide stock of service foreign
direct investment by Japan, West Germany, and France, increased by more than 20
percent per annum totaling $757 billion dollars. This suggests that the foreign
presence in U.S. service sectors is expanding rapidly; however, research in this
area remains sparse. &lt;br/&gt;This project involves planning research to
answer three important questions related to Japanese foreign direct investment
into U.S. service sectors: (1) Do volatile exchange rates deter Japanese service
FDI? (2) Are Japanese plants less likely to fail if they invest in U.S. service
industries that support their U.S. manufacturing operations, and (3) What
determines whether a Japanese firm acquires a U.S. firm, builds a new plant in
the U.S., or enters into a joint venture with a U.S. firm? &lt;br/&gt;This
project aids in answering important questions regarding policy on Japanese FDI
into the U.S. and U.S. competition with Japanese firms. Many services can only
be delivered to foreign markets if they are produced in those markets, hence
understanding the motives for service FDI and firm behavior after entry is
imperative. &lt;br/&gt;