* 0124367
* Electrochemical Light: Putting Modern Technology Into the Hands of Students
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Annette Gordon, Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 05/31/2004
* USD 32,500.00

Chemistry (12) Electrochemiluminescence (ECL), combining elements of
electrochemistry and photochemistry, involves the production of light near an
electrode surface by species that can undergo highly energetic electron transfer
reactions. ECL is a powerful technique that can be used to study a variety of
analytes (e.g., organic, inorganic, biochemical). It is unfortunate that it is
usually thought of as a tool only of the research and clinical laboratory since
using analytical techniques that have "real-world" applications (e.g., in the
clinical analysis of biomolecules) can greatly enhance teaching at the
undergraduate level. We are adapting experiments from the research and
educational literature and are developing new experiments, all of which use ECL
techniques that can be carried out using an ECL analyzer. These experiments are
being implemented in laboratory courses across our general chemistry and
analytical curriculum, including courses for non-science majors and courses
enrolling pre-service teachers. For example, in Fundamentals of Chemistry and in
Chemistry for the Citizen students study claims about the purity of bottled
water by determining the amount of copper in commercial water samples.
Therefore, this state of the art instrument makes it possible for students to
actually carry out environmental and water testing analyses. In Quantitative
Analysis ECL allows the incorporation of quality assurance/quality control and
regulatory issues into the undergraduate curriculum. Our goal is to have
students gain experience with ECL techniques, and develop an appreciation for
the applicability of these techniques to a wide range of problems. These
improvements also reflect modern analytical science and emphasize the
development of sound analytical technique while exposing students to the types
of problems dealt with by professionals in the real world. A secondary goal is
to modernize the undergraduate curriculum and to produce graduates who are
competent in the use of modern instrumentation. The ECL analyzer also is being
used in undergraduate research projects. Evaluation of the project will occur in
a number of ways, including pre-and post-exposure assessment in the affected
courses, and compilation of data from exit interviews with our senior majors.
Procedures for the new experiments will be made available on the internet, and
tested experiments will also be published in appropriate journals.