* 0124121
* Conference:  Variational Methods:  Open Problems, Recent Progress, and Numerical Algorithms, June 11-14, 2002, Northern Arizona University
* MPS,DMS
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2003
* John Neuberger, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 02/28/2003
* USD 10,000.00

0124121&lt;br/&gt;Neuberger&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will support a
conference on Variational Methods: Open &lt;br/&gt;Problems, Recent Progress,
and Numerical Investigations to be held &lt;br/&gt;June 11-14, 2001 at Northern
Arizona University in Flagstaff, Arizona. &lt;br/&gt;The term Variational
Methods in the title refers to a rich area of partial &lt;br/&gt;differential
equations and a family of methods historically used to &lt;br/&gt;investigate
them. Many famous mathematicians have made significant &lt;br/&gt;contributions
in the last century to this area, but it is widely held that the &lt;br/&gt;time
is ripe for a new round of discoveries to be made. Solutions of these
&lt;br/&gt;problems typically rely on tools from a wide range of mathematical
&lt;br/&gt;areas and potentially have a significant impact on the study of
important &lt;br/&gt;physical applications. The purpose of this conference is to
assemble as &lt;br/&gt;many experts as is possible in this research area, in
order to discuss and &lt;br/&gt;catalog the area's most important open
(unsolved) problems and the &lt;br/&gt;methods that might be used to attack
them. Numerical investigations &lt;br/&gt;(using a computer to visualize and
approximate solutions and their &lt;br/&gt;properties) are gaining respect in
the mathematical community, but their &lt;br/&gt;power is not yet fully
appreciated by many in the established research &lt;br/&gt;world, nor are they
yet accessible to many of those who do appreciate &lt;br/&gt;that power. This
modern approach will be integrated with traditional &lt;br/&gt;(non computer-
related) discussions via numerical lectures and hands-on
&lt;br/&gt;technological demonstrations. Special attention will be given to
physical &lt;br/&gt;applications, in order to facilitate our contributing to
real-world science &lt;br/&gt;and to provide a source of renewed inspiration for
our endeavors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The driving force for this conference is a
desire to produce a highly &lt;br/&gt;usable, in fact essential, reference for
those actively researching in the &lt;br/&gt;area and for young mathematicians
just starting their careers. Both &lt;br/&gt;groups will benefit greatly from
having a single succinct catalog of good &lt;br/&gt;research problems together
with an introduction to the most fruitful &lt;br/&gt;relevant mathematical tools
and an exhaustive bibliography. A publisher &lt;br/&gt;(American Mathematical
Society Journal of Contemporary &lt;br/&gt;Mathematics) has already
provisionally accepted a proposal for &lt;br/&gt;publishing this document. The
conference will encourage informal &lt;br/&gt;discussion about the future of our
field, the potential for it to make &lt;br/&gt;significant contributions to the
sciences, and how best to put all this &lt;br/&gt;information in a single
proceedings volume.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the discussed research
will be on nonlinear elliptic partial &lt;br/&gt;differential equations, a key
application of variational methods. &lt;br/&gt;Nonlinear equations in general
are vital to the description of physical &lt;br/&gt;phenomena, and elliptic
equations describe (roughly speaking) one third &lt;br/&gt;of these. The
efficient harvesting of biological mass, modeling of star &lt;br/&gt;birth and
death, and the fundamental equations governing quantum &lt;br/&gt;physics all
rely on elliptic equations. Significant progress in this research
&lt;br/&gt;area has the potential to make a real difference, scientifically and
&lt;br/&gt;economically, to the world at large. The aim is to trigger a vibrant
&lt;br/&gt;renewed surge of interest and effort towards solving these types of
&lt;br/&gt;problems. The conference and corresponding proceedings volume will
&lt;br/&gt;be of equal parts research and educationally oriented. Beginning
&lt;br/&gt;researchers will be exposed to research in mathematics to the
physical &lt;br/&gt;importance of the field, unsolved problems will be suggested
for their &lt;br/&gt;pursuit, and analytical and numerical tools essential to
that research will &lt;br/&gt;be introduced. These new researchers who attend
or, more generally, &lt;br/&gt;have access to the resulting proceedings volume,
will in the long run be &lt;br/&gt;the key contributors. The aim is to encourage
informal discussion, where &lt;br/&gt;real mathematics is done, but guide the
process with a focus on the &lt;br/&gt;ultimate goal of producing a cohesive
document.&lt;br/&gt;