* 0124591
* Biochemical Engineering XII
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2002
* Jay Keasling, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 05/31/2002
* USD 21,000.00

The Biochemical Engineering Conference serves as the premier meeting for the
Biochemical Engineering community. The focus of this Conference will include
important core areas of Biochemical Engineering (fermentation/cell culture and
downstream process development) as well as exciting new frontiers of Biochemical
Engineering (nanotechnologies, the "omics" of proteomics, genomics and
physiomics, marine and environmental biotechnology). The Conference will
illustrate how the same engineering fundamentals (unit operations, mass and
energy transport, thermodynamics, and kinetics) that form the basis of
traditional areas of Biochemical Engineering are being applied to drive advances
in both areas. In addition to the regular sessions, two workshops are planned. A
workshop entitled "Biochemical Engineering Education: fundamentals versus state-
of-the-art" will focus on the often-competing needs to incorporate engineering
fundamental into the curriculum as well as state-of-the-art applications. This
workshop will feature representatives from industry and academe. A second
workshop entitled "New Directions in Biochemical Engineering Research" will
focus on potentially new areas for research in Biochemical Engineering. The
discussion will have as panelists both academic and industrial representatives.
Each panelist will be asked to prepare a single transparency and speak for no
longer than 5 minutes. Following the presentations, input from the audience will
be requested. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;