* 0124714
* SGER:  The Elastic Moduli of Soils With Dispersed Oversize Particles
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* Luis Vallejo, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2003
* USD 66,227.00

To calculate the elastic deformation experienced by soils subjected to static or
dynamic loads, knowledge of the elastic moduli is required. Although the
response of soils to these kinds of loads may not be strictly represented as
linear elastic, solutions based on linear elastic behavior are commonly used for
the estimation of stresses or strains in the field. The elastic moduli are
normally evaluated in the laboratory using conventional triaxial compressive
tests on cylindrical samples. For meaningful test results, it is necessary to
maintain a ratio of sample diameter to the maximum particle size of
approximately 6:1 or greater. For the conventional triaxial specimen diameter of
2.8 in., the maximum grain size that can be tested is 0.5 in. Thus, when soils
are tested in the conventional triaxial apparatus, it is common practice to
remove "oversize" particles with an average diameter greater than 0.5 in.
Samples larger than 2.8 in. can be used in triaxial testing; however this
requires the use of large cells and large loading systems, making the tests too
expensive and time consuming to be used routinely.&lt;br/&gt; The removal of
material larger than 0.5 in. from the samples tested in the conventional
triaxial apparatus will provide unreliable elastic moduli values for the
calculation of stresses and deformations associated with civil engineering
projects built in soils with large rock particles (i.e. glacial tills, residual
and colluvial soils). This proposal presents a theoretical method developed by
Hashin that calculates the elastic moduli of a composite made of an elastic
material containing dispersed large rigid particles. The Hashin method requires
only knowledge of the elastic moduli of the matrix that surrounds the particles
coupled with the concentration by volume of the rigid large particles in the
composite in order to calculate the elastic moduli of the mixture. &lt;br/&gt;
The objective of this one year exploratory investigation is to assess the
validity of the Hashin method by conducting ultrasonic velocity tests on dry
mixtures of soils (clay, silt, and sand) and dispersed oversize particles
(gravel, glass beads, sands). Also, stress-strain curves reported in the
geotechnical literature obtained from conventional static triaxial compression
tests on laboratory prepared soils-large particles mixtures will be used to
obtain the static elastic moduli. Using the ultrasonic velocity measurements,
the laboratory dynamic elastic moduli will be obtained. Using the results from
triaxial compression tests, the static elastic moduli will be obtained. The
laboratory elastic moduli will be then compared with those predicted by Hashin's
theoretical method in order to assess its reliability.&lt;br/&gt; The results of
the exploratory research will be used as a basis to further explore the validity
of Hashin's method as it applies to soil-oversize particle mixtures having a
soil matrix with varying degrees of saturation and heterogeneity.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;