* 0124751
* 2001 TSE: NSF/EPA Partnership for Environmental Research: A Theoretical and Experimental Approach to Rapid Screening and Design of Secondary Refrigerants (TSE01-C)
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2001,10/31/2005
* Nikolaos Sahinidis, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 10/31/2005
* USD 424,560.00

Hydrofluorocarbon (HFC) emissions from the refrigeration and air conditioning
sector in the U.S. currently amount to approximately 13 million metric tons of
carbon equivalent (MMTCE). This number is expected to grow to 27 and 38 MMTCE in
2005 and 2010, respectively. Second only to automotive refrigeration systems,
retail food refrigeration accounts for 25% of these emissions: a typical
supermarket leaks about 1 ton of refrigerants every year.

Secondary refrigeration loops have the potential to reduce primary refrigerant
charges to as little as 10% of that required in a traditional refrigeration
system. Nonetheless, secondary refrigeration has found acceptance in only about
200 out of over 30,000 supermarkets and 300,000 convenience stores in the U.S.
With profit margins comparable to their electric bills, retail food enterprises
are concerned that secondary refrigerants may not be as energy-efficient as the
HFCs that are currently used in direct refrigeration. Improving the energy
efficiency in this sector is of government concern as well since the retail food
industry currently accounts for approximately 4% of electricity consumption in
the nation.

The primary goal of this project is to work towards addressing the following
questions: (a) What are the families of compounds that can act as secondary
refrigeration fluids? (b) What is the energy efficiency of these compounds and
how does it compare to that of the HFCs that are currently used in direct
refrigeration? (c) Are these compounds safe and environmentally benign?

Towards answering these questions, this project integrates theoretical and
experimental research that will: (1) develop a mathematical model which selects
the atomic composition of a refrigerant in such a way that environmental and
chemical constraints are satisfied while the energy efficiency, total warming
impact of the refrigerant life-cycle, and other economic and environmental
objectives are optimized; (2) devise an algorithmic procedure to solve the above
model in a way that overcomes the combinatorial difficulty of the problem as
well as difficulties associated with nonlinearities in property prediction
estimation techniques; (3) establish an experimental procedure for calibrating
the mathematical model through measurement of physical properties of potential
refrigerants; (4) verify experimentally the theoretical findings through
laboratory synthesis of compounds identified by the model and measurement of
their thermal transfer properties in actual refrigeration equipment.