* 0124445
* NSF/EPA Partnership for Environmental Research: New Methods for Carbon Dioxide Separation and Recovery [TSE01-F]
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Richard Noble, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Eric S. Peterson
* 08/31/2005
* USD 387,000.00

CTS-0124445&lt;br/&gt;New Methods for Carbon Dioxide Separation and Recovery
&lt;br/&gt;M. Rakowski DuBois and R. D. Noble&lt;br/&gt;University of Colorado,
Boulder, CO&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad
objective of this project is to develop an efficient electrochemical pumping
process for separating an acid gas from emission sources and concentrating it
for recovery and/or disposal. The electrochemical pumping approach is being
applied to the specific problem of removing and recovering CO2 from dilute gas
streams. The research activities include the identification and synthesis of
appropriate molecular carriers for CO2. Three different types of molecular-based
carriers for CO2, which differ in their advantages and disadvantages, are being
evaluated. In one approach, a redox-active quinone is reduced to produce a base
of sufficient strength to bind CO2 directly in absorption from the waste-stream
source. After CO2 is captured in this manner, the quinone-CO2 complex is
oxidized electrochemically to release concentrated CO2 and to regenerate the
oxidized form of the carrier. A second approach develops redox-active metal
complexes that function in a similar cycle with bicarbonate ion. These have the
advantage of being air-stable and water-soluble. A third approach investigates
quinone carriers that produce an electrochemically controlled pH swing. CO2 is
complexed at high pH by hydroxide ions generated by quinone reduction and
released at low pH produced by quinone oxidation. Work on each carrier system
includes electrochemical studies of the reaction-absorption rates and binding
constants of CO2 as functions of carrier oxidation state and studies of the
electrochemical-pumping systems to determine appropriate operating parameters,
characteristics of reproducibility and stability, and energy efficiencies. In
addition, process-modeling studies and investigations of absorption/desorption
and related mass transport phenomena are being carried out.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current CO2 concentrations in the atmosphere have
increased significantly from pre-industrial levels, and as the use of fossil
fuels continues, CO2 levels will continue to rise. In this scenario, climate
models predict a significant global warming with serious environmental impacts.
Efficient methods must be developed in which CO2 is captured and stored for
future use or sequestered in a stable form. The easiest point to capture CO2 is
from the waste streams of large producers such as power plants, chemical plants,
etc. before the CO2 is diluted by mixing with the atmosphere. It is estimated,
however, that with today's best technology the recovery of CO2 from the exhaust
of power plants will result in a 20-30% reduction in their overall efficiency.
Estimates based on prior research and modeling studies suggest that an
electrochemical pumping process with appropriate molecular carriers can be much
more efficient than current conventional approaches for CO2 recovery. As
appropriate carriers are developed, this process should find application in the
efficient removal of CO2 as well as other acid gases from waste streams of
industrial plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;