* 0124365
* SGER: Multiscale Simulation of Nanostructures: Nanocrystal Quantum Dots, Rods, and Tetrapods
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2001,10/31/2002
* Aiichiro Nakano, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Cyrus K. Aidun
* 10/31/2002
* USD 94,962.00

It is proposed to explore semiconductor nanocrystals such as quantum dots, rods
and tetrapods, as templates for self-assembled 3D architectures of themselves
and of core-shell nanocomposites . Multiscale simulations will be performed on
Cd-S, Cd-Se, Zn-S, Ga-As, and In-As and their core shell nanocomposites. The
relevant dimensional range in most cases will extend from the nanometer to the
continuum, or part of it. They will be accomplished by a seamless combination of
finite element continuum theories, molecular dynamics, and quantum mechanical
calculations. Successful three-dimensional accounts of the resulting space
distribution of atoms will yield a number of property and structural changes, at
both bulk and atomistic levels. Among others, they will bring out the effects of
nanocrystal size and shape, of organic molecules surface termination, and of
nanoindentation testing on tetrapods and their arrays. &lt;br/&gt; The
multimillion-atom multiscale simulation will be displayed and steered in an
immersive and interactive visualization program, its infrastructure being made
available by the State of Louisiana . The three PIs have already accumulated an
extensive practice with molecular dynamics applications (~10 million atoms). In
addition, the they have initiated a close cooperative collaboration with Dr.
Alivisatos' experimental program at the University of California- Berkeley.
There are also plans to offer a number of cross disciplinary courses, leading to
a dual-degree program ( physical/biological and computer sciences), to web-based
global courses and to mentoring activities.&lt;br/&gt; In summary, the PIs have
accumulated an extensive experience in the field of parallel multiscale
simulation, and have proceeded to obtain access to the corresponding high
performance hardware and software. This should give them now a chance to test
the behavior of a number of semiconductors, in a more diversified range of
circumstances. To explore such a promising possibility, it is recommended that a
one-year SCER award of $94,962 be granted, with a starting date of September 1,
2001.&lt;br/&gt;