* 0124186
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science:  Collision Dynamics of Nuclei with High Isospin Asymmetry
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2004
* ManYee Tsang, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 12/31/2004
* USD 36,000.00

0124186&lt;br/&gt;Tsang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a two-year
collaborative research project between Professor ManYee B Tsang at Michigan
State University and Professor Akira Ono of Tohoku University in Japan. The
researchers will undertake a study of collision dynamics of nuclei with high
isospin asymmetry. The focus of this project is the theoretical interpretation
of nuclear multifragmentation, a process that may provide insight into the
liquid-gas phase transition of nuclear matter and the equation of the state of
asymmetric nuclear matter. The first goal will be to study the role of symmetry
energy in the production of isotopes in heavy ion collisions. The second goal
will be to develop transport equations that accurately describe the isotopic
yields and to compare the predictions of these equations to a wide variety of
experimental data produced in central collisions. The third goal is to isolate
experimental signals that are especially sensitive to the non-equilibrium
aspects of the multifragment break up. Included in this latter effort will be
the study of processes such as the neck fragmentation, for example, that are
expected to be rather sensitive to the interplay between reaction dynamics and
fragment formation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project brings together the
efforts of two laboratories that have complementary expertise and research
capabilities. The Japanese scientists pioneered the development of the
Antisymmetrized Molecular Dynamics (AMD) Model and the U.S. scientists have
expertise in the development of Boltzmann-Uehling-Uhlenbeck (BUU) transport
equations. It is anticipated that the research will benefit the development of
quantal reaction models. Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this
project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international
understanding and cooperation. The project advances international human
resources through the participation of a postdoc and a graduate student. The
researchers plan to publish results of the research in scientific journals and
report on the findings at scientific meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;