* 0124972
* Experimental Investigations of the Dynamics of Thermochemical Boundary Layers in the Mantles of Terrestrial Planets
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Mark Richards, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2004
* USD 287,251.00

Manga 0124972

Heat and mass transfer across thermal and chemical boundary layers at the top
and bottom of the mantles of the terrestrial planets govern the chemical and
geodynamic evolution these planets. The dynamics of the top, lithospheric
boundary layers of terrestrial planets are dominated by multi-mode
(brittle/ductile) rheological behavior, e.g., plate tectonics on Earth and
immobile lithosphere on Mars, which are at least readily observed if not
completely "understood". Although deep mantle dynamics are less accessible to
observation, there are still seismological, mineral physics and geochemical data
that provide constraints on mantle dynamics. Near the core-mantle boundary, flow
probably involves both a thermal and chemical boundary layer.

Laboratory experiments can play an important role in treating problems involving
vigorous multi-component convection in which dynamical interactions across
continuous viscosity and density interfaces determine the flow. The
investigators will carry out a series of laboratory experiments aimed at
achieving a better understanding of the dynamics of mantle flow at the Earth's
core-mantle boundary. Over the course of the proposed work they will forge a
better fundamental understanding of thermochemical boundary layers in all
aspects of mantle convection.

The investigation will focus on two classes of experiments: (1) Basic studies of
thermochemical convection to elucidate the coupling of heat transfer and flow
across chemical boundary layers, quantify entrainment rates across viscosity
interfaces, and better understand the dynamics controlling the formation of
thermo-chemical plumes. (2) Focussed studies of plume/plate interactions using
controlled large-scale flow as a proxy for the effects of plate motions. The
investigators also plan to complement their laboratory experiments with
theoretical and 3-D numerical modeling studies. For the latter, the laboratory
experiments will form valuable benchmarks.