* 0124789
* TSE: Sustainable Composite Materials from Renewable Resources for Automotive Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2004
* Amar Mohanty, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jian Cao
* 08/31/2004
* USD 372,862.00

This NSF/EPA Technology for a Sustainable Environment project seeks to address
fundamental issues associated with replacing existing petroleum-based glass
fiber - polypropylene composites with eco-friendly, sustainable, bio-composites
from renewable resource-based natural/bio-fibers and bio-plastics for automotive
applications. The research will focus on: (1) innovative bio-fiber surface
treatments and the design of engineered natural fibers; (2) synthesis of
cellosic bio-plastics with acceptable mechanical properties; and (3) research
into the processing methods to produce void free bio-composites sheets for
stamping processes. The use of an electrical field during the processing
enhances control of fiber alignment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is expected that
this will result in a break-through process for the new generation of bio-
composites that is cost effective as well as environmentally friendly.
University - industry collaboration is expected to add knowledge of the material
and process engineering as well as to create a consciousness in designing value-
added composite materials from bio-resources for the automotive and
transporation industries. Knowledge gained from this research will enhance the
education of students and practitioners in engineering design as well as
manufacturing and production engineers concerned with environmentally benign
manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;