* 0124094
* Conference:  Chromatin Structure and Activity to be held January 26-31, 2002, in Santa Fe, New Mexico
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2002
* James Kadonaga, Keystone Symposia on Molecular and Cellular Biology
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Tornow
* 12/31/2002
* USD 8,000.00

The 2002 Keystone Symposium on "Chromatin Structure and Activity" will be held
January 26-31, 2002, in Sante Fe, New Mexico. The objective of this meeting is
to provide a forum for graduate students, postdocs and leading chromatin
researchers to interact and discuss the current status of the fiels. Many
exciting discoveries have revealed an intimate relation between chromatin
structure and transcriptional activity. Some transcriptional coregulators
function to modulate chromatin structure. Other coregulators catalyze reversible
chemical modifications of chromatin that enhance or repress gene expression.
Beyond the basic chromatin filament, higher-order chromatin structures are
involved in the regulation of enhancer activity and in global transcriptional
repression. In addition, new experimental approaches to the study of chromatin
structure and function are being devised. It is anticipated that current models
will be refined and, in some instances, disputed. In this manner, there will
emerge new concepts and ideas on the molecular mechanisms by which chromatin
functions in the cell. This project will provide funding for the participation
of graduate students, postdocs, and new independent investigators that lack
funding. Specific emphasis will be placed upon the financial support of
individuals from underrepresented racial/ethnic groups.