* 0124594
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Cranial Vault Modification in the Pre-Columbian Andes
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2002
* Phillip Walker, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 12/31/2002
* USD 7,172.00

The ability to effectively convey information about a person's social status is
fundamental to the creation of ethnic identities and social hierarchies. The
custom of cranial vault modification, permanently altering the head shape of
children to create social distinctions, was widespread among Native Americans
during the pre-conquest period. Analysis of this practice has the potential to
provide important insights into aspects of prehistoric social relations that are
available from no other source. In this Ph.D. dissertation research, the health
and social organizational correlates of cranial vault modification are analyzed
from a broad temporal and spatial perspective in the pre-Columbian Andes. This
work focuses on the social functions of cranial modification, both within and
between groups, and its relationship to the rise of social complexity in the
Andes. The goal of the research is to integrate physical anthropological and
archaeological data into an analysis that clarifies the social factors that
motivate body modification.

Collections were carefully selected to encompass a broad spectrum of social
systems. The research will include a large-scale survey of the cranial vault
modification exhibited by more than 2,500 pre-Columbian skulls from the Andes
housed in museums in the United States and Chile. The methods used in the
analysis follow the recommendations in the Standards for Data Collection from
Human Skeletal Remains. Analysis of cranial modification in a large number of
individuals from a variety of cultural contexts is a powerful tool for testing
hypotheses concerning the factors responsible for the development of socially
stratified societies. The bioarchaeological approach, with its emphasis on the
reconstruction of human behavior patterns and health status provides a direct
means through which theories of cultural complexity and the biological
consequences of inequality can be explored. The issues of social differentiation
and cultural complexity addressed in this research have many implications for
understanding the social relations of modern ethnic groups.