* 0124080
* U.S. - Bulgarian Cooperative Research:   Synthesis of Large Quantities of Conductive Nanoparticles. Possible Applications in Batteries
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/2002,09/30/2006
* Kenneth Klabunde, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 09/30/2006
* USD 42,870.00

This is a U.S.-Bulgarian cooperative research project that will focus on
synthesizing large quantities of conductive nanoparticles for possible
applications to battery technology. The principal investigators are Dr. Kenneth
Klabunde from Kansas State University and Dr. Iovka Dragieva from the Central
Laboratory of Electrochemical Power Sources in Sofia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers will devise strategies for the synthesis of large quantities of
conductive and semiconductive nanoparticies. The strategies will be based on two
approaches: 1) modified sol-gel/aerogel procedures employing metal alkoxide
molecular precursors leading to metal oxide nanoparticles, and conversation of
metal oxide nanoparticles to metal sulfide (or selenide or telluride)
nanoparticles by catalyzed solid-gas reactions and 2) borohydride reduction of
mixed metal salts to yield bimetallic metal particles and metal hydrides, and
metal vapor-solvent cocondensation to form nanocrystalline metals and
bimetallics. Through this research the researchers expect to discover and
develop better porous conducting materials for applications as electrodes in Li
ion batteries, metal-hydride batteries, and zinc-air
batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project in materials research fulfills the
program objectives of bringing together leading experts in the U.S. and
Central/Eastern Europe to combine complementary efforts and capabilities in
areas of strong mutual interest and competence on the basis of equality,
reciprocity, and mutuality of benefit.