* 0124653
* Bioinformatics Symposium:  Computer-based Medical Instrumentation and Information Technologies, Hartford, Connecticut, October 12, 2001
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Joseph Bronzino, Trinity College
* Standard Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 08/31/2002
* USD 5,000.00

0124653&lt;br/&gt;Bronzino&lt;br/&gt;Bioinformatics is a scientifically broad
discipline involving the use of computer technology to develop new medical
(virtual) instruments, create and protect computerized patient records, enhance
the operation of medical imaging systems, utilize artificial intelligence
techniques (i.e. expert systems, neural networks, etc.) to develop decision
support systems, create efficient and effective data mining and modeling
approaches, and use robotics in a host of medical applications. This field is
vast and it is difficult to cover all of the topics. Therefore, the Symposium is
to focus on computer-based instrumentation in medical systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objectives of the Bioinformatics Symposium
are:&lt;br/&gt;Present insights into the new research and development efforts
underway in virtual instrumentation, medical imaging and storage, and decision
support systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Present examples of successful
academic/industrial collaborations in these areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Provide
an opportunity for students in biomedical engineering, computer science and
health sciences to learn more about the field of
Bioinformatics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The convening of academic and industrial
professionals from the various disciplines involved in Bioinformatics at the
Symposium and associated Technology Fair will facilitate interdisciplinary and
inter-institutional collaborations in research and development efforts within
the realm of Bioinformatics. The Bioinformatics Symposium and associated
Technology Fair offers a timely opportunity to facilitate the development of
innovations in this emerging area of biomedical engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides support for the publication of printed
proceedings of the meeting.&lt;br/&gt;