* 0124361
* Near Field Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy - Applications to Ferroelectric Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Ram Katiyar, University of Puerto Rico
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/31/2003
* USD 40,000.00

This Small Grants for Exploratory Research (SGER) award will support a project
investigating the application of near-field enhanced micro-Raman Spectroscopy to
ferroelectric thin films. Micro-Raman spectroscopy has been shown to be a useful
tool for material characterization. However, in transparent ferroelectric thin
films grown on insulating substrates the Raman signal drops to undetectable
levels. In some materials the Raman signal can be enhanced through the use of
the surface enhanced Raman scattering effect (SERS). An attempt will be made to
create SERS conditions in thin ferroelectric films of interest by introducing
metallic (Au) nano-particles at the surface, the substrate interface, or within
the bulk of the films. A second method will employ a gold plated atomic force
microscope (AFM) tip to act as a single metallic particle placed on the back
side of a transparent substrate. This second method will also be explored as a
way to map out, on the nano-scale, properties of extended ferroelectric thin
films.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;Ferroelectric materials play a great role in many
technological applications. The next generation of advanced and compact
integrated electronics will require thin films of new classes of complex
electroceramic and other optoelectronic materials. Recent developments in
material processing and thin film fabrication techniques have made available
high quality thin films suitable for these applications. Ferroelectrics are a
class of electroceramics that offer a wide range of useful properties that could
be used to develop devices, such as smart sensors and structures, radiation-hard
non-volatile computer memories, and pyroelectric detectors. Successful
implementation of these devices will require materials with well-defined
properties and device figures of merit. Micro-Raman spectroscopy has emerged as
an excellent non-destructive tool for comprehensive materials characterization
by investigating the effects of size, stress/strain, temperature, pressure, and
electric field on the dynamic scattering behavior. To obtain Raman signals of
measurable strength from thin films, it is necessary to enhance the electric
field strength of the exciting radiation. The method of surface enhanced Raman
scattering (SERS) has proven to be extremely successful in applications to
macroscopic systems. The present exploratory research will investigate methods
of applying the SERS process to characterize ferroelectric thin films in the
nano-domain..&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;