* 0124648
* 2001 Technology for a Sustainable Environment:  Novel Hydrogen Reactor/Separator Design for a Fuel Cell Vehicle Infrastructure to Maintain a Sustainable Environment
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2003
* James Fenton, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas D. Frey
* 08/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

Technology for a Sustainable Environment: Novel Hydrogen Reactor/Separator
Design for a Fuel Cell Vehicle Infrastructure&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;James M.
Fenton&lt;br/&gt;University of
Connecticut&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
explores the merits of a new type of membrane for high-temperature hydrogen
purification so that pure hydrogen can be obtained directly from a hydrocarbon
steam reformer. The new membrane is fabricated from a class of ceramic compounds
called perovskites that can be formulated to be both electron and proton
conductors. These conductivities allow the hydrogen produced by the reforming
reaction to be converted to electrons and protons on one surface of the membrane
and converted to pure hydrogen on the other surface. In addition to producing
pure hydrogen for fuel-cell use, extracting the hydrogen directly from the
reformer shifts the reaction equilibrium to favor the formation of more
hydrogen. Samples of these membrane materials are being fabricated and their
properties determined for use in this application. Hydrogen permeability is
measured and calculations performed to design an integrated reformer-
purifier.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current proton-exchange-membrane fuel-cell
systems require a complex fuel processor containing several components to
produce a hydrogen gas of suitable purity for use in the fuel cell. This new
hydrogen reactor/separator provides a smaller, simpler fuel processor for use in
fuel cell systems. For on-board vehicular hydrogen production from gasoline,
fuel-cell-system power density will be increased, startup time and transient
thermal response will be improved, and cost reduced. Also, for either vehicles
or stationary power generation, this unit will allow use of the existing
natural-gas infrastructure for the formation of a hydrogen infrastructure
through a network of small, low cost natural-gas reformers. These advances could
have a significant impact on the rate of fuel cell commercialization to maintain
a sustainable environment. Pollution that now results from fuel combustion will
be prevented.&lt;br/&gt;