* 0124766
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Shelf-Basin Exchange of Biogenic Material Between the Chukchi and Beaufort Seas
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2007
* Scott Gallager, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 12/31/2007
* USD 556,434.00

Transfer of organic material and organisms from Arctic shelves to the deep
Arctic&lt;br/&gt;basin may impact significantly the biogeochemical
characteristics, and ecosystem&lt;br/&gt;function and structure, of both Arctic
basin and the Arctic shelf ecosystems. However,&lt;br/&gt;the physical and
biological processes influencing both the distribution of organisms
and&lt;br/&gt;biological material on the Arctic shelves and the potential input
of these materials into the&lt;br/&gt;Arctic Ocean and basin presently are
poorly understood. It is critical to increase&lt;br/&gt;understanding of the
biological-physical coupling in the shelf-slope region in order
to&lt;br/&gt;better predict the potential impact of large-scale changes in
climate on the Arctic&lt;br/&gt;ecosystem. The project will describe the role of
mesoscale physical processes in the&lt;br/&gt;exchange or transport of biogenic
material and plankton populations between the Chukchi&lt;br/&gt;Shelf and
neighboring Beaufort Sea as part of the Shelf Basin Interactions Phase II
field&lt;br/&gt;program (SBI). The proposed research has two distinct yet
interrelated components: 1) description of the abundance, taxonomic and size
composition of plankton and particles and aspects of behavior of plankton in
physical features at two locations along the Beaufort/Chukchi shelf break during
two July-August process cruises (2002 and 2004) using a Video Plankton Recorder,
2) a description of the abundance of zooplankton on the outer shelf and upper
slope and the mesoscale physical features that exchange water and biogenic
materials between the two regions over two annual cycles using the absolute
backscatter intensity data from an array of fourteen moored calibrated acoustic
Doppler current profilers.&lt;br/&gt;