* 0124838
* Grant for the support of US participants at the Banff International Research Station
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2006
* David Eisenbud, Mathematical Sciences Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2006
* USD 1,270,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0124838&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: David Eisenbud&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Banff International
Research Station (BIRS), supported by the&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical Sciences
Research Institute in Berkeley in&lt;br/&gt;collaboration with the Pacific
Institute of the Mathematical&lt;br/&gt;Sciences in Vancouver, Canada, will
provide an environment that&lt;br/&gt;optimizes creative interaction and the
exchange of ideas,&lt;br/&gt;knowledge and methods within the mathematical
sciences and with&lt;br/&gt;related sciences and industry. It is modeled on the
extremely&lt;br/&gt;successful European mathematics centers in Oberwolfach
and&lt;br/&gt;Luminy, and the US physics center in Aspen. It is
a&lt;br/&gt;collaborative Canada-US venture. BIRS will pursue an
extremely&lt;br/&gt;broad program, embracing all aspects of the
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;sciences, from the most fundamental work on the great
problems of&lt;br/&gt;algebra, geometry and analysis to modern pure and
applied&lt;br/&gt;mathematics, theoretical and applied statistics, financial
and&lt;br/&gt;industrial mathematics, the mathematics of information
technology&lt;br/&gt;and computer science, and bio-mathematics. Conferences on
math&lt;br/&gt;education, and Schools ranging in level from high-school
to&lt;br/&gt;postgraduate will also be regular features.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
conference center in Germany called Oberwolfach has played
an&lt;br/&gt;enormously important role mathematics for more than half
a&lt;br/&gt;century. Conferences there bring the greatest
mathematicians&lt;br/&gt;from around the world to Germany, and this flow of
people and&lt;br/&gt;ideas is often credited with aiding the quick recovery of
German&lt;br/&gt;mathematics from the devastation it suffered during the war.
It&lt;br/&gt;also helped by introducing generations of graduate students
to&lt;br/&gt;the great men in their fields and to each other. The
Oberwolfach&lt;br/&gt;model was so successful that the French eventually copied
it at&lt;br/&gt;the center in Luminy. Senior US mathematicians are
often&lt;br/&gt;visitors to these centers, but often graduate students
and&lt;br/&gt;younger mathematicians from the United States and Canada are
not&lt;br/&gt;invited, and there are many other ways in which those
centers&lt;br/&gt;benefit Europe much more than the US. The physics center in
Aspen&lt;br/&gt;has provided a resource for the US physics community that
has&lt;br/&gt;provided related services, and the mathematicians who happen
to&lt;br/&gt;have been involved have been impressed with what can be done
in&lt;br/&gt;this mode. It has long been a dream of North
American&lt;br/&gt;mathematicians to have a conference center of their own
that&lt;br/&gt;would provide similar opportunities here, and the goal of
the&lt;br/&gt;Banff International Research Station is to provide this
important&lt;br/&gt;resource for mathematics and related fields.