* 0124945
* HPNC:  Internet2 Connection for the University of Massachusetts Dartmouth's School for Marine Science and Technology
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2004
* Wendell Brown, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Gatchell
* 09/30/2004
* USD 159,548.00

The proposal plans to connect SMAST (School for Marine Science and Technology)
directly to the Northern Crossroads GigaPoP in Boston and then to the Abilene
Network in support of the following research and education
activities&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Become a major supplier and clearinghouse for
distributed data and information related to its programs in ocean environmental
observation/modeling and fisheries oceanography and management research.
C&lt;br/&gt;Collaborate more effectively with its Harvard University colleagues
on the development of data assimilation modeling system.&lt;br/&gt;Become more
actively engaged in the real-time exchange of large observational and model data
that accompanies our joint development of an Advanced Fisheries Management
Information System (AFMIS).&lt;br/&gt;Collaborate more effectively with
colleagues in (1) large eddy simulation modeling of coastal winter-mixed layer
evolution and (2) direct numerical simulation of ocean physical-biological
systems on a remote supercomputer.&lt;br/&gt;Collaborate more effectively in its
GLOBEC/Georges Bank studies on the relation of satellite-derived temperature
fields and biology.&lt;br/&gt;The establishment of an ACCESS GRID node would
establish reliable support for distributed (remote) research and education
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;Provide IGS/SMAST researchers and students with high-
speed access to the virtual libraries that are being built to augment
traditional libraries.&lt;br/&gt;Begin employing advanced visualization
technology to analyze and synthesize results