* 0124730
* TSE: Collaborative Research:  Environmentally Benign Manufacturing - Casting By Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2004
* Paul Steen, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jian Cao
* 09/30/2004
* USD 342,552.00

This National Science Foundation and Environmental Protection Agency
Technologies for a Sustainable Environment project proposes a new technology to
enable continuous casting of molten metals, in a single step, to the
specifications of the designer. Bessemer's vision (1865) of solidifying raw
material directly into final product, without downstream processing steps
(rolling, annealing), may now be realized for thin flat product, to marked
environmental advantage. To cast aluminum foil, e.g., in a single step, would
reduce CO2 emissions to the atmosphere by 250,000 tons per year, in the US
alone. Every kilogram of aluminum saved in reducing manufacturing waste
translates into electricity saved at the energy-hungry smelter. The technology
is based on controlling length scales previously inaccessible to control. The
idea is a marriage between laser and single-roll spin casting technologies. The
laser offers a unique way to bring energy into the zone of contact between
molten metal and substrate. The contact zone is a region of adverse conditions,
generally inhospitable to mechanical intrusion. Successful casting by design, or
tunable casting, will use laser energy to manipulate product quality. One
approach is to condition the substrate by imposing thermal gradients before the
contact zone. Grey-scales in ink-jet printing are produced by the spacing and
arrangements of ink dots of the same size. In much the same way, the proposed
gradients will be established with arrangements and spacing of hot spots. Laser
heating will induce the hot spots at fine scales.

This project will have significant societal benefits in reducing environmental
impact and energy consumption, as well as providing improved scaled-down
processing requirements for industry.