* 0124876
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Intraregional Interaction in the Mesa Verde Region, A.D. 1150-1300: Placing Emigration in its Social Context
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2003
* Keith Kintigh, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 12/31/2003
* USD 12,000.00

A century of research has focused on understanding the complete abandonment of
the Mesa Verde region of the American Southwest by A.D. 1300. Enormous efforts
have been devoted to reconstructing the prevailing environmental conditions and
to understanding where the Mesa Verde people went. However, a full understanding
of this dramatic abandonment requires knowledge of the relationships among
villages prior to and during the depopulation of this region. Existing data are
inadequate to assess these interactions. For this critical period (A.D.
1150-1300), this project investigates social interaction among villages using
evidence for economic cooperation, indicated by the exchange of pottery among
villages and the locations of communal and defensive buildings signifying
cooperation and conflict. The combination of ceramic exchange data and the
distribution of communal and defensive architecture provides a powerful means
for understanding the social processes at work during this otherwise well-
documented abandonment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF funding will permit the
chemical composition analysis of an additional 490 ceramic and clay samples from
nine sites using Instrumental Neutron Activation Analysis. With these samples,
it will be possible to reconstruct patterns of ceramic production and exchange
using a regional database comprising 1,041 ceramic and 60 clay samples from 18
sites. The grant would also fund the compilation of a regional database
documenting the geographic distribution of communal and defensive architecture
necessary for the assessment of the degree of cooperation and conflict among
villages. Both of these databases will provide critical data that will be made
accessible for and can be expanded by future research to further test
anthropological arguments about social dynamics. This study, conducted by Ms.
Donna Glowacki under the supervision of Dr. Keith Kintigh, will contribute to
understanding the effects of stress, such as drought and violence, on social
relationships prior to and during periods of large-scale
emigration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;