* 0124911
* Core Activities of the Board on Behavioral, Cognitive, and Sensory Sciences
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Christine Hartel, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Kellina Craig-Henderson
* 08/31/2009
* USD 350,000.00

This grant provides support for the core activities of the Board on Behavioral,
Cognitive, and Sensory Sciences at the National Academy of Sciences. The Board
responds to public policy needs that coincide with scientific developments in
the behavioral, cognitive, and sensory sciences. This Board will focus on
improving policy decisions by drawing together the collective expertise of
diverse fields of developmental psychology, social processes, perceptual and
sensory sciences, biopsychology and biotechnology, neuroscience and
computational sciences. A Board strengthens communications, broadens the
databases, and makes scientific information more accessible to wider audiences.
Board activities simultaneously improve research by probing issues from diverse
perspectives. Because distinguished scientists volunteer their services as
members of NAS-NRC Boards, such Boards become a mechanism for cross-fertilizing
disparate research domains to inform public policy. A Board directly benefits
science in a number of ways. Scientific disciplines, typically driven by the
issues and methods of their respective fields, have yielded increasing
productivity when jointly considering problems from an interdisciplinary
approach. However, the mission-orientation of most government agencies has
mitigated against mutually shared scientific planning. Thus, the benefits of
such a Board include: (1) providing linkages across federal agencies and the
separate behavioral, social, cognitive, sensory, and technology research
communities; (2) involving nationally-prominent academic scientists in
improvements and developments in the behavioral, cognitive, and sensory
sciences; (3) providing a forum for information exchange relating to science and
public policy; and (4) advancing behavioral, cognitive, and sensory sciences
within the NAS-NRC and through the Board's activities with Congress and the
diverse program offices and research programs across the federal complex.
&lt;br/&gt;