* 0124255
* 2001 Technology for a Sustainable Environment:  High Activity Catalysts for Carbon-Carbon Bond Formation in Water Based on Bulky Water-Soluble Alkylphosphines (TSE01-A)
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2004
* Kevin Shaughnessy, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 12/31/2004
* USD 346,250.00

The focus of this research is the development of highly reactive catalysts for
synthetically useful reactions such as the Heck, Suzuki and Buchwald-Hartwig
couplings. To this end, water-soluble alkylphosphines will be synthesized and
used in conjunction with aqueous-phase palladium-catalyzed coupling reactions.
These reactions efficiently provide structures of interest in areas ranging from
pharmaceuticals and agricultural chemicals to electronic materials and commodity
chemicals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this new NSF/EPA Technology for a
Sustainable Environment (TSE) award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry
Program and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the Directorate of
Mathematics and Physical Sciences are supporting the research efforts of Dr.
Kevin H. Shaughnessy of the Department of Chemistry at the University of
Alabama, Tuscaloosa. Professor Shaughnessy will focus his research on developing
methodology for the use of a new class of sterically demanding, water-soluble
alkylphosphines in palladium-catalyzed C-C and C-heteroatom bond forming
reactions using environmentally benign aqueous solvent. Adoption of this
methodology by industry could result in the decrease of hazardous waste
generation, decrease in energy consumption and decrease in the use of volatile
organic solvents. The undergraduate, graduate and post-doctoral students working
on this project will gain a fundamental education in organic and organometallic
chemistry and approaches to developing environmentally benign chemical
reactions.