* 0124936
* Structure of Liquid Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Peter Pershan, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 06/30/2005
* USD 356,350.00

This project focuses on synchrotron generated x-ray scattering using the
National Synchrotron Light Source (NSLS) at Brookhaven National Laboratory and
the Advanced Photon Light Source (APS) at Argonne National Laboratory to study
the structural properties of thin liquid layers and related novel liquid
surfaces. The structure and fluctuations of a thin liquid wetting layer that
forms on various substrates will be characterized by x-ray specular
reflectivity, off specular diffuse scattering and grazing incidence diffraction.
A unique feature is that some of the wetting will involve the wetting of one
liquid by a separate immiscible liquid. Solvation of selected nano-particles in
these thin layers, accompanied by control of the thickness of the liquid, will
make it possible to the study how 2-dimensional (2D) mesoscopic arrays form on
deposition from solution. In addition, the interactions between thin wetting
liquids and nano-scale structures on Si surfaces, and the manner in which alkane
chains tethered to nano-particles order as the density of the nano-particles
change will be investigated. A second benefit expected from this project, in
addition to the expected scientific knowledge, is that new young researchers
will be trained to carry out cutting edge research using these precious national
synchrotron facilities. In addition, researchers participating in this grant
will participate in the ongoing educational outreach activities at Harvard (see
http://www.mrsec.harvard.edu/education.html) for example, the Research
Experiences for Teachers program (RET) that makes it possible for teachers from
local-area K-12 schools to participate in
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the structure and related physical
properties of liquid surfaces and thin liquid films are important for a variety
of processes that include lubrication, adhesion, catalysis, painting, and
coatings. In addition, the experimental and theoretical study of wetting
phenomena is contributing significantly to the current understanding of
fundamental problems in statistical physics. For example, studying the wetting
of substrates with nano-scale inhomogeneities is important for developing a
technologically promising microprinting method for the production of nano-scale
structures. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;