* 0124167
* Dissertation Research: Ch'orti' Verbal Art and the Poetic Discourse Structures of Maya Hieroglyphs
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2003
* Brian Stross, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Cecile Mckee
* 01/31/2003
* USD 10,322.00

Under the direction of Dr. Brian Stross, Mr. Kerry Hull will collect data for
his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct linguistic research on the Ch'orti'
Maya language spoken in Guatemala. This language is the closest direct
descendent of the language comprising most Maya hieroglyphic inscriptions.
Hull's year of fieldwork in Ch'orti'-speaking communities will involve
participant observation of oral recitation, direct elicitation, and recording
through audio media of healing, agricultural, and other ceremonies. The
transcriptions of ceremonies and oral traditions will then form the basis for
analytic discussions with native speakers to flesh out critical details and
opaque allusions in these ancient forms of expression. The results will then be
compared to features found in the Maya hieroglyphic script with intent of
correlating the poetic discourse forms and archaic metaphorical references in
Ch'orti' with those of its ancestral language in the Maya hieroglyphic
inscriptions. At the present stage of decipherment of Maya hieroglyphic writing,
a large number of expressions can be read syllabically without a full
understanding of their metaphorical or ritual meaning. Ch'orti's linguistic
affinity to the language of the Maya hieroglyphic inscriptions suggests both
languages may also share similar poetic structures and archaic formalized
expressions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The significance of this research is twofold.
First, the project will directly benefit the ongoing decipherment of the Maya
hieroglyphic script. The data gathered from living Ch'orti' speakers will also
form the most thorough study so far of the poetic styles of Ch'orti' ritual
speech. Hidden within such speech are vestiges of ancient cultural conceptions
and metaphorical imagery that will inform research on the language, cultural
conceptions, and ritual practices of the ancient Maya. The Ch'orti' data will
provide a basis for analyses of stylistically similar ritual forms found in Maya
hieroglyphic inscriptions. This aspect of the study will carry the discussion of
Maya hieroglyphic writing beyond grammar and vocabulary, showing that this
writing system is complex in other domains as well. Second, this project will
preserve the currently disappearing forms of poetic speech and ritual knowledge
among the Ch'orti'. This documentation will be useful both for future
generations of Ch'orti'-speakers and also for scholars of Latin American
studies, history, epigraphy, archaeology, anthropology, linguistics,
ethnopoetics, and ethnography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;