* 0124763
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Mesozooplankton-Microbial Food Web Interactions in the Western Arctic Shelf &amp; Basin Regions
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2008
* Carin Ashjian, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 01/31/2008
* USD 310,000.00

A central goal of the Shelf-Basin Interactions (SBI) program is to understand
the processes affecting carbon transformations and fluxes within and between
Arctic shelf and basin ecosystems, and how climate change might impact these
processes. The cycling of carbon in Arctic shelf and basin habitats depends on
the structure and functioning of both micro- and meso- zooplankton acting as
significant consumers of primary production. The partitioning of primary
production between the fractions remaining in the water column or accumulating
to the seafloor (where organic matter is less available for export from the
shelf) can be greatly affected by the relative grazing rates of microzooplankton
versus mesozooplankton herbivores. Microplankton grazing dampens export flux,
while mesozooplankton grazing enhances it. The primary focus of this project is
an analysis of the impact of microzooplankton and mesozooplankton grazers on the
fluxes and exchanges of carbon within the oceanic waters of the Canada Basin and
the shelf waters of the Chukchi/Beaufort Seas. This study will explicitly
address trophic linkages previously unexplored in this region of the Arctic. The
hypothesize is that changing ecosystem structure resulting from climate change
will alter the role of these trophic interactions in the utilization and cycling
of carbon in arctic shelves and basin systems. This project will provide rate
measurements for microzooplankton and mesozooplankton grazing and reproduction,
parameters that are a high priority for the seasonal process cruises in the SBI
project.