* 0124053
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science:  Mean-Field Approach to Collective Excitations in Unstable Medium-Mass and Heavy Nuclei
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Witold Nazarewicz, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 12/31/2005
* USD 30,000.00

0124053&lt;br/&gt;Nazarewicz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a three-
year collaborative research project between Professor Witold Nazarewicz at the
University of Tennessee and Professor Kenichi Matsuyanagi of Kyoto University in
Japan. The researchers will undertake a study of the mean-field approach to
collective excitations in unstable medium-mass and heavy nuclei. The focus of
the research is in those aspects of nuclear structure physics which are of
highest priority in the community: 1) radioactive nuclear beam physics which
will access nuclei at the limits of stability around the proton and neutron drip
lines, and 2) gamma ray spectroscopy which accesses discrete nuclear states in
rapidly rotating nuclei up to the fission limit. The intent is the further
development of techniques that can treat the special properties of weakly bound
nuclei, where the Fermi energy is close to zero. Hartree-Bogolyubov (HFB)
programs that include unbound states are needed. Current programs that include
the continuum states are usually restricted to spherical shapes. The proposal
will continue the development of HFB programs that include non-spherical shapes
as well as the continuum states. This is necessary for a more realistic
description of nuclei around the neutron drip line. An interesting possibility
of different shapes for neutrons and protons, including neutron halos, can then
be investigated. The development of the program will permit investigation of
double beta decay, which has fundamental interest not only to nuclear physics,
but also particle physics and astrophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
brings together the efforts of two laboratories that have complementary
expertise and research capabilities. The research addresses a number of
questions that are of great importance for Japanese and U.S. low-energy nuclear
structure communities. The number of nuclear structure theorists in the U.S. and
Japan is small and the groups are isolated. The project will offer a good
opportunity to join efforts between the two countries. Through the exchange of
ideas and technology, this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and
promote international understanding and cooperation. The project advances
international human resources through the participation of postdocs and a
graduate student. The researchers plan to publish results of the research in
scientific journals and report on the findings at scientific
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;