* 0124237
* 2001 Technology for a Sustainable Environment: Toxic and Nutrient Pollution Prevention in the Chesapeake Bay Using Anion Binding Polymeric Hydrogels (TSE01-C)
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Peter Kofinas, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Eric S. Peterson
* 08/31/2005
* USD 238,250.00

CTS- 0124237&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Toxic and Nutrient Pollution Prevention by Use
of&lt;br/&gt;Anion Binding Polymeric Hydrogels&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Peter
Kofinas, University of Maryland&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Methods
that will effectively remove nutrient and toxic anion pollutants even at
extremely low concentrations from wastewater effluents are a major environmental
need. This work develops an approach that introduces novel crosslinked cationic
polymeric materials for removal of such anions from aqueous waste streams.
Phosphate, nitrate, and perchlorate-binding polymeric amine hydrogels are being
synthesized using various crosslinkers. Their morphology is being characterized
by use of atomic force microscopy, and the rate of anion transport as well as
anion-binding capacity of these hydrogels is being optimized though testing in
various wastewater conditions in batch experiments and lab-scale packed column
systems. An economic evaluation of the cost to produce bulk quantities of the
polymers will be developed, and the possibilities for adsorbent regeneration or
disposal will be explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has local and
regional significance within the vicinity of the Chesapeake Bay, but it also
addresses national issues important to environmental managers and the general
public concerned with the eutrophication of aquatic ecosystems. Missile
propellants containing toxic perchlorate anions and poultry farms and
aquaculture facilities which discharge nutrient pollutants to natural waters
pose a serious pollution problem. The ability of the proposed hydrogels to bind
phosphates, nitrates, and perchlorates from such effluents may lead to a cheap
and efficient way to remove nutrient and toxic anions in wastewater-generating
systems before the water is discharged and to control pollution at the source
for some of the most difficult environmental problems facing the U.S.
&lt;br/&gt;