* 0124013
* ACS Polymer Division Symposium "Nobel Laureates in Polymer Chemistry"; Chicago, IL; August 27, 2001
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2002
* Kenneth Wynne, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2002
* USD 3,000.00

This award provides support of the ACS Polymer Division symposium Nobel
Laureates n Polymer Chemistry, to be held on Monday, 27 August 2001 at the
National ACS Meeting in Chicago, Illinois. These funds will be used to
facilitate attendance of 1 young faculty member and 3 graduate
students/postdocs.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The 2000 Nobel Prize in Chemistry was
won by Professors Hideki Shirakawa (Tskuba University), Alan MacDiarmid
(University of Pennsylvania), and Alan Heeger (UC California, Santa Barbara). In
the Nobel laureates in Polymer Chemistry Symposium, the winners of the 2000
Nobel Laureates in Polymer Chemistry Symposium, the winners of the 2000 Nobel
prize in Chemistry will give lectures in the exact order of their Nobel
addresses that were given in Stockholm in December 2000. This Symposium is
scheduled for Monday, 27 August 2001 at the Chicago ACS Meeting. To recognize
the importance of international interdisciplinary research in polymer science
and the longstanding research collaborations with Japanese polymer scientists,
The Society of Polymer Science of Japan (SPSJ) was asked to "cosponsor" the
"Nobel Laureates in Polymer Chemistry symposium" and has responded
enthusiastically. The President of SPSJ, Professor Tisato Kajiama (Fukuoka
University), will give opening remarks highlighting the close friendships and
research collaborations of U.S. and Japanese polymer scientists. Industrial
participation in this symposium includes a talk by a research leader and session
chairing by key industrial technology managers who are involved in transitioning
basic research into conducting polymer and optoelectronic
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;