* 0124610
* The University of Florida Conference on Theoretical Immunology (UFCTI-2002), May 23-25, 2002, Gainesville, FL
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2003
* Sergei Pilyugin, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 05/31/2003
* USD 11,000.00

Pilyugin 0124610 The investigator and his colleagues organize a conference on
theoretical immunology. The field of theoretical immunology has become a
prominent direction in biomathematics and it concerns mathematical modeling of
the biocomplexity in the immune system, and more specifically the generation of
immune responses to infections, generation and maintenance of immune memory,
understanding the mechanisms that govern persistent infections, designing
optimal strategies for antibiotic treatment of infectious diseases, and vaccine
development. The main goals of this conference are to advance the interaction
between theoretical and experimental directions of immunological research and to
facilitate a better communication between science and medicine. The conference
focuses on modern approaches to mathematical modeling of immune processes using
differential equations and dynamical systems, game theory, mathematical
statistics, stochastic processes and computer simulations, as well as
mathematical algorithms for data mining and data fitting. The conference
features lectures by prominent scientists on fundamental results in the field as
well as reports on work in progress. A special session is devoted to the
discussion of new directions and most significant problems of theoretical
immunology in the near future. The immune system is our primary defense against
viruses and infections. Theoretical immunology is a relatively young field of
science that deals with theoretical modeling of interactions between immune
system and invading parasites. Mathematical and computer models are used to
unify our understanding of the extremely complex functioning of the immune
system. Such theoretical models allow scientists to sort through the growing
wealth of experimental and clinical data and extract fundamentally important
features of immunity, design new experiments, and optimize the performance of
drugs and vaccines. The meeting aims to bridge the gap between theoretical and
experimental biology and medicine and advance the theory of immune processes to
address the current needs of medicine and biotechnology. The conference has an
educational impact by exposing younger researchers and graduate students to the
present challenges in immunology and facilitating their future scientific
careers.

