* 0124841
* Pikuni Integration of Instructional Technology into Academics
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2001,12/31/2006
* Debra Davis, Blackfeet Community College
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jody Chase
* 12/31/2006
* USD 2,461,249.00

Native Americans continue to be vastly underrepresented in the SMET fields,
especially in Information Technology disciplines, and as educators (NCES, 1998).
This proposal seeks to address the chronic underrepresentation of American
Indian graduates in SMET education in a variety of ways. The primary goals of
the proposal are: a) to increase the enrollment of Native American students into
SMET disciplines, b) increase the numbers of Native American graduates from SMET
fields, especially in education, c) develop the SMET research infrastructure at
Blackfeet Community College, and d) build up the Information Technology program
at Blackfeet College as the funding force behind the first two goals. Several
objectives will be implemented as these goals are realized. New SMET faculty
positions will be created and funded in part through the proposal. The
collaborative ties between Blackfeet Community College (BCC), and Montana State
University-Northern will be strengthened. These two partners will develop a
joint curriculum in Information Technology that is friendly to Native American
students. The Information Technology degree program at BCC will be enhanced with
new courses, new capabilities, and additional personnel. Professional
development activities will be conducted for the entire BCC faculty for the
purpose of integrating IT across the curriculum. Key SMET programs at BCC, such
as the Ethnobotanical Greenhouse, the Weather and Water Lab, and the DNA Mapping
Lab, will be targeted as IT supported research areas, and student interns will
be funded to help with the research. Research internships will also be set up at
MSU-Northern for American Indians who transfer into baccalaureate degree
programs in SMET and IT education. A series of Summer Session BRIDGE activities
for Blackfeet Reservation high school and college students will be jointly
hosted by BCC and MSU-Northern at the MSU-Northern campus in Havre. This is an
ambitious project that will serve as a model for others who desire to use some
or all of the various activities that this proposal will
encompass.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIITA project will be a five year, $2
million dollar effort that will significantly impact the numbers of American
Indian students graduating with SMET related degrees. Specifically, the project
staff will assist at least 30 American Indian students to graduate with
baccalaureate degrees in SMET fields of study, with an emphasis toward IT and
education, during the next five years. These graduates will effectively raise
the pool of American Indian IT educators in Montana by 500 percent or
more.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal has provisions for retaining an external
evaluator, and nominal support for an advisory committee. The eight member
advisory committee will be recruited from educators and administrators from BCC,
MSU-Northern, school disricts in the Blackfeet Reservation area, other Montana
tribal colleges, and from the Blackfeet Community. The evaluator and the
committee will meet quarterly with the project PI's.