* 0124131
* SGER: Phylogency, Reproductive Mode, and Parasitism in Antarctic Cidaroid Sea Urchins
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2002
* John Pearse, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 09/30/2002
* USD 16,000.00

The origin of Antarctic biota remains uncertain. Shallow-water, circum-antarctic
habitats have been isolated from the rest of the world since Antarctica
separated from Australia forty million years. With the separation of Antarctica
from South American 25 million years ago, and the inception of the Antarctic
Circumpolar Current and the Polar Frontal zone, the isolation of the Antarctic
biota from the rest of the world's oceans was nearly complete. The exception is
the deep sea, which is replenished by cold, sinking Antarctic bottomwater. Many
Antarctic species are endemic with apparent affinities to species in the deep
sea. A major question about the Antarctic biota is whether deep-sea organisms
invaded and radiated into the Antarctic benthos after it was isolated and cooled
or the Antarctic biota is a refugium and/or source of deep-sea organisms and
Antarctic species invaded the deep sea. This research will focus on cidaroid sea
urchins, as part of an international Antarctic deep-sea biodiversity program to
be conducted on the German Antarctic program's research vessel Polarstern. The
cruise will be conducted in the Scotia and Weddell Seas. Material collected from
the Antarctic shelf to the floor of the adjacent deep sea will form the basis
for a phylogenetic analysis to help resolve origin of this group of organisms.
Studies will also include a focus on larval development, which is unknown in
some species. Finally, an examination of a fungus-like parasite which occurs on
the spines of some species of Antarctic cidaroids, will be conducted in order to
place this parasite into a recognized higher taxonomic category, and to open the
possibility for understanding how it influences echinoid development. This
project will provide new information on a understudied part of the world's ocean
and will contribute to the study of the world's biodiversity.