* 0124006
* Real-time Monitoring of Polymerization Reactions: Part II
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/2001,11/30/2006
* Wayne Reed, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 11/30/2006
* USD 262,444.00

This project will continue work on developing equipment and methodology to
monitor complex polymerization reactions in real time. Such a capability could
benefit both academic and industrial scientists nd engineers. At the fundamental
level, polymer chemists can immediately observe the effects of different
synthetic strategies, monomers, initiators, and other factors and how they
influence kinetics and ploymer properties. This could advance the discovery of
new materials. Industrial researchers could use it as a tool for pilot plant
optimization of industrial processes. One goal of the work is to apply the
methodology to full scale industrial reactors, integrated into a feedback loop
than can control reactions. This in turn could lead to better uses of non-
renewable resources, reactor and personnel time, conserve energy, lead to less
pollution, and enhance product quality. The fundamental work to be done is
threefold: 1) Extension of the PI's "Automatic, Continuous Monitoring of Polymer
Reaction" or "ACOMP" to copolymerization, controlled radicl polymerization, and
emulsion polymerization. This includes development of instrumentation, software,
theory, and kinetic modeling to deal with these complex reactions. 2) Further
develop and use associated, automated equilibrium characterization and modeling
techniques for to the behavior of the polymers whose growth was monitored. This
includes auto-assocition, and interactions in multi-component solutions; e.g.
those involving polymer, solvent, micelles and slts. 3) Introduction o
simultaneous multiple sample light scattering to high throughput screening in
polymerization and other polymer-based kinetic processes. It is expected that
this portion will provide new tools for polymer discovery and synthesis. The
project has potential infrastructure benefits in that students trained in
developing this methodoloty would be of great use to industry.