* 0124768
* WORKSHOP:  PRISM Symposium on Integration, Networking, and the Next Decade; August 9-11, 2001; West Lafayette, Indiana
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2002
* Shimon Nof, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Janet M. Twomey
* 06/30/2002
* USD 5,000.00

This symposium's primary objective is to identify research issues that transform
the traditional industrial engineering environment to a new kind of industrial
engineering work and services considered as e-Work. The scope of e-Work includes
the collaborative computer-supported activities and communication-supported
operations in highly distributed organizations of humans and/or robots or
autonomous software agents such as agent-based manufacturing, workflow and
enterprise modeling, and middleware development. The premise is that without
effective e-Work, the potential of emerging electronic work activities such as
virtual manufacturing, e-supply chain, and e-commerce cannot be competitively
materialized. This award provides partial support of the symposium and
participants' expenses during a two and one half day workshop at Purdue
University on the past, present, and next frontier in the research direction of
Production, Robotics, and Integration Software for Manufacturing/Management
(PRISM). This meeting will bring together previous and current PRISM
researchers, industry practitioners who have experience in computer-oriented
collaborative work, and sponsors who have implemented enhanced technologies to
compare ideas, experiences, and challenges.

The workshop will develop research guidance by survey review of previous and
current research and through panel discussions on advanced production research
for the next decade. The aim is towards solutions in seven areas: (1)
engineering and design collaboration, (2) distributed models of networked
enterprises, (3) assembly and inspection technology, (4) agent-based
manufacturing and service systems, (5) electronic commerce and enabling
technologies, (6) web-based human and computer interaction, and (7) information
assurance for the above areas. The results and proceedings will benefit
researchers at the Purdue PRISM Lab and at other universities by developing and
sharing new advanced production research models and by providing a forum for
researchers to discuss, exchange, and plan their discoveries.