* 0124179
* Multicomponent Diffusion and Speciation Reactions of Major Melt Components, High Field Strength Elements, and Ligands in Haplogranite Melt
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* David London, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2005
* USD 389,188.00

London &amp; Dewers&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0124179&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three projects
will assess or utilize mass transport by diffusion in silicate melts to better
understand the properties of granitic liquids. In Project I, we will complete a
self-consistent thermodynamic, kinetic, and transport model for the
crystallization of water-bearing granite melts under near- and far-from-
equilibrium conditions. The mathematical algorithms are now mostly developed,
and we have recently completed a large number of &lt;br/&gt;experiments that
provide constraints on the kinetics of crystallization in the granite system.
Project II addresses a simple but intriguing question, namely how do granitic
melts become homogeneous by diffusion through the melt (i.e., once eutectic
grain-boundary contacts are lost)? Preliminary experiments indicate that rapid
diffusion of alkalis promotes the attainment of an equilibrium proportion of
alkali feldspar components throughout the melt, and that mixing then occurs
between this alkali feldspar component and silica derived from the melting of
quartz. Project III will address longstanding presumptions about the
relationships among ore-forming metals (e.g., Nb, Ta, Sn, W, Zr, Hf, and REE)
and potential ligands (halogens F, and Cl, and oxyanions of H, B, P). Not only
will the case for speciation be tested, but the stoichiometry of the probable
melt species, along with their diffusion coefficients, will be derived. The
results of Project III will elucidate the extent to which anions other than
oxygen enhance or &lt;br/&gt;decrease the solubility of ore-forming metals in
melt.&lt;br/&gt;