* 0124198
* Program for Persons with Disabilities - PPD: RASEM Squared: Advanced Regional Alliance of Science, Engineering, and Mathematics for Students with Disabilities
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2001,07/31/2008
* William McCarthy, New Mexico State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Mark Leddy
* 07/31/2008
* USD 4,141,269.00

Proposal # HRD-0124198&lt;br/&gt;Institution: New Mexico State
University&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigators: William McCarthy and Ed
Misquez&lt;br/&gt;Title: RASEM Squared&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&g
t;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New Mexico State University will be the lead
institution for a Regional Alliance for Students with Disabilities in Science,
Mathematics, Engineering, and Technology (SMET). The project, entitled RASEM
Squared (or RASEM 2), is based on the successes of an earlier project named
RASEM (Regional Alliance For Science, Engineering, and Mathematics for Students
with Disabilities) funded by NSF. The project's primary goal over the five years
of the program is to increase the number of students with disabilities who
graduate with baccalaureate degrees leading directly to graduate training or to
employment in their desired fields. To achieve these goals, RASEM 2 is
instituting a comprehensive educational approach composed of six innovative
actions, five previously field-tested by RASEM and an additional one that
prepares faculty for full participation of students with disabilities in SMET
curricula. The actions will affect students throughout the education continuum
from K-12, through community colleges, and to universities in New Mexico and far
west Texas. The six actions are: 1. Hands-on science experiences in pre-college
science education environments. 2. Formal research experiences as undergraduates
and graduates. 3. Preparation of faculty for full participation of students with
disabilities in a SMET curricula. 4. Bridge programs between academic levels. 5.
Mentoring by successful SMET professionals and SMET students with disabilities.
6. Securing co-op, summer internships, and professional employment. Each of the
six actions will be evaluated using outcome measures that provide evidence of
the program's efficacy. &lt;br/&gt;The RASEM 2 Alliance is made up of numerous
entities in New Mexico (seventeen 2-year community colleges, six 4-year colleges
and universities, and nine school district regional center cooperatives) and
West Texas (two universities and two educational service centers representing
school districts). The Alliance also includes two national laboratories, the
statewide agencies serving people with disabilities, and a national organization
for the advancement of science. These entities are located in a region that has
a broad spectrum of culturally diverse, economically impoverished constituencies
of students with disabilities and student families. RASEM 2 project coordinators
in three sub-regions will work to strengthen existing ties (or develop new ones)
with public schools in their areas. They will facilitate efforts to provide a
bridge between public schools and higher education institutions and promote
summer programs in their geographical areas. &lt;br/&gt;