* 0124965
* Hf-isotopes in Ocean Island Basalts and Meteorites
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2004
* Vincent J. Salters, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 11/30/2004
* USD 144,944.00

Salters&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0124965&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on
Hf-isotope studies of ocean island basalts (OIB) and meteorites with the goal of
characterizing the mantle and understanding how heterogeneities (metasomatic
component, subducted components etc.) are mixed back into the ambient mantle.
The terrestrial variation in Hf and Nd isotopes indicates that the Lu-Hf and Sm-
Nd system are well correlated and regression of the array leads to eHf = 1.35
?eNd + 3 eHf. I propose to test this excellent correlation between Nd and Hf
isotopic compositions by analyzing materials from "extreme" isotopic or trace
element environments. The Hf and Nd isotope systematics will provide interesting
and powerful information in places where the Nd and Hf systems are differently
correlated. Lu-Hf-Sm-Nd characteristics of pelagic sediments, oceanic crust as
well as carbonatites imply evolution lines that have a different slope than the
terrestrial or ocean basalt array. These distinctive trace element and Hf-Nd
isotopic characteristics allows for relatively easy recognition of these
components in oceanic basalts as well as good estimates on the duration of
isolation of these components (mantle heterogeneity). The fact that the oceanic
island basalt array is so well defined indicates that processes or components
that would move mantle compositions off the array are either insignificant in
volume or are mixed back in on relatively short timescales. A first step towards
understanding these mixing processes is recognition of the different type of
materials (pelagic sediment, oceanic crust etc) and processes (melting,
metasomatism etc) in the sources of the basalts. I propose to obtain Hf-isotope
data for basalts from the Samoan Island chain, from Koolau volcano, Hawaii, and
from Walvis Ridge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A second component of the project is
the determination whether Lu/Hf-Sm/Nd fractionation in chondrites is
significantly different then the time integrated fractionations in earth as
observed by the terrestrial array. Presently there are three different estimates
for the isotopic composition of bulk Earth in Hf-Nd-isotope space. The available
data indicate that Hf and Nd isotopic compositions of meteorites are correlated
and that the meteorite array is at sharp angle with the OIB array. I propose to
analyze a suite of meteorites for Hf and Nd isotopic composition and thereby
better define the meteorite array.&lt;br/&gt;