* 0124926
* A Comprehensive Study of Shear-Wave Splitting and Related Signals Using the Chi-Chi Earthquake Sequence
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Ta-liang Teng, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2004
* USD 163,929.00

This is a seismological study of shear-wave splitting in the source volume of
the large Mw 7.6 Chi-Chi, Taiwan, earthquake of 1999. The study also
investigates the guided fault zone waves, and non-linear wave propagation
effects in damaged fault zone rock, using one of the best data sets in the world
in a region of high natural seismicity. A comprehensive measurement is carried
out on the stress-induced crustal anisotropy, augmented by other possible
signatures of damaged fault zone material, and the project also evaluates the
relationship of observations with (therefore predictive potential of) the
occurrence of great earthquakes. The extensive data set is used that has been
collected by the Taiwan Central Weather Bureau Seismic Network (CWBSN) from 1990
to 2000. Rigorous tests are conducted on the correlation of shear-wave splitting
and on other signals with regional crustal stress variations and lapse time
before and after the Mw 7.6 event. This data set extends back to 1970, providing
a 30-year seismic database for monitoring the bulk crustal properties before,
during, and after the Chi-Chi earthquake sequence. The CWBSN operates a network
of more than 650-station (at 5-km station spacing) of 3-component, large dynamic
range, and broadband accelerographs and a network of 75-station 3-component
high-gain short-period seismometers. Thousands of M &gt; 3 events from the
middle-lower crust have been beautifully recorded with excellent S/N ratios. For
most M &gt; 3 earthquake in the data set, found that there are a number of
recording stations directly above the source with epicentral distance less than
20 km. The software for this project performs particle polarization analysis and
at the same time extracts the shear-wave spiltting delay times through an
automated maximization of the cross-correlation function of the two matched
horizontal component signals. This allows accurate measurements to be made for
testing the idea of shear-wave splitting as a potential indicator for a large
earthquake in the future. This research project has the potential of being more
comprehensive and definitive than any shear-wave splitting work that has so far
been done to date.