* 0124848
* 2001 TSE: Formulating Waterborne Coatings for the Environment: Interactions in Water-Cosolvent Media between Associating Polymers, Surfactants, and Colloidal Particles
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Paschalis Alexandridis, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/2005
* USD 311,999.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CTS-0124848&lt;br/&gt;Alexandridis, P&lt;br/&gt;SUNY
Buffalo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Formulating Waterborne Coatings for the
Environment: Interactions in Water-Cosolvent Media between Associating Polymers,
Surfactants, and Colloidal Particles&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Background: The
coatings and paints industry commands a 50 billion-dollar market worldwide. Over
1 billion gallons of coatings and paints are sold in the U. S. every year.
Because of increased environmental awareness and under regulatory pressure for
the reduction of volatile organic compound (VOC) emissions (e.g., Pollution
Prevention Act of 1990), over half of the coatings and paints are now
waterborne, and the trend for increasing the fraction of waterborne formulations
continues. But even waterborne coatings and paints are not VOC-free, as they
contain cosolvents, which may comprise up to 30% of the total liquid present.
Furthermore, a number of these cosolvents are classified as hazardous air
pollutants (HAP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motivation: There is a need for both an
overall reduction of VOC cosolvents and a replacement of HAP cosolvent by non-
HAP ones. This need challenges the waterborne coating and paint formulations,
but the drive for reformulation is confounded by the dearth of reports in the
open literature regarding the effects of cosolvents on the aqueous solution
behavior of associating polymers and surfactants. These amphiphiles are
essential in stabilizing the resin and pigment colloidal constituents of
coatings and paints and in conferring unique rheological properties (e.g., very
high viscosity at rest and very low viscosity during the spraying or brushing
application). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research objectives: It is the goal of the
principal investigator to develop fundamental knowledge to support and guide the
optimal formulation of waterborne coatings and paints. The specific objectives
are the following: Objective 1 is to establish benchmarks by examining the phase
behavior, structure, and dynamics of aqueous solutions consisting of associating
polymers and surfactants representative of those used in coatings and paints.
Objective 2 is to explore and quantify the effects of various cosolvents (e.g.,
different types of glycol ethers and other polar solvents) on the phase
behavior, structure and dynamics of aqueous solutions consisting of associating
polymers and surfactants. No such information is currently available in the open
literature. Cosolvents can have a profound effect on the solution behavior and
interactions of amphiphiles, and also modify the overall and local viscosity of
the system. Objective 3 is to study the colloidal stability, structure, and
rheology of colloidal suspensions of resins or pigments in aqueous-cosolvent
media that contain associating polymers and surfactants. Such suspensions are
very similar to the ones used in coatings and paints. Of explicit consideration
here is the fact that the cosolvents can interact specifically (e.g., partition
or swell) with the resins. Another very important issue to consider is the
change in the overall and the local composition (and corresponding interactions)
of the particle-polymer-surfactant-cosolvent mixture as the water and cosolvents
evaporate following the application of the
coating/paint.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Impact: The proposed research
directly enables (i) the reduction of VOC cosolvents that are used in waterborne
coatings and paints and the switch to cosolvents that are not HAPs, (ii) the
optimal formulation of waterborne coatings and paints which would result in
overall reduction of coating material (and associated energy costs) needed;
(iii) at the same time the proposed work assists (by providing fundamental
information) the ongoing efforts of replacing organic solvent-borne coatings and
paints with environmentally friendlier waterborne formulations.&lt;br/&gt;