* 0124422
* Experiments in Education:  Studies of the Not So Simple Alkali Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Gerd Bergmann, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 12/31/2004
* USD 300,000.00

This experimental project will address a major theme in condensed matter
physics, the effect of the Coulomb interaction in an otherwise band-free
electron system, that is the alkali metals, largely in thin film form or with
transition metal impurities. The latter systems are excellent probes because
they introduce a strong local exchange repulsion between the d-states of the
impurities coupling to the conduction electrons. However, there are several
difficulties to overcome for the experimental investigations: (a) transition
metal impurities do not dissolve in alkali hosts and (b) the magnetization of
the transition metal impurities is very small and difficult to measure. In this
project the method of quenched condensation is used to prepare alkali films with
small concentrations of 3d and 4d impurities. The magnetization as a function of
temperature and magnetic field is measured with the method of the anomalous Hall
effect. Presently there are no other laboratories in the world that can perform
this task. The experimental goal is two-fold: (a) to determine the effect of the
magnetic impurities on the polarization of the host and (b) to determine the
magnetic moment of the impurities These experiments should stimulate renewed
theoretical effort to rationalize the currently poorly understood measurements.
The experiments introduce graduate students to the technique of high vacuum and
low temperature physics with sophisticated evaporation methods. During the
period of the last several undergraduate students also performed these difficult
experiments, co-authored several publications in major physics journals,
presented their results at American Physical Society meetings, and won first and
second prizes for undergraduate research at the University of Southern
California&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alkali metals are a special group of metals. The
wave length of the conduction electrons is larger than the atomic distance so
that the atomic ions hardly disturb the motion of the electrons. Furthermore the
volume of the atomic ions occupies only a fraction of the total volume. This
makes the alkali metals the best representation of the "jelly" model in which
the electrons move undisturbed by the ions through the metal and interact only
with each other through their electrical charge, the repulsive Coulomb
interaction. Therefore the alkali metals are the ideal system to study
fundamental aspects of Coulomb interaction, which underlies many of the
properties exhibited by solids: ferro-magnetism, high temperature
superconductivity, etc. The effect of the Coulomb interaction can be probed in
the alkali metals by introducing transition metal impurities (for example atoms
of iron, cobalt, nickel, vanadium, titanium,..). These impurities introduce
locally an additional strong Coulomb repulsion which pulls on the electrons like
the bow of a violinist pulls on the string of a violin. The resulting magnetic
moments reveal information about the energetic state of the electrons and the
effect of the Coulomb interaction on them. However, for experimental
investigations there are several difficulties to overcome: (a) transition metal
impurities do not dissolve in alkali hosts and (b) the magnetization of the
impurities is very small and difficult to measure. Two techniques, "quenched
condensation" and the "anomalous Hall effect" overcome these experimental
hurdles. Presently there are no other laboratories in the world that can perform
this task. The experiments introduce graduate students to the techniques of high
vacuum and low temperature physics with sophisticated evaporation methods.
During the period of the last grant several undergraduate students also
performed these difficult experiments, co-authored several publications in
leading physics journals, presented their results at American Physical Society
meetings, and won first and second prizes for undergraduate research at the
University of Southern California.&lt;br/&gt;