* 0124908
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:   Evolutionary History of Holarctic and Ethiopian Hipparionine Horses: Systematics, Lineage Extensions and Adaptations
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2002,02/29/2008
* Michael Woodburne, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 02/29/2008
* USD 149,228.00

Hipparions are an extinct group of three-toed horses that flourished widely in
the Old world shortly after their first occurrence there in the late Miocene, at
about 11 Ma. Once established, hipparions evolved into a multitude of lineages
with chronologic ranges extending to the middle Pleistocene in China and the
late Pleistocene of Africa. The paleobiology of these horses within this great
temporal (ca 10 m.y.) and geographic span has not been addressed systematically
heretofore. PIs believe that hipparions actually originated within the North
American genus Cormohipparion, but the actual species involved has not been
demonstrated. Their proposed research will break new ground in 1. describing a
complex pattern of speciation within Cormohipparion; 2. better resolving the Old
World hipparion immigration and subsequent evolutionary radiation; and 3.
unraveling the origin, evolutionary radiation, multiple geographic extensions
and adaptation of species belonging to a distinctive Old World late Miocene
Pleistocene radiation known as the Sivalhippus Complex. Once having described
and documented the pattern of dispersal and diversification of hipparions in the
Old World PIs will be able to investigate the paleobiology of these horses to
gain further insights on the dietary and locomotory adaptations by which they
achieved their predominance in this evolutionary theater for so long an interval
of time.