* 0125601
* Collaborative Research:  Suspended Sediment Transport in Karst
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Laura Toran, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 04/30/2006
* USD 154,641.00

0125601 Toran

Although it seems intuitively obvious that karst aquifers will carry more
sediment than porous media aquifers, because of the large conduits and faster
velocities, relatively few studies have tried to quantify sediment transport in
karst. Understanding sediment transport is important for a number of reasons.
First, sediment may enhance transport of contaminants that are mobilized by
attaching to sediment. Second, the mobility of sediment also reflects the
potential mobility of bacteria and viruses, which are of concern in evaluating
groundwater quality. And third, the mobility of sediment is a measure of
velocities and transport pathways in karst, a complex issue involving mixing
from different reservoirs, which is difficult to quantify. This research will
address how sediment transport varies with seasons and different storm events by
measuring sediment transport in a set of karst aquifers over the course of a
year and during several different types of storm events. Storm events will
include small and large storms, plus storms with wet and dry antecedent
conditions. Three distinct karst aquifers have been selected that include a
high, medium, and low discharge system. At each site, continuous loggers will be
installed to monitor conductance, discharge, and turbidity to record seasonal
variation and antecedent conditions for storms. In additional, stormwater
samplers will automatically trigger to sample during the selected storm events.
Samples collected monthly and during storms will be analyzed for detailed water
chemistry, sediment composition, and sediment size distribution. Efforts will be
made to model the transport processes for sediment movement within karst
aquifers. The combination of fieldwork and modeling to assess the controls on
sediment transport will be used to classify the different karst systems using
the mixing ratios implied by sediment transport. Unraveling mixing from
different reservoirs is important in both karst and non-karst systems, and this
study will help show how temporal heterogeneity (changes between storm events,
not just within storm events) can provide clues to the internal structure of a
system. This work will demonstrate the importance of temporal heterogeneity in
hydrologic systems by studying an end-member system (karst) and quantifying the
types of measurements needed to understand system response.