* 0125518
* A Method for Obtaining Geophysically Rigorous Estimates of Sea-Level Rate and Acceleration
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* James Davis, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2005
* USD 206,783.00

Davis&lt;br/&gt;0125518&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will
undertake research to obtain the most accurate and geophysically rigorous
determination of global sea-level change to date. To correct tide-gauge data for
the effect of postglacial rebound, the investigators will use state-of-the art
theory, Earth models, and observations. A new element of the proposed research
will be the use of Global Positioning System (GPS) data to correct for vertical
crustal motion. This study requires careful assessment of various GPS data sets
that could potentially contribute to this study, because it is difficult to
achieve the required level of accuracy in the vertical rate with GPS.
Nevertheless, such accuracy, at least on a regional basis, is possible. A recent
analysis of GPS and tide-gauge data from Scandinavia, for example, yields a
regional value for Baltic sea-level rise of 2.1 +/- 0.3 mm/yr. The Baltic tide-
gauge data set, although potentially a powerful contributor to studies of sea-
level change, has never before been used in a global analysis due to its
contamination by postglacial rebound. This research will enable quantification
of the relative contributions to present-day sea level change of thermal
expansion of the oceans and the ongoing melting of glaciers and ice sheets,
knowledge that is crucial to our ability to understand the causes and the
present state of climate change.&lt;br/&gt;