* 0125782
* Collaborative Research:  Late Cenozoic To Recent Fault Slip Distribution in the Central Walker Lane Belt, Western Nevada
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2007
* Jeffrey Lee, Central Washington University
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 01/31/2007
* USD 138,076.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support the investigation of the
dynamics of a system ofintraplate faults in the southern part of the central
Walker Lane belt, known as the Mina deflection, using an integrated approach of
field mapping, tectonic geomorphology, paleoseismology, thermochronology, and
geochronology. Faults within the Mina deflection define a regional-scale
releasing bend that transfers slip from the Eastern California Shear Zone to the
Walker Lane Belt. The Eastern California Shear Zone and Walker Lane Belt
straddle the boundary between dominantly east-west extension in the Basin and
Range province to the east and dominantly NW-shear along the Pacific-North
American plate boundary to the west. The interaction between extension and
transcurrent shear has resulted in the development of a complex array of faults
that accommodate intraplate strain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is
motivated in large part by ongoing geodetic investigations on the magnitude of
present-day strain accumulation and pattern of strain distribution across the
Eastern California Shear Zone and Walker Lane Belt. In light of these geodetic
constraints on strain accumulation, it is timely to improve our understanding of
the spatial and temporal patterns of strain release during late Cenozoic to
Recent times. The two data sets will provide important constraints on geodynamic
hypotheses proposed for the evolution of the Eastern California Shear Zone and
Walker Lane Belt. An accurate characterization of the temporal and spatial
strain distribution within the Eastern California Shear Zone and Walker Lane
Belt is crucial for understanding tectonic processes over a much broader area of
intraplate deformation associated with the interaction between the Pacific and
North American plates.&lt;br/&gt;