* 0125449
* National Technology Transfer and Commercialization Network - TTCN
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2004
* Leonard Silverman, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 09/30/2004
* USD 700,883.00

0125449 &lt;br/&gt;Silverman &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to the
University of Southern California to support the activity described below for 24
months. The proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for
Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF
0179).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners&lt;br/&gt;The partners for the effort are
the University of Southern California (Lead Institution), California State
University Fresno, Caltech, Claremont Graduate University, University of
Arkansas, University of Nevada-Reno, University of Pittsburgh, NASA Ames,
California Technology Trade and Commerce, LA Economic Development Corporation,
Pricewaterhouse Coopers, Gibson Dunn &amp; Crutcher, Niagara Broadband, and
National Collegiate Innovators and Inventors
Alliance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposed Activities&lt;br/&gt;The partners
propose to create and implement a national Technology Transfer and
Commercialization Network to coordinate and provide a variety of resources and
knowledge so that network users can collaborate and innovate. The activity will
provide private sector partners that supply needed technology, financial, and
legal expertise, national labs and state and local governments that assist in
firming and evaluating the program, academic partners that supply vital content
and structure. The partnership will allow the partners and their clients to be
successful innovators, sustaining the partnership in the future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposed Innovation&lt;br/&gt;The proposed network of
academic institutions will provide a variety of resources and knowledge to
partners, especially under-served schools, that they could not generate on their
own. The infrastructure will allow academic institutions to move their
intellectual property into commercialization through partnerships with venture
capital, private companies, start-ups etc. The combined engineering expertise of
the partners will provide resources to small companies that they could not
afford otherwise. The business school expertise of the major academic
institutions will be available for small universities and businesses
alike.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Economic Impact&lt;br/&gt;The partnership
will stimulate and support innovation growth by linking sources of knowledge and
expertise with those needing such sources to make their enterprises prosper,
particularly those in under-served areas. The resulting economic growth and
development will generate additional resources to sustain the
partnership.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Societal Impact&lt;br/&gt;Creation
of economic wellbeing and jobs for people in under-served areas will have a
beneficial effect on the people of those areas.&lt;br/&gt;