* 0125986
* Assessing Crustal Assimilation In The Petrogenesis Of Columbia River Basalt: Plagioclase 87Sr/86Sr Stratigraphy
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2003
* John Wolff, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2003
* USD 85,354.00

Wolff&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0125986&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Assessing the relative
contributions of enriched mantle and continental crust to&lt;br/&gt;continental
flood basalt lavas is a long-standing problem, because essentially the
same&lt;br/&gt;whole-rock geochemical data can be used to argue for either case.
We propose a test&lt;br/&gt;using the Columbia River Basalt Group, the best-
studied flood basalt province in the&lt;br/&gt;world. We shall use laser
ablation sampling in combination with multicollector&lt;br/&gt;inductively
coupled plasma mass spectrometry (MC-ICP-MS) to establish whether or
not&lt;br/&gt;plagioclase phenocrysts in CRBG lavas exhibit zoning in 87 Sr/ 86
Sr. Because plagioclase&lt;br/&gt;crystallizes from basaltic liquids at crustal
pressures, this will establish whether or not the&lt;br/&gt;magmas experienced
changes in Sr isotope ratio during residence in (or transport&lt;br/&gt;through)
the crust. While laser ablation MC-ICP-MS for in-situ isotope ratio analysis
is&lt;br/&gt;not yet a fully developed technique, Sr in plagioclase has been
demonstrated as feasible,&lt;br/&gt;and presents relatively few analytical
challenges. This research has the potential to place&lt;br/&gt;unequivocal
spatial constaints on the depth at which lithosperic contamination
has&lt;br/&gt;affected the compositions of the Columbia River lavas. The results
will affect our&lt;br/&gt;understanding of mantle plume-lithosphere interactions
during genesis of this flood basalt&lt;br/&gt;province.&lt;br/&gt;