* 0125122
* Innovations in Internationalization: Building Multi-Sector Partnerships for Research, Education and Economic Development
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2002,11/30/2005
* Denice Denton, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 11/30/2005
* USD 597,542.00

0125122 &lt;br/&gt;Kalonji &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to the University
of Washington to support the activity described below for 36 months. The
proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program
Solicitation (NSF 0179).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners&lt;br/&gt;The partners
for the award include the University of Washington (Lead Institution),
Washington State Office of Economic Development, Washington State China
Relations Council, Northwest Environmental Business Council, Earth Tech, Inc.,
and Hart Crowser, Inc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposed Activities&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed effort has the following goals: (1) create new team-based approaches
for faculty, students, government and industry partners to collaborate on
international research and education, (2) translate the work of these teams into
products, systems, and services, (3) produce a scientific and engineering
workforce to work in an international marketplace. Teams of faculty and students
from the University of Washington and Sichuan University in Chengdu, China will
be working collaboratively on water resource management, waste water treatment,
forest ecology, environmentally-friendly materials processing, biodiversity, and
the impact of humans on the ecology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposed
Innovation&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the project is on building sustainable
relationships for research-education-economic development. Innovation outcomes
include creation of a workforce to participate in the emerging Chinese market,
creation of the opportunities for small businesses to participate in academic
research and to gain access to new international business opportunities,
increase trade with China for Washington, and "internationalization" of some of
the faculty at the University of Washington.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential
Economic Impact&lt;br/&gt;The major economic impact will be the expanded
opportunities for Washington State business with markets in
China.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Societal Impact&lt;br/&gt;The Pacific Rim
could be a very large market for the United States over the foreseeable future.
Preparation of a workforce to participate in this market is vital to the
citizens of the US in general and especially the West Coast. Asians have already
trained a workforce, and the US is behind. This effort will provide the
workforce to open trade for small business in China.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;