* 0125789
* International Conference on Hyperbolic Problems: Theory, Numerics &amp; Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Thomas Hou, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 08/31/2002
* USD 18,000.00

The International Conference on "Hyperbolic Problems: Theory, Numerics and
Applications" will be held in CalTech on March 25-29, 2002. The planned Hyp2002
conference will be the ninth meeting in the bi-annual international series which
became one of the highest quality and most successful conference series in
Applied mathematics. There have been many new developments in hyperbolic and
nonlinear evolution PDEs since the last international hyperbolic PDEs conference
was held in the US at Stony Brook in 1994. In the 2002 hyperbolic PDEs
conference to be held at CalTech, we would like to bring young and active
scientists together with leading researchers from different disciplines to
address the theoretical, modeling, and computational issues in solving
hyperbolic PDEs and more generally nonlinear evolution equations arising from
various application areas. In fact, we would like to broaden further the scope
of our next hyperbolic conference to include new and exciting research areas
such as multiscale modeling and simulations (deriving and simulating meso-scale
or nanoscale material properties in micro devices), geophysical applications
(wave propagation in random media, coarsening of multi-phase flows through
multiscale porous media), computational biology and computational chemistry,
free boundary problems arising from materials science and multi-component fluid
dynamics (thin films, crystal growth, multi-fluid interfaces, solid/liquid
interfaces). The conference will provide a forum to exchange and to stimulate
new ideas from different disciplines, and to formulate new challenging problems
that will have important physical and industrial
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theoretical and numerical studies of hyperbolic
problems have made tremendous impact in the developments of US economy and
technology. Many high-resolution methods developed in the hyperbolic community
have helped design faster airplanes, new materials, and improve our space
exploration program. The hyperbolic conference series and its proceedings have
become a focal point for active research in a growing field, where theory,
numerics and applications complement each other. The earlier conferences were
focused more on theoretical aspects of hyperbolic conservation laws. As
computers became more and more powerful in the late eighties and the nineties,
many effective numerical methods have been developed in simulating hyperbolic
systems arising in aerodynamics and fluid dynamics applications. The hyperbolic
meetings in this series have been very successful in steering the development of
new high-resolution algorithms for solving complex physical systems. Many of
these developments found new applications outside their traditional area of
Computational Fluid Dynamics, including materials science,
multiphase/multicomponent flows, combustion/detonation, flows with free
boundary, geometrically based motions for image processing and more. We believe
that hosting such a high level conference in the US will greatly benefit the US
scientists working in this general area. It is especially helpful in educating
our graduate students and postdocs, providing them with the opportunity to be in
touch with the leading experts working on the frontier of this field. We will
take several measures to attract young scientists. An effort will be made to
increase the number of women &lt;br/&gt;