* 0125890
* Cold Body Temperature as an Evolutionary Shaping force in the Physiology of Antarctic Fishes
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Bruce Sidell, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 08/31/2006
* USD 555,000.00

0125890&lt;br/&gt;Sidell&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Notothenioid fishes that dominate
the fish fauna surrounding Antarctica have been evolving for 10-14 million years
at a nearly constant body temperature of ~0C throughout their life histories. As
a result, this group of animals is uniquely suited to studies aimed at
understanding and identifying features of physiology and biochemistry that
result from the process of evolution at cold body temperature. This project has
three major objectives aimed at examining adaptations for life in cold
environments: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Identify the amino acid substitutions in
the fatty acid-binding pocket of fatty acyl CoA synthetase (FACS) that explain
its substrate specificity. Fatty acids are a major fuel of energy metabolism in
Antarctic fishes. FACS catalyzes the condensation of CoASH and fatty acids to
fatty acyl CoA esters, a step required for subsequent metabolism of these
important compounds. This research may permit us to resolve the specific amino
acid substitutions that explain both substrate specificity and preservation of
catalytic rate of notothenioid FACS at cold physiological
temperatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Produce a rigorous biochemical and
biophysical characterization of the intracellular calcium-binding protein,
parvalbumin, from white axial musculature of Antarctic fishes. Parvalbumin plays
a pivotal role in facilitating the relaxation phase of fast-contracting muscles
and is a likely site of strong selective pressure. Preliminary data strongly
indicate that the protein from Antarctic fishes has been modified to ensure
function at cold temperature. A suite of physical techniques will be used to
determine dissociation constants of Antarctic fish parvalbumins for calcium and
magnesium and unidirectional rate constants of ion-dissociation from the
protein. Full-length cDNA clones for Antarctic fish parvalbumin(s) will permit
deduction of primary amino acid sequence These data will yield insight into
structural elements that permit the protein from notothenioid fishes to function
at very cold body temperature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Conduct a broad survey of
the pattern of cardiac myoglobin expression in the Suborder Notothenoidei.
Previous work has indicated a variable pattern of presence or absence of the
intracellular oxygen-binding protein, myoglobin (Mb), in hearts of one family of
Antarctic notothenioid fishes (Channichthyidae; icefishes). Because Mb is of
physiological value in species that express the protein, the observed pattern of
interspecific expression has been attributed to unusually low niche competition
in the Southern Ocean. This leads to the prediction that similar loss of cardiac
Mb should be observed in other notothenioid taxa. This part of the project will
survey for the presence and absence of cardiac Mb in as many notothenioid
species as possible and, if Mb-lacking species are detected, will extend
analyses to determine the mechanism(s) responsible for loss of its expression
using molecular biological techniques.&lt;br/&gt;