* 0125651
* ChemQuery: An Assessment System for Mapping Student Progress in Learning General Chemistry
* EHR,DUE
* 11/01/2001,10/31/2006
* Angelica Stacy, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 10/31/2006
* USD 499,976.00

Students in general education science courses typically do not appreciate that
science advances through a series of complex paradigm shifts involving
considerable debate and discussion. Their perception that scientific
understanding of issues proceeds in a cut-and-dry process impedes their grasp of
scientific concepts and their ability to apply science reasoning to issues in
societal contexts. Unfortunately, there is no way to quantify these
misconceptions and thereby address them with a concerted curricular response.
This project is producing an assessment instrument, the Science Perceptions
Survey, designed to measure these dispositions and changes in them as well. The
Science Perceptions Survey is being devised in the context of general education
chemistry courses and validated through correlation with results of written
essays and interviews. An independent evaluator who is not associated with the
development of the assessment tool is managing these validation protocols. Once
validated, the instruments will be freely available to other institutions
considering changes in curricula focused on enhancing the appreciation of
science methods and their place in general education courses. The Principal
Investigators anticipate that the Science Perceptions Survey will be a valuable
tool in delineating deficiencies in students' ability to understand the way in
which scientific arguments are constructed and to guide curriculum development
in correcting these deficiencies. In addition to the curriculum assessment
format, the Science Perceptions Survey will be disseminated in a web-based
format for student self-evaluation. This implementation will provide students
real-time analysis of their tolerance for ambiguity in scientific findings and
their ability to use the scientific method. This ongoing project can be used by
instructors as an assignment in the general education courses to help students
understand how science advances knowledge.