* 0125502
* High-Resolution Mammal Biostratigraphy and Response to Transient Climate Change at the Paleocene-Eocene Carbon Isotope Excursion
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Philip Gingerich, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 12/31/2006
* USD 250,391.00

The Paleocene-Eocene epoch boundary at 55.5 million years before present
coincides with the sudden onset of an 85,000-year greenhouse event of transient
climate change, the Paleocene-Eocene thermal maximum or PETM, that involved
release of massive amounts of light carbon into the atmosphere from shallow
marine methane reservoirs. The resulting negative carbon isotope excursion [CIE]
was first recognized in the deep sea, and then on land in the northern Bighorn
Basin, Wyoming. In the Bighorn Basin the CIE coincides with a "Wa-0" faunal
immigration event including the first appearance of modern orders of mammals
such as Artiodactyla, Perissodactyla, and Primates in North America, and with an
abrupt but short-lived diminution in size of some mammalian lineages. Research
here involves high resolution biostratigraphic investigation of continental
mammals in the PETM interval. A 50-m-thick stratigraphic section containing the
CIE and Wa-0 mammalian fauna is being studied around the margin of the Bighorn
and Clarks Fork basins. Specific objectives include measurement of stratigraphic
sections documenting marker beds and lateral facies changes in this interval;
mapping of distinctive marker beds tying sections together using differential
GPS with meter-scale precision; location of known fossils relative to measured
and mapped bed units; location of productive new lithologies; quantification of
body size change in all lineages crossing the Wa-0 interval; preparation and
description of previously collected and new specimens of Wa-0 mammals focusing
on the newly-discovered Meniscotherium priscum interval at the base of Wa-0; and
collection of additional faunal specimens (gar scales, Coryphodon teeth, etc.)
of known bed level for high resolution study of oxygen isotopes and
paleotemperature through the continental CIE/Wa-0 interval. The overall
objective is better understanding of biotic response to short-term climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;