* 0125385
* Statewide Partnership to Support Technology Innovation and Entrepreneurship in South Dakota
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Gilbert Ustad, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 12/31/2005
* USD 598,247.00

0125385 &lt;br/&gt;Ustad &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to the University
of South Dakota to support the activity described below for 36 months. The
proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program
Solicitation (NSF 0179).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners&lt;br/&gt;The partners of
the award are the University of South Dakota (Lead Institution), Black Hills
State University, Dakota State University, Northern State University, South
Dakota School of Mines and Technology, South Dakota State University, South
Dakota Board of Regents, Forward Sioux Falls, Rapid City Economic Development,
Genesis of Innovation for South Dakota, Genesis Equity Fund, LLC, Small Business
High Technology Institute, South Dakota Health Research Foundation, Dairean,
Inc., Pacer Corporation, South Dakota Health Technology Innovations, TJ
Technologies, Inc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposed Activities&lt;br/&gt;The
activities include: (1) creation of a series of technology entrepreneurship
education modules that will be integrated in science, math, engineering, and
other subjects, (2) modify several existing business and entrepreneurship
undergraduate and graduate courses to focus on technology and R&amp;D
businesses, and (3) integrate university and private sector partners into
technology evaluation and development teams to move innovations and technologies
to market. Current innovation courses at the academic institutions are business-
oriented with little science, engineering, and technology emphasis. This award
will support integration of science and engineering with the business and
management courses and establishment of offices for technology
transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposed Innovation&lt;br/&gt;The project will
develop the knowledge and skills needed by students, faculty, entrepreneurs, and
private sector partners to start and expand technology-based businesses in the
technology business incubators being developed in South Dakota. The project
involves a collaborative effort between public universities and the private
sector to facilitate technology transfer into viable technology and business.
The project will educate and encourage new technology entrepreneurs to start and
grow new businesses. The technology sectors being emphasized are biomedical
sciences and health, materials, information technology/education, and
biotechnology and agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Economic
Impact&lt;br/&gt;The businesses formed will contribute to the economic wellbeing
of South Dakota. Education of a workforce to fill positions in those businesses
will be a priority. The six university campuses will lead as a source of new
knowledge through research and a source of education for the businesses as well
as in providing an entrepreneurial workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential
Societal Impact&lt;br/&gt;Creation of wealth and high-paying jobs for the
citizens of South Dakota will be a major outcome. Indigenous Americans will also
benefit from &lt;br/&gt;