* 0125843
* Diffusive Soil Transport and Hillslope Evolution
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2002,05/31/2004
* David Furbish, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 05/31/2004
* USD 226,759.00

PIs will pursue a comprehensive theory of diffusive soil transport and hillslope
evolution associated with biological activity and surface rainsplash, building
on recent, key developments in hillslope geomorphology. Their objectives are:
(i) to clarify the fundamental ingredients and forms of constitutive (transport)
laws describing these processes, demonstrating the conditions under which
transport is proportional to the land-surface gradient or to the product of the
soil thickness and surface gradient; (ii) to provide the analogue of a kinetic
theory for the diffusion-like coefficient used in hillslope evolution models,
demonstrating how it is an explicit nonlinear function of soil-particle
activity, particle size, soil porosity and soil thickness, and indirectly
related to climatic and biological conditions; (iii) to experimentally obtain
the form of the constitutive law for transport by rainsplash using high-speed
video and particle tracking techniques; (iv) to illustrate the fundamental
significance of particle-activity gradients in producing transport, and
demonstrate this using sandbox experiments for the case of rainsplash, and using
field measurements of soil properties and tracer particles for the case of
subsurface transport; (v) to clarify the ingredients of surface and subsurface
particle dispersal, mixing and sorting, demonstrating how these processes
contribute to hillslope catena structure; and (vi) to develop an advanced
computational model of diffusive transport and hillslope evolution for exploring
the full coupling between land-surface geometry, soil transport, soil thickness
and soil production, including nonlinear responses to external and boundary
forcing. This four-year program will mesh theoretical, experimental, field-based
and computational components. The PIs theoretical work will focus on clarifying:
(i) the ingredients of particle dispersal, mixing and sorting soil-depth and
catena scale; and (ii) the forms of constitutive transport laws. PIs
experimental/field work will: (i) focus on the process of rainsplash, and on
particle mixing and sorting within soils, and at the soil surface; and (ii) be
designed to test/validate the theoretical and computational aspects of their
work. They will also apply high-performance algorithms based on discontinuous
spectral element methods in developing advanced computational codes for
simulating particle behavior at the soil-depth scale, and for simulating
hillslope evolution at geomorphic scales. Under the auspices of the Center for
Earth Surface Processes Center (CESPR), this project will involve collaboration
of scientists expert in geomorphology, fluid mechanics, applied mathematics and
advanced computations. The results of this work will constitute a major, and
critical, contribution to the growing theoretical foundation of hillslope
geomorphology.