* 0125641
* Elementary, Secondary, and Informal Education: ZOOMsci Club (ZOOM Season V)
* EHR,DRL
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2005
* Kate Taylor, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 01/31/2005
* USD 1,303,776.00

The ZOOM children's television series, which reaches over 5.4 million children
each week, teaches viewers the scientific processes as well as delivering
science and mathematics content. The outreach materials and activities provide
viewers with opportunities to explore, experiment and share their creativity.
WGBH is requesting $1,303,776 of a total budget of $3,977,936 to produce 20 new
shows for the ZOOM series. There also will be a new ZOOM campaign, the ZOOMsci
Club, which will provide a unique way for kids to deepen their science and math
knowledge while engaged in ZOOM's hands-on activities. The campaign includes:
the new television programs, new print materials and outreach activities, and a
new area of the ZOOM website that includes an on-line forum for kids to share
results of their experimentation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ZOOM has been chosen by
PBS as the first children's "local/national" show. This PBS initiative
capitalizes on the strength of local public television stations and provides the
opportunity for stations to customize ZOOM to serve the needs of their local
markets. The stations can produce and insert segments that honor local kids for
their volunteer activities and feature local kids answering questions. Stations
also can localize outreach activities, producing their own local ZOOM websites
and launching ZOOM Into Action campaigns to motivate kids to volunteer.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;