* 0125935
* Strain Accommodation by Fracturing During Folding of Sedimentary Rock
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2006
* David Pollard, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 01/31/2006
* USD 134,205.00

The PI's propose to investigate the mechanics of fracturing during folding
because field data indicate this is a significant strain-accommodating mechanism
of the brittle crust. Fractures nucleate and propagate as a result of stress
concentrations, and the stress fields within folds can be constrained by
understanding the associated fracture evolution in space and time. Previous
efforts have argued for simple, symmetric and homogeneous stress-fold
relationships, and various models of fracture formation in such idealized stress
fields have been proposed. These methods have in common that they ignore pre-
folding structures such as joints, which can perturb the stress field within the
fold, if they are reactivated. New fractures then would form in a stress field
different from that predicted by the simple models. At the Emigrant Gap
anticline, a Laramide fold located near Casper, Wyoming, the simplified
relationships of previous models are not capable of explaining the majority of
the observed fractures. The PI's preliminary field observations show that two
tectonic joint sets existed prior to folding, and that most fractures observed
on the fold are sub-parallel to these two sets. Some of the older joints show
shear offsets, arguing for their reactivation during folding. Associated with
the reactivation is the formation of new fractures with strikes that parallel
those of sheared joints rather than the fold axis. Measured fracture intensities
for both fracture sets on the fold are approximately four times the intensities
of the respective joint sets in unfolded strata of the same
formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's will determine the influence of pre-
folding joints, bedding interfaces, and contrasting constitutive properties of
the strata on fracture development and strain accommodation during folding. They
plan to integrate detailed field observations with mechanical modeling of these
structures. Their specific objectives are:&lt;br/&gt; l) Map and document
fractures and fold geometry of various sandstone units at the Emigrant Gap
anticline, including fracture geometries in 3-D, the 3-D shape of the folded
strata, and evidence for bedding-parallel shearing within the shale
units.&lt;br/&gt; 2) Design and execute large-strain numerical experiments using
the FEM code ABAQUS to understand the underlying mechanical process of strain
accommodation by fracturing during folding as motivated by the field
observations.&lt;br/&gt; 3) Integrate the insights gained from the field
observations and numerical analyses to construct a conceptual model to predict
fractures in similar geologic and tectonic settings. This model will modify and,
in cases such as the Emigrant Gap anticline, replace existing models based on
symmetric fold-fracture relationships.&lt;br/&gt;