* 0125746
* Rocky Mountain Agile Virtual Enterprises (RAVE): RAVE Technical Development Center
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2001,10/31/2005
* Richard Donovan,  Montana Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 10/31/2005
* USD 719,299.00

0125746&lt;br/&gt;Donovan &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award is to Montana Tech
(Lead Institution) to support the activity described below for 24 months. The
proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program
Solicitation (NSF 0179).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners&lt;br/&gt;The partners
for the award are Montana Tech, Montana Department of Commerce, Montana State
University-Northern, Structural Dynamics Research Corporation, PFM
Manufacturing, S&amp;K Electronics, Lincoln Electric
Company.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposed Activities&lt;br/&gt;The activities for
the project include: developing systems through which educational resources can
be rapidly deployed to the widely distributed population of Montana, creating
virtual organizations through which independent organizations efficiently
combine core competencies to attain strategic market advantages, development of
on-line courses in concurrent engineering and collaborative commerce,
establishment of procedures and systems through which Montana's private industry
can rapidly and efficiently for mutually beneficial collaborations with units of
the Montana University System, and advancement of the state-of-the-art in
collaborative methodologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposed
Innovation&lt;br/&gt;The proposed innovation is the development and
establishment of state-of-the-art systems and methodologies for collaborative
virtual organizations to promote combination of core competencies for a rural
economy that is widely dispersed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Economic
Impact&lt;br/&gt;The proposed economic impact is the potential to increase the
ability of small companies to respond to opportunities for business by combining
their core competencies in virtual organizations. The average company size in
Montana is 12 employees and the ability of any one company to meet the talents
needed to compete is limited to its talent pool. Combinations of talents from
several companies increases the opportunity to respond to business opportunities
on an ad hoc basis.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Potential Societal
Impact&lt;br/&gt;The economy of Montana is dominated by farm income which has
remained constant for more than 20 years. The average company size in the state
is 12 employees. The population is sparsely dispersed. Increased business
revenue that will result from these companies becoming more competitive will
create much-needed wealth for stability and growth. The project involves
underrepresented minorities, especially native Americans in the business
enterprise of Montana&lt;br/&gt;