* 0125255
* Assessment of Research Doctorate Programs:  Methodology Study
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2003
* Charlotte Kuh, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Lenore S. Clesceri
* 09/30/2003
* USD 300,000.00

Assessment of the quality of doctoral programs and their faculty can be a
powerful tool to improve doctoral education. For institutions, these assessments
have been used in decisions to expand, contract, or merge programs. Potential
graduate students use assessment results as part of the decision about where to
apply and improved measurement could spur increased attention to the graduate
student experience. State boards of higher education have used quality
assessments to reallocate state resources. For administrators, the objective of
"improving in the ratings" can be used to partially justify hiring and other
personnel decisions. Scholars use ratings to examine the correlates of quality
and as a yardstick to help them in designing policies to improve graduate
education. These uses are consequential for all involved in doctoral education
and the Conference Board of Associated Research Councils judges that a periodic
review of the methodology of such assessment is essential given the significance
of its use. The Conference Board of Associated Research Councils is composed of
the American Council on Education, the American Council of Learned Societies,
the National Research Council, and the Social Science Research
Council.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Research Council proposes to conduct
a review of the methodology of assessment of research doctoral programs. The
outcome of this review will be recommendations for the conduct of the next NRC
assessment of doctoral programs. The methodology of assessing faculty reputation
will be addressed, as will the construction of direct measures of effectiveness
of the education of doctoral students. The study will examine the validity of
measures of scholarly reputation and the extent to which they should be uniform
across fields, the taxonomy of fields, and whether a broad reputational survey
is the best way to assess research quality. It will also examine how to design
and incorporate valid measures of the process of doctoral education and outcomes
for recent graduates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A committee of experts consisting of
statisticians, survey researchers, representatives of the major disciplines, and
university administrators, will carry out the review. The committee will be
assisted by information gathered from topical workshops, panels charged with
focusing on taxonomy and measurement for each of the disciplines, and
universities that have volunteered to collect data for prototype measures. The
outcome of the study will be a report with recommendations designed to shape the
next assessment of doctoral programs. Provided funding is obtained by summer of
2001, report completion is expected by February 2003. If the committee
recommends a new assessment, it will take place in 2003-5 with data collected
for the 2002-3 academic year. Total estimated cost for the project from July
2001 through February 2003 (20 months) is estimated to be $1.2 million. We are
requesting $300,000 from NSF. Other prospective funders include the National
Institutes of Health, U.S. Department of Agriculture, and the Sloan and Mellon
Foundations. &lt;br/&gt;