* 0125667
* Towards a Fundamental Understanding of Mineral Dissolution Kinetics: An Integrated Experimental and Theoretical Approach
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Andreas Luttge, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2005
* USD 204,032.00

Luttge&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0125667&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mineral dissolution data
obtained by vertical scanning interferometry have formed the basis for a new
surface model of the dissolution process. This model has been formalized in a
fundamental rate law (Lasaga and Luttge, Science 291, 2400-2404, 2001), with
potential relevance to a wide range of minerals and mineral surface problems. In
this project, we set forth a plan integrating experimental and theoretical
techniques designed to explore the kinetics and dissolution mechanism of
(alumino)silicates. We also anticipate that this work will have far reaching
implications for other minerals as well. The techniques were chosen to enhance
one another and provide complementary information, and include vertical scanning
interferometry (VSI), hydrothermal atomic force microscopy (HAFM), Monte Carlo
(MC) and solvated ab initio and density functional theory (DFT) quantum
mechanical calculations. This approach will also allow us to incorporate results
with data taken from previous experiments involving mineral powders and single
crystals in batch and flow reactors. By operating over a wide range of length
scales, this work has the potential to provide a much-needed, critical link
between the atomic-scale observation of surface phenomena and their macroscopic
result. &lt;br/&gt;The project will produce the following: (1) the dissolution
rates of plagioclase as a function of solid composition, temperature and pH; (2)
a direct comparison of VSI and HAFM data; (3) the relationship of these data to
macroscopic (bulk) rates, as well as ab initio and DFT calculations; (4) the
relationship between reaction rate and mineral surface area in terms of total
(BET) versus reactive surface area; (5) a detailed understanding of the kinetics
and mechanisms of feldspar dissolution from solvated ab initio and DFT
calculations, and their relationship to earlier gas-phase
calculations.&lt;br/&gt;