* 0125306
* Western Arctic Shelf-Basin Interactions - SBI: Collaborative Proposal: Denitrification and Sediment Nutrient Dynamics in the Chukchi and Beaufort Seas
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2007
* John Christensen, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 01/31/2007
* USD 399,998.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE: 0125306&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will
measure sedimentary denitrification rates at selected sites in the Chukchi-
Beaufort continental shelf regions of the Artic Ocean as part of the Shelf Basin
Initiative (SBI). Overall denitrification by facultative anaerobic bacteria in
this region is a function of several factors including the oxygenation state of
underlying sediments, spatial and temporal variation in organic matter inputs,
bottom water nitrate concentrations, and the rates of sedimentary bioturbation
and bioirrigation as well as water column processes. Denitrification along the
wide Artic shelves is currently estimated to be a significant portion of the
global oceanic denitrification rate and additionally responsible for consuming a
significant fraction of the pan-Artic inorganic nitrogen budget. Denitrification
in this region will likely be subject to the impact of global climate change
brought about by either altered circulation patterns, such as changing inflow
patterns of high nutrient Pacific waters through the Bering Straits, or climate
driven changes in ecosystem structure and function resulting from altered sea-
ice distributions. In order to better understand the present variability of
nitrogen cycling in this Arctic shelf basin, the investigators will extend a
limited number of denitrification rate measurements previously made in the
region, and relate these to one or more of a number of contributing
environmental drivers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;