* 0125831
* Electrostatic Tools for Learning and Assessment
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Curtis Hieggelke, Joliet Junior College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 05/31/2006
* USD 75,000.00

Physics (13) The objective of this project is to produce a collection of easy-
to-administer, ready-to-use, classroom- and student-tested materials in
electrostatics (electrically-charged objects, static electric fields, and
electric potential) that can be used as classroom materials, web assignments, or
homework assignments. In addition, pre/post- assessment tools in the same area
are being developed. These focused materials will employ TIPERs (Tasks Inspired
by Physics Education Research) that are easily incorporated partially or as a
whole into existing courses and teaching styles. This second stage follows a
similar project in magnetism and may be followed by incremental development in
stages concentrating on areas such as thermodynamics, waves, and optics. This
project is a collaboration between two-year college and university physics
faculty from institutions that have diverse, representative student populations.
This project team is experienced in educational research as well as developing
and implementing new approaches to, and assessment of, learning. These materials
are being classroom tested at several institutions and will be made available
widely in both print and electronic versions. This project facilitates the
incorporation and application of the results of physics education research into
classrooms and thus improve the learning of physics by students at post-
secondary education institutions.