* 0125756
* Testing the Utility of Detrital Zircon Provenance Analyses: Neogene Drainage Capture and the Snake River Plain-Yellowstone Hot Spot
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Paul Karl Link, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 06/30/2004
* USD 90,615.00

Testing the Utility of Detrital Zircon Provenance Analyses: Neogene Drainage
Capture and the Snake River Plain-Yellowstone Hot Spot&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Paul
Karl Link, Idaho State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0125756&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
will use the distribution of detrital zircon grains in stream systems
surrounding the Snake River Plain-Yellowstone hotspot system to establish
confidence limits on the use of detrital zircons as a fingerprint of provenance
in fluvial systems. &lt;br/&gt;In the northern Rocky Mountains the Yellowstone-
Snake River Plain hotspot and its associated topographic bulge have migrated
northeastward from the late Miocene (17 Ma) to the present. During this time,
the western continental divide of North America has followed the crest of the
migrating topographic bulge. Thus, regional drainage, which in middle Miocene
time was to the east from a continental divide in central Idaho, was disrupted
to radial north- and south-flowing streams draining away from the topographic
bulge. Following passage of the hot spot and subsidence of the Snake River Plain
in its wake, the west-flowing Snake River has progressively captured segments of
several streams, causing them to flow west, rather than north, south, or east.
The migrating hotspot model makes testable predictions about Miocene to Recent
drainage capture. &lt;br/&gt;This project will test the utility of the detrital
zircon provenance method to accurately record drainage basin provenance. PI will
use SHRIMP (Sensitive High-Resolution Ion Microprobe) U-Pb geochronologic
analyses of 60 grains each, from about 50 samples from modern streams and
Neogene terrestrial sediments from the northern Rocky Mountains. He will
investigate the size threshold of fluvial systems where mixing begins to mask
distinctive zircon signatures. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;