* 0125703
* Enhancing the Northeast Ohio Biotechnology Sector
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Jeffrey Glass, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 12/31/2006
* USD 599,834.00

0125703 Wagner This award is to Case Western Reserve University (Lead
Institution) to support the activity described below for 36 months. The proposal
was submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program
Solicitation (NSF 0179).

Partners The partners in the proposed effort include: Case Western Reserve
University (Lead Institution), Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Inc., KAL Equity
Capital Fund, Metro Health Medical Center, Nortech-Northeast Ohio Technology
Coalition, Ohio Innovation Fund, Seven Roien Funds, University Hospitals of
Cleveland, Edison Biotechnology, Inc., CID Equity Partners, Enterprise
Development Inc.

Proposed Activities The award has the following activities: (1) internships for
local high school students to work at Case Western Reserve University and the
Cleveland Bio Technology Park, (2) academic degree programs for undergraduate
students to take one semester of bioengineering and management and internships
for post graduates as part of the master's degree, (3) research activities in
bioengineering or biomedical design where students design a product plus a
business plan for its commercialization, (4) technology transfer with the use of
a new incubator activity.

Proposed Innovation The goal of the effort is to change the culture in Northeast
Ohio to promote vibrant entrepreneurship by attracting young people to
biotechnology, creating new biomedical undergraduate and graduate entrepreneur
track degree programs that combine engineering and management studies, funding
for biology-related entrepreneurs for early evaluation of product concepts and
commercialization, and mentoring for entrepreneurs by successful business
partners.

Potential Economic Impact The award will allow the Northeast Ohio region to
apply its considerable academic research and education strengths to
entrepreneurial endeavors that will generate economic development. The goal is
for the region to become one of the top ten regions for biomedical industry
employment by the year 2010.

Potential Societal Impact Young people will be recruited for careers in
biotechnology and be given education in both engineering and management to
prepare them to become entrepreneurs to lead the new biotechnology economy that
will be one of the top ten in the nation by 2010. The emphasis on recruit and
education of under-represented minorities is a major societal benefit.