* 0125515
* SGER:  Research and Development of Light Assisted Adhesive Gripper (LAAG) Pad Technology
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* Edward De Meter, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 07/31/2003
* USD 74,998.00

The goal of this Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) project is to
investigate the potential performance of fixtures utilizing Light Assisted
Adhesive Gripper (LAAG) pad technology; and, to characterize the design factors
that are critical to its feasible implementation. In particular, this
investigation will: (1) carry out machining tests to verify the dynamic load
capacity of a LAAG pad; (2) carryout a dynamic response comparison between a
dedicated fixture-workpiece system utilizing conventional technology versus one
utilizing LAAG pad technology; (3) determine the necessary optical qualities of
the light transmission system, and generate and test a practical design; and,
(4) carry out laser release experiments in order to determine the impact of
laser switching frequency, laser wavelength, laser power, and adhesive thickness
on workpiece release time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, the successful
development of LAAG pad technology could lead to the following benefits: (1) The
total exposed volume of fixturing necessary to restrain a workpiece will be
significantly decreased, while simultaneously the dynamic stiffness of the
fixture-workpiece system will be significantly increased. (2) Workpiece
degradation due to pre-load deformation and contact surface brinelling and
scratching will be eliminated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;