* 0125911
* Integration of a Gas Chromatograph Mass Spectrometer into the Undergraduate Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2005
* Edward Clennan, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* kristina parsons
* 02/28/2005
* USD 41,658.00

Chemistry (12)

This award is permitting the introduction of GC/MS in an incremental fashion
into the curriculum as students are using this instrument in undergraduate
organic chemistry, quantitative analysis, instrumental methods of analysis,
advanced synthetic laboratories, and undergraduate research. Through a careful
selection of instrument components, the incremental approach is allowing the use
of the GC/MS in both large enrollment lower-division and lower enrollment upper-
division laboratories. Experiments are being adapted from the research and the
educational literature and implemented into our curriculum using an inquiry-
based pedagogy. The incremental approach begins with the concepts needed to
interpret isotopic mass and abundance data, and then continues with
fragmentation patterns of complex species, techniques required for the accurate
analysis of complex mixtures, and identifications through the use of library
software. Finally, a sound introduction to the operating principles of GC/MS is
providing the foundation for sophisticated uses in our upper-division
instrumental methods of analysis and advanced synthesis courses and in
undergraduate research projects. This approach is developing the student's
comprehension of and appreciation for the power of this technique through a
variety of experiences. The creative thinking skills and problem solving
abilities of students are being improved. The installation of the GC/MS is a
continuation of our overall Laboratory Modernization/Technology Integration
Effort.