* 0125818
* Collaborative Research: Interactive effects of UV and vertical mixing on phytoplankton and bacterioplankton in the Ross Sea
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2008
* Ann Gargett, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Milne
* 08/31/2008
* USD 291,133.00

0125818&lt;br/&gt;Gargett&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultraviolet radiation influences
the dynamics of plankton processes in the near-surface waters of most aquatic
ecosystems. In particular, the Southern Ocean is affected in the austral spring
period when biologically damaging ultraviolet radiation is enhanced by ozone
depletion. While progress has been made in estimating the quantitative impact of
ultraviolet radiation on bacteria and phytoplankton in the Southern Ocean, some
important issues remain to be resolved. Little is known about responses in
systems dominated by the colonial haptophyte Phaeocystis antarctica, which
dominates spring blooms in a polyna that develops in the southern Ross Sea. The
Ross Sea is also of interest because of the occurrence of open water at a far
southerly location in the spring, well within the ozone hole, and continuous
daylight, with implications for the regulation of DNA repair. A number of
studies suggest that vertical mixing can significant modify the impact of
ultraviolet radiation in the Southern Ocean and elsewhere. However, there are
limited measurements of turbulence intensity in the surface layer and
measurements have not been integrated with parallel studies of ultraviolet
radiation effects on phytoplankton and bacterioplankton. To address these
issues, this collaborative study will focus on vertical mixing and the impact of
ultraviolet radiation in the Ross Sea. The spectral and temporal responses of
phytoplankton and bacterioplankton to ultraviolet radiation will be
characterized in both laboratory and solar incubations. These will lead to the
definition of biological weighting functions and response models capable of
predicting the depth and time distribution of ultraviolet radiation impacts on
photosynthesis, bacterial incorporation and DNA damage in the surface layer.
Diel sampling will measure depth-dependent profiles of DNA damage, bacterial
incorporation, photosynthesis and fluorescence parameters over a 24 h cycle.
Sampling will include stations with contrasting wind-driven mixing and
stratification as the polyna develops. The program of vertical mixing
measurements is optimized for the typical springtime Ross Sea situation in which
turbulence of intermediate intensity is insufficient to mix the upper layer
thoroughly in the presence of stabilizing influences like solar heating and/or
surface freshwater input from melting ice. Fine-scale vertical density profiles
will be measured with a free-fall CTD unit and the profiles will be used to
directly estimate large-eddy scales by determining Thorpe scales. Eddy scales
and estimated turbulent diffusivities will be directly related to surface layer
effects, and used to generate lagrangian depth-time trajectories in models of
ultraviolet radiation responses in the surface mixed layer. The proposed
research will be the first in-depth study of ultraviolet radiation effects in
the Ross Sea and provide a valuable comparison with previous work in the
Weddell-Scotia Confluence and Palmer Station regions. It will also enhance the
understanding of vertical mixing processes, trophic interactions and
biogeochemical cycling in the Ross Sea.&lt;br/&gt;