* 0125614
* Integrating Calculus and General Physics Using a Workshop and Peer-Leader Approach
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Greg Hill, University of Portland
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 07/31/2004
* USD 98,145.00

Interdisciplinary (99) Mathematics (21) Physics (13)&lt;br/&gt;We are
implementing an integrated physics and mathematics laboratory and classroom in
which we extend cooperative learning models into a unified introductory physics
and calculus course. We address several persistent problems in student learning:
poor conceptualization and retention of material, underdeveloped problem-solving
skills, and difficulty actively applying knowledge across disciplines. We are
integrating and adapting materials and methods from several NSF funded projects
(including Workshop Physics, integrated calculus and physics at University of
New Hampshire, and peer-led team learning) and are building on successful
projects at the University of Portland that use cooperative learning models. We
are teaching a unified introductory math/physics course that encourages students
to make connections across disciplines in the same environment using the same
set of tools. Instructors in this course have greater flexibility in the timing
of topics, at times focusing on building strong foundations and at others,
establishing connections between the subjects. New equipment allows students to
work in small groups on investigative activities with a supervising peer-leader
and a faculty member overseeing the entire class. The design of the classroom
allows faculty to unify lecture with hands-on learning and to integrate computer
usage with group activities such as experimentation and joint problem-solving.
The laboratory also is used in our education of math and physics students
interested in K-12 teaching.