* 0125740
* Elementary, Secondary, and Informal Education:  "My Place by the Bay" --  Prepared Environments for Early Science Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2007
* Janet Petitpas, Bay Area Discovery Museum
* Continuing Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 08/31/2007
* USD 1,479,751.00

The Bay Area Discovery Museum will expand their "My Place by the Bay" theme with
new programmatic elements that "reinforce the theme that people, plants and
animals live together and depend upon each other to survive." Three new activity
areas will be developed that focus on science learning: A) an outdoor "Tot Lot"
for early science learners; B) an outdoor "Discovery Cove" focusing on place-
specific elements of their bayshore site; and C) an indoor recreated "Research
Vessel" outfitted with a simulated navigaion station and marine biology
laboratory. The learning goals for these three areas are: 1) "The Bay
environment is home to many living things"; and 2) "I can do science to explore
and learn about my world". The "Tot Lot," built into a hill, will be a one-half
acre, multi-sensory, outdoor, prepared environment for children under five to
learn about animals living in three distinct Bay habitats: woodland, stream and
meadow. The "Discovery Cove" will be a two-acre area prepared environment for
children up to age eight. Learners will be encouraged to see the bay as an
integrated system that includes animal adaptations, ecological relationships and
human activity. The "Research Vessel" is inspired by the R/V Questuary and is
the place where visitors will use authentic tools to do science. Other features
of this project include an integrated system of Parenting Messages that includes
special signage for parents and a Families Ask Guide for families with children
ages seven and under that is a joint effort of DABM, Golden Gate National
Recreation Area and the Golden Gate National Parks Association. They will also
develop a series of teacher workshops that will link this informal learning
space with the needs of formal education. One specific school group with whom
they will work is the Junipero Serra, an NSF Urban Systemic Intiative site.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;