* 0125919
* Convection of the Mantle Wedge Above Subduction Zones
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2002,10/31/2004
* Peter Kelemen, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 10/31/2004
* USD 99,971.00

This project will provide new constraints on the temperature and viscosity
structure of the wedge in subduction zones by combining petrologic and
geophysical constraints on the thermal structure of the wedge with experimental
and observational constraints on wedge viscosity structure in numerical models
of convection. Petrologic and geophysical constraints indicate that current
thermal models of subduction zones significantly underestimate the temperature
in parts of the mantle wedge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Observations of low seismic
velocity and high attenuation in localized regions of the wedge indicate the
presence of high temperatures, aqueous fluids, or melt. Deformation experiments
on olivine aggregates indicate that a high water content or high melt fraction
can significantly reduce viscosity. Instantaneous dynamic models of subduction
provide indirect evidence for low viscosity in the wedge. Agreement between
model results and observations of topography and geoid improve significantly for
subduction zone models including an isolated low viscosity region in the
wedge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Including a localized region of low viscosity in
time-dependent models of convection will: (1) lead to a higher mean wedge
temperature, a hotter wedge-crust boundary and a hotter slab-wedge interface,
and (2) modify the dynamic coupling between the wedge and the slab. Hybrid
(mixed kinematic-dynamic) and dynamic, time-dependent numerical models of
convection are being used to characterize the dependence of the wedge
temperature and flow distribution on the magnitude and location of localized low
viscosity regions. Combining both numerical methods allows isolation of the
behavior of the wedge viscosity itself on the flow from the modification of the
flow due to changing the viscous coupling of the wedge to the slab.
Specifically, the project is investigating the model dependence on:
asthenosphere viscosity, localized regions of low viscosity, age of the
overriding plate, slab dip, slab velocity, slab age, slab viscosity, fault dip
and depth, and nonlinear rheology. The goal is to find models of convection in
the wedge that are consistent with both petrologic and geophysical data and
include a viscosity structure that more fully reflects the complex rheologic
behavior in this environment.