* 0125835
* Teaching Students to Think as Analytical Chemists by Developing a Laboratory Course in Method Development
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/2002,02/29/2004
* David Harvey, DePauw University
* Standard Grant
* Eileen L. Lewis
* 02/29/2004
* USD 39,072.00

Chemistry (12) We are using an automated atomic absorption spectrometer, an
automated HPLC, and equipment for microwave digestions and extractions to
enhance students learning in analytical chemistry and applying the knowledge
gained to other chemistry courses in the physical and biological sciences and to
research projects. We are adapting a number of problem-based laboratories from
literature such as the environmental monitoring of urban air or trout streams
and the analysis of a clinical control serum. These lab projects make use of
"real" samples (serum, air, water) and require students to design, optimize, and
validate a method(s) to do the work in their project. Two broad pedagogical
objectives of this project are- to provide instruction in modern analytical
chemistry through changes to the analytical curriculum and the acquisition of
modern analytical instrumentation, and to create an educational environment in
which students solve problems by learning to think as analytical chemists. These
objectives are accomplished by: (1) creating a new curriculum that better
represents the skills required in analytical chemistry; (2) providing students
with a problem-based laboratory experience; (3) creating a student-centered lab
emphasizing cooperative learning; (4) training students in the use of modern,
automated instrumentation; and (5) linking the analytical lab experience to a
student's interests. In the Method Development course, an upper-level laboratory
course required of chemistry majors, the students work as part of a research
team to design, optimize and validate an analytical method for an analyte in a
complex, real matrix. Each student assumes responsibility for one or more
aspects of the group's project. A key feature of this project is the use of the
"jigsaw" concept in which students from different groups, but with similar
responsibilities, periodically meet to share information and discuss solutions
to common problems.