* 0125363
* Enhancing and Assessing Spatial Cognition through Computational Craftwork
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Michael Eisenberg, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 06/30/2007
* USD 305,620.00

When professional mathematicians and scientists discuss the nature
and&lt;br/&gt;origins of their own creativity, they often mention the central
role&lt;br/&gt;played by visual and spatial thinking. But despite the apparent
importance&lt;br/&gt;of visual/spatial cognition in mathematics and science
education, there is&lt;br/&gt;still relatively little research aimed at
understanding, enhancing, and&lt;br/&gt;assessing spatial reasoning in math and
science students. Even more, there&lt;br/&gt;are few efforts that seek to blend
novel computational media with the&lt;br/&gt;sorts of spatially and
mathematically rich hands-on crafting activities&lt;br/&gt;that influenced and
motivated earlier generations of scientists. We&lt;br/&gt;believe that progress
can be made on both these fronts--on both basic&lt;br/&gt;cognitive research and
pedagogical development--by an effort at&lt;br/&gt;integration. That is: by
designing playful, creative, and technologically&lt;br/&gt;sophisticated
educational materials for exercising and enhancing spatial&lt;br/&gt;cognition,
we can use those materials as the means to explore and&lt;br/&gt;understand
fundamental issues in spatial cognition as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the
course of this project, then, we plan to:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* Characterize
the nature of spatial expertise in the understanding of&lt;br/&gt;three-
dimensional forms, while creating flexible assessment techniques
to&lt;br/&gt;measure development of that expertise;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;*
Devise a practical spatial curriculum of materials designed to
enhance&lt;br/&gt;and exercise spatial cognition. This curriculum will be based
on a&lt;br/&gt;combination of both hands-on work and creative computational
papercrafting&lt;br/&gt;activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* Extend our current
software research environments (HyperGami and&lt;br/&gt;JavaGami) to incorporate
online spatial advisors that assist students in&lt;br/&gt;reflecting upon,
understanding, playing with, and interpreting&lt;br/&gt;three-dimensional
polyhedral forms; and&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* Create new software to explore both
traditional and novel realms of&lt;br/&gt;mathematical papercrafting, such as
pop-ups, flexagons, anamorphic art,&lt;br/&gt;and surface models. In exploring
these areas, we seek to expand the&lt;br/&gt;landscape of traditional
mathematical papercrafts by exploiting the&lt;br/&gt;creative potential of
computational media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;