* 0125871
* The Physics of the Earthquake Source and Radiated Waves:  Frequency Dependence, Spatial Distribution, and Directivity in Elastodynamic Models of Repeated Fault Ruptures
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2003
* Bruce Shaw, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 11/30/2003
* USD 109,801.00

The main thrust of this work is to seek a deeper understanding of the radiated
waves emitted by earthquakes. In previous work, the investigator has examined
how total radiated energy can be sensitive to the source physics, showing
dfferences for slip versus velocity weakening friction in elastodynamic faults.
This work was expanded to look at the frequency content and spatial dependence
of the radiation. A number of important results were obtained, including: (1) A
new radiating boundary condition allowing a nonuniform prestress, useful for
repeated ruptures, was developed; (2) Having to assume only a physics of the
tractions on the fault, the full spectra of radiated waves for events with a
wide range of sizes were generated; (3) Characterizing the spectral content of
the radiation, a nonlinear magnitude dependence of a second corner frequency was
found, and shown to be related to fundamental source parameters; (4) Strong
directivity effects for large events were exhibited in spectral ratios. With
renewed support, continued research on this subject is being carried out, with a
focus on three specifc projects:

The first project involves further exploration of magnitude and spatial
dependence of directivity effects. Initial results have shown striking
amplification of acceleration spectra away from the epicentral region in large
events. Further exploration of these effects includes time domain complements of
the frequency domain measurements already made. This work will further develop a
new theoretical tool for exploring an issue with potentially large hazard and
earthquake engineering implications.

The second project involves the extension of measurements made in two-
dimensional models of radiated energy spectra to three-dimensional models. A
further generalization of a new radiating boundary condition is being developed
in two dimensions, both extending it to higher dimensions and to continuous
loading, allows direct measurements at long times. This allows quantitative
physical predictions of the magnitude dependence of radiated energy spectra.

The third project involves the application of a new measurement developed in the
models to earthquake data. The measurement takes advantage of a natural
averaging measure through summing of energy spectra to convert to average
acceleration spectra. In the models, the period of the peak average acceleration
spectra was shown to reflect fundamental source parameters. Measurements of the
magnitude dependence of this quantity in earthquakes are being carried out.