* 0125152
* Collaborative Research:  The Chemical Ecology of Shallow-water Marine Macroalgae and Invertebrates on the Antarctic Peninsula
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Bill Baker, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 05/31/2006
* USD 434,332.00

0125152&lt;br/&gt;Amsler/Baker/McClintock&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The benthic
marine ecosystem near Palmer Station, Antarctica provides an excellent site for
the study of the function and evolution of chemical defenses in marine
organisms. Antarctica is unique in that sea stars and other invertebrates are
the major predators on benthic animals. Sea stars are quite different from
other, biting predators because they often feed by extruding their cardiac
stomach over their prey for external digestion. This feeding pattern should be a
particularly strong selective force for surface-sequestration of chemical
defenses, especially in Antarctica where sea stars are the major sponge predator
and biting spongivores are relatively uncommon. Antarctic sea stars are slow
moving predators that feed on individual sponges for long periods of time and
can have patchy distributions. However, they are much larger than the small
grazers thought to be important in inducing chemical defenses at lower
latitudes. Previous studies by the investigators have established the presence
and ecological role of secondary metabolites in a wide variety of sessile and
sluggish antarctic marine invertebrates and in marine macroalgae.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current project focus on two sets of questions
concerning the function and evolution of chemical defenses. First, the
predictions of the Optimal Defense Theory and the Induced Defense Model of plant
and animal chemical defenses will be tested. The former theory predicts that
chemical defenses will be differentially sequestered in tissues that are most
susceptible to predation. The latter theory predicts that such predators should
select for inducible defenses and these Antarctic predator-prey relationships
provide the opportunity to separate the issue of predator size from the basic
predictions of the model. Second, the investigators propose to utilize the
ecologically dominant members of the Antarctic Peninsula's rich macroalgal flora
and the distinctive nutrient environment of coastal Antarctica to test
predictions of multiple, interactive roles for secondary metabolites in brown
macroalgae including predictions of the Induced Defense Model. An additional
test will examine whether increased ultraviolet radiation in shallow water
benthic communities caused by atmospheric ozone depletion might be affecting
secondary metabolite production. Because of the dominance of these macroalgae in
their communities, understanding factors that influence their trophic
relationships are important for understanding community dynamics as a whole. The
investigators plan to continue to vigorously pursue and foster opportunities to
integrate their scientific research with a variety of educational activities,
including supporting undergraduate, as well as graduate and postgraduate
research; and science teachers through the NSF Teachers Experiencing Antarctica
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;