* 0125726
* ChemSense: Investigating Learning and the Impact of Sustained Integration of Representational Tools and Chemical Investigations in the Classroom
* EHR,DRL
* 01/15/2002,08/31/2005
* Brian Coppola, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* N. Hari Narayanan
* 08/31/2005
* USD 1,158,750.00

A multidisciplinary program of research and development that examines the impact
of the sustained integration of representational tools and chemical
investigations on chemistry learning and teaching in high schools and colleges
will be undertaken. A team of chemists, cognitive scientists, computer
scientists, and science educators will focus on three critical and interrelated
issues: chemical understanding, scientific investigations, and discourse and
representation. The project will generate new knowledge about the relationship
between students' understanding of chemical phenomena and their generation and
use of various representations at the macroscopic (physical, aggregate) and
microscopic (atomic and molecular) levels and in the context of collaborative
laboratory investigations. Additionally it will evolve new knowledge about the
relationship between teacher activities, scaffolding, and support and students'
use of representations in collaborative laboratory investigations. It is planned
to extend the development of a learning environment, the ChemSense Knowledge
Building Environment that both supports and benefits from research activities.
This environment allows students and teachers/professors to collaborate in the
sustained investigation of chemical phenomena, collect data, build
representations of these phenomena, and participate in scaffolded discourse to
explain these phenomena in terms of underlying chemical entities and mechanisms.
The project team will work with chemistry professors and high school chemistry
teachers to implement this environment for an entire semester in a range of
college and high school chemistry courses. These activities and assessments will
be designed around key dimensions associated with the particulate nature of
matter and chemical reactions: change in molecular geometry, connectivity,
aggregation, state, and concentration. In high school classrooms, these
dimensions will be employed within fairly standard first-year high school
chemistry topics: electronegativity and bond formation, solubility, gas laws,
and chemical reactions. Undergraduate studies will focus on integration of
ChemSense into two types of classroom situations: a first-year lecture course
designed to convey general chemical principles through organic chemistry, and a
first-year, integrated "studio" course that combines lecture and wet-lab
experiences. With appropriate laboratory activities and teacher guidance, the
extended use of student generated, static and dynamic representations of
chemical processes, along with instrument generated representations of their
investigations, should result in deeper discourse and understanding that connect
physical phenomena with underlying chemical entities and mechanisms.

