* 0125252
* Collaborative Research:  CTD/Hydrographic and Underway Service Measurements for the Shelf-Basin Interactions Phase II Field Project
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2008
* Laurence Padman, Earth and Space Research
* Continuing Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 05/31/2008
* USD 190,765.00

This project will conduct service measurements for a three year Shelf Basin
Interaction Phase II field program in 2002-04. The service measurements include
water temperature profiles, salinity, dissolved oxygen concentration,
transmissivity, fluorescence and photosynthetically active radiation; inorganic
nutrients (nitrate, nitrite, phosphate, silicate and ammonia), chlorophyll-a,
salinity and dissolved oxygen concentrations; and underway measurements
including temperature and salinity, standard meteorological observations,
Acoustic Doppler Current Profiler (velocity and backscatter), and various
underway measurements made by SBI-designated science programs. A full set of
service measurements will be made on two cruises each year in 2002 and 2004 and
on one cruise in 2003. A limited set of measurements will be made on mooring
emplacement cruises in FY 2002, 2003, and 2004. All service measurement data
resulting from the work will be available at sea to all SBI investigators in
scientifically useful form and&lt;br/&gt;will be placed on-line at a site linked
to the UCAR Joint Office for Science Support (JOSS)&lt;br/&gt;and/or delivered
to JOSS (or other designated official data repository for the SBI Phase II
Field&lt;br/&gt;Program) via express service shortly after the conclusion of
each cruise. Data will be reported in&lt;br/&gt;preliminary, interim, and final
form as appropriate for the SBI Project.&lt;br/&gt;