* 0125848
* Refinements and Interpretation of Images of the Antarctic Crust and Upper Mantle
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Nikolai Shapiro, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 06/30/2005
* USD 242,215.00

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
Office of Polar Programs, provides funds for a seismological study of
Antarctica. The crust and upper mantle beneath Antarctica remain among the most
poorly understood regions directly underlying Earth's surface. Seismic surface
wave dispersion is uniquely suited to providing information about the crust and
upper mantle beneath Antarctica because surface wave tomography can perform well
in regions with relatively few receiving stations and remote seismicity. There
are three principal goals for this research: to continue to refine the seismic
images of the crust and upper mantle beneath Antarctica and surrounding oceans,
to improve methods to quantify the quality of these images, and to begin to
elucidate the nature and cause of some of the more prominent seismic velocity
anomalies in the uppermost mantle. Prior work was devoted to developing and
applying the capabilities to estimate and assess seismic models at high southern
latitudes. This research will continue to advance these capabilities, but a
larger fraction of the efforts will be devoted to understanding the resulting
images of the crust and upper mantle underlying the Antarctic Plate. The work
will be divided into the following five subject areas: (1) continued surface
wave dispersion measurements and data processing, (2) methodological
improvements in surface wave tomography, resolution analysis, and inversion, (3)
experiments to determine whether azimuthal anisotropy can be estimated robustly,
(4) estimation of a refined model of the crust and upper mantle at high southern
latitudes, and (5) development and application of methods to interpret the new
model to gain geophysical insight into the temperature, composition, and
evolution of the Antarctic asthenosphere, lithosphere, and crust. The rapidly
growing seismic data sets from both global networks and temporary arrays in and
around Antarctica promise to combine with improvements in surface wave
tomography and inversion to significantly refine the images of the seismic
structure of the crust and upper mantle beneath the Antarctic Plate. These
refinements will help to provide the basis for an improved understanding of the
geophysics of the Antarctic lithosphere. Structural and tectonic features that
are of particular interest for further elucidation include: the West Antarctic
Rift system with implications concerning the separation between East and West
Antarctica during the Cenozoic, the East Antarctic craton in relation to other
cratons in the world, the SE Indian Ridge with emphasis on the uppermost mantle
near the Australian-Antarctic Discordance, the thermal and compositional
structure of the upper mantle beneath the Antarctic Plate, and the distribution
of anisotropy (radial and azimuthal) across Antarctica and the southern oceans.
This research should help to advance broadly our understanding of the Antarctic
crust and upper mantle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;