* 0125767
* Hydrous Components in Nominally Anhydrous Crustal Minerals
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/2001,11/30/2004
* George Rossman, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 11/30/2004
* USD 229,662.00

Rossman&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0125767&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many minerals that are
usually formulated as anhydrous actually contain low concentrations of water or
hydroxide bound in distinct sites in their structure. These components influence
the properties of the host phase to an extent that is far disproportionate to
their actual concentrations, and together, constitute a globally significant
reservoir of hydrogen in planet Earth. Our research program is directed at 1)
characterizing the chemical form and concentrations of these components in
natural minerals and related synthetic materials, 2) relating the hydrous
components to other physical and chemical properties of the host phases, and 3)
exploring the significance of the hydrous components to the terrestrial geologic
system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We select naturally occurring minerals from
several geologic occurrences and characterize their hydrous components with a
variety of spectroscopic probes. One major objective is to determine the
quantitative amount of the hydrous components in the host phases. The general
characterization of hydrous components in minerals provides basic information
about the global water reservoir contained in minerals systems and provides
information relevant to the entry and role of hydrogen into technological
products (synthetic minerals and related structures) used in a variety of
industries. The absolute calibration data is needed to constrain the
quantitative amount of hydrogen in the various mineral reservoirs, an important
parameter in evaluating the role and transport of volatiles in the Earth's
systems. We ultimately expect to be able to prepare general calibrations for
major groups of minerals found in the earth's crust.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
content of these components in anhydrous minerals is potentially a useful
indicator of fluid history or fluid variation within a geological system. We
will work to establish the extent and conditions under which anhydrous minerals
preserve a record of water activity in rock by investigating the variation of OH
in anhydrous minerals in well-studied geological environments that have
experienced inhomogeneous fluid conditions. Our results will be compared to
oxygen isotope systematics that record fluid history in the same mineral or
rock. Through detailed studies, we will gain insight into factors such as oxygen
fugacity that could modify the retention of OH and H2O in anhydrous mineral
structures.&lt;br/&gt;