* 0125685
* Collaborative Research:Multidisciplinary Investigations of Structure and Deformation Beneath Southern Africa
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Robert Detrick, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Kaye Shedlock
* 08/31/2003
* USD 74,781.00

This study is providing constraints on the distribution, geometry, and magnitude
of structure and deformation within and near the Archean cratons of southern
Africa. A combined seismic and numerical modeling approach is used to accomplish
these goals. Results from this work are providing key information regarding the
accretion and subsequent evolution of stable cratonic regions, the depth
distribution of mantle deformation, and the degree of coupling between tectonic
plates and sublithospheric mantle. Specifically, the following issues are being
addressed: 1) the 3-D seismic structure of the crust and upper mantle in Archean
craton regions of southern Africa, with a focus on the depth extent of the
lithosphere and on the relationship of crust and upper mantle velocities to
geologically-defined tectonic boundaries; and 2) the 3-D distribution of upper
mantle anisotropy in this area, and its implications for deformation in the
lithosphere and flow in the sublithospheric mantle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new
two plane wave technique that inverts variations in surface wave phase and
amplitude across a broadband seismic array constrains three-dimensional (3-D)
crust and upper mantle seismic structure. Data for this analysis come from the
82 station Southern Africa Seismic Experiment, part of the larger-scale
multidisciplinary Kaapvaal Project. Unlike traditional regional surface wave
tomography where planar wavefronts and great circle source-receiver raypaths are
assumed, a significant advantage of the current method is that it accounts for
wavefield perturbations due to lateral heterogeneity, scattering, or
multipathing along ray paths. Both isotropic and anisotropic seismic structure
are determined using Rayleigh and Love waves recorded at the SASE stations, and
by inverting the surface wave data with existing shear wave splitting results in
this area to determine best-fitting 3-D models of seismic velocity and
anisotropy beneath southern Africa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The numerical modeling
component involves calculating 3-D models of mantle flow and determining the
relationship of these models to observations of seismic anisotropy and
deformation of the mantle lithosphere. A lithospheric keel morphology
appropriate for southern Africa is constructed through integration of the
results of the surface wave analyses with previous body wave results. This
geometry, is used to examine models of mantle flow around the keel in which flow
is driven either by horizontal plate motion or vertical mantle upwelling.
Predicted anisotropy for both body and surface waves using the elastic
parameters of southern Africa mantle nodules and the results of other
deformation studies are calculated to evaluate the potential extent of
sublithospheric mantle deformation. The results of predicted seismic anisotropy
due to mantle flow will be merged with the observed seismic anisotropy to help
constrain the distribution of mantle deformation beneath southern Africa.