* 0125675
* Strength and Elasticity of Mantle Minerals by Radial X-Ray Diffraction and Brillouin Spectroscopy
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Thomas Duffy, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2004
* USD 216,236.00

Duffy&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0125675&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the
investigators will study rheological and elastic properties of mantle minerals
by combining new radial x-ray diffraction techniques with Brillouin spectroscopy
in a diamond anvil cell. Radial x-ray diffraction is a new high-pressure method
that can constrain a wealth of information about single-crystal elastic
constants, yield strength, strength anisotropy, stress continuity, texturing,
and even the equation of state. Advantages of radial diffraction relative to
other techniques for strength and elasticity determination are that the
accessible pressure range reaches into the deep lower mantle and there is no
requirement for high-quality single crystals. A major goal of this study is to
explore the capabilities of radial x-ray diffraction by choosing a set of
materials for which the investigators can simultaneously apply radial
diffraction to 60 GPa and Brillouin scattering on single crystals to 20 GPa.
This will provide a direct comparison of elasticity determined by the new
lattice strain methods with well-established Brillouin techniques. Specific
materials to be examined included perovskites, magnesiowustites, spinel,
corundum, brucite, and calcium oxide. These results will have fundamental and
wide applications to high-pressure studies and our understanding of the Earth's
deep mantle.&lt;br/&gt;