* 0125732
* High-resolution Study of the Correlation of Earthquakes and Earth Tides: Constraints on Earthquake Nucleation
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2004
* John Vidale, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2004
* USD 71,404.00

The lunar tide has been suspected of causing earthquakes for more than a
century. It is important to understand the influence of tides on the occurrence
of earthquakes to improve understanding of the stress and the strain patterns
just as an earthquake begins. A better understanding of earthquake nucleation
could aid attempts to predict earthquakes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most previous
studies of whether earthquakes are sensitive to tides have been inconclusive. A
recently completed project by the investigators showed that earthquake rates are
no more than a few percent higher when tides favor stresses than when tides act
to discourage earthquakes. This work used tens of thousands of earthquakes on
simple parts of the San Andreas fault in northern and central California and
computes the tides with a sophisticated model including the moon, the observed
tides in the world's oceans, and the detailed coast line in
California.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines an expanded dataset with
greater resolution and resolves the level of tidal influence on earthquakes. The
work will also check to be sure that several possible confounding effects,
including the temporal clustering of earthquakes into swarms and aftershock
sequences and the presence of artifacts in earthquake catalogs do not affect the
results. A refined estimate of the effect of lunar tides on the rate of
earthquake occurrence will be produced. Results of this study will be useful in
the search for new ways to further improve understanding of earthquake
nucleation.