* 0125093
* Rate of Bouts as a Measure of Response Strength
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2004
* Richard Shull, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Godfrey R. Bourne
* 12/31/2004
* USD 92,436.00

Rate of Bouts as a Measure of Response Strength

Richard L. Shull University of North Carolina at Greensboro

It seems almost self-evident that the tendency to engage in an activity should
be directly related to the size of the reward for the activity (incentive value)
and to the motivation level. Yet response rate in the laboratory has often
turned out to be surprisingly insensitive to such factors. For example, response
rate is an increasing, negatively accelerated function of the rate of its
reinforcement (well described by a rectangular hyperbolic function). And
sometimes response rate even decreases as the size of the reward is increased.
The proposed research is based on the possibility that response rate is
insensitive because, as typically calculated, it is a mixture of two different
kinds of responding, a sensitive type and an insensitive type. There is reason
to suspect that rate of initiating bouts of an activity might be highly
sensitive to incentive and motivational variables whereas responding within
bouts might not be. If so, bout-initiation rate should be a better candidate
than total (composite) response rate for determining the fundamental relation
between responding and reinforcement. Despite a considerable amount of
suggestive evidence, however, this possibility has not been adequately developed
or evaluated--mainly because researchers have been unsure how to determine
unambiguously and nonarbitrarily when bouts begin and end and thus how to
measure bout-initiation rate. Recently Shull and his colleagues described and
validated a technique for determining bout-initiation rate and bout length--
based on fits to limbs of log survivor plots of interresponse times. Using this
technique, the proposed research will examine the possibility that the function
relating bout-initiation rate to reinforcement variables (such as rate of
reinforcement) is invariant over different response types and over variables
that alter response rate by changing bout length. The proposed research will
also determine if the relation between bout-initiation rate and reinforcement
rate is approximately linear over a wide range. If these possibilities are
confirmed, the results would favor a surprisingly simple and general principle
of response strength due to incentive and motivational variables.