* 0125253
* Geomagnetic Paleointensity of the Early Earth [2.45 Ga] as recorded in Karelia [Russia] and the Superior Province [Canada]
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2004
* John Tarduno, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2004
* USD 253,200.00

Tarduno&lt;br/&gt;0125253&lt;br/&gt;Geomagnetic paleointensity data from
Proterozoic and Archean rocks can provide insight into the origin and early
history of the Earth's magnetic field. This interval is of particular interest
because it may mark the time of growth of the solid inner core. However,
paleointensity measurements are difficult because of alteration induced during
standard (Thellier) laboratory heating procedures. The investigators have
developed an approach to measure paleointensity using single plagioclase
crystals that has potential for studying the early geodynamo. Plagioclase
crystals, which contain nanometer-sized magnetic inclusions, are less
susceptible to experimental alteration than many bulk-rock samples. Preliminary
rock magnetic and Thellier analyses of plagioclase crystals separated from 2.45
billion-year-old mafic dikes from Karelia (Russia), provide the basis for this
work. They propose field and laboratory programs to obtain time-averaged
paleointensity data based on single plagioclase crystals from Proterozoic and
Archean dikes of Karelia and the Superior Province (Canada). These data will be
used to test hypotheses concerning the early geomagnetic field, including
whether a stepwise increase in paleointensity occurred related to inner core
growth, and whether the early field had large octupole components. This work
includes support for a postdoctoral researcher, a graduate student, and several
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;