* 0125867
* Petrotectonic Evolution of High-Pressure and Suspected Ultrahigh Pressure Granulites and Eclogites in Neoproterozoic Nappes of South-East Brazil
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Christopher Parkinson, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Glen S. Mattioli
* 08/31/2003
* USD 128,048.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0125867&lt;br/&gt;Parkinson&lt;br/&gt;University of South
Carolina&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this proposal is to
document the petrological characteristics and tectonic significance of high- to
ultrahigh-pressure metamorphism (HP-UHPM) of Pan-African nappes in Minas Gerais
State, southeast Brazil. The crystalline nappes are components of the Tocantins
orogen, which extends along strike for around 1000 km, and records
Neoproterozoic convergence, subduction and collision between the Sao Francisco
craton and Rio de la Plata plate. Techniques to be applied will include: [1]
X-ray compositional mapping of major and trace elements in garnets, [2]
identification of inclusion species in garnet and zircon by micro-Raman
spectroscopy, [3] textural and compositional characterization of exsolution
lamellae and integration of precursor phase compositions, [4] SHRIMP U-Pb
geochronology of zircon zonal domains. These studies will be complemented by
conventional analyses of reaction textures and petrofabrics. The observation of
coesite-grade metamorphism in the Americas not only impacts local studies of the
Brasiliano-Pan African tectonic framework, but also provides a comparison
between deep burial in the Proterozoic (at c. 630 Ma) and better studied
Cainozoic orogenic analogues. This proposal, which addresses directly ancient
convergent margin orogenesis, provides critical detail field, geochemical, and
geochronological data of deeply buried rocks now exposed at the surface. The
newly derived P-T-time data for this 630 Ma terrane will be incorporated into
regional geodynamic models for the evolution of the South American
orogen.&lt;br/&gt;