* 0125214
* Mechanisms of acoustic stimulation of fluid flow in porous media: Integration of laboratory pore-scale studies and theoretical model development
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2002,10/31/2004
* Richard Vigil, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 10/31/2004
* USD 200,000.00

O125214&lt;br/&gt;Beresnev&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two pervasive practical problems
are related to the reduced mobility of organic fluids in porous media: the
difficulty in removing organic contaminants from groundwater and incomplete
petroleum recovery from reservoirs. The existing solutions are expensive and
often ecologically hazardous. On the other hand, the flow of pore fluids can be
significantly enhanced by the application of elastic waves. The sonic
stimulation is ecologically clean and economical. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proliferation of sonic-stimulation technologies has been hampered by inadequate
understanding of the mechanisms by which the elastic waves mobilize pore fluids
. A theory of sonic stimulation virtually does not exist. The proposing team at
Iowa State University aims at gaining insight into quantitative physical
mechanisms of stimulation and building a mathematical model of key phenomena in
play.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To study the microscopic mechanisms of fluid-sound
interaction, the investigators will use the pore-scale flow visualization
apparatus developed at the Department of Chemical Engineering. The unit matches
the refractive index of all phases in a porous cell to make it transparent to
light. A fluorescent dye is added to the organic fluid to make it the only one
visible when illuminated by a laser source; the two-dimensional images are
captured by a digital camera and then combined in a three-dimensional rendering
of the system. The unit allows direct observation of the movement of organic
ganglia subjected to sonic forcing. These investigations will be combined with
the development of a theoretical and numerical model of sonic stimulation at the
Department of Geological and Atmospheric Sciences. Among the mechanisms to
include is the peristaltic motion, the effects of mechanical vibrations on
capillary forces, coalescence of ganglia, and the boundary-film effects. The
theoretical analyses will use the multi-phase continuum approach (Navier-Stokes
equations) and the Monte-Carlo (pore-network)
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By integrating the theory development with the
pore-scale investigations, a working model of the sonic stimulation will be
built. This model will serve the basis for the applications of the new
technology to environmental restoration and enhanced oil
recovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;