* 0125657
* Development of Quadrupole Magnetic Field-Flow Fractionation: Application to Characterization of Magnetic Colloids and Microparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Jeffrey Chalmers, Cleveland Clinic Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Eric S. Peterson
* 02/28/2006
* USD 290,491.00

Development of Quadrupole Magnetic Field-Flow Fractionation: Application to
Characterization of Magnetic Colloids and
Microparticles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of the
proposed work is to develop magnetic field-flow fractionation (MgFFF) into a
powerful tool for characterizing magnetic colloids in terms of their
paramagnetic component content. The various FFF techniques are elution-based
separation methods in which the degree of retardation of a colloidal material
depends on the strength of interaction of the colloid particles with the applied
field. The quadrupole magnetic field is radially symmetrical and lends itself to
an annular FFF channel geometry. Such a geometry has already been exploited for
biological cell sorting using immunospecific magnetic colloid labels. A novel,
helical channel geometry is proposed that will have several advantages over a
simple annular channel. It has simplified inlet and outlet geometry, it will
nullify the effects of varying field strength around the annular circumference,
and it will have increased separation length for a given quadrupole magnet.
Effort is being devoted to optimizing the channel geometry and operating
conditions. The importance of carrier solution chemistry cannot be
underestimated because aggregation or chaining of magnetized particles must be
avoided. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quadrupole magnetic FFF offers the unique
possibility of characterizing colloidal material in terms of its distribution in
magnetization. Other techniques yield only a bulk, or mean value for the
magnetization. Distribution information would be invaluable to the manufacturers
of these materials. The inclusion of a quadrupole electromagnet will broaden the
applicability of the instrument. The field strength can be adjusted to suit the
magnetic properties of the sample. Using programmed decay of field strength, the
instrument will be capable of characterizing magnetically polydisperse
particulate samples in which magnetization varies widely from particle to
particle. The method will be useful for characterizing microparticles and
colloids. It will also lend itself to separation of proteins by functionalizing
the surface of the particles to promote selective adsorption.&lt;br/&gt;