* 0125666
* Collaborative Research:  Petrologic and Geochemical Investigations of Low Temperature Fluid-Rock Interactions within a Hot Spot, Oceanic Island Volcano from Study of the HSDP Core
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Peter Schiffman, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 07/31/2007
* USD 102,396.00

0125666&lt;br/&gt;Schiffman&lt;br/&gt;The project will focus on combined
petrographic and geochemical analyses of altered rock core recovered from a deep
drill hole near Hilo, on the Big Island of Hawaii. Some of this material comes
from a 3 km-deep drill hole completed by the Hawaii Scientific Drilling Project
(HSDP) in September, 1999. The reminder will come from new samples that will be
recovered when the existing hole is deepened, beginning in early 2003. The
primary objective of this project will be to develop and test models for rock
alteration using an integrated analytical approach for studying the recovered
core materials. Major questions to be addressed are: (1) What is the alteration
history of the basaltic material which underlies Mauna Kea volcano, how has it
been influenced by various types of alteration processes, and are these distinct
from other forms of seafloor alteration? (2) How has this alteration affected
the mineral composition and physical properties of these materials? (3) How
significantly has alteration affected the chemical composition of the submarine
portions of the Mauna Kea? and (4) What is the evidence regarding (proposed
models invoking) deep circulation of ground waters within the interior of this
volcano? Questions # 1 and 2 will be addressed through the systematic study of
the alteration mineralogy. Question #3 and 4 will be addressed by detailed
geochemical investigations of elemental and isotopic signatures associated with
the conversion of basaltic minerals and glass to palagonitized glass, layer
silicates, and zeolites. Trace element and isotopic analyses will provide the
means of evaluating the exchange of basaltic, seawater, meteoric components
during alteration. Stable isotopic analyses of alteration minerals should allow
us to test a hydrologic model suggesting that meteoric fluids have circulated
deep within the interior of Mauna Kea. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;