* 0125477
* Collaborative Research:  Stratigraphic Resolution as Key to Tectonic Synthesis in the Southeastern New England Avalon Zone Around Boston, Massachusetts
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2006
* Margaret Thompson, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 03/31/2006
* USD 97,802.00

Integrated paleomagnetic/geochronologic study necessitates radical tectonic re-
thinking in the Boston portion of the Southeastern New England Avalon Zone
because new isotopic data reveal fundamental flaws in the long accepted regional
stratigraphy. For example:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Reportedly Neoproterozoic,
but previously undated Brighton volcanic interbeds from four geographically
separated sections in the Roxbury Conglomerate have maximum ages of
approximately 587 Ma, 490 Ma, 438 Ma and 362 Ma based on 1-4 grain zircon
fractions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Reportedly Ordovician Quincy Granite (based
on an upper intercept date of 437 + 23 Ma) has yielded Siluro-Devonian zircons
(single grain analyses with 207 Pb/ 206 Pb dates of approximately 410
Ma).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Reportedly 630 + 15 Ma Dedham Granite west of the
Boston Basin has yielded a weighted mean 207 Pb/ 206 Pb date of approximately
610 Ma based on three single zircon analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary
paleopoles based on these geochronological data further suggest
that:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. The previously reported Neoproterozoic Avalonian
pole form the Roxbury Conglomerate is from Silurian or younger
rocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Reliably dated Neoproterozoic rocks formed at
low-mid latitudes rather than the previously reported high-mid latitude for the
610 to ~ 570 Ma interval.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks funding for
continued work to clarify stratigraphic and structural relationships
in&lt;br/&gt;the Boston area as a basis for completing 5 or 6 well dated
paleomagnetic poles. These poles will constrain revised interpretations of the
paleolatitude of the Southeastern New England Avalon Zone during Neoproterozoic
arc magmatism, its position during during hypothesized "snowball" earth climatic
events and the timing of mid-Paleozoic accretion to North America. Oriented
paleomagnetic cores will be collected at 21 new locations in Avalonian arc rocks
including Dedham Granite and Mattapan Volcanic Complex, in overlying
Neoproterozoic strata including the Cambridge Argillite and glaciomarine
deposits comprising the Squantum Member of the Roxbury Conglomerate, in
"Brighton" Volcanics and in several other formations of uncertain or poorly
constrained age (including reportedly Jurassic intrusive rocks of the Medford
dike and Calf Island sill). Twelve of these sites are also targeted for
supporting geochronology and ten for geochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;