* 0125501
* Workshop:  A Framework for Integrating Nutritional,   Environmental, and Neuroscience Contributions to Children's Development
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,12/31/2003
* Theodore Wachs, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 12/31/2003
* USD 16,080.00

Abstract

Frameworks for Integrating Nutritional, Environmental, and Neuroscience
Contributions to Children's Development

T. D. Wachs & B. Lozoff

A workshop is planned to focus on the Functional Isolation Hypothesis. This
hypothesis can serve as a theoretical framework for integrating the linked
contributions of nutrition, environment, and neuroscience to children's
cognitive and socio-emotional development. The core of the hypothesis is the
assumption that nutritional deficits simultaneously act to adversely influence
both central nervous system (CNS) development and function, as well as the level
of the child's involvement with their environment and the nature of parent-child
transactions. Parent-child transactions and the child's involvement with their
environments, in turn, can impact the child's CNS development and functioning.
Within this framework developmental outcomes are viewed as the result of the
operation of linked nutritional, environmental, and CNS influences. Using the
functional isolation hypothesis to link nutrition, environment, and
neurosciences, a workshop is proposed to bring together 15 leading researchers
from these 3 domains to discuss critical core questions that are central to the
integrated study of functional isolation at the human level. The goal is to form
research networks among nutritional, environmental, and neuroscience researchers
that will focus on the interdisciplinary study of the nature of functional
isolation and its consequences for children's development.

