* 0125169
* Potential Vorticity Diagnosis of African Easterly Waves and Tropical Cyclones
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Michael Morgan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 07/31/2006
* USD 349,079.00

Potential vorticity (PV) diagnosis has been used as a powerful tool in studying
midlatitude cyclone developments. The PIs will use this tool to study the
downstream evolution of African easterly waves (AEWs), their interactions with
the large-scale flow, and their subsequent development into tropical cyclones
(TCs). Specific studies include: 1) to reexamine whether AEWs are, in fact,
wave-like disturbances, 2) to determine whether the deformation and concomitant
superposition of AEW PV by the large-scale environmental flow is a viable
mechanism alone to trigger tropical cyclogenesis, 3) to understand more
completely the three-dimensional structure and evolution of TC PV, 4) to relate
the steering layer of TCs to the depth of the PV column, and 5) to examine the
sensitivity of TC steering to various microphysical parameterizations in NWP
models. The hypotheses associated with the tasks are: 1) the intensification of
the AEWs is related to their change in shape (from elongated to more circular)
associated with appropriate deformation and 2) the intensity and track of a
cyclone is related to its depth. Global analyses from European Center for
Medium-range Weather Forecast (ECMWF), in conjunction with satellite data and
satellite-derived winds and aircraft data, will be used to analyze the portrayal
of AEWs. Investigation on TCs' development and structure will be carried out
with high-resolution non-hydrostatic research models.

Tropical cyclone formation remains one of the largely unsolved problems in
dynamic meteorology. This research using PV analysis has the potential to
provide greater insight into the mechanisms of the transformation of African
easterly waves into tropical depressions and provide guidance in tropical
cyclogenesis prediction. The project provides good opportunities for training
graduate students.