* 0125934
* SGER:  A Pilot Study of Plutonochronology:  Rapid Dating of Recent Sediments and Soils using Pu Activities and 240Pu/239Pu Determined by ICPMS.
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,04/30/2003
* Michael Ketterer, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 04/30/2003
* USD 48,963.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A Pilot Study of Plutonochronology: Rapid Dating
of Recent Sediments and Soils using Pu Activities and 240 Pu/ 239 Pu Determined
by ICPMS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies of the chronology and
inventory of anthropogenic pollutants in the environment require a well-
calibrated timeline in soils and sediments. These sediment and soil profiles are
most frequently and reliably dated using time-consuming radiocounting
measurements of excess 210Pb, 137Cs, and 239+240Pu. Dating of recent soils and
sediments using plutonium isotopes has not been more extensively pursued because
of analytical difficulties. The fact that the application of quadrupole ICPMS to
Pu chronology has been overlooked represents one of the more striking missed
opportunities of the 1990s in isotope geochemistry, as ICPMS technology has been
suited to this task for at least the last decade. The goal of this project is to
demonstrate and further develop the use of inductively coupled plasma mass
spectrometry (ICPMS) in Pu dating of soils and sediments. This approach will
provide a much faster complement or alternative to established radiodecay
counting of 137Cs and/or excess 210Pb. It will examine Pu activity and isotope
ratio profiles in Lake Coeur DAlene, Idaho, and Pine Valley Reservoir
(Washington Co., UT). &lt;br/&gt;