* 0125094
* Experimental Tests of the Effects of Order-Disorder on Stability and Elasticity of Minerals at High Pressures and Temperatures
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2001,04/30/2005
* John Parise, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 04/30/2005
* USD 232,623.00

Parise and Chen&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0125094&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal plans a
focused study on three systems of direct relevance to the Earth's lower crust
and mantle and for which considerable data exist: dolomite, selected oxide
spinels such as magnesioferrite (MgFe2O4) and qandilite (Mg2TiO4), and
orthopyroxene (opx, En50Fs50). The goal is to determine the state of order in
these materials as a function of both temperature and pressure using Rietveld
refinement, confirm the breakdown curve proposed by Luth from his quench
experiments on dolomite, and determine the relationship between order (X) and P-
and S-wave velocities at high PT. It is recognized that quench experiments
followed by single crystal structure determination can be useful, and that
measurements at high pressure or high temperature alone are valuable. However,
an opportunity exists now to couple crystallographic measurements with the
estimation of ultrasonic travel times at simultaneously maintained high pressure
and temperature for the first time, and thereby more closely approach
measurements directly relevant to the Earth's lower crust and upper-mantle.
These simultaneous measurements are ideally suited to the problem of order-
disorder and its effects on stability and elasticity. X-Ray diffraction provides
a record of X and of the thermal EoS while the new set up for ultrasonic work
provides simultaneous determinations of P and S-wave velocities. The latter
measurements are crucial since there is no longer a need to change samples to
perform separate measurements for P- and S-waves; several groups report that
while in some materials (orthopyroxene for example) P-waves appear unaffected by
cation substitution, the S-wave velocities do vary. Some technical development
will accompany the project and it is hoped this will find application in the
research of other groups interested in simultaneous real-time determination of
structure and elasticity, and in correlating atomic structure with physical
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;