* 0125097
* Collaborative Research: Experimental Study of the Origin and Nature of High Pressure Faulting Relevant to Earthquakes in Subducting Lithosphere
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/2001,11/30/2005
* Yingwei Fei, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 11/30/2005
* USD 70,914.00

Fei &lt;br/&gt;EAR-0125097 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conventional brittle
failure is impossible at significant depth within Earth because the combination
of pressure and temperature ensures that the flow strength of rocks is exceeded
before the fracture strength. Nevertheless, earthquakes occur abundantly within
descending slabs of oceanic lithosphere in subduction zones, in several cases to
depths as great as 680 km, where they stop abruptly. Although the mechanism by
which these earthquakes occur is unknown, their seismic signals ensure that they
represent sudden failure of rock along a fault. There are two mechanisms
presently known that can enable faulting to occur at high pressure. The first,
dehydration embrittlement, involves generation of a free fluid phase by
breakdown of hydrous minerals; the free fluid assists in opening of microcracks
which is a crucial step leading to shear failure. So far as is known, this
mechanism could potentially explain all earthquakes if appropriate hydrous
phases are present in the mantle and if their stability fields are such that
they dehydrate under appropriate conditions to yield the observed depth
distribution. The second, phase-transformation-induced faulting can be triggered
during the phase transformations of olivine to its denser polymorphs, which
occur with increasing depth. This mechanism can potentially explain the bimodal
depth distribution of earthquakes and their abrupt termination at the base of
the upper mantle if metastable olivine is preserved in the cold cores of
subduction zones at transition-zone depths. However, given current understanding
of the phase distribution within subducting lithosphere, neither mechanism can
comfortably explain the occurrence of very large earthquakes at depths exceeding
500 km. The investigators will apply their collective expertise in high-pressure
technology, experimental deformation, and seismology to achieve the following:
(1) test the hypothesis of reactivation of hydrated faults; (2) monitor
experiments on dehydration embrittlement and transformation-induced faulting by
detection and location of acoustic emissions; (3) develop improved high-pressure
experimental assembly designs for in situ synchrotron experiments on shear
failure; (4) use faulting experiments on both dehydration embrittlement and
phase-transformation-induced faulting to place new constraints on these two
faulting mechanisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;