* 0125633
* Elementary, Secondary, and Informal Education: Birds in the 'Hood / Aves del Barrio
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2006
* John Fitzpatrick, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing grant
* Sylvia M. James
* 12/31/2006
* USD 1,019,603.00

"Birds in the Hood" or "Aves del Barrio" builds on the Cornell Laboratory of
Ornithology's (CLO) successful Project Pigeon Watch, and will result in the
creation of a web-based citizen science program for urban residents. The primary
target audience is urban youth, with an emphasis on those participating in
programs at science centers and educational organizations in Philadelphia,
Tampa, Milwaukee, Los Angeles, Chicago and New York. Participants will develop
science process skills, improve their understanding of scientific processes and
design research projects while collecting, submitting and retrieving data on
birds found in urban habitats. The three project options include a.) mapping of
pigeon and dove habitats and sightings, b.) identifying and counting gulls and
c.) recording habitat and bird count data for birds in the local community.
Birds in the Hood will support CLO's Urban Bird Studies initiative by
contributing data on population, community and landscape level effects on birds.
Support materials are web-based, bilingual and include downloadable
instructions, tally sheets, exercises and results. The website will also include
a web-based magazine with project results and participant contributions. A
training video and full color identification posters will also be produced. The
program will be piloted at five sites in year one, and then field-tested at 13
sites in year two. Regional dissemination and training will occur in year three.
It is anticipated that 5,000 urban bird study groups will be in place by the end
of the funding period, representing nearly 50,000 individuals.