* 0125918
* Development of a Numerical Model for the PVTX Properties of Na-K-Ca-Fe-C1 Solutions in Magmatic/Hydrothermal Ore Deposits
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Robert Bodnar, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2005
* USD 336,500.00

Bodnar&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0125918&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A three-year experimental
study will be conducted to determine the temperature-pressure-composition (PTX)
limits of fluid immiscibility over the temperature and pressure range
appropriate for magmatic-hydrothermal ore deposits associated with shallow
granitic magmas. The study will focus on fluid compositions in aqueous solutions
containing Na, K, Ca, and Fe chlorides, starting with the less-complex sub-
systems containing Na-K, Na-Ca, and Na-Fe chlorides. Samples of immiscible
fluids will be trapped in situ using the synthetic fluid inclusion technique,
and compositions of the fluids will be determined using standard
microthermometric analytical techniques. The compositional data will be used to
develop an empirical numerical model to predict P-T conditions attending
magmatic-hydrothermal processes. The model will require only information that is
easily obtainable during conventional microthermometric and/or microchemical
analysis of fluid inclusions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The feasibility of the
project has been documented by preliminary studies on the water-NaCl-KCl system.
The data confirm that the synthetic fluid inclusions trap a representative
sample of the fluid(s) present at experimental run conditions, and maintain
these compositions during quenching to ambient laboratory conditions. Moreover,
conventional microthermometric analysis of the coexisting liquid-rich and vapor-
rich inclusions can be employed to determine the fluid compositions. Preliminary
data for the water-NaCl-KCl system show that partitioning of sodium and
potassium between coexisting liquid and vapor varies systematically with both
temperature and pressure. Specifically, sodium partitioning into the liquid
phase becomes less pronounced with increasing temperature and with decreasing
pressure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;