* 0125528
* Collaborative Research: Modeling Thermobaric Effects in Antarctic Deep Ocean Convection
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2005
* Timothy Stanton, Naval Postgraduate School
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Falkner
* 02/28/2005
* USD 242,950.00

0125528&lt;br/&gt;Stanton&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This collaborative project is a
modeling study of thermobaric instability in the ocean, and its effect on deep
convection in the Southern Ocean. Thermobaric instability refers to the fact
that the compressibility of sea water is a non-linear function of pressure, so
that a colder and fresher layer overlying a warmer and a saltier layer may be
statically stable, but become unstable if it is disturbed. That this is
theoretically possible has been known for a long time, but only recently has it
been considered as an effect that could actually occur in the Southern Ocean,
specifically as the potential explanation of the episodic occurrence of polynyas
(sizable areas of open water within the sea-ice pack) in the Weddell
Sea.&lt;br/&gt; This evaluation of the impact of thermobaricity on deep ocean
convection will be based on a numerical Large Eddy Simulation (LES) model
capable of simulating directly the convection plumes and large scale oceanic
flow features that would be expected with intense thermobaric overturn. Based on
preliminary results of an LES model initialized and forced by conditions
observed during previous oceanographic cruises to the Weddell Sea, this proposed
work will combine a carefully structured series of model runs with observations
to identify critical overturning processes. &lt;br/&gt;