* 0125182
* Seismology of Outer Rise Earthquakes
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2004
* Hiroo Kanamori, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 01/31/2004
* USD 63,943.00

The world's largest and most destructive earthquakes occur on the interface
between subducting and overriding plates, with interplate coupling playing an
important role in their seismogenesis. Updip from this interface, the outer-rise
comprises a broad and gentle upwarping of the oceanic lithosphere just before it
descends into the trench. Almost 20 years ago, researchers, showed a correlation
between the occurrence of outer-rise earthquakes and interplate thrust events.
The improved seismological data and tools currently available enable us to
develop an updated and enhanced catalog of outer-rise seismicity, including
mechanisms, depths and spectral characteristics, which can be subsequently used
to review models and hypotheses concerning these outer-rise events and the
deformation of subducting plates.&lt;br/&gt;A large number of events have
occurred since the earlier catalogs were compiled and, the seismic data quality,
coverage and availability have improved significantly. This enables us to better
constrain depth, location and focal mechanism through detailed waveform
modeling. Using our new catalog, our understanding of the stress evolution
within the trench and outer-rise and the relationship between seismic coupling
and outer-rise earthquakes can be refined. This work is also a first step
towards the development of a new generation of geodynamic models, improving the
constraints on the mechanical properties of the lithosphere and the dynamics of
the slab where it bends into the subduction zone. Additionally, it examines the
relationship of these earthquakes to the structure of the subducting plates, as
evidenced by bathymetric and reflection/refraction profiles.&lt;br/&gt;Of
particular interest is the spatio-temporal behavior of outer-rise seismicity.
Although most outer-rise events are tensional, a small number of deeper events
are compressional. These compressional earthquakes have been speculated to
either precede an interplate thrust, occur in regions which have not experienced
an interplate thrust event during the preceding few decades, or occur adjacent
to an area which has had interplate slip. The bending stresses and the pull of
the subducting slab are probably large relative to regional tectonic stresses or
the cyclic stresses associated with seismic coupling. However, these stress
perturbations may still trigger events in the outer-rise and may cause the
neutral surface (the zero stress boundary between tensional upper plate and
compressional lower plate) to shoal significantly. The stress changes following
interplate events can thus be viewed as perturbations of the overall dynamics.
From these temporal and spatial relationships, it is clear that the state of
stress in the outer-rise may change in both time and space in response to
interplate coupling. The record of seismicity should reflect these changes and
can therefore shed light on the physical processes at work. &lt;br/&gt;Of
greatest importance is the enhancement of our understanding of the physics of
outer-rise deformation. The results will have further implications for several
other disciplines. Improved knowledge of the temporal and spatial character of
outer-rise seismicity is an important first step towards the development of a
new generation of models of subduction zone dynamics. Since some large
interplate earthquakes occur close to populated areas or generate tsunamis,
compressional outer-rise events as stress build-up indicators may be important
for intermediate term earthquake hazard assessment.