* 0125883
* Thermal Conductivity of Quartz and Feldspars with Application to Continental Heat Flow
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2003
* Anne Hofmeister, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2003
* USD 30,800.00

EAR-0125883 Hofmeister

A one-year investigation of thermal conductivity (k) of crustal minerals using
spectroscopic measurements and modeling is proposed. The data will be
supplemented with new measurements of the thermal diffusivity of a plagioclase
feldspar using a laser-flash apparatus. These measurements will provide a
benchmark of the PI's model for the lattice contribution against available
reliable data on thermal conductivity below room temperature for quartz and
feldspar, and against the laser flash measurements at high T. The calibrated
model will provide high T data appropriate for diffusion of heat in the Earth,
and will constrain pressure dependencies through the equation of state. The
purpose is to try and understand why the most recent heat flow data from the
continents is lower than that from the oceans (Pollack et al. 1993), contrary to
the expected correlation of high heat flow with high radioactive contents, and
to the partitioning of almost all of Earth's radioactive elements into the crust
The imbalance suggests that virtually no heat from the mantle escapes through
the crust. From the determination of k(T,P) for quartz and feldspars, the
continental crust can be approximated by a conductive cooling model that
incorporates internal heating. Requiring that the surface heat flux and
temperature be matched will give solutions relating the basal temperature to the
radioactive contents. Comparison of results with previous independent estimates
of radioactive contents (based on chemical inventory) and of temperatures (based
on phase relations) will set limits on these interrelated quantities, and thus
on the basal heat flow from the mantle. This result should provide a constraint
for convection models of the mantle.

