* 0125611
* Yeast in the Antarctic Dry Valleys: Biological role, distribution, and evolution
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Laurie Connell, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 05/31/2006
* USD 327,199.00

0125611&lt;br/&gt;Connell&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Yeasts in the Antarctic Dry
Valleys: Biological role, distribution, and evolution&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
soil community of Antarctic polar desert is comprised of few endemic species of
bacteria, fungi, and invertebrates. Both filamentous and single cellular fungi
have been isolated from a diversity of Antarctic soil types, but only yeast
appear to be endemic to the polar desert soils. Although the ecological roles of
yeast in Antarctic soils is undefined, yeast may be the principal taxa in the
heterotrophic communities that synthesize sterols required by soil
invertebrates. In addition, yeast may be involved in accumulating and mobilizing
growth limiting nutrients such as phosphorus into the polar desert food web.
This multidisciplinary research will characterize the roles soil yeast play in
the McMurdo Dry Valley ecosystem in order to better understand polar deserts and
other extreme environments, as well as provide a foundation for incorporating
yeast into biogeochemical models of temperate environments. Soil microbiota
mediate most of the terrestrial ecosystem processes such as decomposition, soil
respiration, the uptake and fixation of micro and macro-nutrients,
detoxification of heavy metals, and serve as major global carbon sinks. The
complexity of soil communities in temperate regions pose difficulties in
studying the relationships between biotic and abiotic parameters of ecosystem
function and the factors controlling populations of soil microbiota remain
poorly understood. The extreme climate and relatively simple community structure
of the continental Antarctica desert regions offer a unique opportunity to
define interactions between soil organisms that are central to many ecosystems
processes. The abundance and distribution of yeast in polar desert soils will be
correlated with physical and chemical soil properties and these data will be
stored and analyzed using Geographic Information Systems (GIS). Several
physiological parameters will be explored in vitro to develop a basis for
understanding the functional role(s) these organisms may play. The evolution of
Dry Valley yeast will be addressed by determining intra- and inter-valley
population relatedness patterns, based on DNA sequence. These experiments will
form a strong foundation for future investigations, provide additional
opportunities for collaborative research and students from middle school through
college will be given the opportunity to participat in this project.&lt;br/&gt;