* 0125624
* Collaborative Research: Neotectonic Structure of Terror Rift, Western Ross Sea
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2008
* Terry Wilson, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 06/30/2008
* USD 260,566.00

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
Office of Polar Programs, provides funds for a study to investigate the tectonic
development of the southwestern Ross Sea region. Displacements between East and
West Antarctica have long been proposed based on global plate circuits, apparent
hot spot motions, interpretations of seafloor magnetic anomalies,
paleomagnetism, and on geologic grounds. Such motions require plate boundaries
crossing Antarctica, yet these boundaries have never been explicitly defined.
This project will attempt to delineate the late Cenozoic - active boundary
between East and West Antarctica along the Terror Rift in the western Ross Sea,
where young structures have been identified, continuity between active extension
and intracontinental structures can be established, and where accessibility via
ship will allow new key data sets to be acquired. We will use multi-source
marine and airborne geophysical data to map the fault patterns and volcanic
structure along the eastern margin of the Terror Rift. The orientations of
volcanic fissures and seamount alignments on the seafloor will be mapped using
multibeam bathymetry. The volcanic alignments will show the regional extension
or shear directions across the Terror Rift and the orientations of associated
crustal stresses. Swath bathymetry and single channel seismic data will be used
to document neotectonic fault patterns and the eastern limit of recent faulting.
Delineation of neotectonic fault patterns will demonstrate whether the eastern
margin of the Terror Rift forms a continuous boundary and whether the rift
itself can be linked with postulated strike-slip faults in the northwestern Ross
Sea. Seafloor findings from this project will be combined with fault kinematic
and stress field determinations from the surrounding volcanic islands and the
Transantarctic Mountains. The integrated results will test the propositions that
the eastern boundary of the Terror Rift forms the limit of the major, late
Cenozoic -active structures through the Ross Sea and that Terror Rift kinematics
involve dextral transtension linked to the right-lateral strike-slip faulting to
the north. These results will help constrain the kinematic and dynamic links
between the West Antarctic rift system and Southern Ocean structures and any
related motions between East and West Antarctica. In the first year, a
collaborative structural analysis of existing multichannel and single channel
seismic profiles and aeromagnetic data over the Terror Rift will be conducted.
The location of volcanic vents or fissures and any fault scarps on the sea floor
will be identified and a preliminary interpretation of the age and kinematics of
deformation in the Terror Rift will be produced. Late in the second year, a one-
month cruise on RVIB N.B. Palmer will carry out multibeam bathymetric and
sidescan sonar mapping of selected portions of the seafloor of Terror Rift.
Gravity, magnetics, seismic reflection and Bathy2000 3.5 kHz sub-bottom profile
data will also be collected across the rift. In the third year, we will use
these multisource data to map the orientations and forms of volcanic bodies and
the extent and geometry of neotectonic faulting associated with the Terror Rift.
The project will: 1) complete a map of neotectonic faults and volcanic
structures in the Terror Rift; 2) interpret the structural pattern to derive the
motions and stresses associated with development of the rift; 3) compare Terror
Rift structures with faults and lineaments mapped in the Transantarctic
Mountains to improve age constraints on the structures; and 4) integrate the
late Cenozoic structural interpretations from the western Ross Sea with Southern
Ocean plate boundary kinematics.&lt;br/&gt;