* 0125842
* Collaborative Research: Multiple Isotope Analyses of Soil Sulfate and Nitrate in the Antarctic Dry Valleys
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Huiming Bao, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 03/31/2006
* USD 223,338.00

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
Office of Polar Programs, provides funds for a study sulfate and nitrate in
soils of the McMurdo Dry Valleys region of Antarctica. This goal is to quantify
atmospheric deposition of sulfate and nitrate and to generate the first
quantitative model for the origin, distribution, and post-depositional
alteration of atmospheric sulfate and nitrate in Dry Valley soils. In addition
to testing the hypothesis that landforms in the Dry Valleys have been stable for
millions of years, results from this work will provide a valuable reference for
quantitative soil development in hyper-arid deserts elsewhere on Earth and on
Mars. The approach involves isotopic analyses of sulfur, oxygen, and nitrogen in
the water-soluble oxy-anions, sulfate and nitrate, in soils of differing ages
and parent materials. The breakthrough that makes this proposal possible is the
recent discovery of mass-independent oxygen-isotopic composition for sulfate and
nitrate in Dry Valley soils that shows that atmospheric deposition has
contributed a significant amount of sulfate and nitrate to the cold-desert soils
over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent work by the PI's identified spatial
patterns in the oxygen-isotopic composition of sulfate in Dry Valleys soils and
requires the existence of two sulfate end members, sea-salt sulfate and biogenic
sulfate. Here, the biogenic sulfate refers to those sulfates formed by the
oxidation of reduced biogenic sulfur gases (e.g., dimethylsulfide) in the
atmosphere. Biogenic sulfate, due to its long residence time can travel greater
distances relative to sea-salt sulfate. The isotopic analyses of oxygen and
sulfur that will be done within this project will differentiate between biogenic
sulfate and sea-salt sulfate in Dry Valley soils. In addition, preliminary data
on the oxygen-isotopic composition of nitrate from these soils reveal
exceptionally large nitrate oxygen-17 anomalies and a spatial pattern that
reflects a single nitrate source rather than two sources as for sulfate. To
quantify long-term atmospheric input of sulfate and nitrate and their subsequent
mobility in soils of this unique environment, this project will (1) sample
vertical soil profiles at centimeter-to-sub-centimeter-scale resolution, (2)
systematically analyze oxygen and sulfur isotopes in sulfate and oxygen and
nitrogen isotopes in nitrate, (3) examine soils of a wide range of radiometric
ages and parent materials, including ancient volcanic ashes, colluvium, lodgment
tills, and ice-sublimation tills, and (4) construct a simple one-dimensional
transport model for sulfate and nitrate in vertical soil
profiles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project represents collaboration between a
low temperature isotope geochemist and a geomorphologist who has extensive
experience in the Dry Valleys region. When combined with existing radiometric
isotope chronology of Dry Valley soils developed over the last 15 years, the
proposed stable isotopic analyses will, for the first time, quantify the rate
and style of soil development and patterned ground evolution in the Dry Valleys
region. These quantitative data are of paramount importance for achieving a
thorough understanding of the Dry Valleys ecosystem and for establishing
baseline data for comparison with anticipated analyses on Martian regolith
following a sample return mission to Mars.&lt;br/&gt;