* 0125598
* High-Resolution Upper-Mantle Tomography Using Seismic Arrays and Full-Wave Frechet Kernels:  Southern Africa
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Li Zhao, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2004
* USD 164,142.00

Zhao, Li&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this proposal is to develop a high-
resolution tomography method for seismic arrays. Resolution to sub-array
structure is enhanced by inverting the phase and amplitude variations between
adjacent stations, rather than at individual stations, in order to minimize
biases caused by uncertainties in lateral heterogeneities far away from the
array. Frechet kernels of the data are calculated by coupled normal-mode
summation so that all finite-frequency effects are accounted for with no high-
frequency or averaging approximations. A new traveling-wave method will also be
developed to calculate exact kernels near stations. Asymptotic Legendre
functions are used to express waves from the source to sub-array heterogeneity
(scatterer), but exact Legendre functions are adopted for waves from the
scatterer to the station.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The tomography method
is being developed for the Southern Africa Seismic Array, deployed to study the
Kaapvaal craton, and 3-D inversions are conducted for upper-mantle anisotropic
structure. Data are measured for surface and upper-mantle body waves at an
average of 50 three-component stations from 51 teleseismic events. The result
will shed new light on the conflicting features in some of the recent regional
models, such as the presence of an oceanic-type low-velocity zone beneath the
craton and shear-wave anisotropy. The multi-station, full-wave method developed
here is also well suited to serve the need of the upcoming USArray. With its
proposed average spacing of about 70 km between adjacent stations, this method
will be able to provide a nearly uniform lateral resolution of about 50 km in
the upper mantle over the entire continental United States.&lt;br/&gt;