* 0125000
* Meeting Support:  Modeling Across the Scales - Atoms to Organisms to be held January 5-10, 2002, in Santa Fe, New Mexico
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2003
* De Witt Sumners, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2003
* USD 19,710.00

Sumners&lt;br/&gt;0125000&lt;br/&gt; The investigator and his colleagues in the
Program in&lt;br/&gt;Mathematics and Molecular Biology (PMMB) organize
an&lt;br/&gt;international conference on the subject of multiscale
phenomena&lt;br/&gt;at the interface of the biological and mathematical
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;This meeting includes a broadly multidisciplinary set
of&lt;br/&gt;participants, students and researchers active at the
interface&lt;br/&gt;between mathematics (broadly defined) and biology. This
project&lt;br/&gt;supports the participation of approximately 15 domestic
students&lt;br/&gt;and young scientists, selected from a national pool of
applicants&lt;br/&gt;generated by web and journal advertisements for the
meeting. An&lt;br/&gt;unusual feature of the meeting is an opening day of
tutorials,&lt;br/&gt;which prepare the attendees for the lectures, with
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;scientists introducing basic principles to biologists
and&lt;br/&gt;biologists giving tutorials for the quantitative scientists.
Two&lt;br/&gt;sessions focus on issues of importance to students working at
the&lt;br/&gt;interface between the computational sciences and
biology.&lt;br/&gt;Students are especially welcome to attend the meeting and
present&lt;br/&gt;posters on their work.&lt;br/&gt; The Program in Mathematics
and Molecular Biology (PMMB)&lt;br/&gt;conducts research at the interface
between molecular biology and&lt;br/&gt;the mathematical sciences and trains
students and postdocs in&lt;br/&gt;this area. An essential part of this effort
is a series of&lt;br/&gt;conferences on mathematics and molecular biology. The
meetings&lt;br/&gt;provide a comfortable but challenging environment where
students&lt;br/&gt;and scientists from each discipline can learn about the
other&lt;br/&gt;discipline and about multidisciplinary approaches to the
solution&lt;br/&gt;of important problems in modern biology. This
fosters&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary training, catalyzes new
interdisciplinary&lt;br/&gt;collaborations, and in an important scientific area
helps develop&lt;br/&gt;more people with both mathematics and biology expertise.
The&lt;br/&gt;project supports students and junior scientists.&lt;br/&gt;