* 0125799
* High Resolution Chronostratigraphic Constraints on Terminal Paleozoic Crises and Recovery in the Circum-Tethys Region
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Paul Renne, Berkeley Geochronology Center
* Continuing grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 12/31/2005
* USD 285,134.00

ABSTRACT

High Resolution Chronostratigraphic Constraints on Terminal Paleozoic Crises and
Recovery in the Circum-Tethys Region

Roland Mundil, Kenneth R. Ludwig, Paul R. Renne

This research program is intended to improve the calibration of late Permian
through Triassic biostratigraphic and magnetostratigraphic time scales towards
an enhanced understanding of the terminal Paleozoic environmental and biotic
crisis and subsequent Mesozoic recovery. Improved time scales are critical to
realistic evaluation of the causes of, and interrelationships between, the
various observed biotic and paleoenvironmental anomalies that characterize this
transition. Our initial radio-isotopic age data (both U/Pb and Ar/Ar) are at
variance with recent studies, many of which favor a rapid extinction caused by a
bolide impact. Although an impact at or near the P-T boundary cannot be excluded
a priori, a more gradual scenario and a causal relation between the massive
continental basalt volcanism in South China at the end of the Permian and
Siberia at the Permian-Triassic boundary - possibly in combination with other
factors - and the biotic crisis must be considered. Despite the dramatic
increase in available geochronologic data for the Late Permian through Early
Triassic interval, crucial questions remain unanswered and will be addressed: 1)
How synchronous are global biostratigraphic correlations across the Permo-
Triassic boundary, and how precisely can biostratigraphic, geochemical,
lithostratigraphic, and other records be correlated? 2) What are the temporal
relations between terrestrial and marine records across the Permo-Triassic
boundary? 3) What was the rate of the biotic recovery in the Early Triassic? 4)
Do interlaboratory discrepancies (either physical or by interpretation) between
high-precision U/Pb zircon ages for the Permo-Triassic boundary undermine the
inferred extremely rapid chronology of extinction events? Indeed, how reliable
is U/Pb zircon geochronology as a Phanerozoic time scale method?