* 0125544
* Collaborative Research: Fast Dynamos in the Computer, the Galaxy, and the Laboratory
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Alexandre Lazarian, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 07/31/2004
* USD 59,999.00

AST 0125544&lt;br/&gt;Lazarian&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program is
aimed at understanding the generation and evolution of astrophysical magnetic
fields. Magnetic fields play decisive role in many astrophysical processes from
mediating star formation and transporting angular momentum in ubiquitous
accretion disks to influencing heating/cooling within clusters of galaxies. In
all these situations, the large magnetic Reynolds numbers of the flows require
that any changes of magnetic field topology be implemented through fast
reconnection, while magnetic field generation requires fast
dynamo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project makes use of recent advances in
numerical capabilities to test recently advanced theories of fast reconnection
and fast dynamos. It also proposes further development of reconnection theory,
comparisons of theoretical and numerical results with liquid sodium
measurements, and simulations of the galactic dynamo. Another very important
outcome of this effort will be the development of a parallel AMR MI-ID code,
RIEMANN, for simulating MHD phenomena in rotating astrophysical systems. This
will be a general-purpose utility that will be made widely available to the
community. Funding for this project was provided by the NSF program for
Extragalactic Astronomy &amp; Cosmology (AST/EXC).&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;