* 0125876
* Active Student Participation in Introductory Physics Laboratories Using RealTime Physics
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Claudio Guerra-Vela, University of Puerto Rico at Humacao
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 06/30/2006
* USD 99,723.00

Physics (13) This project is modernizing the introductory physics laboratory
using computerized instructional technology. Microcomputer Based Laboratory
(MBL) tools that use the RealTime Physics (RTP) program designed by David
Sokoloff and Ronald Thornton are being adapted. Students in their first and
second year of college and also high school physics instructors and students are
participating in the project. The objective is that the student play an active
rather than passive role in performing the experiments which include data
acquisition, analysis (graphs and calculus) and intuitive inference. Immediate
visual display of the experimental results saves time and enhances students'
laboratory skills and their ability to retain the physical concepts learned. The
implementation of the RTP also allows development of more appropriate laboratory
exercises for students with different science majors. The standardized Force and
Motion Conceptual Evaluation is being used to evaluate the effectiveness of the
methods. An external peer reviewer familiar with education policies in Puerto
Rico is also evaluating progress. To better prepare students who may come to the
university while still in high school, a summer workshop is being organized for
local high school science instructors to assist them in learning new and
powerful ways of teaching basic science. Videos tapes showing high school
students immersed in physics related experiments are being distributed to local
high schools in order to make studying physics more attractive as a career
option.