* 0125668
* Delaware Valley Community College and High School Outreach Network
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2006
* Sally Solomon, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 11/30/2006
* USD 714,999.00

0125668 Luzzi

This award is to the University of Pennsylvania to support the activity
described below for 36 months. The proposal was submitted in response to the
Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF 0179).

Partners The partners in this effort are the University of Pennsylvania (Lead
Institution), Drexel University, the Collegiate Consortium, HUBS (Hospitals,
Universities, Businesses, Schools), MAGPI (Metropolitan Area GifaPop in
Philadelphia for Internet2), Bucks County Community College, Delaware County CC,
Montgomery County CC, the CC of Philadelphia in Pennsylvania, Camden County CC
in New Jersey, Delaware Technical CC in Delaware, Hartford CC in Maryland, SAIC
through HUBS, Centocor, Cephalon, Sunthes, Life Sensors, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, and Ben Franklin Technology Partners.

Proposed Activities This proposal presents a partnership or academic, non-profit
and corporate partners in the Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Delaware, Maryland
region to provide the infrastructure, curriculum development, teacher training
and curriculum implementation for Associates Degree programs in nano- and nano-
bio-technology. The proposal includes the building of an infrastructure that
will leverage the power of high bandwidth communications for regional virtual
classrooms and telexperimentation. The program also includes outreach to high
schools in the region.

Proposed Innovation The proposal centers on the need for a technically skilled
workforce, if the region is to achieve its full economic potential in the
technology-rich pharmaceutical, life science and advanced chemical sectors. The
companies in these technology sectors will need workers from PhDs to technicians
to enable growth and economic well-being. The partners propose a coordinated
effort in tech-based outreach for education and training, especially at the
associates degree level. Approaches included are internet portal and
collaboration groupware to support dynamic formation of research teams and
virtual classrooms, distance learning, tele-experimentation with remote
participation in experiments via near-real-time digital images of scientific
instruments, high-bandwidth communication through Internet 2 for video-
conferencing.

Potential Economic Impact Partnerships with universities, community colleges,
the private sector, and regional government are needed to provide the workforce
education/training from associate degree through PhD degrees will provide the
workforce needed to attract and retain high-tech industry in pharmaceuticals,
advanced chemical, and life sciences to the four-state region.

Potential Societal Impact Currently a significantly lower percentage of the high
school graduates in the region receive education beyond high school than for
Silicon Valley. The region needs a highly-trained workforce to attract and
retain industry for high paying jobs. The young people in the region now have to
accept low-paying jobs or relocate. This integrated effort will provide the
training and the jobs needed to change that.

