* 0125635
* Integration of Wireless Technologies into an Undergraduate Networks Exploration Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Randy Smith, Jacksonville State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark James Burge
* 12/31/2005
* USD 29,109.00

Computer Science (31)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goals of this project are
to advance the integration of wireless computer networking technologies into the
undergraduate curriculum, to improve the educational experience, employment
possibilities, and theoretical depth of undergraduate computer science and
information systems majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to achieve this goal,
this project has the following objectives:&lt;br/&gt; - Provide undergraduate
students with a solid appreciation of the fundamentals of wireless technologies
through hands-on experience in installing, troubleshooting, and administering
wireless components.&lt;br/&gt; - Provide experience developing applications
that require a strict adherence to minimal protocols.&lt;br/&gt; - Leverage
existing sound and proven laboratory experiences developed locally and elsewhere
to demonstrate wireless technologies.&lt;br/&gt; - Demonstrate to the students
applications of networking technologies, wired and wireless, in areas other than
a traditional office environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using the webware
developed at Worcester Polytechnic Institute, the client-server systems
developed by Sam Houston State University, the firewall setup from Trinity
College, the wireless technologies developed at Illinois State University and
North Carolina A&amp;T, this project augments an existing exploratory, hands-on
networking laboratory with wireless technology. These technologies are
incorporated and explored in the laboratory in a three-pronged
approach:&lt;br/&gt;1. Closed laboratory sessions utilizing a heterogeneous
local area network augmented with wireless technologies.&lt;br/&gt;2.
Undergraduate research into the application of wireless technology in
manufacturing environments where wired access may not be feasible.&lt;br/&gt;3.
Undergraduate development projects emphasizing the scarcity of resources, the
need for brevity and the implications of embedded type
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project utilizes exemplary material
adapted from outside sources as well as adaptation and integration of materials
developed from the existing laboratories.