* 0125893
* Cultural Emergence and Health in Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Timothy Dye, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 08/31/2005
* USD 618,116.00

Dye&lt;br/&gt;0125893&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of the Antarctica has
expanded beyond the initial population of scientists and military personnel to
include other support staff (e.g., construction, food service, housekeeping and
sanitation personnel) without an explicit scientific or military mission.
Experts speculate that as space populations develop, a similar mix of residents
may emerge. Such organizational and cultural merging in restricted living
environments undoubtedly creates new cultural landscapes (ethnoscapes) that can
influence health and health behavior. In addition, because of the extreme
environmental conditions in Antarctica, health risks and health care are
particularly important in this new cultural context. &lt;br/&gt;The specific
aims of this project are to 1) model the emergence of cultural stages in
isolated confined environmental (ICE) ethnoscapes as experienced through work,
recreation, and daily living in Antarctica, 2) identify those elements of ICE
ethnoscapes that are specific to an individual season on the ice and those
elements which are repeated across seasons, 3) relate how the temporal and
content stages of ICE ethnoscapes interact with risk, behavior, and injury, and
4) demonstrate the utility of electronic and distance-based assisted ethnography
in conducting social research in ICE environments of Antarctica. These aims will
be accomplished with a pre-deployment qualitative phase of interviews and focus
groups with individuals who have spent at least one season in Antarctica within
the past three years. The second phase will be on-ice with the project team
residing in Antarctica for an extended period to conduct on-site observation and
interviews with Antarctic residents. &lt;br/&gt;This research could contribute
to the development of context-sensitive explanatory models of culture and injury
risk, screening procedures for long term residence in isolated confined
environments, and the methods of their derivation remotely. The study of
cultural emergence in Antarctica as an analog to space could prove useful in the
development of models of health and health behavior in an isolated confined
environmental (ICE) context.&lt;br/&gt;