* 0125414
* Innovation in Aircraft Manufacturing through System-wide Virtual Reality Models and Curriculum Integration
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Dennis Siginer, Wichita State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 12/31/2006
* USD 628,185.00

0125414 Siginer

This award is to Wichita State University to support the activity described
below for 36 months. The proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships
for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF 0179).

Partners The partners are Wichita State University (Lead Institution), Boeing
Aircraft Company, Cessna Aircraft Company, Raytheon Aircraft Company, Brittain
Machine Inc., Delmia Corporation, Kansas Technology Enterprise Corporation, and
the Society of Manufacturing Engineers.

Proposed Activities The broad objectives of the project include: foment the use
of integrated virtual reality models of manufacturing systems by the partners to
design, improve, and operate the manufacturing systems, and teach the workforce
(new graduates as well as current industry personnel). The following activities
support these objectives: integrate the curricula of the industrial engineering
and manufacturing engineering programs at Wichita State University using the
model that ties the courses together and integrates the applicability of and
interrelation between the knowledge and skills gained, provide the students with
real-world experience in manufacturing systems, and transfer the computer
modeling tools to industry.

Proposed Innovation The partnership will provide industry with computer modeling
tools that are more realistic and system-based for aircraft manufacturing. The
new curriculum will provide students with state-of-the-art real world
engineering experience that is closer to the needs of the regional aircraft
industry.

Potential Economic Impact Wichita is home to major manufacturing facilities of
Boeing Aircraft Company, Bombardier/Learjet, Cessna Aircraft Company, and
Raytheon Aircraft Company. Aviation is responsible for 10% of the earnings in
the State of Kansas, and manufacturing is responsible for 60% of the income in
Wichita. Since aircraft manufacturers face stiff global competition, innovation
is necessary to maintain economic and technological superiority in the aviation
manufacturing business. Having state-of-the-art tools and a workforce educated
and trained with these tools is absolutely required for survival in this
industry sector.

Potential Societal Impact Economic well being and jobs for this region are
critically dependent upon the aviation industry's maintaining its competitive
advantage with tools and people trained to use them.