* 0125981
* Generating an Isotopic Record of Atmospheric Methane and Nitrous Oxide Over the Last Century from South Pole Firn Air
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2005
* Todd Sowers, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 03/31/2005
* USD 130,212.00

0125981&lt;br/&gt;Sowers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a project to
construct an isotopic record of atmospheric methane and nitrous oxide over the
last century from South Pole firn air. Over the last 150 years, atmospheric
methane and nitrous oxide concentrations have risen in response to increased
emissions from various anthropogenic activities. As this trend is liable to
continue in the foreseeable future, it is important to understand the
biogeochemical processes that contribute to the emissions of these two
greenhouse gases. In this context, records of the variations in the atmospheric
loading of trace gases found in ice cores and interstitial spaces in the snow
near the surface of the ice sheet (firn air) provide fundamental boundary
conditions for reconstructing historical emission records. One way to improve
our understanding of the cycling of bioactive trace gases and their emission
records is to use stable isotope tracers, which have been recorded in the ice
cores and firn air. This project will develop records of carbon-13 and deuterium
isotope ratios of methane, as well as the nitrogen-15, oxygen-18 and the
isotopomer composition of nitrous oxide trapped in firn air samples collected in
January 2001 at the South Pole. These measurements will allow isotopic records
of these atmospheric gases to be reconstructed throughout the 20th century. Such
records will help to establish the relative contribution of individual sources
with a higher degree of confidence than is currently available.