* 0125172
* Collaborative Research: Anslope, Cross-slope Exchanges at the Antarctic Slope Front
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Stanley Jacobs, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 05/31/2005
* USD 942,071.00

This study will investigate how the Antarctic Slope Front and continental slope
morphology determine the exchanges of mass, heat, and fresh water between the
shelf and the deep ocean, in particular those leading to outflows of dense water
into intermediate and deep layers of the adjacent basins and into the world
ocean circulation While the importance to the global ocean circulation and
climate of cold water masses originating in the Antarctic is unquestioned, the
processes by which these water masses enter the deep ocean circulation are not.
The primary goal of this work therefore is to identify the principal physical
processes that govern the transfer of shelf-modified dense water into
intermediate and deep layers of the adjacent deep ocean. At the same time, it
seeks to understand the compensatory poleward flow of waters from the oceanic
regime. The upper continental slope has been identified as the critical gateway
for the exchange of shelf and deep ocean waters. Here the topography, velocity
and density fields associated with the nearly ubiquitous front must strongly
influence the advective and turbulent transfer of water properties between the
shelf and oceanic regimes. The study has four specific objectives: [1] Determine
the mean frontal structure and the principal scales of variability, and estimate
the role of the front on cross-slope exchanges and mixing of adjacent water
masses; [2] Determine the influence of slope topography and bathymetry on
frontal location and outflow of dense Shelf Water; [3] Establish the role of
frontal instabilities, benthic boundary layer transports, tides and other
oscillatory processes on cross-slope advection and fluxes; and [4] Assess the
effect of diapycnal mixing, lateral mixing identified through intrusions, and
nonlinearities in the equation of state on the rate of descent and the fate of
outflowing, near-freezing Shelf Water.