* 0125706
* Cold Microphysical Effects on Surface Rainfall Variability in the Tropics
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2002,10/31/2004
* Konstantine Georgakakos, Hydrologic Research Center
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 10/31/2004
* USD 180,000.00

0125706&lt;br/&gt;Georgakakos&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the two-year
research project is to quantify the relative&lt;br/&gt;importance of (a) the
large-scale forcing fields of water vapor and&lt;br/&gt;thermal buoyancy versus
(b) the storm microphysics for the development&lt;br/&gt;of the spatio-temporal
characteristics of convective oceanic surface&lt;br/&gt;rainfall variability. Of
particular interest is to understand the&lt;br/&gt;effects of cold microphysical
properties on rainfall variability at&lt;br/&gt;various spatiotemporal domains
and resolutions. The research studies&lt;br/&gt;oceanic rainfall as a first step
toward the understanding of the causes&lt;br/&gt;of rainfall variability by
separating the large scale forcing and&lt;br/&gt;microphysics from the complex
terrain influences present in continental&lt;br/&gt;rainfall. The research
results are of fundamental importance for&lt;br/&gt;hydrometeorology and
hydrology, and they may be used in applications&lt;br/&gt;such as (a)
downscaling or upscaling rainfall estimates obtained by&lt;br/&gt;remote sensing
or by large-scale climate models, or (b) hydrologic&lt;br/&gt;design studies
requiring rainfall estimates of high spatio-temporal&lt;br/&gt;resolution.
Statistical-dynamical numerical models of rainfall genesis&lt;br/&gt;and
evolution are combined with data from national large-scale&lt;br/&gt;experiments
to achieve the goals of the project. State equations for&lt;br/&gt;the vertical
momentum, mass and energy conservation are integrated&lt;br/&gt;efficiently
using typical vertical profiles of the state variables,&lt;br/&gt;estimated from
field experiments in convective regimes. A number of&lt;br/&gt;quantitative
hypothesis are tested regarding the causes of rainfall&lt;br/&gt;variability in
domains of a 256-km length, with spatial resolution of 1&lt;br/&gt;km and
temporal resolution of 1 min. The models are used in a&lt;br/&gt;Monte-Carlo
framework that incorporates uncertainties in observed data,&lt;br/&gt;large-
scale forcing fields, and model microphysical
parameterizations,&lt;br/&gt;including possible feedbacks from the generated
cloud to the near field&lt;br/&gt;large-scale forcing.&lt;br/&gt;