* 0125870
* The Significance of Ultrahigh-Pressure Metamorphism in the Tso Morari Complex, NW Himalaya
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Kip Hodges, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 03/31/2006
* USD 209,623.00

Recently discovered, Eocene ultrahigh-pressure (UHP) metamorphic assemblages in
the northwestern Himalayas may indicate the limited subduction of Indian
continental crust beneath Eurasia during Himalayan-Tibetan orogenesis. At
present, the tectonic significance of this observation is controversial because
the distribution of Himalayan UHP metamorphic assemblages has not been mapped in
detail, because the age of metamorphism is imprecisely known, and because the
structural relationships among UHP rock packages and their surroundings are
largely unconstrained. We propose an integrated geochronologic (U-Pb, Sm-Nd, and
40 Ar/39 Ar), Nd isotopic, petrologic, and structural study of the most recently
discovered UHP terrain in the Himalayas: the Tso Morari complex of Ladakh,
India. Thus far, the UHP-diagnostic mineral coesite has been found at Tso Morari
only in mafic eclogite that may or may not be of Indian plate affinity; an
important part of our proposed work will be to determine if UHP assemblages
occur in lithologies that can be traced unequivocally to a provenance in the
Indian plate. If so, our aim of establishing high-precision dates for UHP
metamorphism will determine whether or not continental subduction occurred
subsequent to the initiation of India-Eurasia collision - well-constrained by
independent means - or prior to collision in an intraoceanic environment, as has
been proposed recently. We also intend to develop a more comprehensive knowledge
of the pressure-temperature- time evolution of this UHP terrain over the Eocene-
Miocene interval, one of the most poorly understood intervals in the history of
the orogen. The integration of such data with detailed maps and kinematic
analysis of major structures should result in much better constraints on the
processes responsible for the exhumation of UHP rocks in the Himalayan-Tibetan
system.