* 0125629
* In Situ Measurements of the Acoustic Properties of Antarctic Krill
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Peter Wiebe, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 04/30/2005
* USD 289,999.00

0125629&lt;br/&gt;Chu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Antarctic krill is a key species of
the Antarctic marine ecosystem and it is a species that is subject
to&lt;br/&gt;international assessment and management. A variety of techniques
have been used to estimate their&lt;br/&gt;abundance and/or biomass including
biological and acoustical estimations. However, the
total&lt;br/&gt;abundance/biomass estimated from the two approaches do not agree
and both are subject to considerable&lt;br/&gt;errors. The purpose of this
proposal is to provide a new approach that can be used to reduce the
estimated&lt;br/&gt;errors resulting from the acoustic
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;It is well known that the acoustic technique is far more
efficient than the conventional survey techniques&lt;br/&gt;involving nets,
pumps and trawls in studying the temporal and spatial distributions of
zooplankton.&lt;br/&gt;However, the accurate interpretations of acoustic
scattering data require reliable knowledge of the material&lt;br/&gt;acoustic
properties (sound speed and density contrasts) of live animals. These material
properties depend&lt;br/&gt;on the spatial and temporal distributions of the
oceanographic parameters: temperature and pressure, as&lt;br/&gt;well as the
animals body structure. For fluid-like weakly scattering marine animals, such as
krill, small&lt;br/&gt;variations in the sound speed can result in substantial
variations in the measured volume scattering strength.&lt;br/&gt;The lack of the
ability in predicting and/or measuring the variations of the acoustic properties
in situ greatly affects and limits our ability to accurately interpret the
acoustic data and to obtain reliable abundance and/or biomass estimates. This
proposal is intended to address this issue by in situ measurement of the
material properties of Antarctic krill and their spatial and temporal
variability. These measurements are crucial to the abundance and/or biomass
estimates in the Antarctic region. To provide in situ measurements of material
acoustic properties, we propose to use the Acoustic Properties Of zooPlankton
(APOP), developed at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, in a cruise
conducted in the Antarctic region. The APOP system is able to measure the sound
speed and density contrasts of marine organisms in situ. From this proposed
research, we expect to obtain a temporal and spatial variation of in situ
material properties of Antarctic krill. By incorporating in situ material
properties of Antarctic krill with acoustic and biological survey data, the
confidence in estimates of the abundance and/or biomass of Antarctic krill is
expected to be strengthened greatly.