* 0125565
* Collaborative Proposal: Active Faulting Within the Eastern Tibetan Margin and Western Sichuan Basin, P. R. China
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2007
* Arch Johnston, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 01/31/2007
* USD 198,125.00

The eastern margin of Tibet is one of the most enigmatic plateau margins in the
world. Elevations rise from less than 500 m within the Sichuan Basin to more
than 6.5 km over a distance of about 30 to 50 km. This is steeper than the
Himalayan front, which owes its origin to the active thrusting of the Indian
subcontinent under Tibet. In stark contrast to the Himalaya, however, the
eastern margin of Tibet shows insignificant evidence of active thrusting.
Moreover, the lack of a significant sedimentary basin adjacent to the margin and
the absence of geodetic shortening further testify to the insignificance of
active thrusting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New field investigations indicate that
while active thrusting is indeed scarce, there is ample evidence for significant
active strike-slip faulting. Initial reconnaissance field investigation reveals
three and possibly four significant right-lateral strike-slip faults that trend
NE, and two major left-lateral strike-slip faults that trend ~N-S. Research is
now focused on determining the rates and detailed geometry of these faults, each
of which are critical components in planned attempts at constraining relative
crustal motions in the region. These observations are able to constrain the
various proposed hypotheses and therefore enable us to understand the evolution
of this part of the Tibetan margin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Early investigation has
also revealed the likelihood of significant active faulting within the Sichuan
Basin. This is of particular concern, because the suspect faults may represent
significant strong ground motions and the Sichuan Basin is home to about 60
million people.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rates of fault slip are being determined by
a careful sampling strategy whereby the ages of landforms that have been offset
by faulting are being estimated by cosmogenic radionuclide analyses. The style
and pattern of active faulting is being determined by a combination of imagery
analysis, topographic analyses, and detailed field mapping in regions previously
identified during reconnaissance field work. The combination of slip rates and
fault geometry yields a set of kinematics that discriminate among the competing
models.