* 0125249
* Extinction and Recovery of Crinoids Resulting from Climatic Change during the Ordovician-Silurian Biotic Crisis
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* William Ausich, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 05/31/2005
* USD 50,974.00

Crinoids (Phylum Echinodermata) were among the most important marine organisms
throughout the Paleozoic (ca 570 to 265 million years ago). They were dominant
in maintaining the ecological structure Paleozoic communities, in diversity and
abundance among echinoderms, and in importance as sediment contributors that
ultimately led to the limestones of today. However, end-Ordovician global
environmental change resulted in a mass extinction of crinoids and, ultimately,
a macroevolutionary reorganization of crinoids as they diversified during the
Early Silurian. End-Ordovician environmental change was caused by global cooling
and sea level lowering resulting from a continental glaciation on the southern
paleocontinents. A thorough understanding of the end-Ordovician biotic crisis
will provide an important example of the consequences of global environmental
change in deep time against which to compare global environmental changes that
have occurred in the most recent past and for predicting future oceanic impacts
of global environmental change. The objectives of this proposal are the
following. 1) Field collection and study of crinoids in strata immediately
surrounding the Ordovician-Silurian boundary, i.e. the Ellis Bay and Becscie
formations. 2) Collection of samples for isotopic analysis will be coordinated
with work by our Canadian colleagues in order to develop as thorough an
understanding as possible of these stratigraphic sections. The plan is to sample
the Ashgillian Vaureal Formation, for which isotopes are not known, and to take
samples in formations that span the O-S boundary in unsampled sections in the
eastern part of the island. 3) Within the time available, integrate the two data
sets to further develop an understanding of whether the Anticosti Island
Ordovician-Silurian succession is complete or whether there are paraconformities
present that would affect the objectives of the study being proposed. and 4)
provide a research learning experience for undergraduate and graduate students
through field studies, laboratory research, and preparation of theses
(undergraduate and graduate).



