* 0125274
* Does Modern Flat-Subduction Cause Subsidence or Uplift?
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2004
* Teresa Jordan, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 03/31/2004
* USD 50,000.00

Abstract

The PI proposes to determine the direction and approximate magnitude of change
in long-wavelength elevation that is the consequence of the modern flat
subduction system beneath central Chile and western Argentina. The specific
study area is the Sierras Pampeanas province, a broad region that is analogous
to the Laramide Rocky Mountain province of North America. In both regions
basement blocks are uplifted along reverse faults in the foreland of the
orogenic belt (Andes Mountains in South America and Cordilleran orogen in North
America). But in the North American ancient example the foreland region suffered
long-wavelength subsidence due to flat subduction, whereas the Sierras Pampeanas
area today stands above sea level and above neighboring foreland regions with
more normal subduction angles. The purpose of this study is to test the
hypothesis that the Sierras Pampeanas region has risen (at long wavelength)
during flat subduction.

This project is a study of a continental interior whose objective is to
constrain the subduction process. Its utility is tectonic, even if its methods
are stratigraphic. Flat subduction merits focused study because it presents an
excellent opportunity to view the properties of subducting plates and their
interactions with overriding plates from a different perspective, which will
shed light on "normal" subduction systems as well as flat-slab systems. The
nature of contact between a subducting slab and an overriding plate is of
enormous human importance, responsible for the vast majority of the world's
seismic budget. But for seismological studies and mechanical models of plate
interactions to lead to fruitful insight and accurate predictions, we must have
geological constraints on the long-term responses of the overriding plates to
the subduction zone processes.

The PI proposes to compare modern long-wavelength topography of the Sierras
Pampeanas to the topography when flat subduction began using three means of
characterizing the middle Miocene paleo-topography. First, a graduate student
and the PI will collaborate with Argentine colleagues to determine the extent of
middle Miocene marine horizons across the Sierras Pampeanas. Such units are
moderately well constrained near the northern and eastern extremes of the region
and hypothesized to reach central sectors of the Sierras Pampeanas, but that
hypothesis needs critical testing. Second, They will use seismic reflection data
(provided by Repsol-YPF) to construct transects of the relief on the basal
surface across which the middle Miocene strata onlapped, and then the relief on
the surface across which the upper Miocene strata were draped. One transect will
span most of the province from north to south, and a second will span the
Sierras Pampeanas from west to east. Third, they will take advantage of the fact
that a peneplain-like low-relief surface pre-dated the Miocene deposits and use
this as a structural marker in both the ranges and basins. They will construct a
Digital Elevation Model of current elevations of that pre-Miocene surface and
remove from it the short-wavelength deformation across late Miocene to Recent
faults. Comparison of the long wavelength elevation variations of this
"partially corrected surface" to the modern long-wavelength topography, to the
transects of relief underlying the middle and upper Miocene strata, and to the
marine shoreline will reveal sectors that uplifted or that subsided during flat
subduction.