* 0125282
* Plant Biology Laboratories and Curriculum that Integrate the Biological Levels of Organization
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2005
* E. William Hamilton, Washington and Lee University
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 02/28/2005
* USD 69,357.00

Biological Sciences (61)&lt;br/&gt;The Department of Biology at Washington and
Lee University is expanding and updating its course curriculum in the plant
sciences. Currently, the department offers three courses related to the plant
sciences and the material is limited primarily to taxonomy and systematics. A
general review of photosynthesis is presented in General Biology as well as in
an upper division botany course. The primary goal of this project is to modify
the plant portion of the General Biology laboratory course, which uses
functional but outdated equipment, and to introduce two new courses in plant
biology. An additional goal is to integrate concepts within courses across
biological levels of organization and to establish the importance to students of
understanding that integration. Utilizing plants as the "model system," gaps
between molecular biology, biochemistry, cellular biology, physiology, and
organismal biology will be bridged. These goals are being met by adapting
previously implemented models from Grinnell College (ILI # 9850544) and the
University of Connecticut (ILI #9796271) into a series of courses: general
biology, a new plant biology course and into and a new upper level experimental
plant biology course. Standard methods from all levels of biological
organization are being utilized, providing exposure to a variety of techniques
(from molecular to organismal) that enrich the understanding of plant biology
for a population of biology students with diverse career plans. The equipment
being acquired (6 plant physiology workstations, two growth chambers, mini SDS-
PAGE/Western transfer equipment, a portable photosynthesis system, and a
portable chlorophyll fluorescence system) enable students to obtain organismal,
physiological and biochemical data in the lab, as well as in the field, and will
successfully integrate biological levels of organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;