* 0125272
* TALPA:  Technology Applications and Learning toward Professional Achievement
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* E.Lee Gorsuch, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 08/31/2005
* USD 599,832.00

0125272 &lt;br/&gt;Schroeder &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to the
University of Alaska-Anchorage to support the activity described below for 36
months. The proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for
Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF
0179).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners&lt;br/&gt;The partners for this activity
include the University of Alaska-Anchorage (Lead Institution), University of
Alaska-Fairbanks, University of Hawaii-Manoa, University of Washington, Ford
Motor Company, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, The Boeing Company, Kimberly Clark,
Alcoa, IBM Kirkland-Washington, Bureau of Reclamation, Microsoft, Flour Daniel,
Alaska Technical Center, Northwest Arctic Borough School District, White Swan
High School, Confederate Bands and Tribes of the Yakama Nation, NANA/DOWL
Engineers, and NANA/Colt Engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposed
Activities&lt;br/&gt;The effort will bring computer technology to remote
communities, provide high school students with a vision of a career in science
and engineering, connect students with professionals in industry and academia,
provide industrial partners with a technologically trained workforce, and
develop the enabling infrastructure necessary to sustain the effort long-
term.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposed Innovation&lt;br/&gt;The academic
institutions will establish a modern computer laboratory with space, utilities,
and Internet access in a remote rural community in each state in the
partnership. High school juniors and seniors in a college-ready high school
curriculum will be targeted. These students will be given state-of-the-art
hardware and software training. Students will have summer internships with
partner companies where they will be paid cash as well as scholarship money with
any of the partner universities. The students will attend a summer bridging
program the summer after graduation from high school to prepare them for
college. The industry partners provide $500,000 annually for the bridging
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Economic Impact&lt;br/&gt;The program
will provide hundreds of high school students with access to technology-based
education and jobs. These students are from sparsely populated rural states, and
most are Indigenous Americans. The economic benefits result from a highly
skilled workforce for the industry partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential
Societal Impact&lt;br/&gt;The targeted students are Indigenous Americans from
rural Alaska, Hawaii, and Washington. The program can be replicated for any
region with an indigenous population. More than 300 students have "graduated"
from the internship program in the past. The current award will provide needed
resources to attract more students, provide more computer facilities, and
interact with more industrial partners.&lt;br/&gt;