* 0125752
* Large Scale Dynamic Simulation And Optimization Tools For Chicago Freight Infrastructure And Operations
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Athanasios Ziliaskopoulos, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2005
* USD 592,376.00

0125752 &lt;br/&gt;Ziliaskopoulos &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to
Northwestern University to support the activity described below for 36 months.
The proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation
Program Solicitation (NSF 0179).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners&lt;br/&gt;The
partners for this award include Northwestern University (Lead Institution),
University of Illinois-Chicago Circle Urban Transportation Center, Chicago Area
Transportation Study, City of Chicago, Metropolitan Planning Council, Business
Leaders for Transportation, Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railway Company, Union
Pacific Railway Company, Central States Trucking Company, and Roadway
Express.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposed Activities&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this effort is to forge an effective partnership among all major stakeholders of
the intermodal freight industry in Chicago. Three interdependent research
programs will be established to create a sustainable effort: (1) development of
a framework with advanced quantitative decision support tools, to evaluate
innovations in business process, infrastructure, and technology that streamline
operations and eliminate unnecessary delays, (2) perform in-depth analyses of
past, current and future trends of the intermodal freight industry by collecting
and interpreting data, and (3) promotion of the use of decision support tools
through educational programs for the partners. The framework with decision
support tools includes a dynamic traffic simulation assignment/simulation
module, a terminal operations module, and a logic module to assist in
coordinated planning of all operations in the Chicago area. The in-depth
analysis of past, current and future trends will include data from Illinois DOT,
City of Chicago, trucking companies, rail companies, maritime and custom data,
shippers, and freight industry proprietary data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposed
Innovation&lt;br/&gt;Modules exist that model each sector of the intermodal
transportation system, but there has not been an integrated analysis/simulation
of the integrated transportation system for a city as large as Chicago. The
proposed effort will incorporate data and models for each sector and integrate
them in a mathematical tool for scheduling the movement of freight to minimize
loss of time and efficiency for the system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential
Economic Impact&lt;br/&gt;More than 60% of the US container movement go through
the Chicago region. Conservative estimates predict a fourfold growth by the year
2020. This means more than 100,000 daily truck movements between rail terminals,
all over existing streets and roads. Empty trucks returning to a terminal plus
traffic delays taken alone will cost millions of dollars in lost revenue. An
integrated computer-based scheduling tools to minimize empty trips and efficient
use of the street grid will save millions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential
Societal Impact&lt;br/&gt;The impact on the efficiency of movement of freight
plus the reduction of unnecessary traffic on the street system in the Chicago
region will have a large impact on the quality of life in the region. Loss of
freight traffic because the region has reached gridlock could have a huge
negative societal and economic impact.&lt;br/&gt;