* 0125460
* Integrating Computer Ethics Across the Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Marion Ben-Jacob, Mercy College
* Standard Grant
* Mark James Burge
* 04/30/2005
* USD 105,875.00

Interdisciplinary (99)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By integrating computer ethics
across the curriculum, this project addresses the following &lt;br/&gt;concerns:
1) the increased use of instructional technology in the classroom; 2) the growth
&lt;br/&gt;of enrollment in online distance education programs; 3) the need to
improve the knowledge &lt;br/&gt;of ethical, social and legal issues in
computing of women and underrepresented minorities; &lt;br/&gt;and 4) the
limited ties between technology and other disciplines. The workplan is to:
&lt;br/&gt;1) develop modules that are interdisciplinary in design and that
capitalize on the life &lt;br/&gt;experiences of Mercy students for all the
general education courses offered at the College; &lt;br/&gt;2) develop modules
addressing the specific issues of online distance learning courses;
&lt;br/&gt;3) lead workshops on designing ethics modules for all courses for the
Mercy faculty on a &lt;br/&gt;faculty seminar day; 4) design and conducting an
online workshop for faculty at other &lt;br/&gt;colleges and universities; and
5) develop a new course for computer information science &lt;br/&gt;majors.
These curriculum enhancements are designed to: 1) increase the diversity of
&lt;br/&gt;students who are knowledgeable about computer ethics and the related
social and legal&lt;br/&gt;issues so the rewards of technology can be reaped by
all in an equitable manner, and &lt;br/&gt;2) emphasize oral, written and
critical thinking competencies while focusing on the
&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary connections of computer
ethics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to accomplish this work, we are adapting a
range of materials previously developed and made available to the community via
NSF support. These materials include a range of case studies in computer ethics
and the social aspects of computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This course includes
an online team-taught module with a faculty member of DePaul
&lt;br/&gt;University and student-student collaborative projects from the two
institutions.