* 0125828
* Incorporation of Hands-On Learning Activities into an Innovative General Science Optics Course
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Vasilis Pagonis, McDaniel College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/2004
* USD 69,349.00

Physics (13)&lt;br/&gt;The project is completely redesigning the optics course
for non-science majors, A World of Light and Color, from a traditional lecture
format into a collaborative, activity-based classroom environment. About 80% of
the students attending Western Maryland College (WMC) are non- science majors
and many lack a basic comprehension of the scientific endeavor. During the past
decade, the physics education research community has demonstrated that well-
designed, student- centered activities help students achieve a deeper
understanding of physical concepts, while fostering an appreciation of science.
To capitalize on these findings, the project is combining the Workshop Physics
approach with optics activities that have been developed at WMC. Workshop
Physics, a discovery-based approach pioneered at Dickinson College, has been
successful in introductory physics courses, and the project is adapting and
implementing many aspects of this delivery method to meet the needs of General
Science students. Providing students the opportunity to explore optical
phenomena in a collaborative, student- centered environment should result in a
positive learning experience. Students also should appreciate the role computers
and data analysis play in the scientific process, and computer-assisted
activities appropriate are being designed specifically for non-science majors. A
specific objective of the project is to develop and disseminate high-quality
optics activities for non-science majors nationwide. Finally, this project will
serve as a prototype for the renovation of the entire General Science curriculum
at WMC.