* 0125475
* Ontogeny of Aerobic Capacity, Lipid Metabolism and Elevated Myoglobin Concentrations in the Skeletal Muscles of Weddell Seals
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Shane Kanatous, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 07/31/2004
* USD 132,270.00

0125475&lt;br/&gt;Kanatous&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address the
temporal development of aerobic capacity, lipid metabolism and oxygen stores in
the skeletal muscles of young Weddell seals relative to aspects of the cellular
environment that are important in the genetic regulation of myoglobin expression
during maturation. The study will collaborate with ongoing investigations of the
diving and hunting behavior of free-ranging adult and subadult Weddell Seals to
investigate adaptations and the genetic control of the ontogeny of enzymatic,
ultra-structural, and vascular adaptations for diving that occur in the skeletal
muscles of adult Weddell seals. The first objective is to characterize the
developmental changes in aerobic capacity, lipid metabolism, fiber type, and
myoglobin concentration and distribution using enzymatic, immuno-histochemical
and myoglobin assays in newborn, newly weaned, subadult and adult seals. The
second objective is to determine the molecular controls for changes in the
concentration and distribution of myoglobin in skeletal muscles during
maturation. Molecular techniques will be used to determine the differences in
mRNA populations in the swimming muscles of the different age classes of Weddell
seals. These data will identify the proteins and transcription factors that
influence the ontogenetic changes in myoglobin concentration. The results will
increase our understanding of both the ontogeny and molecular mechanisms by
which young seals acquire the physiological adaptations necessary to become
competent divers and marine predators. In addition, this study will advance our
knowledge of the molecular regulation of myoglobin in skeletal muscle, which has
broader applications for human medicine.&lt;br/&gt;