* 0125589
* Collaborative Proposal -- Eocene Climate Record of Seymour Island: The Environmental Context for Ecological and Evolutionary Change
* GEO,OPP
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2007
* Kyger Lohmann, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 01/31/2007
* USD 152,376.00

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
Office of Polar Programs, provides funds for a study to investigate
paleoenvironmental conditions during the Eocene on Seymour Island, Antarctica.
The cooling trend that began with early Eocene peak warmth and culminated in the
growth of permanent ice sheets on Antarctica in the early Oligocene marks the
most significant interval of climate change in the Tertiary, both because of its
magnitude and the effects it had on the composition, diversity and ecology shelf
faunas. Seymour Island on the Antarctic Peninsula provides a unique setting
within which the interplay between changes in climate and environment can be
directly related to the concurrent evolution of invertebrate macrofaunas.
Because of its high southern latitude location, the Paleogene sedimentary
sequence at Seymour Island may record the timing of the onset of cooling, and
the magnitude of that change through time, more precisely than less sensitive
lower latitude sites. In addition, because the succession is highly
fossiliferous, patterns of change in the diversity and ecology of invertebrate
communities can be directly evaluated within this context of environmental
change. The evolution of these high latitude shelf faunas during the Paleogene
is especially important as they may represent the source of diversification for
many southern hemisphere warm water faunas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Richard
Aronson (Dauphin Island Sea Lab) and Daniel Blake (University of Illinois) have
suggested that cooling during the Eocene had a profound affect on the ecology of
shallow marine faunas at high latitudes. They hypothesize that cooling
eliminated the shell-crushing predators that abound in warmer waters, thus
lifting the predation pressure on the remaining molluscan fauna. In response,
they predict that predation pressure by the shell drilling gastropods will show
an increase through time, and that characteristic shell architectures that
defend against shell crushers will show a decline. They are currently testing
this hypothesis through a paleontological investigation of the Eocene La Meseta
Formation on Seymour Island. However, to evaluate their hypothesis that cooling
is the direct cause of ecological change, it is critical that a temperature
history be assessed independently and tied directly to their documented patterns
of predation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will work collaboratively with
Aronson and Blake to generate a high-resolution temperature curve for the Eocene
section on Seymour Island. This record will be derived from the d18O values of
shell carbonate from several bivalve, gastropod, and brachiopod taxa sampled
from the identical horizons used for their paleoecologic study. Possible offsets
among co-occurring taxa (vital effects) will be quantified through intensive
sampling of multiple taxa within shell beds to ensure that a meaningful
composite, long-term record can be assembled. Replicate samples for each
available taxon will be collected from each sampling horizon, so that
variability within time horizons can be accommodated when assessing the
magnitudes of change observed throughout the Eocene. Samples for isotope
analysis will be collected under this project while working as a member of
Aronson and Blake's field team. This will ensure that the records of temperature
and faunal change are explicitly linked. Such an integrated approach will
provide a more complete understanding of the evolutionary and ecological effects
of cooling on the Antarctic ecosystem, and offer insight into the response of
faunas to global climate change. &lt;br/&gt;