* 0125992
* Light Inquiry Through Experiments: Project LITE
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/2002,09/30/2007
* Peter Garik, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2007
* USD 574,465.00

Physics (13)

This project continues work begun under Award No. 9950551.

The project is developing, evaluating, and disseminating educational devices,
software, and curriculum materials that center on the nature of light, optics,
color, and perception. The major innovation of the project is the introduction
of "homelabs" about light into college science courses. These inquiry-based,
quantitative laboratory experiences are designed for students to perform in
their own homes. Many of these activities take advantage of the unique
properties of computers, allowing students to use inexpensive optical materials
to manipulate, explore, and study the light coming from their monitors. In the
Project LITE "proof-of-concept" phase (funded through NSF Award No. 9950551),
the investigators conducted the initial development and testing of a number of
these homelabs.

The basic educational goal of the homelabs is to encourage individualized hands-
on (and "eyes-on") learning. The use of homelabs also seeks to alleviate a major
resource problem faced by many large, introductory-level, non-majors university
science courses, arising from the limited availability of laboratory space,
equipment, and teaching assistants.

Project LITE materials are being developed and tested at Boston University. The
national impact of individual homelabs is being extended by integrating them
into community college, university, and high school courses in astronomy,
biology, chemistry, earth science, physics, and psychology, as well as into
science courses for pre-service teachers. The homelabs are also useful for
distance education, home learning, and adult continuing education.