* 0125803
* Exploiting Spatial and Channel Diversity in Ad Hoc Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2002,03/31/2003
* Samir Das, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Admela Jukan
* 03/31/2003
* USD 229,991.00

Mobile ad hoc networks are multi-hop wireless networks, with dynamically
changing network topology. Evaluating network capacity is a hard problem in such
networks because of the shared nature of the radio medium and possibility of
spatial reuse. The latter is again influenced by routes used and node mobility.
On the other hand, understanding the network capacity in terms of available
bandwidth is crucial to design effective routing protocols. The resarchers
propose empirical techniques to evaluate the network capacity. The techniques
work in conjunction with a simulator and use mobility and session-level traces
to compute capacity that can be compared against the network utilization
reported by the simulator. Preliminary experiments indicate interesting results
that more capacity is available with higher mobility; however common routing
protocols fail to utilize the additional capacity for better routing
performance. Preliminary analysis indicates that spatial diversity is not
exploited enough by conventional protocols, indicating that multipath routing
protocols and distributing traffic over multiple paths would be quite effective.
While investigating better techniques to evaluate capacity will be one component
of the researchers work, they will also expend substantial effort in developing
multipath protocols and techniques to achieve better load balance. For
efficiency they will focus on protocols with an on-demand nature. The
researchers indicate in this proposal how multiple, link- or node-disjoint,
loop-free routes can be computed on demand without the use of source routing,
with minimal additional overhead. The researchers will further development and
analysis of such protocols. The emphasis will be on obtaining as many multipath
routes as possible. Our preliminary results already indicate that such routing
mechanisms reduce route discovery attempts, thus improving both delay and
throughput. We will also focus on evaluating techniques to distribute load on
multiple routes effectively for a fuller utilization of the available capacity.
However, we point out that the dense nature of most ad hoc networks will form
multiple routes in radio vicinity. In that case, topologically disjoint routes
may still share radio medium. To achieve diversity further, we propose using
multiple channels in the underlying medium access control (MAC) layer so that
independent channels can be assigned to neighboring routes. While individual
channels may now have less capacity, some preliminary results indicate that
significant performance gains are possible if the transmitter is capable of
transmitting on multiple channels concurrently. The researchers wish to explore,
among other things, channel selection issues for individual links and paths when
multipath routes are available. To summarize, the overall goal in this project
is to better our understanding of the capacity of a mobile ad hoc network
operating with real network protocols; and to exploit spatial and channel
diversity significantly with a synergistic use of multipath routing and
multichannelMAC protocols.