* 0125121
* Crustal Anisotropy and Mantle Stratigraphy in the Tibetan Plateau and Central Andes
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2005
* George Zandt, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 03/31/2005
* USD 101,217.00

The largest mountains and highest plateaus on Earth are built when continents
collide. Seismic converted phases (receiver functions) are used to investigate
two key questions in continental collisions: does the lower crust flow beneath
high plateaus, and does continental mantle subduct beneath mountain belts? If
crustal flow occurs in a relatively thin channel, as some modeling predicts, it
would develop a strong structural or mineral fabric that may be identified by
seismic anisotropy. Unlike shear-wave splitting studies that provide only bulk
anisotropy information between the source and receiver, azimuthal variations of
converted phases can constrain anisotropy parameters for layers within the
crust. Previous studies have generally found crustal anisotropies &lt;5%, but
highly anisotropic (&gt;10%) layers within the crust have recently been
identified in New Zealand and the Central Andes using the receiver function
method. This new technique is being applied to receiver functions recorded
across the highest elevations on Earth, the Tibetan Plateau, in order to search
for evidence of large-scale crustal flow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The upper mantle
beneath the stable interiors of continents is layered on a large scale. Some
layer boundaries are observed regionally and denoted by seismologists as "H",
"X", and "L". The origin of the stratification of the continental upper mantle
is still poorly understood. In some locations the layering has significant dip.
Receiver functions have been used to image modern subductions zones as well as
identify dipping layers in the upper mantle beneath ancient cratons. Some of
these layers beneath cratons appear to have anisotropic properties and may
identify relict continental subduction zones. Even if the origin of the
stratification is unknown, it can be used as a "tracer" to follow the subduction
or destruction of an impinging strong plate beneath a continental collision
zone, for example, to track the Indian plate beneath the Himalayas and
Tibet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this project is to map out
crustal anisotropy and upper mantle layering across the Tibetan Plateau, and use
the results to improve our understanding of how high plateaus are built. This
research will continue the development of the receiver function technique in the
study of seismic anisotropy and mantle stratigraphy, and contribute to the
technical education of two young scientists.