* 0125688
* Interseismic Strain Along the Northern Edge of Tibet Using SAR Interferometry
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/2002,06/30/2007
* Gilles Peltzer, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Eva E. Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2007
* USD 321,000.00

The current rate of strain concentrated along the Altyn Tagh and Kunlun fault
systems in northern Tibet is being determined using the technique of radar
interferometry. These fault systems play a key role in the dynamics of the
continental deformation in Asia, yet their slip rate and associated deformation
are still poorly known. Currently debated issues include the respective amounts
of the convergence between India and Asia that are absorbed by crustal
thickening and by lateral extrusion of continental blocks, or the
characterization of the distribution of deformation throughout the continent.
These issues are unresolved because of the poor knowledge of the present-day
kinematics in the collision zone. In addition, northern Tibet has been the locus
of two large earthquakes in 1997 and 2001 producing a disruption in the current
inter-seismic strain pattern in the northern part of the collision zone.

Spatially continuous maps of the line of sight displacement of the ground along
active fault zones are being constructed by interferometric processing of
synthetic aperture radar (SAR) data. This research exploits the extensive
archive of ERS SAR data covering the northern Tibet area that have been acquired
by the European Space Agency since 1992. Errors in the data due to poor orbit
determination and troposphere phase propagation delay are reduced using a
baseline re-estimation procedure and data averaging, following the approach
developed with radar data of California. Line of sight displacement maps are
then combined to constrain deformation process models of long-term fault creep
and of co-seismic slip and post-seismic relaxation for the 1997 and 2001 events.
The data are used to determine distribution of inter-seismic strain in the
vicinity of the Kunlun and Altyn Tagh faults, far-field slip-rate associated
with the faults and variation of rates along the length of the faults, surface
displacement associated with the 1997 and 2001 earthquakes, possible linkage
between these two events, influence of post-seismic processes on the strain
accumulation in other sections of the fault. Slip rates are being compared with
long-term rates inferred from geological observations.