* 0125669
* Towards a Robust Constitutive Law for Calcite Rocks
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Brian Evans, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2005
* USD 199,997.00

EAR-0125669 J. Brian Evans

In this project the investigators focus on crystal plastic mechanisms involving
dislocation creep and diffusion flow. Our understanding of the creep strength of
calcite rocks, which are usually complex polyphase assemblages, is largely based
on data from a few relatively pure limestones and marbles, from single-phase
synthetic marbles, or even from single crystals, and, with a few exceptions,
only over very small strain increments. Based on experience with deformation of
other rocks and ceramics, one might expect rock strength to be highly dependent
on dispersed second phases, solute impurities, preexisting porosity, grain size,
and grain-size distribution, as well as temperature, pressure, and pore-fluid
chemistry. The standard paradigm, steady-state power-law creep, as applied to
calcite rocks, typically relates only temperature, stress, strain rate, and for
diffusion creep or boundary sliding processes, grain size. Current data from
tests on synthetic marbles with and without an added second phase, and on
natural rocks suggest that the standard power-law equation fails to predict
accurately the stress sensitivity of strain rate observed in conventional
triaxial mechanical experiments in the dislocation flow regime. One particular
problem may arise if the microstructure in the rock evolves with strain or time.
Such structural variables might include average grain size, grain-size
distribution, grain orientation, and dislocation structures that scale with
grain-size. Previously it has been assumed that grain size had no influence on
strength for high-temperature dislocation creep. In materials composed of more
than one phase, the average grain size, shape, and distribution of second-phase
particles, and the total amount of the second phase may also affect strength. In
this work, carefully controlled samples of marble will be synthesized and tested
at high temperature and pressure. The investigators intend to systematically
investigate the effect on strength of matrix grain size, second-phase content,
and solid solutions of magnesium, iron, manganese, and strontium. An important
aspect of the work is the correlation of grain and dislocation microstructure
with mechanical behavior. High strain experiments will be conducted using
loading in simple shear, conventional triaxial extension, and confined torsion.
The expanded data set will be used to construct a more robust constitutive law,
applicable to a larger set of thermodynamic conditions.