* 0125429
* Consortium for Stable Laser Applications
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2001,09/30/2004
* James McMillan, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 09/30/2004
* USD 598,553.00

0125429&lt;br/&gt;Craig &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award is to Montana State
University (Lead Insititution) to support the activity described below for 24
months. The proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for
Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF
0179).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners&lt;br/&gt;The partners include Montana
State University (Lead Institution), AdvR, Inc., Tektronix, Inc., Scientific
Materials Corporation, IBM Almaden Research Center, ILX Lightwave Corporation,
MSU Techlink Center, Gallatin Development Corporation, and Montana Board of
Research and Commercialization Technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposed
Activities&lt;br/&gt;The partners will collaborate to develop the requisite
technology and to incorporate it into various operational optical communications
and computing systems. The Lead Institution will do fundamental research and
transfer the results to the partner companies. Two companies will assist in the
development of the technologies based on the research results. Two of the
partner companies will provide insertion platforms into systems level products.
One company will provide fabrication facilities for the products. The not-for-
profit partners will ensure a pro-business climate for establishment of new
small and medium-sized companies. The state partner will provide funds when
needed to promote the development and commercialization of promising
technologies. This effort builds upon a new state-funded center for
optoelectronics, named the Spectral Information Technologies Laboratory. The
charter of the laboratory includes the directive to perform transfer of
technology that results form basic research on
optics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposed Innovation&lt;br/&gt;The consortium of
companies, university, and public partners cover the entire chain from research
to development, to insertion, to fabrication to development of business
opportunities, to funding for formation of companies necessary to transform new
research into commercial activities. The optical technologies covered will have
a large role in the future of information technologies that underlie the current
innovation economy of the last ten years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential
Economic Impact&lt;br/&gt;Montana's economy is currently in the bottom 10%
nationally. The population of the state is below 750,000. Creation of 2000 new
high-tech jobs in the state will have a major
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Societal Impact&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
activity will use the research and education of the state university system to
promote new high-paying jobs for bright Montana citizens. Heretofore, most
university graduates had very limited opportunity for jobs in the state, making
the state a net exporter of highly educated talent. The resulting income will
raise the economic wellbeing for the entire state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;