* 0125719
* Violent Basaltic Explosive Volcanism: A Case Study Of The 1886 Tarawera Eruption, New Zealand
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2001,05/31/2006
* Bruce Houghton, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 05/31/2006
* USD 175,011.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0125719&lt;br/&gt;Houghton&lt;br/&gt;University of
Hawaii&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Basaltic volcanism is most typically thought to
produce effusion of lava, with the most explosive manifestations ranging from
mild Strombolian activity to more energetic fire fountain eruptions. However,
some basaltic eruptions are now recognized as extremely violent, i.e. generating
widespread phreatomagmatic, subplinian and Plinian fall deposits. These
eruptions are particularly dangerous because the ascent rate of basaltic magma
prior to eruption can be very rapid (giving warning times as little as a few
hours) and because their precursors may be ignored or misunderstood. The main
question addressed in this proposal is: what are the conditions that cause
basaltic magma to adopt an eruption style more typical of chemically evolved,
highly viscous magma? Possible mechanisms (acting singly, or in concert) are:
(1) interaction between magma and water, (ii) very rapid ascent producing a
delayed onset of degassing then exceptionally rapid "runaway" vesiculation at
shallow levels in the conduit, (iii) microlite crystallization and degassing of
the magma during ascent leading to increased viscosity. Our goal is to establish
the triggering mechanism for the Plinian phase of the 1886 Tarawera eruption.
This proposal will test the hypothesis that this phase was a consequence of
either rheologic changes during magma ascent that accompanied early (pre-
fragmentation) interaction between the basaltic melt and water-bearing rhyolitic
units forming the conduit walls or late-stage magma water
interaction.&lt;br/&gt;