* 0125304
* Genes for Georgia: Translating Genomic Research into Regional Economic Growth
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2005
* Gordhan Patel, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 02/28/2005
* USD 600,000.00

0125304 &lt;br/&gt;Holbrook &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to the
University of Georgia to support the activity described below for 24 months. The
proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program
Solicitation (NSF 0179).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners&lt;br/&gt;The partners
for this award are the University of Georgia, Avigenics Inc., Georgia Cotton
Commission, Georgia Research Alliance, OneGeorgia
Authority.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposed Activities&lt;br/&gt;The effort will
focus on creating gene encyclopedias and bioinfomatic infrastructure needed to
identify diversity of potential value to bio-based
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposed Innovation&lt;br/&gt;Leveraging
genomic technologies in this manner is expected to spawn an unprecedented era of
innovation in bio-based industries, nurturing the development of new value-added
products and intrinsic genetic solutions to agricultural challenges, in a manner
that is publicly acceptable and compatible with responsible stewardship of the
ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Economic Impact&lt;br/&gt;Outcomes
from this effort will include: (1) new ventures to expand and diversify regional
bio-based industry opportunities, (2) empowering small businesses to compete
with multinationals by partnering with public researchers as a virtual R&amp;D
resource, (3) strengthening the national science infrastructure by adding
enabling tools for new plants and animals, (4) partnering with existing outreach
networks to provide regional professionals with the training needed to exploit
these tools, while preserving the links of the individuals to their home
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Societal Impact&lt;br/&gt;Young
professionals will receive the education and jobs needed to provide regional
economic wellbeing and remain in the region avoiding a regional "brain
drain".&lt;br/&gt;