* 0125343
* Development And Commercialization of Advanced Wood-Based Composites In Maine
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* James Ward, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 12/31/2005
* USD 575,543.00

0125343 Dagher

This award is to the University of Maine to support the activity described below
for 36 months. The proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for
Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF 0179).

Partners The partners for the award include the University of Maine (Lead
Institution), Maine Technology Institute, Eastern Maine Development Corporation,
State Department of Economic and Community Development, The Manufacturing
Extension Partnership, Maine Department of Transportation, Louisiana Pacific,
Dow Chemical, State Farm Insurance, Henderson and Bodwell, The Kenway
Corporation, Market Development Alliance of the FRP Composites Industry, APA the
Engineered Wood Association, National Institutes of Standards and Technology,
USDA Forest Products Laboratory.

Proposed Activities The award will support the following activities: (1)
strengthen partnerships among the University of Maine, private industry, state
organizations, forest product industry organizations, and national laboratories
to foster commercialization of composite reinforced wood, (2) develop innovative
strategies for commercializing composite reinforced wood hybrids that can become
models for other university research centers, establish commercialization
projects (reinforced wood composite beams using low-grade hardwoods, disaster-
resistant housing using reinforced sheathing panels, novel long-strand composite
lumber beams and columns).

Proposed Innovation Housing industry in the US accounts for 28% of the total
construction industry, and most of the wood used is high-grade conventional wood
lumber. The supply of high-grade lumber is declining in the US. Reinforced
composite wood will allow the use of low-grade lumber from other species of
trees in more abundant supply, and provide skilled jobs in Maine. These products
will lower the cost of wood products for housing in the US. Increasing the
resistance of housing to disasters such as hurricanes and earthquakes will make
a major impact on the economy of the nation.

Potential Economic Impact Ninety percent of Maine is forested, and 25% of the
state's economy is based on forest resources. The forest economy has
traditionally been based on export of raw lumber with unskilled labor and few
value added timber products. Other manufacturing jobs have moved from the state
recently, leaving unskilled jobs and service industries (e.g., tourism) as the
major source of income. Successful commercialization of composite reinforced
wood will play a large role in developing a growing state economy. Lower costs
for wood products for housing construction will have a major economic impact in
the US. Increasing the resistance of housing to disasters will lower the cost of
repair, maintenance, and insurance for disasters.

Potential Societal Impact Maine ranks 29th in the nation in terms of advanced
degree scientists/engineers and 50th in science/engineering graduate students.
The job market for young scientists and engineers is bleak in Maine. The
educational program will include entrepreneurial education as well as science
and engineering to provide a skilled workforce for the economy surrounding the
new wood-based technology/economy. The housing industry amounts to $800
billion/year in the US alone.