* 0125242
* Revisiting the Tidal Activation of Seismicity with a Damage Mechanics and Friction Point of View
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2003
* Charles Sammis, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2003
* USD 68,575.00

If earthquake nucleation were strictly a stress-threshold effect, then one would
expect a correlation between times of peak tidal stress and regional seismicity.
Failure of statistically rigorous tests to find such a relationship places
important constraints on the nucleation process. Explanations of this failure to
observe correlation generally involve an accelerating self-driven nucleation
process that occurs on a time scale longer than the diurnal tide thereby
destroying the expected synchronization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although a general
correlation between tides and earthquakes is not observed, it has recently been
reported that a correlation of seismicity with tides is observed to develop
during the few years before an earthquake in a finite sized region that scales
with the magnitude. This emergent correlation has been interpreted as a
consequence of the "critical point model" for regional seismicity. According to
the critical point model, an earthquake, once nucleated, can jump barriers to
grow large only when the crust is in a "critical state" that is characterized by
long-range stress correlation. The rational is that the crust is more sensitive
to tidal stress perturbations when it is near the critical state. If true, the
emergent correlation of seismicity with tides offers another tool (in addition
to accelerating seismic moment) for monitoring the approach of a fault network
to the critical state, and the attendant possibility of a large
earthquake.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A preliminary attempt to reproduce the reported
observations of emergent correlation between diurnal tides and seismicity before
large earthquakes has not been successful. After reviewing published theoretical
arguments in support of emergent diurnal correlation, there is no reason why,
even in the critical state, it should not be destroyed by self-driven delayed
nucleation. However, review of the theory leads to formulation of a new
hypothesis for the tidal activation of seismicity: tidal activation occurs only
when the sum of tectonic plus tidal stress exceeds the prior maximum value
(analogous to the Kaiser effect in acoustic emissions). In this case the 15-day
beat between solar and lunar tides predicts a strong 15-day correlation. The
delayed nucleation that is hypothesized to destroy the diurnal correlation may
not have as large an effect on the new longer cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is developing suitable observational techniques to optimize detection of
this 15-day quasiperiodic signal and searching for it before a suit of large
earthquakes in a variety of tectonic settings. also developing a suitable null
hypothesis and tests for the statistical significance of any signals we find.
Even if the 15-day signal is not observed, a statistically significant negative
result places important constraints on the physics of earthquake
nucleation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effects of cyclic perturbations on a
uniformly driven system as it approaches a critical state using a cellular
automaton are being investigated. The Olami-Feder-Christensen non-conservative
automaton develops long-range stress correlations leading to a critical state.
Rate- and state-dependent friction is added to the automaton's failure criterion
to produce self-driven delayed nucleation. Although this automaton is not
realistic in its simulation of long-range elastic interactions between faults,
it provides a suitable testbed for the two hypotheses being explored: 1) whether
tidal activation becomes stronger near the critical state, and 2) whether
delayed nucleation associated with rate and state-dependent friction is expected
to attenuate the 15-day correlation to the same extent as the diurnal
correlation.