* 0125464
* Physical-biological control of primary production in Beaufort and Chukchi Sea ice: Its contribution to shelf-basin interactions in the western Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2008
* Rolf Gradinger, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 01/31/2008
* USD 799,899.00

0125464&lt;br/&gt;Gradinger&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary proposal
aims to quantify sea ice primary production in the Chukchi and Beaufort seas.
The main working hypotheses are that both light and nutrient supply control
biomass formation within the sea ice. While irradiance controls the rate of
biomass change in spring and autumn, nutrient advection dominates during summer
as meltwater accumulation below the ice impedes nutrient supply and hence limits
the total biomass accumulation in the ice cover. To verify these hypotheses the
project combines field studies, laboratory experimental work and remote sensing
observations. This approach is designed to quantify the ice-related
biogeochemical processes and to supply a regional, seasonally varying estimate
of carbon accumulation in, and release from, the ice cover. The shipboard work
will take place during two spring-summer (May-August) expeditions when physical,
chemical and biological parameters will be measured at locations encompassing
the prevalent ice types. Ice thickness and structure will be determined using an
indirect measurement technique along transects varying in length from hundreds
to thousands of meters. Ice cores will be analyzed to determine the vertical
distributions of salinity, temperature, stable isotope concentrations, algal
pigment concentrations and species composition. Primary production will be
determined using optical and tracer techniques. Laboratory experimental work
will assess the relationships among ice physics, chemistry and algal activity
and to extrapolate results of the field measurements to early spring and late
summer when shipboard sampling is more difficult. Integration of remote sensing
data will contribute to regional estimates of ice algal production and its
temporal and spatial variability within the study region. This proposal
contributes to the goals of the western Arctic Shelf-Basin Interaction program
by assessing the regional contribution of ice-associated primary production and
consequent accumulation and release of carbon from the ice to the adjacent water
column system. Results are expected to help in understanding and quantifying the
ice algal community response to climate variations.