* 0125314
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:   Soft Tissue and Membrane Preservation in Permian Cephalopods
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2006
* Neil Landman, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 01/31/2006
* USD 40,000.00

We plan to investigate the internal features of cephalopod molluscs from Permian
deposits in North America. In particular, we are studying the remains of soft
tissues of siphuncular cords and membranes that have been preserved by early
diagenetic phosphate mineralization in Permian cephalopods from Buck Mountain,
Nevada. This research represents a follow-up study of our initial discovery of
preserved membranes in three ammonoid specimens from this locality. We plan to
expand this discovery with our primary objective the examination of the Buck
Mountain cephalopod fauna for preserved membranes and soft tissues. This fauna
includes prolecanitids, goniatitids, and nautiloids and is housed in Ohio
University and Boise State University. We will prepare these cephalopods using
acidification techniques and then examine the specimens with scanning electron
microscopy. The study of the remains of soft tissues and membranes in Paleozoic
cephalopods has previously been an unobtainable research goal. We pose two
hypotheses: 1) the structures in these cephalopods are, indeed, soft tissue
remains, now phosphatized, that preserve the details of their original
microanatomy and 2) that these structures are homologous with those of modern
cephalopods and reveal information about phylogeny and functional morphology.
This study will lead to a better understanding of how these ancient and extinct
animals lived and functioned in their environment. In this way, these
discoveries will contribute to our fundamental knowledge of the paleobiology of
fossil cephalopods.