* 0125096
* Testing the Discovery of Archean Terrestrial Mass-independent Sulfur Isotope Anomalies
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2003
* Douglas Rumble, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 11/30/2003
* USD 192,510.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0125096&lt;br/&gt;Rumble&lt;br/&gt;Carnegie Institution
of Washington, Geophysical Laboratory&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of
this proposal is to confirm the discovery of mass-independent sulfur isotope
fractionation by replicate analyses to validate accuracy and to identify mineral
hosts of anomalous sulfur and measure its heterogeneity. The motivation for
additional study of sulfur isotope analyses is because of their utility as
biomarkers in ancient rocks. In Precambrian rocks where fossils are non-existent
and organic residues have been converted to carbon, sulfur isotope mass-
dependent fractionations remain as an indelible record of the vital processes of
sulfate-reducing microbes. With the discovery of mass-independent sulfur isotope
fractionations in Archean rocks, sulfur isotope geochemistry has acquired even
greater significance. Such fractionations are known in the upper atmosphere
where gas phase reactions take place under the strong influence of ultraviolet
light. Sulfur isotope analyses, therefore, may give evidence for the former
existence of life but they may also record a previously unknown chapter in the
evolution of Earth's atmosphere. This proposal will examine the distribution of
anomalous sulfur geographically in Archean and Proterozoic metamorphic rocks.
Stratigraphic sections will be measured to establish a sulfur isotope
fractionation time distribution. The new sulfur isotope laser fluorination
microprobe at the Geophysical Laboratory of the Carnegie Institution will be
used to do detailed examination of Archean and Proterozoic metamorphic rocks.
&lt;br/&gt;