* 0125417
* Elementary, Secondary, and Informal Education:  "Invention at Play"
* EHR,DRL
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Gretchen Jennings, Smithsonian Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 05/31/2007
* USD 1,593,241.00

The Lemelson Center for the Study of Invention in cooperation with the Playful
Invention and Exploration Network (a consortium of six museums) will develop
"Invention at Play." This will be a traveling exhibit in two sizes (3,500 sq.
ft. & 1,500 sq. ft.) exploring the value of play and its critical role in the
development of creative human beings. Audiences will a) learn how play fosters
creative talents among children as well as adults; b) experience their own
playful and inventive abilities; and c) understand how children's play parallels
processes used by innovators in science and technology. The exhibit will be
divided into three sections: 1) the "Invention Playhouse" where visitors will be
offered a variety of creative play activities to help them understand how
playing builds creative and inventive skills; 2) "Case Study Clusters" where
visitors will learn about the playful habits of five inventors, and 3) "Issues
in Invention and Play" where visitors learn about ideas and debates among
theorists who have linked inventive processes to children's play. This exhibit
is based on documentation collected by the Lemelson Center since 1995 from and
about inventors of the past and present, and symposia they have organized to
examine the characteristics of innovative processes. This research has led to
new insights into remarkable parallels between children's play and the way
inventors approach their work.

A series of complementary educational activities and programs will be developed
and documented in an Educational Manual. These programs will be aimed at diverse
audiences including families, parents, teachers and other groups in science and
children's museums nationwide and will help extend the impact of the exhibit
theme beyond the exhibit itself. Teacher workshops will be developed and
arranged for each venue along with a special teacher's manual that will be
distributed during exhibit-related school events offering a variety of
activities on the themes of inventive play, creative model of problem solving,
and exemplary tales of playful events and habits in the lives of interesting
American inventors. RK & Associates have done the front-end audience surveys for
this project and will do the summative and remedial evaluation work. The exhibit
prototyping will be done by the Science Museum of Minnesota exhibit contractors.

