* 0125908
* Time-Resolved Structural Analysis of Heavy Metal Cation Exchange Reactions in Anionic Clay and Manganese Oxide Nanoparticles
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Jeffrey Post, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2005
* USD 225,957.00

Heaney&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0125908&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anionic clays and manganese
oxides occur abundantly as nanocrystalline coatings on soil and sediment
particles in surficial environments. They exhibit a remarkable facility for
exchanging ions dissolved in aqueous fluids and act as major traps for anions
and cations. The investigators of this proposal will apply a novel
crystallographic approach to resolve mechanisms of cation exchange in layered
double hydroxide and Mn oxide materials. Powdered samples will be monitored by
synchrotron X-ray diffraction during the process of cation exchange. These
experiments will yield the first time-resolved analyses of the structural
distortions that occur to accommodate substitutions by transition metals in low-
temperature minerals. Additionally, in concert with high-temperature infrared
spectroscopy, synchrotron XRD analyses will be performed as samples are heated,
allowing the structural manifestations of thermal decomposition to be correlated
with cation exchange capacity.&lt;br/&gt;These studies will allow the
investigators to capture intermediate transition steps that are overlooked by a
more conventional static analysis of final run products. As the structural
perturbations that are associated with chemical substitutions tend to stabilize
the exchanged phases, these studies will indicate which factors limit the degree
of exchange for selected cations. Consequently, these experiments will suggest
approaches to the design of new remediation materials with amplified exchange
characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;