* 0125663
* Ecological Diversity of Miocene Mammals of Pakistan
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2008
* Anna Behrensmeyer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 01/31/2008
* USD 414,661.00

Ecological diversity of Miocene mammals of
Pakistan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Catherine Badgley, Thure Cerling, Anna K.
Behrensmeyer, John C.
Barry&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0125663&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
This collaborative project evaluates the ecological and evolutionary responses
of mammals to changes in climate and vegetation during the late Miocene (5 to 11
million years ago), as known from the terrestrial record of Pakistan. Fossils
and sedimentary rocks of northern Pakistan are well documented by the work of
our international research team that has conducted over 25 years of field work
on the geology, paleontology, and paleoecology of the Siwalik sequence. (Siwalik
refers to fluvial sediments shed by the rising Himalayas over the last 20
million years.) Work to date on Siwalik sediments and vertebrate fossils,
especially mammals, has provided a detailed record of changing fluvial systems,
climate and vegetation, preservational attributes of fossil assemblages, and
mammalian faunas. This record is one of the best documented continental
ecosystems of the Cenozoic and now presents the opportunity to evaluate changes
in taxonomic composition, speciation, immigration, local extinction, and
ecological attributes of mammalian species and faunas in relation to sustained
environmental change.&lt;br/&gt; Our project involves first the creation of an
electronic database (the Siwalik species database) for fossil mammals. The
database will contain ecologically informative, specimen-based measurements,
including morphological and isotopic data for each species. Next, we will use
this compilation of data to test three models of how mammalian faunas changed
over time. One model focuses on the direct effects of changing climate and
vegetation on the composition and ecological attributes of mammals. The second
model evaluates whether or not species with large geographic ranges and high
local abundance dominate the pattern of faunal change. The third model examines
the hypothesis that the arrival of several species of extremely large mammals
(the size of elephants) altered the local habitat through feeding and trampling
and caused changes in the rest of the ecological community. Each model makes a
unique set of predictions about the timing and nature of faunal change in
relation to environmental change. These predictions will be tested with the data
assembled in the database.&lt;br/&gt; The Siwalik species database will
stabilize the taxonomic and ecological data for Siwalik mammals and make these
data accessible for other studies of Old World history. Tests of the three
models of faunal change will demonstrate how the fossil record contributes to
patterns and theory in community ecology.&lt;br/&gt;