* 0125516
* From Intellectual Capital to Successful Business Enterprises
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2004
* Cecil Burge, University of Southern Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 09/30/2004
* USD 714,998.00

0125516 &lt;br/&gt;Urban &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to the University
of Southern Mississippi to support the activity described below for 24 months.
The proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation
Program Solicitation (NSF 0179).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners&lt;br/&gt;The
partners involved include the University of Southern Mississippi (Lead
Institution), Petal High School, Jones Junior College, Pearl River Community
College, Mississippi Department of Economic and Community Development,
Mississippi Technology Alliance, Mississippi Technology Incorporated,
Mississippi Center for Community and Economic Development, Area Development
Partnership, Mississippi Polymer Institute, Office of Naval Research
Laboratories, Cooperative State Research Education and Extension Service,
National Institute of Science and Technology, John C. Stennis NASA Space Center,
Bayer, Inc., Rohm and Haas, J.M. Huber, Eastman Chemical
Company.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposed Activities&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
activities include: (1) develop, promote, and sustain an accessible
infrastructure for innovation, (2) develop mechanisms for innovation for three
model companies (an existing startup, a developing company, a new company), (3)
design and implement educational program leading to the increase of the
workforce. The vision is to develop a mechanism capable of translating polymer
science and engineering discoveries to commercialization through development of
new and retention and enhancement of existing
companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposed Innovation&lt;br/&gt;Proposed
innovations include: creation of new jobs in the region, establishment of an
infrastructure for beta testing and marketing to drive business plans and
strategies for success, provide an educated workforce (engineers, scientists,
management, sales), attraction of capital investors, provide continuing
technical support for new and young companies, return of capital to the research
base to ensure continued innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Economic
Impact&lt;br/&gt;The potential economic impacts include creation of three new
companies with up to 300 new jobs in Mississippi over the next five years,
establishment of an infrastructure for technical support for new companies to
ensure success, establishment of an education partnership to provide a workforce
from skilled laborers to Ph.D. scientists and engineers to support the polymers
industry in Mississippi, attraction of investment capital to the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Societal Impact&lt;br/&gt;The major
societal impact will be the increased standard of living for the state resulting
from higher paying jobs and wealth/taxes from new companies in the
state.&lt;br/&gt;