* 0125595
* Broadband Seismological Investigations of Earth Structure and Earthquake Sources
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Thorne Lay, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2006
* USD 525,001.00

This is a four-year project to conduct seismological investigations of deep
earth structure and earthquake sources.Using modern digital seismic waveform
data, fundamental questions about dynamical structures in the mantle and rupture
processes of large earthquakes will be addressed. The discovery of systematic
variation of interplate earthquake rupture duration will be followed-up by
detailed analysis of the source finiteness for very small thrust earthquakes on
the megathrust fault in subduction zones. On average, these shallow events are
found to take 2 to 3 times longer to rupture than comparable seismic moment
events at larger depths. Establishing whether this is due to low stress drop or
low rupture velocity requires determination of rupture dimensions, which will be
pursued using directivity analysis with theoretical and empirical Green's
functions. Studies of major boundary layer dynamics will also be conducted.
Amplitude and arrival time anomalies for S waves from intermediate and deep
focus earthquakes will be modeled by three-dimensional methods to help constrain
the velocity structure and fate of deep slab downwellings. The effects of these
downwellings on phase equilibria in the mantle will be examined using waveform-
stacking methods that detect and characterize velocity and impedance contrasts
in the mantle around subducting slabs. Complex velocity heterogeneity near the
core-mantle boundary will be analyzed using new digital data sets and a hybrid
2D/3D wave propagation method that has recently been developed at
UCSC.&lt;br/&gt;