* 0125410
* Quantifying the Temporal Characteristics of Congestion Events in the Internet
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2007
* Tyrone Duncan, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2007
* USD 286,267.00

The objective of this research is to lay the foundation for a QoS metric that
can be easily &lt;br/&gt;understood and can be used for the design of future
packet networks. The premise of the &lt;br/&gt;proposed research is that Quality
of Service (QoS) mechanisms have not been widely &lt;br/&gt;employed because of
both their complexity and their lack of relationship to user
&lt;br/&gt;perceived performance. Therefore, it is currently difficult to
justify the investment in &lt;br/&gt;complex QoS technologies while their value
to the end customer is unknown. There have &lt;br/&gt;been cases where
commercial networks have been over provisioned, resulting in all users,
&lt;br/&gt;independent of QoS requirement or priority, receiving the same
service. Based on these &lt;br/&gt;experiences network customers are reluctant
to pay extra for QoS. &lt;br/&gt;Historically, the telephony QoS metric, call
blocking probability, was not only &lt;br/&gt;easily understood but provided the
foundation for network design. Clearly this metric is &lt;br/&gt;not suitable
for packet networks like the Internet, since packet networks experience delay
&lt;br/&gt;and packet loss in the presence of congestion. Recently, it has
become increasingly &lt;br/&gt;apparent that temporal characteristics of the
congestion episodes have the dominant effect &lt;br/&gt;on user perceived QoS.
Reinforcing the increasing importance of the temporal &lt;br/&gt;characteristics
of congestion is the recent work in the Internet Engineering Task Force
&lt;br/&gt;(IETF) on measurement-based temporal QoS metrics. Once congestion
occurs at a &lt;br/&gt;bottleneck point in the network it tends to persist and
cause a user observable &lt;br/&gt;impairment. Thus, there is a need to increase
our understanding of the temporal &lt;br/&gt;characteristics of congestion. To
address this issue a new QoS metric is defined, the rate &lt;br/&gt;of
congestion events per unit time, and a research effort identified to develop
analytic &lt;br/&gt;methodologies to study this QoS metric. Specifically, this
research will focus on: 1) &lt;br/&gt;predicting the frequency of congestion
events for long range dependent (LDR) like &lt;br/&gt;traffic, i.e., fractional
Brownian motion, in a network context, 2) developing simple
&lt;br/&gt;approximations for predicting the frequency of congestion events, 3)
validating the &lt;br/&gt;resulting prediction methodologies for networks using
real high resolution traffic &lt;br/&gt;measurements, 4) developing efficient
techniques to measure the rate of congestion &lt;br/&gt;events, and 5) relating
the congestion event metric proposed here to new measurement-&lt;br/&gt;based
temporal QoS metrics. A rigorous definition is proposed for the time between
&lt;br/&gt;congestion episodes, which leads to the application of first hitting
time analysis for its &lt;br/&gt;prediction. The proposed research will exploit
some recent theoretical results as well &lt;br/&gt;develop new methods for
predicting first hitting times for a realistic traffic. &lt;br/&gt;Network users
have been struggling to quantify their perceived performance. The &lt;br/&gt;new
QoS metric proposed here summarizes the network component of performance in
&lt;br/&gt;one easily understandable number. Equally important, the proposed
metric is structured &lt;br/&gt;in such a way that it can be used for network
engineering. We expect the proposed &lt;br/&gt;metric, combined with accurate
prediction techniques, will play an important role in &lt;br/&gt;designing
future packet networks. &lt;br/&gt;