* 0125164
* Application of High-Precision Earthquake Location to Subduction Zones: Japan and New Zealand
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Clifford Thurber, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2004
* USD 189,517.00

The initial focus of this project is the development and refining of seismic
analysis methods, such as precise waveform cross-correlation and waveform
similarity clustering, to improve earthquake location and seismic source imaging
for existing, well-characterized seismic datasets. Along with these tools,
relative arrival-times and cross-correlation lag information are being
incorporated into 1D and 3D tomographic algorithms to enhance the robustness of
velocity models derived from passive seismic data. These developments are then
used for analysis of large seismic catalogues from Japan and New Zealand.

The software development is divided into three principal areas: (1) high-
precision seismic waveform cross-correlation (WCC) for arrival time estimation,
(2) robust event clustering and (3) relative arrival-time ("double-difference")
seismic tomography. Component 1 improves on an existing, highly successful WCC
method to reduce phase pick inconsistency within catalogues by incorporating
such innovations as wavelet-based spectral and cross-spectral estimation, auto-
picking and improved uncertainty analysis. Component 2 expands upon event
clustering methods by developing a hierarchy of clusters based upon waveform
similarity measures at different scales. This multiple-frequency-band approach
provides a framework for rapidly associating events into hierarchical clusters
to expedite cross-correlation repicking for precise location estimates. In the
third component of development, relative arrival time data including the
adjustments obtained from WCC are incorporated into 1D and 3D velocity inversion
techniques. Recent work using relative arrival times ("double difference"
location) has demonstrated great potential for improved earthquake location by
adding these parameters into the location equations; capitalizing on relative
traveltime information in combination with WCC pick refinements may also improve
velocity models through reducing the existing scatter in hypocenter locations
and associated arrival times used in the tomographic method. These software
tools will be made available, with documentation, to the scientific community.

The analysis tools are applied to obtain detailed understanding of the
seismotectonics of subduction zones and their associated seismic hazards. Two
regions are being investigated: Japan and New Zealand. In Japan, two separate
populations of earthquakes within the subducting plate define a double seismic
zone whose spatially distinct seismic source regions indicate variations of
stress regimes within the downbending plate. Large, damaging, historic
earthquakes have been shown to correlate with microseismic distributions and
slab boundary morphology in the region, but the microseismicity is characterized
by somewhat diffuse clusters. These clouds of hypocenters often lend themselves
well to precise relocation methods, which can illuminate details of the
seismogenic fabric previously obscured by random location errors. Refinement of
these locations and improved delineation of shallow and deep seismic source
structures will sharpen the image of the subducting slab and better define
relationships among the distinct regimes. In New Zealand, a region of high shear
strain accumulation rate has been identified around Wellington. Applying the new
analysis tools to earthquakes in this region will improve delineation of
seismogenic structures, which then allows them to be related to crustal faulting
and hypothesized locked zones along the slab interface. Defining the details of
these seismic sources facilitates a better understanding of the localized stress
regimes and permits refinements of models for how the subduction regime
influences faulting and deformation in the overriding crust. These
investigations are being undertaken in collaboration with researchers in Japan
and New Zealand.