* 0125833
* Collaborative Research: Comparative and Quantitative Studies of Protistan Molecular Ecology and Physiology in Coastal Antarctic Waters
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2007
* Rebecca Gast, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 02/28/2007
* USD 528,361.00

Gast&lt;br/&gt;0125833&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phototrophic and heterotrophic
protists are ubiquitous in extreme cold-water environments where they are
central to the production and utilization of energy and the cycling of elements.
The dominance of protists in Antarctic food webs indicates major ecological and
biogeochemical roles for these unicellular eukaryotes. Understanding the
structure and diversity of these communities, and the adaptations that allow
these assemblages to flourish near the lower limit of temperature in the ocean,
is of fundamental importance to biological oceanography and to understanding the
activities and evolution of life on our planet. The diversity of protistan
assemblages has traditionally been studied using microscopy and morphological
characterization. Due to the tedious nature of this approach and the inherent
lack of taxonomic characters associated with most small protists, these
approaches are inadequate for ecological studies of these communities. Molecular
methods that utilize gene sequences for the identification and quantitation of
naturally occurring protists offer a solution to this problem. This project will
address issues of protistan community structure, population abundance, and
adaptation to life in extreme cold through molecular and physiological studies
on assemblages in the seawater and ice habitats of the Ross Sea, Antarctica.
Research will focus primarily on species of phagotrophic protists (protozoa)
which are ecologically important but for which no information currently exists.
The work is designed to contribute new understanding concerning the biodiversity
of protistan assemblages of coastal Antarctica, provide tools for ecological
studies of these assemblages, and produce benchmark data on the basic
physiological processes of protistan species in this extreme cold-water
environment.