* 0125610
* Model Investigations of the Transition from Inland to Ice Stream Flow
* GEO,OPP
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2007
* Robert Bindschadler, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 01/31/2007
* USD 211,866.00

0125610&lt;br/&gt;Waddington&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides three
years of funding to study the transition from slow inland flow to fast ice
stream flow by making use of a suite of geophysical measurements that have been
made near the onset region of ice stream D in West Antarctica. These data
provide a unique opportunity to develop and validate glaciological models of the
controlling processes in ice stream onset zones. Important processes to quantify
are motion at the bed and deformation in the ice. Previous analyses indicate
that the controlling resistive forces shift from the bed to the sides during the
transition from slow inland flow to fast, streaming flow. Model sensitivity
analyses will be used to investigate the relative importance of feedbacks
between basal processes and ice deformation in the transition from inland to ice
stream flow. Model experiments will determine what factors control the location
of the onset of streaming flow, and how that location might migrate when
conditions at the bed, or along the flow direction, changes over time. The
overall goal of this work is to improve understanding of the evolution of the
WAIS drainage system. This study is a first step towards understanding the
physics that govern the transition from slow inland flow to fast streaming flow.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;