* 0125062
* Student Travel Support for Transducers 01, The 2001 International Conference on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators in Munich, Germany, June 10-14, 2001
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2001,03/31/2002
* Thomas Kenny, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Filbert J. Bartoli
* 03/31/2002
* USD 9,999.00

The 2001 International Conference on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators
represents an&lt;br/&gt;important opportunity to capture a perspective on the
current state of the art in microstructure&lt;br/&gt;fabrication and the
development of MicroElectroMechanical Systems. The 11th
International&lt;br/&gt;Conference on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators
(Transducers '01) will be held in Munich,&lt;br/&gt;Germany, from June 10-14,
2001.&lt;br/&gt;Transducers is a biennial conference focusing on theory, design,
fabrication, and&lt;br/&gt;application of solid-state sensors, actuators, and
microsystems. It is an interdisciplinary gathering&lt;br/&gt;with participants
from university, government, and industrial laboratories representing
diverse&lt;br/&gt;cross spectrum of fields: electrical engineering, mechanical
engineering, materials science,&lt;br/&gt;biomedical engineering, physics,
biology, chemistry, and microelectronics.&lt;br/&gt;We propose to partially
sponsor travel for student authors of papers from North America&lt;br/&gt;to
this conference. These student authors have been selected from a very
competitive pool of&lt;br/&gt;abstract submissions, and represent the most
talented young members of the MEMS community.&lt;br/&gt;These students will
travel to the conference to present their own work, and then spend
the&lt;br/&gt;remainder of the week attending presentations and discussions,
gathering information on the&lt;br/&gt;most important breakthrough technologies
revealed at the conference. Much of the fabrication&lt;br/&gt;and integration
technology is of direct relevance to technologies and applications funded
through&lt;br/&gt;NSF Electronics and Controls Systems office. Each of these
students will write a brief report&lt;br/&gt;describing the important
technologies they learned about at the conference, and these will
be&lt;br/&gt;gathered into a summary report to NSF highlighting new trends in
this community, important&lt;br/&gt;thrusts initiated by other countries, and
areas where the US technological base holds advantages&lt;br/&gt;or
disadvantages.&lt;br/&gt;The funding that we request will allow partial travel
support for approximately 12 student&lt;br/&gt;authors from various institutions
in North America.