* 0125925
* Collaborative Research: Investigation of a Proposed Suture Between East and West Gondwana - - An Integrated Field, Geochronologic, and Remote-Sensing Analysis In East Madagascar
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2003
* Timothy Kusky, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 04/30/2003
* USD 13,799.00

This project will investigate the age, structural geometry, and regional extent
of a proposed geological suture (the Betsimisaraka suture) in East Madagascar,
approximately 50 km wide and over 700 km long, that welds the continental
fragments of East and West Gondwana. The suture hypothesis poses a fundamental
challenge to the current paradigm regarding the configuration of Rodinia and its
transformation to Gondwana. The objectives of this research are to determine the
structural vergence, kinematics, and timing of terrane-accretion and terminal-
suturing events in the critical part of the EAO that have important global-scale
implications for Neoproterozoic tectonics. Research will proceed through an
integrated program of geologic mapping and structural analysis, together with
remote sensing analysis (Landsat TM and SIR C/X radar), U-Pb geochronology,
geochemical, and radiogenic isotope (Re-Os, Sm-Nd) investigations. The
structural investigations and sample collections will be made along five river
transects that traverse the proposed suture. Within the proposed suture are
meter-and km-scale blocks of peridotite, hartzburgite, gabbro, and basalt
interpreted as relicts of the former Mozambique Ocean. Geochemical and
geochronological analysis of these will place constraints on their age and
origin, and provide an important test of the suture hypothesis. Structural
investigations and U-Pb dating of rocks within and adjacent to the proposed
suture will allow us to evaluate other critical elements of the hypothesis, and
place important constraints on the configuration of continental terranes within
Gondwana. TM imaging and SIR C/X radar analysis will reveal macro-scale
kinematic relations and provide a basis for extrapolation of the suture to a
larger scale. This work will lead to a new understanding of kinematics, age and
overall structural vergence in the critical, eastern part of the EAO where
strongly divergent views of its evolution are emerging. The research will
involve collaboration between professional colleagues in Madagascar and the
U.S., and allow for the participation and training of American and Malagasy
students in field- and laboratory-based research.