* 0125180
* Symposium: Beyond Carrier Proteins: Integrative and Evolutionary Roles of Hormone-binding Proteins,  to be held January 2-6, 2002 in Anaheim, California
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2002
* Kevin Kelley, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 09/30/2002
* USD 5,040.00

The goal for this symposium is to advance the recognition of hormone-binding
proteins (HBPs) as centrally-positioned regulators in endocrine systems, that
have significant influences both in the integration of cell and physiological
function as well as in the evolution of endocrine systems. In this symposium,
HBPs will be defined as proteins in the extracellular environment (mostly) that
bind hormones or similar factors, usually with a high affinity, and that
therefore maintain a central regulatory position between a hormone and its
ability to transduce its signal through its cell receptor. The emphasis of the
symposium will be to look beyond the role of HBPs as 'carrier proteins' and
instead to bring in the emerging concepts of HBPs as multifunctional regulatory
proteins that can play dynamic --even predominant-- roles in integrating
endocrine systems. Of particular interest will be where HBPs have developed
regulatory properties beyond that of primary hormone-binding, including those
that broadcast into other endocrine systems. With the diverse properties of HBPs
being increasingly defined, it is also becoming clear that many HBPs have
interesting evolutionary histories, not only in the development of their
properties through different taxa, but also in their influences on the evolution
of the hormone and receptor systems with which they interact. Such data are
providing an enhanced understanding, and biological perspective, of the roles of
HBPs in endocrine systems. In this symposium, there will be 13 plenary lectures
by speakers who will serve as "ambassadors" for their respective HBP(s) of
interest. The speakers are encouraged to present their own work in the context
of general and underlying regulatory mechanisms ("integrative context") and,
where possible, in the context of the evolution of the respective endocrine
systems ("evolutionary context"). It is expected that several of the speakers
will also draw connections between different HBP/endocrine systems, as well as
to diverse physiological systems. Given the involvement of HBP/endocrine systems
in the integration and evolution of diverse physiological systems, including
reproduction, development, neural systems, immune systems, and others, this type
of symposium will afford an opportunity for a wide spectrum of biologists to
learn about a forefront area in endocrinology with relevance to them. Twelve
speakers will consider more specific aspects of certain HBPs, with a thirteenth
lecture to be more general and given as the first annual Howard A. Bern Lecture
in Comparative Endocrinology and presented by the namesake himself this year. On
the following day, there will be an associated HBP Mini-Symposium at which
students, postdocs, and others will have an opportunity to participate. The
internationally recognized Journal of Endocrinology will publish the symposium
proceedings. To date, general recognition of the importance of HBPs to endocrine
regulation and to the evolution of endocrine systems has been limited, despite
increasingly compelling evidence for their central, key roles in many systems.
As far as we are aware, there has not yet been a broad-reaching symposium of
this type, which orients itself on a "cross-cutting" theoretical basis.
Particularly unique are the emphases on the multifunctional nature of HBPs and
on their role in endocrine system evolution.