* 0125993
* Micromagnetic Experiments on Small Single Particles: Defects, Nucleation, and Wall-Pinning
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Susan Halgedahl, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2006
* USD 195,704.00

Halgedahl&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0125993&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The physical origins of
pseudosingle-domain (PSD) behavior in small magnetic particles have been
subjects of lively debate, because PSD grains are thought to carry much of the
stable remanence in rocks. Two ingredients contribute most to PSD behavior:
transitions in magnetic domain state and defects that pin domain walls. Despite
the important role of defects having been recognized for decades, recent
theories and experiments in rock magnetism underscore how little we understand
about their impact on key problems such as domain wall nucleation, wall-pinning,
the stabilities of remanences to alternating field (AF) demagnetization,
acquisition of thermal remanent magnetization (TRM), and even the potential for
extracting paleointensities from PSD grains of certain magnetic minerals. Single
particles of judiciously-chosen magnetic minerals can provide "magnified" views
of both nucleation events and wall-defect interactions. Owing mainly to its weak
demagnetizing field and few domains, hematite is such a magnifier. This
combination of properties opens up a window for studying the intrinsic impact of
defects on magnetic behavior. We will use large, single platelets of hematite to
better understand how defects control nucleation and domain wall pinning. Six
sets of core experiments are proposed here. These would determine: (1) the
thermal stability of SD-like (or near SD-like) states induced at room
temperature; (2) domain states for weak-field TRM; (3) temperature dependences
of nucleation fields; (4) temperature dependences of critical fields that unpin
mature domain walls; (5) AF stabilities of truly multidomain hematite carrying
strong-field remanence and weak-field anhysteretic magnetization, and (6) the
frequency distribution of critical unpinning fields.&lt;br/&gt;