* 0125311
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: A Bioarchaeological Investigation of Postclassic Civic-Ceremonial Burials in PetUn, Guatemala
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,02/28/2003
* Prudence Rice, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2003
* USD 11,307.00

Under the direction of Dr. Prudence Rice, Mr. William Duncan will collect data
for his doctoral dissertation. Mr. Duncan has participated in long term NSF
supported archaeological to reconstruct late prehistoric population distribution
and social organization in the Peten lakes region of northern Guatemala. After
devolution of classic Mayan civilization in this region, local Mayan groups
nucleated into smaller social entities until their ultimate conquest by the
Spanish. Through combined archaeological, historical and ethnographic work the
team has traced continuities through time and correlated late prehistoric and
extant Mayan populations. This provides an excellent opportunity to trace change
over time and evaluate, for example, the impact of such events as the classic
Mayan "collapse" and the Spanish conquest. Dr. Duncan will focus on burial
ritual. Because burials - both skeletal remains and associated grave offerings -
are often well preserved in the archaeological record they are the focus of
considerable scientific attention. Most societies have strict rules governing
their form and through analysis of grave remains it is often possible to work
backwards and reconstruct multiple aspects of social organization. In the course
of the Northern Peten work, many burials from multiple Postclassic groups have
been recovered. With NSF support, Mr. Duncan will expand and analyze this
sample. He has noted that burials vary along multiple axes. Some are "domestic"
and associated with individual dwellings. Others are multiple in nature and
likely took place in a broader civic context. Within this latter distinct
variants are evident. Based on both Middle American and world wide ethnographic
comparison it is postulated that different burial variants served different
purposes: in some cases the goal was to move the soul onwards to an afterlife.
In others, the reverse was the case. Based on an ethnographically derived set of
criteria Mr. Duncan will analyze methods of burial and compare them across
different contexts and different social groups. He will also conduct an analyses
of the skeletons themselves and use a set of discrete dental traits with a high
degree of heritability to examine degree of relationship among and between
individuals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is important for several
reasons. It will provide insight into prehistoric Mayan social organization and
the results will be of interest to many Middle Americanists. Through a unique
combination of archaeological and biological approaches it will help to develop
an analytic technique of potentially wide applicability. Finally it will assist
in training a promising young scientist.&lt;br/&gt;