* 0125805
* Gold and Copper Speciation and Partitioning in S- and Cl- bearing Melt-Vapor-Brine Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Philip Candela, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2004
* USD 205,448.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0125805&lt;br/&gt;Candela and
Piccoli&lt;br/&gt;University of Maryland&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experiments will
be performed to determine the speciation and partitioning of gold and copper in
felsic melts + vapor or brine (starting composition of KCl+NaCl+HCl+H2O)
assemblages, some with added sulfur, at 800 degrees C covering a range of
pressures near 100 MPa. Experiments performed in sulfide-saturated systems
(e.g., pyrrhotite-intermediate solid solution assemblage) will be performed to
determine copper and gold partitioning in vapor/melt, brine/melt and
vapor+brine/melt assemblages. This effort complements experiments on crystal-
melt partitioning of Au and Cu among magnetite and biotite, and rhyolite melt.
Taken together with existing experimental data, the proposed research will yield
a preliminary model for the behavior of Cu and Au in melt-crystal-vapor-brine
systems that can be used to test hypotheses for the origin of porphyry and
related Au-Cu deposits. The melt-volatile phase experiments proposed here are in
high demand given that the relative roles of brine versus vapor and sulfur
versus chloride-bearing ligands are not clear in light of the pioneering
analytical work on natural fluid inclusions by both Bodnar (1995) and Audetat et
al. (1998). These workers have suggested that both sulfur-bearing species and
the vapor phase may be important in transporting these Cu and Au in ore-forming
environments. Our study is designed to provide basic thermodynamic data to
determine the controls on copper and gold partitioning in magmatic-hydrothermal
systems and to clarify transport mechanisms for these economically important
metals.&lt;br/&gt;