* 0125917
* Geochemical Evolution Of The Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2005
* Stanley Hart, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 11/30/2005
* USD 549,392.00

Hart&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0125917&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant has as its
overarching goals the understanding of the placement, genesis, evolution and
lithologic nature of the several known heterogeneous mantle domains, and the
dynamics of melting and melt extraction from these mantle domains. Several
paradigm "warps" have been in progress during the period of our last renewal.
One is the increasing evidence that mesoscale mantle heterogeneities (veins,
pods, layers) may be important in creating some of the isotopic heterogeneity
observed in mantle-derived melts. This in turn demands a better understanding of
melting and melt transport processes. The second is the concept that the deepest
mantle may be convectively isolated from the overlying mantle (with a boundary
at circa 1700 km). This in turn demands a better understanding of the chemical
and lithologic make-up of mantle plumes, as they may provide our most direct
sampling of the deep mantle. &lt;br/&gt;Several of the isotopically-defined
mantle domains are thought to be a result of lithospheric recycling, and yet we
have little understanding of the parentage or lithologic expression of this
material, or of its melting dynamics. We will explore two avenues as a means to
confront this problem. The first is an in-depth study of the Samoa hotspot (the
most extreme EM2 mantle plume). The high 87Sr/86Sr (~ 0.7089) of the Samoan
plume, and its distinctive chemistry, is conventionally ascribed to recycling of
ancient lithosphere containing a terrigenous sediment component. However, no
model has as yet satisfactorily accounted for many of the puzzling geochemical
characteristics of EM2 hotspots (e.g. the coexistence of enriched 87Sr/86Sr,
heavy d18O, and high 3He/4He). We propose to undertake analytical studies of
volcanics from the older seamounts west of Samoa, of shield lavas from western
Upolu and Savai'i (putatively the oldest subaerial volcano in Samoa), and of
basalts from two younger seamounts east of Samoa. Sample suites from all of
these locations are in hand. This work will include 40Ar/39Ar dating of these
volcanoes, to test the age-progression hypothesis, and trace element and
isotopic work to elucidate the pedigree of the EM2 component in
Samoa.&lt;br/&gt;The second avenue is a study of the isotopic composition and
trace element signatures of melt inclusions in phenocrysts from EM1 and EM2
basalts (using in-situ ionprobe and laser-ablation ICP/MS techniques). In
general, the geochemical diversity captured in melt inclusions far exceeds that
observed in the erupted host lavas. The nature of these melt inclusions, which
likely represent pre-aggregated melts, will shed significant light on the
melting lithologies and melt transport networks involved in EM hotspot
volcanism. We should be able to discriminate between large-scale and small-scale
mantle heterogeneities, and between mafic and ultramafic lithologies; this
should allow a firm test of the recycled lithosphere model for EM2
plumes.&lt;br/&gt;