* 0125728
* Using Smart Antennas for Ad Hoc Networking
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2006
* Suresh Singh, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 06/30/2006
* USD 324,365.00

Over the past several years two technologies, ad hoc networking and smart
antenna systems, have developed independently of one another. Smart antenna
systems have been developed primarily for cellular communication systems while
ad hoc network technology has been developed for military and disaster relief
network models. In this research, the researchers plan on utilizing smart
antenna systems in the context of ad hoc networking. The researchers believe
that smart antennas with their ability to dynamically form directed beams will
allow the capacity of ad hoc networks to dramatically
increase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach in this research is to exploit
direction of arrival information obtained at&lt;br/&gt;the antenna level for MAC
and routing protocol design and, conversely, use routing and MAC layer
information to form appropriate beams. This integrated approach appears to be
ideal in terms of improving the overall system performance. The planned approach
will rely on simulations as well as modeling. For the simulation, the
researchers propose adding smart antenna models into NS-2. In addition, since
one of the performance metrics is energy, the researchers plan on incorporating
accurate energy models for beamforming and direction of arrival algorithms into
NS-2. One of the two approaches that will be explored for this is a mixed
NS-2/DSP (Digital Signal Processor) environment in which NS-2 uses external DSPs
to run the antenna algorithms and the exact measured energy cost is returned to
the simulator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will have a significant impact
on the existing state of the art in ad hoc&lt;br/&gt;network design. The
researchers believe that as smart antenna systems mature, these systems are the
right choice for infrastructureless networks. This research will develop
protocols and answer questions related to performance improvements and the
energy cost of using smart antennas. The researchers hope that the work will
enable other researchers to explore this merging of technologies as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;