* 0125338
* Collaborative Research: Investigating Timescales of Hydrologic Transport in Catchments Using Natural Tracer Time Series, Theoretical Models, and  Laboratory-Scale Simulations
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Xiahong Feng, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 02/28/2006
* USD 39,181.00

0125338 Feng

The travel time of water through a catchment -- that is, the time it takes for
rainfall to reach the stream -- is a fundamental hydraulic parameter controlling
the persistence of soluble contaminants, and thus the downstream consequences of
pollution episodes. A catchment is characterized by a distribution of travel
times, reflecting the diverse flow paths that rainfall can take to the stream.
Thus, quantifying catchments' travel time distributions should help to clarify
the hydrologic mechanisms controlling flow routing in the subsurface.
Understanding the timescales of transport and storage in catchments is also
important for predicting how rainfall inputs will be chemically modified by
reactions with catchment soils and bedrock. But despite the importance of
catchment travel time distributions for watershed hydrology and geochemistry,
they have rarely been quantified and the mechanisms controlling them are poorly
understood. Catchment travel time distributions can be inferred from long-term
time series of inert tracers, such as chloride, in rainfall and streamflow. It
has recently been shown that catchment travel-time distributions can have
unexpectedly long "tails", implying that they can retain soluble contaminants
for much longer than would otherwise be expected [Kirchner, Feng, and Neal,
Fractal stream chemistry and its implications for contaminant transport in
catchments, Nature, 403, 524-527, 2000]. The proposed research program builds on
this recent work, and has four main components: a) analyses of long-term time
series of rainfall and streamflow concentrations of chloride (a naturally
occurring nonreactive tracer) from humid forested catchments in diverse
geological settings, using spectral, autocorrelation, and cross-correlation
methods to infer each catchment's characteristic travel time distribution, b)
development and testing of alternative conceptual models for the observed
travel-time distributions, c) construction of laboratory-scale physical models
to simulate the hypothesized mechanisms underlying these conceptual models, and
d) analyses of reactive tracer data, to complement the passive tracer (chloride)
studies. This integrated program of data analysis, conceptual modeling, and
laboratory-scale physical models is designed to clarify the mechanisms that
control catchment-scale transport, storage, and mixing of waters and their
associated solutes. This project is expected to lead to: a) improved
understanding of catchment flowpaths and travel time distributions, and the
factors controlling them, b) improved understanding of how catchment flowpaths,
and reactions between aqueous and solid phases, affect the mobility of reactive
solutes at catchment scale, c) improved tools for using hydrologic and
geochemical time series to probe the internal workings of catchments, and d)
improved methods for testing catchment flow and routing models through
comparisons with field data.

