* 0125784
* Noble Gas Partitioning Between Mineral Interiors And Grain Boundaries
* GEO,EAR
* 11/15/2001,10/31/2002
* Kenneth Farley, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 10/31/2002
* USD 88,447.00

Farley and Asimow&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0125784&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the
ubiquitous use of noble gases as tracers of Earth processes and as chronometers,
many fundamental aspects of their geochemical behavior are, surprisingly, poorly
understood. Among the uncertain characteristics are the siting of noble gases in
rocks and minerals, mineral/melt partitioning behavior, solubility and
diffusivity in important and commonly analyzed minerals, and transport mechanism
and rate through wet and dry rocks. This proposal seeks to address a
particularly critical characteristic of noble gas geochemistry, about which
neither data nor theoretical understanding exist: at equilibrium, how do noble
gases partition between grain boundaries and crystals? Unlike all other
elements, the noble gases are uncharged and rather large atoms that do not fit
in any obvious way within most crystal lattices. Thus it is not unreasonable to
propose that noble gases will partition into the defect-rich region between
grains. This possibility is not commonly considered, yet if true, would have
profound implications for several important fields of geochemistry, most notably
including studies of mantle evolution and noble-gas-based geochronology. The
proposed research project seeks to investigate in a quantitative and
thermodynamically rigorous way the partitioning behavior of noble gases between
mineral interiors and grain boundaries in rocks. The conceptually simple
experimental technique relies on reactor-produced isotopes to eliminate the
concerns regarding atmospheric adsorption and contamination that plague studies
based on natural isotopes. In addition to producing otherwise rare isotopes,
neutron irradiation provides an initial condition closely analogous to in-situ
radiogenic noble gas production relevant in nature. Although isotopes of all
noble gases can be produced in many different substrates in this way, this pilot
study will focus on just one model system: the partitioning of 4He and 37Ar in
polycrystalline aggregates of diopside, equilibrated after irradiation at
elevated temperature and pressure in the piston-cylinder device. Along with
partitioning measurements, samples will be characterized texturally and
chemically with the electron microprobe, SEM, and transmission electron
microscope to directly assess the physical nature, width, and chemistry of the
grain boundary region.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will develop and explore the
techniques necessary for establishing the role of grain boundaries in noble gas
behavior through study of this one simple system. If the irradiation technique
works for assessing He and Ar partitioning in diopside, it should be generally
applicable for other noble gases and other materials, and as such has potential
well beyond the initial pilot study.&lt;br/&gt;