* 0125787
* Late Quaternary Tectonics and Environmental History in the Kamchatka- Komandorsky Region, Russian Far East
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2002,06/30/2008
* Joanne Bourgeois, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 06/30/2008
* USD 361,660.00

The primary goal of this project is to determine the history of earthquakes,
tsunamis, and coastal deformation in the northwestern-most Pacific and
southwestern Bering Sea, since the retreat of glaciers about 10,000 years ago.
In order to achieve this history, the project will also contribute to the
millennial-scale history of large volcanic eruptions on Kamchatka. Primary means
for accomplishing these goals are field work, coastal surveying, trench
excavation, strata description and sampling--as well as radiocarbon dating for
age control, and analysis of volcanic ash layers and of tsunami deposits. This
project focuses on the region where the Emperor Seamount chain and the Aleutian-
Komandorsky islands are colliding with Kamchatka, and where the subduction zone
ends, with tectonic transition into the Bering Sea. The history of tsunamis and
volcanic eruptions in this region has applications to the entire North Pacific
and Bering Sea region--as a guide for understanding tectonic history, as a tool
for correlation (for example, in the Aleutians), and as an indicator for
natural-hazard analysis. Moreover, Kamchatka tsunamis affect localities and
populations as distant as Hawaii and Chile. This project also will record the
history of vegetation changes at selected sites via pollen analysis and
macrovegetation studies. In cooperation with archaeologists, human-occupation
levels will be recorded for potential future exploration, and for documenting
the relationship between human habitation and geologic events. This project also
will provide ages of basal peat horizons, which have implications for global
carbon budgets and for climate-change models.