* 0125979
* Scalable AQM Routers Supporting Hetergenous Traffic
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Christopher Hollot, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2006
* USD 334,753.00

In the past decade the world has seen an explosion in Internet activity and with
it has come increased expectations for its performance. Internet users now
demand faster and higher-quality service for applications ranging from
audio/video-on-demand to Internet telephony. At the heart of these information
exchanges is the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) and active queue management
(AQM) schemes which work together with the goal of preventing network congestion
and improving end-to-end performance. However, it is becoming increasingly
evident that the present form of these schemes may not be able to cope with the
growing demands on the Internet. It is well documented that congestion-avoidance
schemes relying on Drop-Tail routers are prone to high-loss rates while AQM
routers deploying random early detection (RED) are difficult to
tune.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motivated by this situation, this proposal is
concerned with the design of advanced AQM schemes. This projects approach
departs from the prevailing techniques by explicitly relying on dynamic network
models and feedback control principles. Central to the approach is the
recognition that AQM schemes are feedback control systems and that feedback
control principles provide essential tools for the analysis and design of AQM
strategies. The absence of feedback control principles from the design scene so
far is apparently due to a lack of an analytical model of TCP. Fortunately, this
roadblock has been recently removed by one of the PIs through the introduction
of a fluid-flow model that expresses TCP in a language that allows network
control engineers to analyze and design AQM schemes. Indeed, in several recent
papers the PIs have accomplished just that by: 1) relating key network
parameters to the performance of AQM networks, 2) analyzing RED and suggesting
parameter settings for stable queue management, and 3) introducing a new AQM
scheme, the PI controller, that compares favorably with
RED.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research builds on these recent results
and has two objectives. First, to study the interaction of heterogeneous fluid-
flows with AQM routers and secondly, to investigate the scalability of PI
controllers. The first objective is aimed at the recently developed TCP/AQM
movel which assumes only long-lived flows and ignores short-lived flows. This
research will develop models of heterogeneous flows and explore their impact on
the AQM analysis and design. In the second objective the PI controller is
considered which was originally designed and analyzed for a TCP connection
encountering only a single bottleneck router. The scalability for the PI
controller will be explored where complex network topologies, consisting of many
routers each under local PI control, will be considered. Unlike the development
of the original PI controller, this research will necessarily use, multivariable
feedback control techniques to establish network stability, performance and
robustness to network parameter variations.&lt;br/&gt;