* 0125562
* Collaborative Proposal:    SHALDRIL - A Demonstration Drilling Cruise to the James Ross Basin
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* James Zachos, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 08/31/2007
* USD 67,880.00

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
Office of Polar Programs, provides funds for a demonstration project to prove
the viability of shallow ship-based geological drilling while simultaneously
collecting useful cores for assessing the early history of the Antarctic ice
sheets. For over three decades, U.S. scientists and their international
colleagues exploring the shallow shelves and seas along the margins of Antarctic
have been consistently frustrated by their inability to penetrate through the
over-compacted glacial diamictons encountered at shallow sub bottom depths
(within the upper 10 m) over these terrains. This is particularly frustrating
because advanced high resolution seismic reflection techniques clearly show in
many areas the presence of older successions of Neogene and even Paleogene
sequences lying just beneath this thin veneer of diamictons. Until the means are
developed to recover these sequences, a detailed history of the Antarctic ice
sheets, which is an essential prerequisite to understanding Cenozoic
paleoclimate and future climate change on a global scale, will remain an elusive
and unobtainable goal. After four years of study and evaluation with the aid of
a professional engineer (and over the course of two workshops), the SHALDRIL
Committee, an interested group of U.S. scientists, has identified at least two
diamond-coring systems deemed suitable for use on existing ice-breaking U.S.
Antarctic Research Program vessels. The goal of this project is to employ
diamond-coring technology on the RV/IB Nathaniel B. Palmer in order to test out
and demonstrate the feasibility of both ship-based diamond coring and down-hole
logging. For this "demonstration cruise" coring will be attempted along a high-
resolution seismic reflection profile on the continental shelf adjacent to
Seymour Island, Antarctic Peninsula, an area of high scientific interest in its
own right. Here the well-defined geologic section is estimated to range from
Eocene to Quaternary in age, effectively spanning the "Greenhouse-Icehouse"
transition in the evolution of Antarctic/global climate. A complete record of
this transition has yet to be obtained anywhere along the Antarctic margin.
Following core recovery, this project will result in correlation of the
paleoclimate records from the new cores with detailed fluctuations of the ice
margin recorded at higher latitudes in the eastern Ross Sea by the recently
concluded, fast-ice-based Cape Roberts Project. If successful, this mobile and
flexible drilling system will then be available to the broader scientific
community for further research in paleoenvironmental conditions and other areas
of science that are currently hindered by the present gap that exists in the US
Antarctic Program's technical capability to explore the Antarctic shelves
between the shore-line/fast-ice margin and the continental slope. SHALDRIL will
be able to operate effectively in the "no man's land" that presently exists
between the near shore (where the fast-ice-based Cape Roberts Project was
successful) and the upper slope (where the Ocean Drilling Program's vessel
JOIDES Resolution becomes most efficient). This technological breakthrough will
not only allow major outstanding scientific problems of the last three decades
to be addressed, but will also favorably impact many current U.S. and SCAR (ICSU
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research) Antarctic or drilling-related
initiatives, such as WAIS, ANTIME, ANDRILL, ANTEC, IMAGES, PAGES, GLOCHANT
(including PICE), MARGINS, ODP, and STRATAFORM.