* 0125579
* Collaborative Research: Dynamics and Climatic Response of the Taylor Glacier System
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2007
* Kurt Cuffey, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 07/31/2007
* USD 307,704.00

This award supports a project to significantly improve our understanding of how
Taylor Glacier flows and responds to climate changes. Taylor Glacier drains the
Taylor Dome region of the East Antarctic Ice Sheet and terminates in Taylor
Valley, one of the Dry Valleys of Victoria Land. It provides a crucial and
unique link between two intensively studied Antarctic environments: the Taylor
Dome, from which a 130 kyr ice core paleoclimate record has recently been
extracted, and the Dry Valleys, a pivotal Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER)
site and a focus of research on geomorphology and glacial geology. The proposed
work will thus make an important contribution to ongoing efforts to exploit the
Taylor Dome - Dry Valleys system to build a uniquely comprehensive view of
regional long-term environmental changes. The proposed work has two
complementary components: field research and numerical modelling. Two field
seasons will be used to measure velocity, surface strain rate, mass balance, ice
thickness, glacier bed reflectance, and subglacial topography, along a nearly
complete longitudinal transect of the Taylor Glacier, and along select cross-
valley transects. This information will be used to constrain numerical models of
ice and heat flow for the Taylor Dome - Taylor Glacier system. These calibrated
models will be used to analyze the time-dependent response of the Taylor Glacier
to climate changes. The synthesis of results will be aimed to improve
understanding of the glacial geomorphology of Taylor Valley, and to illuminate
impacts on the Taylor Valley lakes ecosystem. The project will have a major role
in furthering the careers of a doctoral-level graduate student and a post-
doctoral researcher.