* 0125762
* Elementary, Secondary, and Informal Education -- Stardust:  Our Search for Origins (A Travelling Exhibition)
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2007
* Paul Dusenbery, SPACE SCIENCE INSTITUTE
* Continuing Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 01/31/2007
* USD 1,222,278.00

The Space Science Institute (SSI) seeks to develop the "Stardust Project,"
designed to introduce the public to concepts related to the birth of stars, the
search for planets beyond our solar system and the search for life beyond earth.
The project's three components include a 2,500 square-foot travelling exhibition
called "Stardust: Our Search for Origins;" a comprehensive education program for
museum staff and grades 4-9 school teachers and a public Web site that
incorporates and builds on the exhibit and education content.

The project proposes to assemble standards-based educational materials for
dissemination through workshops conducted at museums that host the exhibit. The
educational programs -- particularly professional development workshops for
teachers -- target, among other groups, underserved Native American and Hispanic
teachers associated with a partnership between SSI and the NSF Rural Systematic
Initiatives in the American West.

The project is built around strong partnerships with two NASA Origins Program
missions and with established informal education institutions including the New
York Hall of Science, the Lawrence Hall of Science, the Denver Museum of Nature
and Science, TERC and the SETI Institute. Its goals are to make it possible for
teachers, students and the public to learn about:

The formation of stars, planets, and the solar system; The conditions necessary
for life; The effect of life on Earth's environment; The methods used to detect
planets orbiting distant stars and The scientific tools used in origin research
-- from space-based telescopes to microscopes.