* 0125287
* ROLE: Facilitating the Understanding of Complex Adaptive Systems Through Computer Simulations
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Kelly Mix, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 09/30/2005
* USD 330,910.00

Interactive computer simulations are increasingly being used to teach
students&lt;br/&gt;scientific principles, but relatively little systematic
research has done on&lt;br/&gt;the factors that make a simulation pedagogically
effective. This research&lt;br/&gt;explores how to design a computer simulation
so that students learn the&lt;br/&gt;scientific principle underlying it, and
transfer this principle to new&lt;br/&gt;domains. Principles from the
interdisciplinary science of complex adaptive&lt;br/&gt;systems are chosen
because these mathematical formalisms are applicable across&lt;br/&gt;a wide
range of domains. Laboratory experiments with students will explore
how&lt;br/&gt;active exploration of one simulation benefits or hinders
understanding of a&lt;br/&gt;subsequently presented simulation based on the same
principle. Experiments&lt;br/&gt;will explore the roles of concreteness and
idealization, simulation similarity,&lt;br/&gt;and individual differences in
abstract transfer. The scientific goal of the&lt;br/&gt;inquiry is to gain an
understanding of how perceptual experience can lead to&lt;br/&gt;abstract
conceptual understanding, and how conceptual understanding can
change&lt;br/&gt;perceptual experience. The practical goal is to translate this
understanding&lt;br/&gt;into general educational principles for integrating
computer simulations into&lt;br/&gt;classroom activities.