* 0125098
* Occupation History and Diet of Adelie Penguins in the Ross Sea Region
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2003,12/31/2008
* Steven Emslie, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 12/31/2008
* USD 162,586.00

#0125098&lt;br/&gt;Steve Emslie&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Occupation History and Diet
of Adelie Penguins in the Ross Sea Region&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
build on previous studies to investigate the occupation history and diet of
Adelie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae) in the Ross Sea region, Antarctica, with
excavations of abandoned and active penguin colonies. Numerous active and
abandoned colonies exist on the Victoria Land coast, from Cape Adare to Marble
Point will be sampled. Some of these sites have been radiocarbon-dated and
indicate a long occupation history for Adelie penguins extending to 13,000 years
before present (B. P.). The material recovered from excavations, as demonstrated
from previous investigations, will include penguin bones, tissue, and eggshell
fragments as well as abundant remains of prey (fish bones, otoliths, squid
beaks) preserved in ornithogenic (formed from bird guano) soils. These organic
remains will be quantified and subjected to radiocarbon analyses to obtain a
colonization history of penguins in this region. Identification of prey remains
in the sediments will allow assessment of penguin diet. Other data (ancient DNA)
from these sites will be analyzed through collaboration with New Zealand
scientists. Past climatic conditions will be interpreted from published ice-core
and marine-sediment records. These data will be used to test the hypothesis that
Adelie penguins respond to climate change, past and present, in a predictable
manner. In addition, the hypothesis that Adelie penguins alter their diet in
accordance with climate, sea-ice conditions, and other marine environmental
variables along a latitudinal gradient will be tested. Graduate and
undergraduate students will be involved in this project and a project Web site
will be developed to report results and maintain educational interaction between
the PI and students at local middle and high schools in Wilmington,
NC.&lt;br/&gt;