* 0126281
* Thermochemical Models of Earth's Mantle Convection: New Insight from Fractionation and Outgassing Processes
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Louise Kellogg, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2005
* USD 248,938.00

Basalt geochemistry records information about mantle dynamics, indicating that
there are at least five reservoirs in the mantle. However, the dynamical meaning
of such reservoirs is ill-constrained. Efforts to reconcile the full range of
types of observational data have recently given rise to several new geodynamic
models that include layers of different composition in the mantle. The
investigators will evaluate these and related models, by using numerical models
of thermo-chemical convection in the mantle to determine the geochemical
signatures predicted by different dynamical models. Simulations will include
tracers to represent various chemical species. Partial melting processes at
ridges are taken into account, yielding fractionation between oceanic crust and
lithosphere, and outgassing into the atmosphere. These processes have not been
included in previous large-scale, fully dynamic, convective models. The
simulations keep track of ancient oceanic crust, and include intrinsic density
variations between eclogite and peridotite, as well as inhomogeneous heat
production rates. The investigators will address the ability of their different
models to reproduce some of the features of basalt, and to be in agreement with
geodynamical observations such as the heat flow. They will also test the
sensitivity of the results to petrologic and geodynamic parameters.

