* 0126486
* Student and Instructor Centered Electronic Textbooks in the Computer Science Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Ryan McFall, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* Stephen R. Cunningham
* 08/31/2004
* USD 84,947.00

Computer Science (31)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
increase the effectiveness of textbooks in the undergraduate science curriculum.
Our experience at Hope College and the literature indicates there are several
problems with current textbooks, including difficulty in matching texts to
course needs in the areas of emphasis, breath, depth and level. These problems
are addressed by developing a new textbook model. The effectiveness of the model
will be determined by its application in our general education course,
Introduction to Computer Science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a
prototype of an electronic textbook where the instructor determines the content
of the textbook. Traditional textbook content as well as supplemental materials
provided by the instructor or determined by the student is used. Students
augment the material supplied by the instructor with other resources, including
resources created by the student. The textbook integrates previously
disconnected resources in the learning experience, such as homework assignments
and laboratory experiments, into a single environment. Both student and
instructor have the ability to annotate any of the materials used or referenced
in the textbook. Integrating all of these features creates a textbook that is
customizable by both student and instructor and provides a single location that
students can use to organize the learning resources available for a course.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important feature of our model is that it is designed
to run on handheld computers, allowing the textbook to be portable and
convenient for students to use.&lt;br/&gt;