* 0126141
* Introducing Indivisibles into Calculus Instruction
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Bronislaw Czarnocha, CUNY Hostos Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Lee Zia
* 09/30/2006
* USD 399,954.00

The PI's Bronislaw Czarnocha and Vrunda Prabhu, will conduct two year-long
cycles of&lt;br/&gt;teaching experiments to introduce the intuition of
"indivisibles" into calculus instruction and&lt;br/&gt;integrate it with
standard ways of instructing via Riemann construction. They plan to
study&lt;br/&gt;closely the conceptual and computational development of students
who receive this instruction. It&lt;br/&gt;As part of this project, the PI's
will investigate:&lt;br/&gt;(1) What is the process of transformation and
development of the intuition of lines (the&lt;br/&gt;indivisibles) into a
precise, mathematical concept?&lt;br/&gt;(2) Does the introduction of the W-C
construction based on indivisibles, the interplay of that&lt;br/&gt;construction
with the standard Riemann construction, and the instruction that integrates
both,&lt;br/&gt;strengthen students' understanding of the concept of the
definite integral?&lt;br/&gt;In the proposed project, they will conduct and
coordinate Calculus instruction at six&lt;br/&gt;institutions, assess students'
performance via tests, essays and clinical interviews, collect
data&lt;br/&gt;resulting from the different assessment and analyze the data in
preparation for a refinement of the&lt;br/&gt;teaching strategy. As a general
framework they will adopt Vygotsky's theory with its emphasis&lt;br/&gt;on the
cognitive processes in the zone of proximal development, which dictates
important&lt;br/&gt;consequences on the instruction and assessment. Students
will be guided by the activities of the&lt;br/&gt;class to enable them to
experience the process of mathematical thinking and to reveal its
content&lt;br/&gt;to the teacher. The role of the instructor will be to provide
systematization of their spontaneous&lt;br/&gt;development grounded in the
precise mathematical understanding of the concept in question.
The&lt;br/&gt;directions their spontaneous thought processes take, will be under
investigation during the course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is a balance
between various aspects: (1) the natural intuition of the learner
vs.&lt;br/&gt;the academic instruction, (2) computational mastery vs. conceptual
understanding, (3) teaching&lt;br/&gt;and research.