* 0126408
* COMPASS: COnvection Morphology Parameter Space Study
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2006
* Donald Perkey, Universities Space Research Association
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 05/31/2006
* USD 367,022.00

Understanding and forecasting the intensity and structural characteristics of
deep convective storms as a function of the storm environment is an interesting
scientific problem and of great interest to operational forecasters. This
research seeks to explore several new dimensions of the large parameter space
that regulates the morphology and intensity of convective storms. The study will
be undertaken using a full-physics three dimensional cloud simulation model,
initialized with environments designed to permit independent investigation of
eight separate parameters that are believed to be responsible for much of the
sensitivity of storm structure to storm environment. Exploratory studies have
already demonstrated the existence of large sensitivities of storms to most of
these parameters, in at least portions of the full parameter space.
Sensitivities already found include bulk convective available potential energy
(CAPE) and bulk shear, the shapes of parcel buoyancy and shear profiles, and the
depths of both the mixed layer and moist layer. The shape of the relative
humidity profile and the temperature at cloud base are other parameters of
potential importance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the preliminary results
already reported constitute a first step in exploring many of the relevant
parameter space dimensions, the findings need to be extended to embrace a larger
range of values of parameters. In order to address these needs, this project
will expand the previous research by building and analyzing a more complete
archive of idealized cloud simulations. Progress is expected to be rapid because
the tools needed to build the simulation environments and to analyze the model
output are already mostly in place. In the analysis of the model data, emphasis
will be placed on quantifying the storm morphology variations and on documenting
the effects of the various competing physical mechanisms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is expected that study of these simulations will
significantly enhance understanding of convective storm behavior within a broad
range of environmental conditions and will allow progress towards the goal of
improving storm forecasts.