* 0126262
* Antarctic Meteorological Research Center (AMRC) 2002-2005
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Charles Stearns, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 09/30/2006
* USD 640,606.00

This proposed work is the continued operation of the Antarctic Meteorological
Research Center (AMRC) for three years. AMRC is a meteorological data
acquisition and management system with nodes at McMurdo Station and at the
University of Wisconsin, Madison. The system is a resource and archive for
meteorological research and a test bed for improving operational synoptic
forecasting. Its basis is a computer-based system for organizing, manipulating,
and integrating antarctic environmental data, developed by the University of
Wisconsin. It captures the flow of meteorological information from polar
orbiting satellites, automatic weather stations, operational station synoptic
observations, and research project data, producing a mosaic of antarctic
satellite images on an operational basis. It also receives environmental data
products, such as weather forecasts, from outside Antarctica, and acts as a
repository for existing archived databases. The AMRC provides customized weather
and climate information for a variety of antarctic users, including aircraft and
ship operations of the US Antarctic Program. Currently the AMRC produces the
Antarctic Composite Infrared Image, a mosaic of images from four geostationary
and three polar-orbiting satellites, which is used for both forecasting and
research purposes.