* 0126580
* Enhancement of the Organic Chemistry Laboratory Curriculum Using Temperature-Programmable, Computer-Controlled, and Network -Accessible Gas Chromatographs
* EHR,DUE
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2004
* Laura Parmentier, Beloit College
* Standard Grant
* Harry Ungar
* 12/31/2004
* USD 38,314.00

Chemistry (12) We are using temperature-programmable, computer-controlled gas
chromatographs (GCs) equipped with TCD detectors to refine, adapt and
incorporate a comprehensive set of experiments in the general and organic
chemistry sequences. The enhanced throughput of the computer-controlled GCs
provides access to the acquired data and powerful data analysis software
anywhere on the campus intranet. The experiments extend our innovative inquiry-
driven model for General Chemistry and Chemical Equilibrium to Organic
Chemistry. Students are first introduced to GC instrumentation in General
Chemistry through an analysis of fats and oils as part of our current topical
module on fats and nutrition. In the Organic sequence, several key experiments
are run in an investigative, "what if" fashion by individual students. For
example, detailed examination of the conditions and mechanistic details of the
hydroboration reaction by observing the effect of different solvents, alkenes,
and hydroboration reagents are investigated by students. In another experiment,
students compare E1 vs. E2 elimination of 2-bromobutane to give cis- and
trans-2-butene. Since the isomers can be resolved by the GC system, the relative
yields lead to insights about the mechanism. Finally, the GCs are also being
used in an inter-disciplinary course on perfumes and in community outreach
activities in a Howard Hughes-funded program for "Girls and Women in Science,"
where sixth grade girls and their teachers perform "hands-on" GC analyses of
gasoline and other common materials. We are carrying a comprehensive assessment
of the project by an on-site specialist in chemical education. We will
disseminate the results of the project nationally through the web sites and
links to the NSF-funded ChemLinks Coalition, as well as through articles in The
Journal of Chemical Education once they become available.