* 0126218
* Authigenic smectite in Cape Roberts Project cores, Antarctica: implications for environmental, basin and tectonic history
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2006
* Sherwood Wise, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 01/31/2006
* USD 166,981.00

0126218&lt;br/&gt;Wise&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award, provided by the
Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the Office of Polar Programs,
provides funds for a study of clays (specifically smectite) in cores from the
Ross Sea, Antarctica, toward an understanding of the age and origin. One of the
most surprising discoveries of the recently concluded geological drilling of the
Cape Roberts Project (CRP) in the eastern Ross Sea, Antarctica, was the presence
of authigenic smectite clays in lower Oligocene (or older) sandstones in the
lower portion of Hole CRP-3, which was diamond-cored continuously to 941 meters
below sea floor with 98% recovery. This is the first confirmed report of
authigenic smectite in sandstones from the Antarctic continental margin.
Situated along the eastern margin of the Victoria Land Basin, adjacent to the
rising Transantarctic Mountains, CRP-3 was drilled to elucidate the
paleoclimatic and tectonic history of the region; however, the base of the
Cenozoic section is poorly dated, with limited constraints from biostratigraphy
and paleomagnetics. This project is designed to shed additional light on the
spatial extent, source, timing, and mode of emplacement of the authigenic
smectite, which were probably emplaced shortly after deposition of the host
sediments. This will help constrain the age of the basal Cenozoic sediments and
the environment in which the smectite formed. This in turn will lead to a better
understanding of the tectonic processes at work during the early history of the
basin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because this serendipitous discovery was not
anticipated prior to drilling, only a pilot study could be undertaken within the
time and funding constraints dictated by the science plan for the project. Work
to date allows the definition of three multiple working hypotheses to account
for the source and mode of emplacement of the authigenic smectite: 1) Burial
diagenesis with necessary components sourced from volcanogenic materials and
heavy minerals within the Cenozoic sequence or from a dolerite intrusion in the
Paleozoic sandstones below; 2) Precipitation from hydrothermal waters associated
with possible igneous intrusion(s) and nearby faults; 3) Mobilization and
injection of fluids along a nearby fault that bounds a major graben parallel to
the Transantarctic Front. The data gathered form the preliminary study was
insufficient, however, to arbitrate among these three
possibilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports work to test, to the
extent possible, these three hypotheses and to allow completion of the study
through: 1) a thorough examination of the core by scanning electron
microscope/energy-dispersive microprobe analysis to determine the extent of the
smectite in CRP-3 and the nearby CRP-2 core (also predominantly of Oligocene
age), and 2) radiometric dating of the authigenic clays and potential source
rock(s) by the 40Ar/39Ar method. Completion of the study will help answer
fundamental tectonic an paleoenvironmental questions posed by the CRP project,
will help guide future exploration of the Antarctic margin (such as by the
ANDRIL, SHALDRIL, and IODP projects), and will impact major Antarctic
initiatives such as ANTEC, MARGINS, and STRATAFORM.&lt;br/&gt;