* 0126715
* Instrumental Methods Across the Chemistry Curriculum with Emphasis on Macromolecular Structure Studies
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2006
* James Scheirer, Albright College
* Standard Grant
* Eileen L. Lewis
* 01/31/2006
* USD 52,166.00

Chemistry (12)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We are enhancing our undergraduate
curriculum by adapting and implementing into our chemistry and biochemistry
courses projects which make use of our newly acquired CD spectropolarimeter. Our
primary emphasis is to develop an integrated biophysical chemistry laboratory
course that involve a series of projects focused on the investigation of
macromolecular structure and function using the CD instrumentation. We are also
integrating CD instrumentation into our sophomore and higher level laboratories
and in ongoing student-faculty research projects. The project-based biophysical
laboratory represents a forum for investigation of macromolecular structure and
function by instrumental means. Aspects of polypeptide and DNA structure are
being examined using the CD spectrometer. In sophomore Organic chemistry,
students use the CD instrumentation to determine the absolute configuration of
chiral compounds. Additionally, we are adapting a project-oriented experiment
from the J. Chem. Educ. in which our students in advanced organic chemistry use
the CD instrumentation to determine the absolute configuration of alpha amino
acids following completion of an organometallic synthesis. Coupled with our 200
MHz NMR and the UV/vis spectrophotometer, students in the biophysical chemistry
course investigate the thermodynamics of protein and DNA structures. The
overarching goal of our project is to enhance our students' problem solving
skills in chemistry and biochemistry through incorporation of modern
instrumentation and to enable them to seek varied approaches to the solution of
scientific problems. &lt;br/&gt;