* 0126366
* Consortium Development: George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation "NEES" Consortium Development Project
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2001,12/31/2004
* Cherri Pancake, Consortium of Universities for Res in Earthquake Engineering
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joy Pauschke
* 12/31/2004
* USD 2,092,840.00

The George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) is
a project funded under the National Science Foundation (NSF) Major Research
Equipment appropriation. The goal of NEES is to provide a national, networked
simulation resource of 20 or more geographically-distributed, shared use, next-
generation experimental research equipment sites, with teleobservation and
teleoperation capabilities, which will transform the environment for earthquake
engineering research and education through collaborative and integrated
experimentation, computation, theory, databases, and model-based simulation to
improve the seismic design and performance of U.S. civil and mechanical
infrastructure systems. NEES will be constructed through September 30, 2004, and
then enter its operational period from October 1, 2004 through September 30,
2014, during which time it will be operated by a NEES Consortium (to be
established under this award). This 36-month cooperative agreement with the
Consortium of Universities for Research in Earthquake Engineering (CUREE) is to
conduct the project entitled "George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake
Engineering Simulation (NEES) Consortium Development." This award is the outcome
of the peer review of proposals submitted to program solicitation NSF 01-56,
"George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES):
Consortium Development." The extensive project team is led by CUREE and includes
individuals from the following organizations: Civil Engineering Research
Foundation, Cornell University, Earthquake Engineering Research Institute,
Louisiana State University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Oregon State
University, San Jose State University, University of California at Berkeley,
University of California at San Diego, University of Kansas at Lawrence,
University of Michigan at Ann Arbor, University of Minnesota at the Twin Cities,
University of Southern California, and University of Texas at Austin. This
project team will outreach extensively to the earthquake engineering community,
NEES System Integration awardee, and NEES equipment site awardees to accomplish
three major tasks. First, this project will organize and run activities to gain
community-generated input and broad consensus for the organizational structure
and governance of a single community-based and community-led NEES Consortium.
These activities must culminate in the completion by October 1, 2003, or
earlier, of all documents required for NEES Consortium establishment and
operation and in a proposal submitted to NSF for ten-year operation of NEES (FY
2005-FY 2014). Activities are included during the period from October 1, 2003 to
September 30, 2004 to enable start-up operation of NEES by the NEES Consortium.
Second, this project will organize activities to facilitate community-generated
input and consensus needed by the NEES system integration awardee for detailed
network design. Third, this project will coordinate outreach and training
activities for the NEES equipment sites as they become operational before
September 30, 2004. To accomplish this scope of work, project activities will
include national workshops, regional workshops, white papers, and working groups
with membership from the earthquake engineering community. This project will
maintain an interactive web site to keep the earthquake engineering community
informed of activities and progress. Project activities will be coordinated by
an Executive Council. These tasks, critical self-assessment, and project
management will be conducted in accordance with the awardee's Project Execution
Plan. NEES and this award are part of the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction
Program.









