* 0126601
* The Children's Research Initiative: Integrative Approaches - CRI: The Study of Brain-Behavior Relations in the Context of Development
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2001,05/31/2003
* Charles Nelson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Marguerite Barratt
* 05/31/2003
* USD 66,456.00

The Study of Brain-Behavior Relations in the Context of
Development&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Charles Nelson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the
past decade, tremendous strides have been made in elucidating the neural
underpinnings of human cognition and emotion. Regrettably, similar gains have
not been made in understanding the development of these functions. This is
unfortunate, as the study of development is not only important in its own right,
but also has implications for understanding mature function. For example,
knowledge gained from the study of development can provide useful information
with regard to how the brain accomplishes the tasks that makes behavior
possible. When one finds that a particular process appears in a particular
sequence it suggests that experience provided by one system may be used to grow
the next. When several different processes all appear at the same time in
development, it suggests that a common mechanism may underlie all of these
activities. Understanding the effects of experience and maturation on a
behavioral system are central concerns of the developmental approach.
Developmental studies make it possible to search for sensitive periods and raise
the question of what brain changes bring a sensitive period to an end. The
overall objective of this center grant planning proposal is to capitalize on the
gains being made in adult cognitive and affective neuroscience and extend these
gains to the study of development. &lt;br/&gt;The Center for Neurobehavioral
Development (CNBD) at the University of Minnesota will be home to this
application. The faculty that comprise the CNBD are made up of an eclectic group
of faculty that collectively have in common an interest in the relation between
brain and behavior in the context of development. The CNBD faculty has strengths
in a variety of areas, and have specifically targeted for investigation studies
that focus on the following four areas: (a) The organization of sensory and
perceptual systems (b) The development of memory, (c) The development of
attention and executive functions as cognitive constructs and in the service of
emotion and behavior regulation, and (d) Emotion and stress regulation. Although
many of the faculty that comprise the CNBD have worked together in the past,
because this is a new center, its participants are not yet as well integrated as
would be desirable. This planning grant will facilitate such integration.
Project activities during the planning phase will consist of a) meeting of
"affinity groups," in which like-minded faculty will meet on a regular basis to
discuss common interests, b) inviting guest speakers from other universities
whose research interests overlap with those of CNBD faculty, c) inviting
consultants to the CNBD that will help identify themes common to the full
faculty, d) having the Director of the CNBD (and PI of this application) visit
with other center directors around the US, and e) hosting a faculty
retreat.&lt;br/&gt;