* 0126982
* Multidisciplinary Use of an Atomic Absorption Spectrometer at an Undergraduate Women's College
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2002,10/31/2005
* Rebecca Ambers, Sweet Briar College
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 10/31/2005
* USD 54,239.00

Interdisciplinary (99) Chemistry (12)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
implementing the use of atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS) in the chemistry
and environmental science curricula. Recent internal and external assessments of
the chemistry program as well as the recent implementation of the environmental
sciences program have demonstrated a gap in curricula as a result of students
not using AAS in the laboratory. AAS has been established as a fundamental
technique in the quantitative determination of trace metals. In order to
implement AAS into six courses of the chemistry curriculum and one course of the
environmental science curriculum, a number of experiments are being adapted and
modified from the educational literature. Students are using AAS in general
chemistry laboratory, environmental analytical chemistry laboratory, and then
the intermediate laboratory I/II and advanced laboratory I/II sequence. In the
ES program, AAS is used in the advanced environmental science laboratory. In
addition, seniors are able to use AAS in their senior research projects that are
required for graduation. Students learn the theoretical basis of AAS and also
have extensive hands-on experience. This ensures proper training in AAS for
chemistry and environmental science majors who go on to graduate school or are
employed in the private or public sector.