* 0126158
* A Workshop on  Williams Syndrome and the issue of Neurogenetic Developmental Disorders, May 15-22, 2002, in Budapest, Hungary
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Ilona Kovacs, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Amy L. Sussman
* 08/31/2002
* USD 9,700.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A Workshop on Williams Syndrome and the Issue of
Neurogenetic Developmental Disorders&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ilona Kovacs &amp;
Csaba Pleh&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Williams syndrome is a rare developmental
disorder that has captured the attention of developmental cognitive scientists
because it has been implicated in several double dissociation mechanisms. The
peculiar developmental profiles and uneven distribution of results are of
interest because they enable scientists to study the "separability" of various
cognitive functions. The syndrome is interpreted as having impaired vision and
less impaired language; impaired visual integration and less impaired analytic
processing; better grammar than lexicon; and, high social competence. The
workshop will be based on intense experimental and theoretical cooperation
between several internationally recognized researchers in the field. The
workshop will focus on: developmental models used in explaining Williams
syndrome abilities; exact profiles of visual impairment of Williams syndrome
subjects of all ages; working memory and language acquisition in Williams
syndrome; language profiles of Williams syndrome subjects obtained from
populations speaking different languages; comparisons with other populations,
most notably with autistic subjects; and issues of self-help in families of
Williams syndrome children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;