* 0126024
* The Seagrass History of Florida Bay Reconstructed from Integrating Micropaleontological and Geochemical Proxies
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Laurel Collins, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2004
* USD 154,340.00

ABSTRACT

The Seagrass History of Florida Bay Reconstructed from Integrating
Micropaleontological and Geochemical Proxies

Laurel S. Collins, Rudolf Jaffe, James W. Fourqurean, William T. Anderson
Florida International University

How much of the variation in coastal environmental conditions is naturally
occurring and how much has been caused by humans? This question is addressed
with the historical record of seagrass abundance, which today is highly
correlated with environmental water quality. The study is set in Florida Bay,
part of the environmentally challenged Everglades National Park. The main
objective is to collect cores of Florida Bay sediment and use proxies of
seagrass abundance contained therein as indicators of the environmental water
quality for the past few hundred years. Proxies are used because seagrass itself
is not preserved in sediments. The geochemical proxies are measures of organic
matter (organic carbon, nitrogen, molecular biomarkers, stable isotopes - d13C,
d15N, dD) and micropaleontological proxies are abundances of seagrass indicator
species (foraminifera, diatoms). Hypersalinity has recently been linked to large
seagrass die-offs in Florida Bay. Several proxies will also be used to determine
the correlation between historical salinity and seagrass changes.

This grant funds the pilot project to extract sediment cores from Florida Bay,
conduct sedimentologic analyses, determine radiometric ages, and calibrate the
proxies to modern seagrass abundances and salinities. The investigators will
subsequently collect geochemical and micropaleontological data from the cores,
integrate the data in statistical analyses, and interpret the results.

Knowledge is advanced by incorporating the results in geology, biology and
chemistry classes taught by the investigators, and providing the basis for three
graduate student theses. FIU is a federally recognized minority university.