* 0126435
* Promoting Undergraduate Research through the Development of Two Interdisciplinary Research Methods/Statistics Courses and Increased Support of Student Research
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Vishwa Bhat, William Paterson University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel P. Maki
* 06/30/2006
* USD 197,975.00

Interdisciplinary (99)&lt;br/&gt;This project increases students' involvement in
undergraduate research by developing two team-taught interdisciplinary research
methods statistics courses. The interdisciplinary team approach is adapted from
the approaches developed by Donovan at Kean University and Peaslee at Hope
College. The project also provides faculty development opportunities to foster
greater inclusion of active learner methodologies in courses, and creates a
centralized program to promote and support undergraduate research activities.
The unique configuration of the nine basic and applied sciences and health
sciences programs in the College provides team-teaching and student-faculty
research opportunities across disciplinary boundaries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project activities include: (1) Development of a team-
taught interdisciplinary two-course sequence on research methods/statistics
courses that is offered for sophomore students majoring in Biology, Nursing,
Mathematics, Computer Science, Environmental Science and Geography, and Exercise
and Movement Sciences. During the first course, students working in
interdisciplinary research groups complete the first two sections of a research
report including the introduction and review of literature. Labs are conducted
and instructions on statistical computer programs are also provided. The second
course covers additional statistical procedures and computer applications in
addition to writing the method, results, and discussions sections of a research
report. Labs and research presentations provide student-active learning
opportunities. The proposed courses are adapted from undergraduate research
courses at several institutions (such as Hampshire College, Portland State
University Samford University and Spellman College among others). (2) Faculty
development activities include workshops and seminars on student-active learning
and the effective use of students in research. (3) The promotion of student
involvement in research includes the tracking and encouragement of students who
complete the two-course sequence, expansion of paid summer research
opportunities, and development of a part-time position to oversee and promote
student involvement in research.&lt;br/&gt;