* 0126412
* Near-field Antenna Factor: An Oxymoron?
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2002,11/30/2005
* Robert Nelson, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Rongqing Hui
* 11/30/2005
* USD 82,870.00

0126412&lt;br/&gt;Nelson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of high-speed electronics
has provided many beneficial effects to society. Unfortunately, one of the
potentially adverse effects is that electromagnetic interference (EMJ) can cause
malfunction in electronic devices. In particular, circuits made from high-speed
devices can become a source of EMI in other devices, or they can be susceptible
to malfunction from EMI. In order to design products that are less susceptible
to EMI. equipment designers need to know the "electromagnetic environment" of
their product. This is obtained via antenna measurements. However, if the
devices are in "complex environments" (i.e., close to the radiating, source, or
to other metal objects) measuring these fields can be a real challenge. For
these cases the antenna factor (e.g., the parameter that allows one to convert a
measured antenna voltage to the desired electric field) is ill-
defined.&lt;br/&gt;Three questions are addressed in this work:&lt;br/&gt;oCan
antenna factors be determined for frequency-selective (i.e.. narrow-band)
measurements of the electric field when the measurement antenna is in the near
field of the radiating source, and in close proximity to other metal objects? if
so, how is it appropriately defined?&lt;br/&gt;oWhat parameters (e.g., distance
from the radiating source, distance from the scatterers, etc.) significantly
affect the antenna factor for such measurement situations?&lt;br/&gt;oWhat
guidelines can be offered regarding the validity of using "far-field" antenna
factors in terms of the measurement parameters identified above?&lt;br/&gt;A
three-fold method including analytical expressions, numerical modeling, and
experimental measurements will be used to determine answers to these questions.
Analytical expressions will be evaluated to determine the AF for two specific
near-field situations when source and receiving antennas are in free space, and
when they are over a ground plane. Numerical models of near-field measurement
environments will be constructed and a method-of-moments software code will be
used to numerically determine the AF for several near-field scenarios. Matching
funds from TUV Product Services, Inc. will provide access to world-class test
facilities, making it possible to gather experimental data which will be used to
verify computational and analytical results. Lastly, parameters that
significantly affect the near-field antenna factors will be identified and
characterized, and guidelines will be developed to determine the conditions for
which far-field antenna factors can be used with reasonable
accuracy.&lt;br/&gt;This work will answer the question of whether or not antenna
factors can be determined for "complex" measurement environments for the
specific case of a dipole antenna. If the study shows that the concept of a
"near-field antenna factor" is indeed valid, and that the AF can be simulated
via computational methods, the way will be paved for further work with many
types of antennas. If the study shows that the concept is not valid for a dipole
antenna, it is doubtful that it will be valid for any other type of antenna
typically used in the EMC community. As a result, many investigators will be
warned that it is not worth their precious time trying to simulate such an
entity. In either case, positive results are expected. Additionally, if the
results indicate that the "near-field antenna factor" is a reasonable concept,
suggestions will also be presented regarding which measurement parameters most
significantly affect the AF, along with guidelines regarding when the far-field
AF can be used to provide reasonably accurate results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;