* 0126758
* Integrating High-Field NMR Spectroscopy throughout the Undergraduate Chemistry Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2004
* Tappey Jones, Virginia Military Institute
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 03/31/2004
* USD 121,834.00

Chemistry (12) The purpose of this project is to introduce modern multinuclear
Fourier Transform Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectroscopy experiments
throughout the undergraduate chemistry curriculum. Experiments are drawn from
pedagogical and research literature and are adapted to specific courses. They
are designed to present students with a breadth of hands-on NMR experiences to
illustrate the power and variety of NMR techniques. Laboratory experiments begin
with an introduction to 1H NMR spectroscopy in the freshman year. The sophomore
year uses a more rigorous treatment of 1H and 13C NMR and, in the junior year,
students receive an introduction to the power of NMR as a method to study
kinetics, nuclear spin relaxation mechanisms, and multiple pulse experiments,
and they explore instrumental factors. In their senior year, students use a
variety of sophisticated one and two-dimensional NMR techniques (COSY, HETCOR,
DEPT, INADEQUATE) to determine the structure and properties of spectrally
complex molecules. This project is designed to positively impact the science
education of all chemistry and biology majors. In addition, the NMR is being
used extensively by students involved in undergraduate research. Students from
nearby Southern Virginia University also are making use of the instrument in
several of their courses and through their participation in undergraduate
research.