* 0126968
* A Standards-Driven, Inquiry-Based Science Curriculum for Future Elementary School Teachers
* EHR,DUE
* 02/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Hank Yochum, Sweet Briar College
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 07/31/2005
* USD 50,446.00

Interdisciplinary (99)&lt;br/&gt;The science departments at Sweet Briar College
are making a strong commitment to enhancing the preparation of new teachers by
developing a set of new science courses for the undergraduate pre-service
teacher. These courses, Chemistry by Inquiry, Life &amp; Earth Science by
Inquiry, and Physics by Inquiry, fulfill the newly mandated requirements for
teacher licensure by the Commonwealth of Virginia. Our new Science by Inquiry
curriculum supports National Science Education Standards and is modeling for
pre-service teachers "best-practices" in inquiry-based and hands-on approaches
to teaching.&lt;br/&gt;This project is building upon a strong commitment to
undergraduate science education and a commitment by the science faculty to
outreach activities in the community. In addition our project is informed by
national efforts in undergraduate science reform, including similarly focused
NSF-funded projects: &lt;br/&gt;(1) Steven Fifield, et. al., "Integrating
Inquiry-Based Science and Education Methods Courses in a 'Science Semester' for
Future Elementary Teachers" (NSF award no. 0088527), University of Delaware.
This is a problem-based learning project.&lt;br/&gt;(2) Sally Jean, "Project
Inspire: Investigations in Science for Pre-Service Teachers; Promoting and
Producing Inquiry-Based Relevant Experiences" (NSF award no. 0088646), Keene
State University. &lt;br/&gt;(3) Alfonso M. Albano, "Building Bridges: Science
Education Reform at Bryn Mawr College" (NSF award no. 9850090), Bryn Mawr
College. &lt;br/&gt;Through adaptations of these programs we are creating
science courses for pre-service undergraduate teachers that inspire them to
create and discover. Our objectives in implementing this new curriculum are to
provide the newly trained teachers with content mastery and hands-on science
experiences and activities which are directly transferable to the NK-6
classroom, and to do so in an environment which encourages open-ended
investigation and active learning. Students who complete these courses develop
competency in&lt;br/&gt;science methodology, acquire a good attitude toward
science and the scientific process, and learn the requisite skills (written,
oral, and quantitative) to be successful teachers of science.