* 0126930
* Incorporation of a Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization Mass Spectrometer into the Undergraduate Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Jeffrey Hugdahl, Mercer University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Ungar
* 02/29/2004
* USD 84,400.00

Chemistry (12)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the acquisition of a matrix-assisted
laser desorption/ionization MALDI time-of-flight (TOF) mass spectrometer, we are
incorporating MS techniques into our undergraduate chemistry curriculum. Over
the last 20 years the ability to analyze large involatile molecules by mass
spectrometry has grown to the extent that it is now a common technique. In order
to introduce the use of this research tool to our students, we are adapting,
implementing, and developing disciplinary and interdisciplinary projects into
the General, Organic, Biochemistry and "Problems in Chemistry" laboratory
courses at Mercer University. We are adapting these experiments into our
discovery-based pedagogy to further enhance student learning. In addition to the
laboratory courses, we are using the instrument in ongoing student-faculty
research projects. The incorporation of MALDI-TOF-MS into the curriculum has
permitted us to analyze involatile species, including proteins and clusters. Our
students are first introduced to the MS technique during their first semester of
General chemistry by studying the concepts of isotopes and average molecular
mass. Students then continue their study of MALDI techniques by performing
individual and group experiments in Organic chemistry and Biochemistry courses.
Finally, they gain a significant laboratory experience in the application of MS
in the capstone "Problems in Chemistry" laboratory sequence. In addition,
students interested in organic synthesis and biochemical research continue to
use the instrumentation in a number of ongoing student-faculty research
projects. Our ultimate goal is to further utilize this instrument throughout our
curriculum and generate laboratory exercises that demonstrate the utility of
this modern technique at the undergraduate level.&lt;br/&gt;