* 0126639
* Developing an Integrated Undergraduate GIScience Curriculum for Five University of Maine System Campuses
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Matthew Bampton, University of Southern Maine
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 05/31/2006
* USD 115,921.00

Geography (88) The core purpose of this project is to adapt key elements of the
core curriculum developed by the National Council for Geographic Information and
Analysis (NCGIA,1997), combining these with materials already used on some
campuses in the University of Maine system. This is a collaborative project
designed to benefit five universities that are part of this system: The
University of Southern Maine, The University of Maine, Fort Kent, The University
of Maine, Machias, The University of Maine, Augusta, and The University of
Maine, Farmington. The broader purpose of this collaborative project is to
enhance GIScience education throughout the state of Maine on the 5 collaborating
campuses. On each campus a dedicated laboratory is being equipped to support the
development of a modern geographical information science (GIScience) curriculum,
comprised of GIS and GPS technology and related educational materials. We are
developing and implementing a sequence of two GIScience courses for
undergraduate students in each of the five universities. These are being
designed to educate students to a common standard of achievement, although there
are local variations designed to meet the varied needs of the 5 participating
campuses. The new curriculum meets a growing need for high-quality GIScience
education in a variety of fields. We are designing the two-course sequences to
foster active learning by customizing exercises and data sets to the diverse
geographic locations and programmatic strengths of each campus. Our project is
also enhancing and developing the skills of the faculty, and integrating
advanced technology into a variety of disciplines. Our plan is to disseminate
our work through our teaching, on-site workshops for our faculty colleagues,
internet publication, and presentation at professional meetings. Project
evaluation is being assisted by on-site peer input during faculty workshops, and
periodic review by a three member advisory panel of GIScience scholars and
professionals.

