* 0126855
* Case-Based Reasoning for Engineering Statistics
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Norma Hubele, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 08/31/2003
* USD 74,622.00

Using findings from cognitive science, a prototype of an intelligent tutoring
system (ITS) is being developed. This ITS utilizes case-based reasoning (CBR) to
scaffold undergraduate engineering students in their learning of introductory
probability and statistics. This scaffolding process is based on the principle
that successful problem solvers and experts gain a better grasp of the
underlying problem structure by moving back and forth as they reach dead-ends or
see new ways to formulate the problem. Specifically, the students learn the
following three steps: 1) situation conception--understand the problem in
everyday language; 2) mathematized situation conception--create a mathematical
representation; and 3) solution method conception--carry out the mathematical
procedures. Existing commercial software and well-established research index-
based CBR and rule-based expert systems are used to support the presentation of
ITS by graduate students to the undergraduate students in the course. The
assessment of ITS is to test two hypotheses: 1) Does the ITS increase the
internalization of key concepts by the students? and, 2) Does the ITS increase
the student independence in representing and solving problems? Also, assessments
based on comparing the performances on questions related to the hypotheses for
ITS-students and non-ITS-students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This initial evaluation
of ITS from the standpoint of integrating it with an existing engineering
statistics course, allows the participation of other universities who also offer
the engineering statistics course to participate in a joint, longer term project
to realize a fully functional ITS. Also, the partnership with other universities
provides a vehicle for embedding ITS into other courses where the same cognitive
and instructional principles are appilcable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The final
product--a prototype and recommendations for a more fully functional ITS--
will:&lt;br/&gt;1. Assist students in extracting the underlying common structure
from engineering statistics problems that illustrate the full range of
engineering disciplines;&lt;br/&gt;2. Allow the student to generate, customize,
and change a virtual infinite collection of exercises that can be solved with
the assistance of the ITS. The students can explore the effect of changes to
different parameters and how those changes influence the solution;
and&lt;br/&gt;3. Help students formulate and solve practical and open-ended
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The final product will be kept on CD-ROM, and
further dissemination will be via workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Keywords:
Case-based reasoning, intelligent tudoring system