* 0126497
* The Use of Instructional Technology to Address Different Student Learning Styles
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2005
* E. Dendy Sloan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Bevlee Watford
* 02/28/2005
* USD 450,970.00

Engineering-Chemical(53)&lt;br/&gt;We have developed interactive hybrid
curriculum materials for teaching chemical reaction engineering. Our materials
consists of textbooks, a CDROM, as well as a web site on the Internet. A
prototype of this hybrid has been evaluated over the past two years at the
University of Michigan. Through the use of interactive computer modules (ICM) we
are supporting students with different student learning styles. These learning
styles are outlined in the Felder/Solomon Inventory and we have designed our
materials to address these in a number of different ways. The simulations we
have created are around various chemical reactions. These simulations model
complex problems that allow students to alter key parameters and evaluate their
results to complement homework assignments, classroom lectures, and student
study groups. These problems have been designed to enhance student critical
thinking and problem solving skills. Updated authoring software Quest 10 from
Quest 2.0 will be utilized as well as FEMLAB to upgrade our existing modules.
Our original materials have gained a wide audience in the Chemical Engineering
community. We are disseminating our new material through two textbooks, our
CDROM that is being distributed to every chemical engineering department through
the CACHE Corporation, and the Internet.