* 0126584
* CRI: Children's Motivational and Adrenocortical Responses to Challenge: Mediators of Child Care Effects on Kindergarten Adjustment
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2007
* Gregory Pettit, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Amy L. Sussman
* 09/30/2007
* USD 552,541.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Children's Motivational &amp; Adrenocortical
Responses to Challenge: Mediators of Child Care Effects on Kindergarten
Adjustment&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jacquelyn Mize and Gregory S.
Pettit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Intervention and correlational research studies
provide compelling evidence that high-quality preschool programs have beneficial
effects on cognitive and language development and school achievement for middle-
class and at-risk children, and that these effects often persist into the
elementary grades. Historically, beneficial effects of early childhood programs
have been explained as the result of enhanced academic learning for children
attending the programs. However, more recent models focus on relationships as
the critical contexts, and social-emotional processes as the critical
mechanisms, through which early childhood environments influence children's
subsequent academic success. The social-emotional mechanisms through which early
childcare exerts influence have not been elucidated. &lt;br/&gt; This research
examines two social-emotional processes that may account for variations in the
effects of early childhood programs on children's adjustment and achievement in
their first year of public school. These social-emotional processes are compared
with academic achievement as mediators, or explanations, of the effects of the
early childhood environment on early school adjustment. Specifically, it is
proposed that: (1) effortful control, particularly in challenging situations, as
measured by children's behavior and levels of stress hormones (e.g., cortisol);
and (2) children's motivation and beliefs about achievement, account for the
effects of teacher-child interactions on early school adjustment. Children's
regulation and motivational beliefs and behaviors are thought to arise, in part,
from teacher-child interactions. &lt;br/&gt;Three cohorts of children from
diverse family backgrounds (n = 60 in each cohort; middle- to low-SES,
approximately 38% minority; approximately 50% low income) are being followed
from the beginning of their experiences in 4-year-old preschool classrooms
through the end of their first year in public school (kindergarten).
Participating children are enrolled in preschool classrooms that vary widely in
quality; these include state-supported pre-kindergarten demonstration projects,
for profit centers, and federally supported programs for low-income families.
Teacher effects on effortful control and motivation are assessed through
observations and questionnaires. Parent effects on effortful control and
motivation are assessed through questionnaires. In preschool, the quality of
teacher-child relationships are assessed via teacher report, observations of
classroom interaction, and the child's reliance on the teacher as a support
during a challenge task. Children's effortful control is assessed in a series of
tasks that include the ability to delay gratification; response to
disappointment; slowing motor activity; suppressing or initiating activity to
signal; effortful attention; and ability to lower voice. Children's responses to
failure on a series of puzzles are used to measure motivational beliefs and
patterns. Children's stress hormone levels will be assessed during daily
activities in the morning and afternoon (basal levels), and before and after a
challenging task (reactive levels). Basal and reactive hormone levels are seen
as indicators of the functioning of the child's hypothalmic-pituitary-adrenal
axis (HPA), which may temper or exacerbate the effects of preschool program
quality and parenting on effortful control and achievement. Achievement will be
assessed in fall and spring of the pre-kindergarten year with normed school-
readiness and language measures. Children's kindergarten adjustment will be
assessed with teacher ratings and interviews with children. This study will
answer enduring questions regarding how preschool programs affect children's
development, and the qualities of programs that contribute to children's success
in school. This information will be used in teacher-training and program-design
to insure that all young children enter school ready to learn. &lt;br/&gt;