* 0126409
* Discovering rRNA and Homeobox Genes by DNA Sequencing and Bioinformatics in an Undergraduate Molecular Biology Course
* EHR,DUE
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2003
* Chester Fornari, DePauw University
* Standard Grant
* Katherine J. Denniston
* 12/31/2003
* USD 81,328.00

Biological Sciences (61) This project is adapting a laboratory model presented
by Dr. Adele Wolfson at a PKAL workshop. In an attempt to look at questions on
how sequence data is obtained, and how can it yield new knowledge and
understanding about the structure, function, organization, and evolution of
genes and proteins while providing a genuine research experience for students,
this project will: (1) enhance a mid-level Molecular Biology course for
undergraduate biology and chemistry majors by developing an inquiry-based,
project-driven series of five laboratory modules in Recombinant DNA technology
and Bioinformatics; and (2) create a Molecular Genetics and Bioinformatics (MGB)
laboratory facility for Biology and Chemistry students engaged in collaborative
research projects. Each laboratory module consists of linked experiments, and
the modules constitute a semester-long project in the isolation and analysis of
rRNA genes and homeobox genes from 3 sources: the nematode Caenorhabditis
elegans, the closely related microscopic invertebrate Brachionus plicatilis (a
rotifer), and an unknown organism for identification by rRNA gene sequence
homology. The modules include specific experiments in DNA isolation, primer
design and optimization, polymerase chain reaction (PCR), cloning and sequencing
PCR products from rRNA and homeobox gene families, and comparative bioinformatic
analysis of sequenced DNA for both molecular phylogeny (rRNA genes) and function
(homeobox genes). A final module includes formal reports and presentations in
multimedia formats (talks and posters). The simultaneous use of model and non-
model experimental organisms gives students an experience in how new knowledge
is systematically generated through controlled experimentation. The objective is
to offer students the opportunity not only to explore documented concepts in a
model organism, but also to apply these concepts and experimental practices to
discover new knowledge about other organisms through testing of specific
hypotheses. The proposed MGB facility will contribute not only to the biology
departmen's curriculum, but also to a newly developed curriculum in the
chemistry department and an anticipated major in Biochemistry. This plan also
initiates a curricular and programmatic shift toward interdisciplinary
interactions between the two departments.