* 0126149
* High-Resolution Modeling of Surface Topography, Ice Motion, and Mass Balance in the Lambert Glacial Basin using Radar Remote Sensing and GIS Techniques
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2006
* Kenneth Jezek, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 03/31/2006
* USD 244,374.00

This award supports a project to characterize the morphology, ice motion
velocity and mass balance of Lambert Glacier, Antarctica using state-of-the-art
remote sensing and GIS techniques. Lambert Glacier is the largest ice stream in
the world. Because of its size, it plays a fundamental role in the study of
glacial dynamics and mass budget in response to present and future climate
changes. Along with the bedrock topography and ice thickness data derived from
airborne radio echo soundings and snow accumulation data compiled from ground-
based measurements, the dynamic behavior and mass balance of the Lambert glacial
basin in a Geographic Information Systems (GIS) environment will be examined.
Specific objectives are to: (1) Extract two-dimensional ice velocity field over
the entire Lambert glacial basin using speckle matching and differential
interferometric SAR (InSAR) techniques, and produce a full coverage of radar
coherence map over the drainage basin. With the ice velocity data, calculate the
strain rate field from the initiation areas of the ice stream onto the Amery Ice
Shelf; (2) Derive high-resolution digital elevation model (DEM) over the Lambert
glacial drainage basin using SAR stereo, differential interferometric SAR, and
GLAS laser altimetry techniques. Based on the DEM, extract ice divides and ice
flow directions, delineate the snow catchment basin, and calculate the balance
deformation velocity and the basal shear stress; (3) Interpolate traverse ice
thickness data collected by Australian and Russian airborne radio echo sounding
surveys into a regular grid, and derive a regular grid of bedrock topography in
combination with the DEM; (4) Integrate newly derived ice velocity and ice
thickness data as well as snow accumulation rate data compiled from previous
ground-based measurements into a geographic information system (GIS), and
calculate the mass flux through the ice stream at the grounding lines and net
mass balance throughout the drainage basin. With these new measurements and
calculations derived from advanced remote sensing techniques, we will be able to
improve our understanding of dynamic behavior and current mass balance status of
the Lambert glacial basin, gain an insight on the relationship between ice mass
change and the variation in regional and global climate at decadal scale, and
provide an evaluation on the issue of whether the Lambert glacier basin is
subject to surging in the context of future climate change.