* 0126270
* Paleoclimate Inferred from Lake Sediment Cores in Taylor Valley, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Steven Forman, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 07/31/2006
* USD 103,790.00

Polar Programs, provides funds for a study of sediment cores from the McMurdo
Dry Valley lakes. The Dry Valley lakes have a long history of fluctuating levels
reflecting regional climate change. The history of lake level fluctuations is
generally known from the LGM to early Holocene through 14C dates of buried
organic matter in paleolake deposits. However, the youngest paleolake deposits
available are between 8000 to 9000 14C yr BP, suggesting that lake levels were
at or below current levels for much of the Holocene. Thus, any information about
the lake history and climate controls for the Holocene is largely contained in
bottom sediments. This project will attempt to extract paleoclimatic information
from sediment cores for a series of closed-basin dry valley lakes under study by
the McMurdo LTER site. This work involves multiple approaches to dating the
sediments and use of several climate proxy approaches to extract century to
millennial scale chronologies from Antarctic lacustrine deposits. This research
uses knowledge on lake processes gained over the past eight years by the LTER to
calibrate climate proxies from lake sediments. Proxies for lake depth and ice
thickness, which are largely controlled by summer climate, are the focus of this
work. This study focuses on four key questions: 1. How sensitively do dry valley
lake sediments record Holocene environmental and climate variability? 2. What is
the paleoclimatic variability in the dry valleys on a century and millennial
scale throughout the Holocene? Especially, is the 1200 yr evaporative event
unique, or are there other such events in the record? 3. Does a mid-Holocene
(7000 to 5000 yr BP) climate shift occur in the dry valleys as documented
elsewhere in the polar regions? 4. Is there evidence, in the dry valley lake
record of the 1500 yr Holocene periodicities recently recognized in the Taylor
Dome record? Core collection will be performed with LTER support using a state-
of-the-art percussion/piston corer system that has been used successfully to
retrieve long cores (10 to 20 m) from other remote polar locations. Analyses to
be done include algal pigments, biogenic silica, basic geochemistry, organic and
inorganic carbon and nitrogen content, stable isotopes of carbon, nitrogen, and
oxygen, carbonate phases, salt content and mineralogy, and grain size. In
addition this project will pursue a multi-chronometer approach to assess the age
of the core through optically-stimulated luminescence, 226Ra/230Th , 230Th/234U,
and 14C techniques. New experimentation with U-series techniques will be
performed to allow for greater precision in the dry valley lake sediments.
Compound specific isotopes and lipid biomarkers , which are powerful tools for
inferring past lake conditions, will also be assessed. Combined, these analyses
will provide a new century to millennial scale continuous record of the Holocene
climate change in the Ross Sea region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;