* 0126883
* Integrating Flow Cytometry into the Investigative Curriculum in Undergraduate Biology
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Jill Manske, University of St. Thomas
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 02/29/2004
* USD 92,970.00

Biology (61) The Biology Department at the University of St. Thomas has built a
curriculum for both majors and non-majors that introduces undergraduates to
modern biological techniques modeled on actual scientific investigations. This
project is introducing flow cytometry into this curriculum in order to address
our goal of providing students with hands-on exposure to current technology via
investigative laboratory experiences. The project is modeled after successful
similar efforts at Occidental College, Haverford College, Ursinus College, and
San Diego State University. The flow cytometer is a powerful tool for detailed
analysis of complex populations of cells in a short period of time. In recent
years, flow cytometers have become less expensive and more user-friendly, making
them accessible and appropriate for undergraduate biology education. In this
project we are integrating flow cytometry into our curriculum via three majors
courses, two non-majors courses, and independent student research. We also
making flow cytometry available to Biology faculty in a Twin Cities consortium
of five private institutions. We are aiming to expand future use of the
technology into other courses of our curriculum such as advanced cell biology,
microbiology, molecular biology, evolution and ecology, as seen in other
undergraduate programs.