* 0126184
* Studies of Fault Fabrics and Earthquake Mechanics from the Precise Relative Locations of Microearthquakes
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Allan Rubin, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2005
* USD 264,996.00

Microearthquakes (earthquakes smaller than magnitude ~3) that have similar
hypocenters (locations) and focal mechanisms (fault planes and slip directions)
produce ground motions at a given seismic station that appear very similar. By
comparing the recorded seismic waveforms of these earthquakes, it is possible to
obtain very accurate estimates of the relative arrival times of the seismic
waves, and ultimately very accurate estimates of the relative locations of the
earthquakes. Errors in relative location obtained using this method are tens of
meters for events separated by hundreds of meter, and, after correcting for
time-dependent station changes, meters for events separated by tens of meters or
less. These errors are a factor of 10-100 smaller than those in the published US
Geological Survey Northern California Seismic Network (NCSN) catalog. This
increase in resolution has led to significant new insights in two different
areas of fault studies. First, structures internal to the fault zone that
previously could not be seen have been imaged. Second, because the relative
location errors between the nearest microearthquakes are much smaller than the
rupture dimensions (tens to hundreds of meters), this resolution allows studies
of earthquake interaction using datasets of many thousands of events. In the
area of fault structure, microearthquake relocation shows that the seismicity
along many creeping faults is organized into slip-parallel "streaks", tens to a
few hundred meters tall and up to kilometers in length. In the area of rupture
interaction, it has been observed that the distribution of aftershocks of
microearthquakes along the central San Andreas fault is very asymmetric, with
many more of the nearest aftershocks (in space and time) occurring to the
northwest of a prior mainshock than to the southeast. This is attributed to the
contrast in material properties across the fault and how this contrast affects
the dynamics of the mainshock (preferential propagation to the southeast). If
this explanation is correct, it is relevant to seismic hazards because
directivity of large earthquakes concentrates ground shaking in the direction of
propagation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current research is devoted to developing
catalogs of thousands of precisely-located microearthquakes in regions of
geologic interest, interpreting these catalogs in terms of their implications
for fault mechanics, and improving the relocation method. More time-dependent
corrections are being determined for NCSN stations and made available to the
seismological community. The more precise locations obtained with the station
corrections are being used to search for (1) subtle changes in fault dip
associated with the observed microseismic lineations and (2) short lineations on
faults believed to have little slip, to distinguish between competing ideas for
the origins of the lineations. In the area of asymmetric aftershock
distributions, the dataset is being extended to smaller mainshock sizes using
the Parkfield HRSN catalog, the relocation code (with time-dependent station
corrections) is being modified to routinely determine the local across-fault
P-wave and S-wave velocity contrasts, and numerical modeling of rupture on the
interface between dissimilar materials is being undertaken to test the
explanation proposed for the origin of the symmetry. Finally, the statistics of
aftershock sequences of microearthquakes on different faults are being compared
to the predictions of analytic models of rate-and-state friction, and to
numerical models of rupture interaction on planar faults. The goals are to test
models of rate-and-state fault friction and to determine differences in loading
rates and/or surface properties of the various faults. Because for some faults
the earliest portion of the aftershock sequences might have been "lost" because
of the network "blind" time following a triggering event (perhaps a few tens of
seconds), the nearly 100 s archived waveforms of all cataloged events are being
processed to identify and locate events that would ordinarily have triggered the
network. These studies will lead to further insights into the mechanics of
earthquakes.