* 0126148
* Deciphering the Tectonic History of Slowly Cooled Precambrian Polymetamorphic Terranes in the American Southwest
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2003
* Christopher Andronicos, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Arthur Goldstein
* 02/28/2003
* USD 26,607.00

The Proterozoic tectonic history of the American southwest is the subject of
considerable controversy. Controversy revolves around the nature of ~1.4 Ga
plutonism and tectonism and its relationship to Paleoproterozoic (1.8-1.6 Ga)
crustal accretion. To help resolve this question The P.I. will investigate the
Cimarron Mountains of northern New Mexico and the Needle Mountains of
southwestern Colorado. These two regions preserve deformation and plutonic
histories that record both Paleoproterozoic accretion and subsequent
Mesoproterozoic reactivation. 1.4 Ga metamorphism has erased the
Paleoproterozoic thermal signature in most of northern New Mexico and southern
Colorado. Therefore, these two proposed study areas may provide the only
opportunity to decipher the Paleoproterozoic metamorphic and cooling history in
northern New Mexico and southern Colorado.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Cimarron
Mountains contain an upper amphibolite grade block and a greenschist grade block
separated by the Fowler Pass Shear Zone (FPSZ). Metamorphic mineral assemblages
across the shear zone suggest up to 10 km of vertical separation. Cooling ages
from the high-grade block suggest high-grade metamorphism occurred at ~1.4 Ga.
In contrast, rocks in the low-grade block record a 1678 Ar 40 /Ar 39 cooling
age: this is the oldest cooling age reported in northern New Mexico. Detailed
structural analysis of the two blocks and the F.P.S.Z. will be undertaken to
clarify the deformation history and tectonic significance of this structure and
its relationship to the metamorphic evolution of the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Needle Mountains record a much different
history. Paleoproterozoic supracrustal rocks in this region are divided into two
packages. The Uncompahgre Formation, consisting of quartzites and schists, is
regionally metamorphosed to the greenschist facies. These rocks rest on a
sheared unconformity above the second package, which is composed of amphibolite
facies gneiss, migmatite, and schist. The 1.46 Ga Eolus granite intrudes both
packages and has a well-developed contact aureole with peak metamorphic
assemblages including sillimanite and K-feldspar. However, many of the rocks far
from the granite have assemblages that appear to be unaffected by 1.4 Ga
metamorphism. This situation may provide the opportunity to determine the
thermal structure of the crust during Paleoproterozic orogenesis as well as
during the 1.4 Ga overprint. In order to better understand the role of 1.4 Ga
tectonics in the evolution of southwest North America, the P.I. will undertake a
structural, metamorphic, and geochronologic study of the two ranges. Both of
these areas are similar in having 1.4 Ga metamorphic features and
Paleoproterozoic thermal and metamorphic signatures. These regions are therefore
well suited to determine which deformational and metamorphic features belong to
each of the two events. The preservation of Paleoproterozic metamorphic features
makes these areas ideal for testing of models for slow cooling and long-term
residence in the middle crust in newly formed lithosphere.&lt;br/&gt;