* 0126165
* Food, Hair, Beverages and Water:  Analytical Biochemistry Across the Curriculum.  A Case Study Approach
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Peter Schaber, Canisius College
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 05/31/2005
* USD 70,016.00

Chemistry (12)&lt;br/&gt;This project is an interdisciplinary effort between the
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, and the Biology Department. New
Supercritical Fluid Extraction (SFE) and Capillary Electrophoresis (CE)
Instrumentation is being integrated into the laboratory component of several
analysis oriented chemistry, biology and biochemistry courses using modern
teaching methodologies. The focus of the plan is to develop an
analytical/biochemistry cluster of experiments that runs through the current
Sophomore and Junior/Senior laboratory courses. Experiments within this cluster
are based upon the Case Study method, with students working in small groups;
involve the use of one or both of the proposed instruments; and focus on issues
of biochemical relevance. Experiments and protocols from the Journal of Chemical
Education and from primary research journals are being combined and adapted in
order to create the Case Studies. This approach better prepares chemistry,
biology, and biochemistry students by involving them in the consideration of
"real world" problems, and by providing hands-on experience using modern
analytical instrumentation and techniques. As a result of this experience,
students are expected to become more efficient learners, retain what they learn
longer, exercise their critical thinking skills, and involve themselves in more
interesting and challenging experiments than were available in the past. Case
Studies are being written in a manner that will allow other colleges and
universities, similarly equipped, to readily adapt these methods. Results of the
project will be reported at national and regional meetings and published in
appropriate college science teaching journals. &lt;br/&gt;