* 0126599
* CRI: Planning the Center for the Study of Children's Development in Relationships
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,09/30/2003
* Ross Thompson, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Marguerite Barratt
* 09/30/2003
* USD 90,335.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Planning a Center for the Study of Children's
Development in Relationships &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Julia Torquati, Lisa
Crockett, Carolyn Edwards, Marcela Raffaelli, and &lt;br/&gt;Ross
Thompson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Relationships are critical to intellectual,
emotional, social, and physical growth in childhood. Relationships with parents,
grandparents, siblings, peers, teachers, caregivers in day care and preschool,
and others contribute to the development of skills, respond to the child's
individuality, facilitate new learning and growth, and provide sources of
security and support. Relationships have recently been described as the "active
ingredients" of healthy development by the Committee on Integrating the Science
of Early Childhood Development of the National Academy of Sciences in their
report, From Neurons to Neighborhoods. But although much is known about the
impact of specific relationships on children's development, there are many
limitations to current understanding. This project proposal requests support to
enable investigators to advance the science of relationships in development by
planning the creation of a Center for the Study of Children's Development in
Relationships. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The overarching goal of the Center is to
develop the capacity for multi-disciplinary research on children's development
within relationships, from infancy through adolescence, encompassing the
varieties of relationships and develop-mental processes characteristic of
childhood. More specifically, researchers at the Center will develop: (a) a
shared theoretical view of development and relationships to guide their work,
(b) a framework for coordination among specific research activities conducted by
research scientists, (c) processes for scholarly exchanges through workshops,
conferences, and networking opportunities, (d) educational activities for
graduate students, postdoctoral scholars, and visiting scientists, (e)
associations with institutional and community resources concerned with children,
(f) a repository for data and reports that already exist concerning development
and relationships from both local and national sources, and (g) procedures for
disseminating research conclusions to other scholars, communities, human service
professionals, and policymakers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The goals of the
proposed planning period are to inaugurate the development of this Center by
building collaborative partnerships within the University of Nebraska, and with
scholars at other institutions, and to initiate specific research programs by
critically examining current research on children's relationships to identify
gaps in conceptualization, measurement, populations studied, or developmental
stages and transitions that have been examined. During the proposed planning
period, several activities will occur. These include (a) an assessment of future
research needs through monthly meetings, exchanges of reviews of the literature,
and consulting with an advisory board of experts, (b) building multidisciplinary
collaborations within the University, and with scholars outside it, (c)
developing a shared theoretical framework through collaborative interaction, and
(d) preparation and submission of a Center grant proposal.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The Center for the Study of Children's Development in
Relationships will also accomplish several ancillary goals. First, it will
provide an infrastructure for the integration of education and research on this
important topic. Second, it will broaden the representation of underrepresented
groups through active recruitment of scholars, students, and research
participants. Finally, the work of Center scholars will enhance knowledge of the
field through independent research activities and review of the research
literature. &lt;br/&gt;