* 0126095
* Integration and Enhancement of the Antarctic Collection at the Museum of Texas Tech University
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2002,12/31/2006
* Sankar Chatterjee, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 12/31/2006
* USD 125,039.00

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
Office of Polar Programs, provides funds for the unification and upgrading of
its Antarctic collection; its proper storage and curation; development of an
electronic database; and network access. This award will support a collection
manager for two years, installing modern, archival-quality steel cabinets, and
rehousing, conserving, and barcoding the entire collection. These changes will
vastly increase the availability and research potential of a significant and
unique Antarctic collection, and they will help to preserve a rich cultural,
historical, and scientific legacy. The Antarctic collection constitutes one of
the best repositories of archival, geological and paleontological holdings in
the nation. The archival collection was amassed over a fifty-year span and
contains maps and rare books in addition to Antarctic research samples. The
comprehensive igneous and metamorphic rock collection gathered from the orogenic
belts of Queen Maud Range, Marie Byrd Land, and Ellsworth Land is important for
understanding the paleotectonic evolution of the Transantarctic Mountains and
West Antarctica. The paleontological collection includes exquisite plant fossils
from the Allan Hills, which indicate a Gondwanian heritage for Antarctica.
Several holotypes of Cretaceous vertebrates from Seymour Island, including
Polarornis, the oldest known Antarctic bird, provide additional evidence for
high latitude heterochroneity.