* 0126984
* Adaptation and Implementation of an Electrophysiology Laboratory for Undergraduate Psychology and Physics Students
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2002,10/31/2003
* Paul Moes, Calvin University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 10/31/2003
* USD 12,689.00

Psychology - Biological (71)&lt;br/&gt;Students in psychology and physics need
inquiry-based experiences to prepare them for the &lt;br/&gt;increasing use of
technology in graduate research and clinical work. Students at Northwest
&lt;br/&gt;Nazarene College in Idaho have used electrophysiological recording
equipment in an undergraduate laboratory that has successfully fostered hands-on
student learning and faculty-student research. This project is adapting this
laboratory and creating a joint-use electrophysiological recording laboratory
for students in the Psychology and Physics departments at Calvin College. This
laboratory is based on The Neurodata Model 15 Amplifier made by Grass
Instruments -- designed for recording electroencephalograph (EEG) data and
event-related potentials (ERP). We are revising and expanding the laboratory
courses beyond the initial adaptation in psychophysiology to include
undergraduate research in cognitive and motivational psychology. The lab is also
being used to study the physical properties of physiologically generated
electrical potentials. Electrophysiological recording has become an essential
element in many medical, human service, and research settings.
&lt;br/&gt;Physics and biology students are being introduced to the laboratory
through the study of physics for the health sciences. Students will continue to
use the laboratory in advanced research&lt;br/&gt;courses, and through student-
faculty research projects. Our goals are to foster greater technical competency
and enhance the learning of theory and applications in the classroom. Specific
outcomes include revised laboratory manuals, Web-based dissemination of
laboratory exercises, student research presentations, and student-faculty
publications.