* 0126020
* Monazite as a Sensitive Indicator of the Timing and Type of Fluid Activity During Metamorphism
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* John Ayers, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2005
* USD 195,459.00

Ayers and Miller&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0126020&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The susceptibility
of monazite to fluid-induced recrystallization has important implications for
interpretation of ages measured in-situ by electron or ion microprobe. To refine
interpretations, complementary laboratory and field experiments
have&lt;br/&gt;been designed to identify and characterize monazite
recrystallization and alteration in granitoids and associated rocks. The
solubility of monazite will be measured as a function of pressure, temperature
and fluid composition using the double-capsule method to identify the conditions
and fluid compositions that lead to enhanced solubility and recrystallization.
Experiments run in cold-seal pressure vessels at 400-600 degrees C and 0.1-0.2
GPa will characterize the effects of varying concentrations of potential
complexing ligands F, Cl and OH. Large natural crystals will then be run in
fluid at&lt;br/&gt;identified conditions of high solubility to characterize the
rate of recrystallization and the effect of alteration on intracrystalline
zoning and elemental and oxygen isotopic composition. Duplication of zoning
styles and oxygen isotope systematics observed in natural monazites will create
a firm link between monazite alteration and fluids, establish the conditions
under which alteration occurs, and greatly increase confidence in
interpretations of monazite ages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Field studies are
designed to test the hypothesis that the ages of altered zones in monazites
correspond to the timing of fluid influx, and to test important hypotheses
specific to those field areas. The effects of changing temperature, fluid
composition, and fluid/rock ratio on preexisting monazite will be examined in
contact metamorphic aureoles in which magmatic fluids infiltrate monazite-
bearing country rocks: the Ireteba pluton in southern Nevada, the Birch Creek
pluton in the White Mts. of east-central California, and the Red Hill W-Sn
deposit in northern Guangdong Province, Southeast China. Fruitful
geochronological studies of monazite and zircon in the Dabie Shan central UHP
(ultra-high pressure) zone will be extended to the enigmatic northern Dabie
complex to determine the areal extent of UHP metamorphism and the assignment of
the northern Dabie to the Yangtze or Sino-Korean blocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;