* 0126922
* Shared Eye-tracking Laboratory for Undergraduate Research and Education in Psychology
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2003
* Craig Kinsley, University of Richmond
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 05/31/2003
* USD 13,619.00

Psychology - Cognitive (73)&lt;br/&gt;A shared Eye-Tracking Laboratory (ELT) has
been established at the University of Richmond to advance undergraduate
coursework and research. This laboratory is modeled after a similar one at the
University of Chicago, but has been adapted for primary use by undergraduate
students. Although eye tracking is being increasingly used for research in
psychology, engineering, human factors, and education, students at primarily
undergraduate institutions rarely gain experience with this advanced technology.
The goal of the proposed ELT is to give students a greater understanding of
advanced research methodologies in psychology, greater preparation for advanced
study in a variety of related fields, and a deeper understanding of mind, brain,
and eye. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ELT enhances the curriculum of advanced
research methods courses in social psychology, cognitive psychology, cognitive
science, adult development, and behavioral neuroscience. This lab is being used
to demonstrate prior findings, and to conduct experiments that extend earlier
work. In addition, students in these advanced methods courses are learning how
to collect and analyze eye-tracking data in order to investigate their own
research questions. Students who have been trained in eye tracking also have the
opportunity to use the ELT for independent research projects under the direction
of the principal investigator or co-principal investigators. Typically, 35
psychology majors conduct independent research at the University of Richmond
Psychology Department each year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;