* 0126761
* Integrated Laser and Computer Exercises for Physical Chemistry Lab Instruction
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Jean Standard, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* kristina parsons
* 04/30/2005
* USD 27,353.00

Laser and computer technologies have revolutionized modern physical chemistry
research over the past few decades as lasers now allow molecular processes and
chemical reactions to be probed in unprecedented detail. Current research in
computational chemistry provides a wealth of information related to molecular
structure, energetics, and reactivity. Integrated laser experiments are being
adapted and implemented into the physical chemistry laboratory sequence.
Further, to bring relevance to the subject, the exercises are based on processes
that are important in atmospheric chemistry. The specific exercises being
adapted from the educational and research literature include studies of the
reaction of oxygen atoms with propene and the reactions of hydroxyl radical with
halocarbons. In the exercises, students are employing laser technology to make
experimental measurements of the reactions followed by computational exercises
and molecular modeling studies of the processes. These integrated laser,
computational, and molecular modeling exercises merge research and teaching by
utilization of the skills and research strengths of the principal investigators,
specifically laser kinetics of environmentally important compounds and ab initio
computational chemistry. Undergraduate students are employed to test the
exercises and to provide feedback.&lt;br/&gt;