* 0126969
* Success by Design:  Building Faculty Capacity to Improve Curriculum and Instruction
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Jerome Haky, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 07/31/2004
* USD 74,999.00

Interdisciplinary (99)&lt;br/&gt;Faculty in the Colleges of Science and
Education at Florida Atlantic University (FAU) have been working collaboratively
for three years to address problems of student achievement and retention in
first semester courses in Chemistry, Biology, and Physics. Through this work
they have recognized the need to improve the design of course, curriculum, and
alignment of course components. This project is now entering a phase where
further development is likely to have benefits for a number of universities in
the US. We are engaged in (1) conceptualizing a "Curriculum Design Model" (CDM)
to serve as a framework for the development of instructional modules; (2)
applying this CDM to the development and trial of 5 prototype instructional
modules in chemistry, biology, and physics; (3) evaluating the CDM in terms of
student achievement in these 5 modules, improved student motivation, and
stronger student interest in science; (4) institutionalizing a process of
faculty professional development; and (5) designing, running, and evaluating
undergraduate peer leader training. &lt;br/&gt;There are three main design
features of the CDM for introductory science courses, summarized
as:&lt;br/&gt;1. "Less is more:" Faculty should cover the most important topics
in greater depth, emphasize relationships between core concepts, and design
instructional activities to give learners practice in representing their
understanding of core concepts. &lt;br/&gt;2. "Scaffolding learning:" Novice
learners cannot be expected to direct their attention to core concepts in a
discipline, rather, they require extensive guidance from faculty to deepen their
thinking and understanding. Curriculum should be designed to provide a
"scaffold" on which to promote this kind of learning.&lt;br/&gt;3. "Peer
learning:" The learning environment should allow and encourage students to
engage in mutual discussion in order to construct and deepen their own
conceptual understanding. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The modules and this
instructional practice are being field tested with Florida Atlantic University
and Palm Beach Community College students. Based on the evaluation of these
field tests, the Curriculum Design Model is being refined, and further
development of the prototype instructional modules undertaken. Mechanisms for
extensive collaborations have been established with community colleges in the
area through the Region V Area Center for Educational Enhancement, which is a
local office of the Florida Department of Education. &lt;br/&gt;