* 0126110
* Investigating Geochemical Variability and Timing of Holocene Climatic Changes in Productivity and Terrigenous Input on the East Antarctic Margin
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Robert Dunbar, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 05/31/2006
* USD 132,097.00

0126110 Murray

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
Office of Polar Programs, provides funds for a paleoceanographic and
paleoclimate study of recently acquired marine sediment cores from the
continental shelf of East Antarctica. The goal of this work is to develop a
better understanding of Holocene climate change on the East Antarctic Margin
(EAM) via geochemical studies of ultra-high resolution sedimentary sequences
recovered during the Coring Holocene Antarctic Ocean Sediments (CHAOS) program
conducted in early 2001. A diverse suite of geochemical analyses will be carried
out that will provide indicators of nutrient utilization, surface and export
production, terrigenous flux, and terrigenous provenance by developing an
integrated database of d15N, d13C, opal, TOC, and a diverse suite of 17 major
and trace elements. This project has two mutually reinforcing components:
inorganic proxy work at Boston University, and complementary isotopic studies at
Stanford University. The work will target important hypotheses and questions
relating to East Antarctic Margin (EAM) climate variability over decadal-,
centennial-, and millennial-scale time scales, as well as assess the impact of
global climatic events such as the Little Ice Age, Holocene climatic optimum,
Medieval Warm Period, and Younger Dryas. This work will compare and contrast
records from the EAM (a terrestrial ice sheet) to the Palmer Deep record off the
West Antarctic Peninsula (a predominantly marine-based ice sheet). It will
examine relative timing of events between the EAM, Palmer, and Northern
Hemisphere Holocene records, and compare the relative timings of climatic change
in both the biologic (nutrients and export) and physical (terrigenous) systems
acting along the Antarctic continental margin. Integrating biological and
physical studies allows for a comprehensive assessment of the combined marine-
terrestrial Antarctic system. Documenting changes in export production through
inorganic chemical means will be an important independent approach from that
taken by researchers focusing on the paleontological record (e.g. diatom
assemblages), and will provide quantitative information regarding the frequency
of change in the sequestering of atmospheric CO2. In addition, variations in
nitrogen isotope ratios can either reflect differences in relative utilization
of nitrate in the photic zone or can be used to track the exchange of nutrients
between deep and surface waters. Carbon isotope records track bloom events,
which reflect productivity in the surface waters. Each of the isotope proxies
(d15N, d13C, TOC, biogenic opal, major/trace elements, etc.) responds to
different aspects of the biogeochemical cycle, and only by synthesizing them can
a more complete picture of the region's systematics be achieved. Changes in the
terrigenous flux and chemical provenance may indicate variations in the
weathering patterns of bedrock and soil on the EAM, delivery of ice-rafted
debris, the strength of ocean currents, or behavior of different glacial regimes
on the margin. Interpreting these results within the context of other studies
will allow an assessment of the response of local glaciers to changes in climate
and precipitation on the margin. These issues have been targeted with similar
methodologies and integration of data sets with great success in the Palmer
Deep, West Antarctic Peninsula. The sediments from the East Antarctic Margin are
of comparable resolution and integrity to allow for future comparisons of the
response of both the East Antarctic Ice Sheet and West Antarctic Ice Sheet to
climate change.