* 0126671
* Developing and Assessing Impact of Problem-Based Learning Materials
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Sudhir Mehta, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 12/31/2004
* USD 74,984.00

Engineering - Mechanical (56)&lt;br/&gt;The latest reports from the National
Research Council, the Carnegie Foundation, and the National Science Foundation
recommend that faculty use the problem-based learning (PBL) method of
instruction in undergraduate education. The literature claims that the PBL
method has inherent potential to foster problem-solving, teamwork, and
communication skills and, therefore, it is superior to the traditional (subject-
based) learning method. As a consequence, the goal of this project is to develop
a prototype PBL set of course materials that is based on the PBL model, and use
this model to formally test this claim. To accomplish this goal, the PI uses
established characteristics of a "good" PBL problem along with proven processes
for writing PBL problems to do the following: (a) develop PBL materials for a
engineering measurements course in the mechanical engineering curriculum at
North Dakota State University (NDSU); (b) evaluat, using both formative and
summative assessment methods, the enhancement in student learning and skills
development from this PBL course ; (c) evaluate the project outcomes using the
results from five independent institutions; and (d) disseminate the tested PBL
educational materials through a web site, CD-ROM, and several workshops to the
academic community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In summary, we are developing PBL
course materials using proven pedagogical concepts with the assistance of
partners from leading instrumentation industry. An independent five-member
committee is evaluating all aspects of the project. These committee members are
experienced engineering educators from five different institutions. They are
providing assessment data during the development phase of the project and
testing the PBL modules at their own sites. The dissemination plan includes
workshops scheduled for K-12 school teachers, regional colleges and university
faculties, and tribal college faculties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key words:
Problem-based learning, inquiry-based, PBL problems.