* 0126555
* CRI: Center for Research on Children: Conducting, Synthesizing, and Disseminating Development Science to Benefit Children, Science and Society
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2007
* Stephen Ceci, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing Grant
* Amy L. Sussman
* 08/31/2007
* USD 2,455,267.00

Every day we hear media reports of far-reaching decisions affecting children's
lives--made by legislators, politicians, school boards, government agencies,
judges, and others--ostensibly based on sound research. But basic scientists
often cringe when they learn of the misunderstanding and misapplication of the
research that allegedly informs these decisions. There exists in our society a
schism between the scientists who conduct sound empirical research and the
decision-makers who translate it into practice. The goal of CIRC is to improve
the quality of the conduct and dissemination of child-related research. We aim
to place rigorous, scientifically defensible research findings into the hands of
society's decision-makers to better inform their thinking about complex issues
and the decisions they make. Research conducted through the institute will also
inform basic science in the core disciplines. CIRC will achieve these goals by
commissioning and servicing national teams of outstanding developmental
scientists to study policy-relevant questions and create a consensus report for
broad dissemination. Questions will be selected on the basis of their potential
to contribute core knowledge to basic science. The planned dissemination process
is designed to inform policy-makers and also to impact the lives of the next
generation of scholars now in high school, college, and graduate school. CIRC
will foster the integration of research, undergraduate education, graduate and
postdoctoral training, and public dissemination of rigorous child-related
scholarship with the potential to benefit children, science, and society. CIRC's
research will tap the developmental sciences (including developmental
psychology, economics, medicine, neuroscience, and life-course sociology).
CIRC's goals will be accomplished through the interaction of seven components
designed to (a) contribute to basic scientific knowledge, (b) inform policy and
the media, and (c) integrate these first two goals with undergraduate education
of underserved populations and graduate/postgraduate training of the next
generation of scholars. CIRC will enable multidisciplinary teams to undertake
studies pertaining to children in any substantive area of developmental science
(e.g., social, cognitive, biological). CIRC's seven components are: 1) A
mechanism to commission high quality, developmental science studies on questions
of relevance to children; 2) The assembling of an Advisory Board of eminent
scholars from developmental psychology, neuroscience, economics, medicine,
policy, and sociology, who will guide the selection of research topics to be
commissioned and the nomination of scholars to conduct the research. The
Advisory Board will also mentor postdocs and grad students, advise teams of
visiting scholars on substantive issues, participate in miniconferences, and
help spread the word about CIRC's existence and aims; 3) Graduate and
postdoctoral training experiences to provide the next generation of scholars
with unique training in conducting rigorous developmental research that benefits
children; 4) A postsecondary training initiative to insert into current
curricula the results of commissioned studies, targeting colleges and
universities with substantial Latino and African American enrolments and low-SES
community colleges serving students of all races; 5) Formal print dissemination
(the publication of a monograph series translating promising developmental
research into policy proposals, the preparation of press releases, etc.); 6)
Formal non-print dissemination (the organization of miniconferences, a public
web site, and press conferences); and 7) Coordination with existing Cornell
centers and institutes to leverage resources of this proposal.