* 0126014
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH/CRI: Children's Digital Media Centers
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2007
* Sandra Calvert, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Amy L. Sussman
* 08/31/2007
* USD 1,171,254.00

American children spend many hours with media each day. Although much of this
time involves television viewing, an increasing amount involves participation
with digital interactive entertainment technologies, including the Internet.
Even television as we know it will soon change dramatically, with digital
television adding improved clarity of images and the opportunity for
interactivity. Knowing how to use these interactive technologies will be a
necessary skill for an educated workforce in the 21st century and may be a
gateway to studying science and technology. Therefore, knowing how children use
and learn from these digital technologies is an important step in ensuring that
children will develop these basic skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although
children invest their free time heavily in electronic entertainment media,
relatively little is known about how new interactive media impact children's
learning in informal learning contexts. One problem is that the field is
interdisciplinary. Researchers examine diverse issues rather than examine
specific areas of interactive digital media systematically and then consolidate
that knowledge into a central information base. Another problem is the rapid
change in digital technologies, making researchers one step behind the latest
developments. One outcome of these problems is a poor knowledge base for
understanding of how new digital entertainment technologies influence children's
learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the next 5 years, this Center will advance
theory and method in how children learn through digital interactive
entertainment media. Using an interdisciplinary team of researchers from the
fields of psychology, human development, communications, sociology,
anthropology, and medicine, researchers will explore multiple levels of analysis
in order to explicate the role that dialogue, in the form of interactivity and
identity, play in children's learning from entertaining interactive digital
technologies. At a macro level, two types of survey will be conducted to
document patterns of change and similarity over time in children's access to,
and use of, new and emerging digital platforms. These macro level studies will
guide the direction of micro level experimental, observational, and ethnographic
studies that will examine what interactivity is and how and what children learn
from online digital experiences. Parallel research activities will examine
children at different age groups, providing both cross-sectional and
longitudinal findings on children's uses of media and the impact of media on
their development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overall, these research activities will
expand the knowledge base about: 1) the kinds of digital media that are
emerging; 2) the kinds of interactive digital media experiences children choose
to have; 3) the impact of these interactive experiences on children's long-term
social adjustment and academic achievement; 4) how specific kinds of
interactions with digital technologies impact children's learning; 5) how
interacting with each other online influences children's learning and identity
construction; and 6) how observational and interactive experiences are
represented in the developing brain. This knowledge base will be disseminated in
published form in professional journals, through presentations at national and
international conferences, and via interconnected websites to create synergistic
activities among the researchers, policy makers, child advocacy groups, and
creators in the children and digital media field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Children's Digital Media Centers, based at Georgetown University, will also
include the University of Texas at Austin, Northwestern University, and the
University of California Los Angeles. Centers will include a Steering Committee
and an Advisory Board of distinguished colleagues. &lt;br/&gt;