* 0126496
* TIMEQCC-Teaching Improvement through Mathematics Education at Queensborough Community College: Adapting and Implementing TIME2000 for the Community College
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2005
* Mona Fabricant, CUNY Queensborough Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 01/31/2005
* USD 150,000.00

Mathematical Sciences (21)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major shortage of qualified
mathematics teachers exists and is expected to worsen. By adapting and
implementing Queens College's (QC/CUNY) exemplary TIME2000 program (NSF DUE
9652972), the pipeline of prospective mathematics teachers at the middle and
high school levels is being increased. TIMEQCC is establishing a mathematics-
education program at Queensborough Community College (QCC) and increasing the
junior year cohort in TIME2000. The success of TIME2000 has been demonstrated
through increased retention rates, media recognition, and additional funding
from the college and a private foundation. The goal of increasing the pipeline
of qualified teachers is being accomplished by targeting the under-recruited
population of QCC students who have completed college algebra or precalculus
with a B or better and then retaining them using two major innovations. These
innovations are:&lt;br/&gt; 1. Cross-campus counseling and teaching (QCC and
QC), including an interdisciplinary mathematics education course.&lt;br/&gt; 2.
Implementing the successful QCC upper level mathematics retention model --
tutoring in upper level mathematics courses, study groups based on the Uri
Treisman model, and tutoring internships in the Mathematics Learning
Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working closely with the TIME2000 faculty at QC,
the structure of the program is being adapted for the community college student.
Formative and summative evaluations are being conducted using QC's established
evaluation procedures. Dissemination is through the CUNY Council of Math Chairs
and national on-line conferences.