* 0126488
* Planning for an American Indian Child Development Center
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,11/30/2003
* Beverly King, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 11/30/2003
* USD 15,379.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Planning for an American Indian Child Development
Center&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Joseph M. White &amp; Beverly R.
King&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Efforts to develop an American Indian Child
Development Center on the campus of South Dakota State University in Brookings,
SD, will begin with a two day workshop designed to address several issues. The
workshop will help in the development of a specific mission and a set of
narrowly defined research objectives. At present the purposes of a Center at
SDSU would be to identify factors that influence positive development from
different levels of analysis (e.g., individuals, families, and communities) and
context (e.g., ethnicity, culture) among American Indian children. These
influences may or may not be the same as the majority culture. Further insight
into this issue is needed in order to use this information to assist American
Indian children and their families in the process of understanding functional
pathways to development across childhood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Activities
planned for the workshop include training in the life course perspective, both
in terms of a theory to guide future research and in terms of designing
methodologies that will be sensitive to multiple influences on American Indian
child development. This will include selected faculty involved in defining the
research questions and potential projects. Although much of this work will have
been done prior to this time via preliminary correspondence, this initial
morning session will be designed to review and refine the research questions and
ensuing framework. The afternoon session will be open to the academic community
at large to receive training on the life course perspective and the methodology
used to work within this framework. Smaller breakout groups are anticipated to
explore issues related to this paradigm. Groups will then reconvene to conclude
the day's activities and to allow the consultants to respond to any final
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second day of the workshop will include a
more focused level of training from American Indian representatives from local
tribes and communities. They will be asked to share presentations about their
beliefs, understanding, and practice relative to children. Smaller breakout
sessions will occur prior to lunch and resume after lunch. Groups will again
reconvene to pull information together and provide concluding comments. Input
from the tribal communities will be critical to finalizing the research
questions and agenda.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research collaborators will have
several follow-up meetings to review the information gleaned from the workshop
and integrate it into the original set of specific research questions that were
developed prior to the workshop. This information will then be used to develop a
more coherent and focused proposal for the development of a center.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, visits to a few existing American Indian Centers
sometime following the workshops will be invaluable. The visits may help
identify ways in which a center focused on American Indian Child Development
might function and how the specific research questions and ensuing projects may
be facilitated.&lt;br/&gt;