* 0126629
* SBIR Phase I: Time-Lapse P- and S-Wave Monitoring of Fluid Flow
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2002
* David Lumley, Fourth Wave Imaging Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 12/31/2002
* USD 100,000.00

0126629 Tura This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project concerns
using elastic P-wave and S-wave seismic data simultaneously to obtain time-lapse
seismic monitoring images of fluid saturation and pore pressure changes in an
oil reservoir. Time-lapse seismic using P-waves alone may not allow
discrimination between fluid saturation changes and reservoir pressure changes
since such information is contained in the large source-receiver offsets of
P-wave seismic data, which can be contaminated by noise and subject to data
acquisition aperture limitations. Using S-waves in addition to P-waves in time-
lapse analysis can lead to more accurate inversion results, yielding reliable
estimates of reservoir saturation and pressure changes. The proposed project
will allow customers to avoid costly errors in development and production of
economic oil reservoirs and yield higher recovery rates. For this feasibility
phase a reservoir model will be constructed, and three-dimensional P- and S-wave
synthetic seismic data at two production times will be generated. These time-
lapse P- and S-wave data sets will be processed simultaneously and will be
cross-equalized and inverted to yield changes in reservoir saturations and
pressure. The inverted data will be analyzed to assess the feasibility of the
proposed approach on field data. Commercial applications of the technology
proffered by Fourth Wave Imaging will include accurate mapping of bypassed oil
and monitoring of costly injected fluids. In addition, the firm will be able to
better image flow compartmentalization and determine the hydraulic properties of
faults and fractures. These applications will allow cheaper and more efficient
production of oil reservoirs, guide reservoir management decisions, and help
maximize the life of both new and existing fields while minimizing recovery
costs. The proposed methods also have commercial applications in monitoring
ground water reserves, contaminant plumes and environmental clean-up projects.
In medical imaging, use of elastic waves has the potential to yield superior
results over acoustic waves alone. Commercial products resulting from this work
will consist of time-lapse P- and S-wave seismic data processing, interpretation
and analysis tools and methods.

