* 0126589
* Collaborative Research: Integration Of Simulation Technology into Undergraduate Engineering Courses and Laboratories
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Tao Xing, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Susan Burkett
* 02/28/2006
* USD 204,679.00

Engineering - Mechanical (56)&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is the
integration of simulation technology into undergraduate education through the
development of teaching modules (TM) for complementary computational fluid
dynamics (CFD), experimental fluid dynamics (EFD), and uncertainty analysis (UA)
for use in teaching undergraduate fluid mechanics courses and laboratories.
Faculty partners from colleges of engineering at small and large public, small
private, and small historically minority private universities are collaborating
on the development of the TM, the effective implementation, the evaluation, the
dissemination, and the pedagogy of simulation technology using web-based
techniques. The evaluation plan includes collaboration with faculty from the
University of Iowa, College of Education, the Department of Psychology and
Quantitative Foundation and Center for Evaluation Assessment. The TM include
three parts: 1) lectures on CFD and EFD methodology and standard procedures and
UA; 2) CFD templates for academic use of commercial industrial CFD software; 3)
exercise notes for use of CFD templates and complementary EFD and UA. The
commercial industrial CFD software is FLUENT, http://www.fluent.com/, which is a
widely used CFD software in many industries and universities and a partner in
the present work. Faculty development activities are occurring in parts 1) and
3) of the production of the TM, and during part 2), faculty development
activities are occurring during the generation of TM specifications and
collaboration with FLUENT on design of CFD templates. FLUENT is providing
software development and testing of CFD templates; training of faculty in the
use of CFD templates; national/international self-sustaining web-based
distribution of the TM, including all parts 1) -3); and free faculty use of
FLUENT/Flowlab. Faculty partners will meet yearly for development of the TM and
collaboration and training with FLUENT/Flowlab. The initial capability of the TM
are based on those capabilities developed in the proof-of-concept at The
University of Iowa in spring semester 1999, fall semester 2000, and spring
semester 2001. The results from this prior effort may be reviewed at
http://www.icaen.uiwa.edu/~fluids/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a
collaborative between the University of Iowa (0126589), Iowa State University
(0127459), Howard University (0127932) and Cornell University
(0127464).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Keywords: FLUENT, Flowlab, teaching modules,
computational fluid dynamics, experimental fluid dynamics, uncertainty analysis.