* 0126161
* Collaborative Research:  Remote Observations of Ice Sheet Surface Temperature:  Toward Multi-Proxy Reconstruction of Antarctic Climate Variability
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Eric Steig, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 08/31/2005
* USD 332,567.00

This project will develop spatially extended and statistically reliable
estimates of Antarctic surface temperature variations over the past several
centuries, using a multi-proxy calibration/verification approach that combines
the climate signal in ice core, satellite remote sensing, and weather station
data. Antarctica has been problematic from the point of view of large-scale
paleoclimate reconstruction because of the paucity of long-term instrumental
data, and the relatively low resolution of most ice cores. Several new
developments, particularly the network of shallow (~100 meter) ice cores from
the ongoing International Trans-Antarctic Scientific Expedition (ITASE) project
will yield broad spatial coverage of annually resolved ice core physical
properties, chemistry, and stable isotope data over more than a hundred years.
Second, there are now over twenty years of microwave and infrared brightness
temperatures available from satellites covering virtually all of Antarctica with
seasonally resolved information that has been demonstrated to record the ice
surface/near surface temperature with very reasonable precision and accuracy.
Finally, higher quality microwave emission data from Advanced Microwave Scanning
Radiometers (AMSR) with much finer spatial resolution and radiometric fidelity
than those from previous sources will offer an improved view of longer term mean
temperatures in Antarctica.&lt;br/&gt;The 40-year instrumental record and the
shorter but spatially more comprehensive Automatic Weather Station network will
be combined with seasonally-resolved 37-gigahertz satellite-based ice surface
temperature estimates to reconstruct Antarctic-wide temperature patterns during
the past forty years. The sparser Antarctic instrumental surface temperature
data available back nearly to the beginning of the century will be added for
longer-term, though quite spatially-restricted, cross-validation of these
reconstructions. This cross-validation procedure has been used successfully with
roughly century-long instrumental records at locations primarily in the Northern
Hemisphere. The longer time scale will be approached through a cross-validation
of the proxy-based pre-20th century surface temperature reconstructions using
information on thermal emission from deeper in the firn that is contained in
low-frequency passive microwave satellite measurements. The low-frequency
estimates, supplemented by borehole thermometry, will provide important
independent verification of the long-term averages of the annual surfac