* 0126515
* Children's Research Initiative: Infant Perception Of Referencing Through Dynamic Gestures During Early Lexical Development
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2001,09/30/2007
* Nancy Rader, Ithaca College
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 09/30/2007
* USD 135,288.00

Abstract Collaborative Proposal: Infant Perception of Referencing Through
Dynamic Gestures During Early Lexical Development

Nancy Rader

The main objective of the proposed research is to test a perceptually-based
theory hypothesized to underlie early word comprehension. The theory has its
basis in socialization practices used by caregivers in interacting with infants
at a very early stage of word learning. In determining how infants initially
come to perceive the relation between a word and its referent, complexities
arise from the fact that the word is a segment of what perceptually is a
continuous stream of speech sounds. Additionally, the referent is one element
embedded within a complex, dynamic environment. How could an infant detect which
span of the speech stream is a word and what that word means? In searching for
an answer to this question, a set of four studies has been designed. These
studies test the hypothesis that the types of perceptual information that
caregivers present in gesture and speech attract attention and make the
correspondence between a word and its referent available and easily detectable.
The research will examine a range of semantic functions that includes nouns
(objects), verbs (object motions), and adjectives (object attributes). The
sample will be comprised of infants from English-speaking families and will
include mothers whose highest education level is a high school diploma as well
as those with a college education. The research will be carried out at Ithaca
College, a primarily undergraduate institution; the undergraduate students
assisting with the project should gain an appreciation of a scientific approach
to psychology and a greater interest in pursuing graduate studies. While the
results of this research will be of interest to theorists of language
development, they also should have great practical significance. Understanding
the processes underlying early word learning will help educators devise more
effective techniques for impaired language learners, for children with
developmental disabilities, and for anyone learning a second language.

