* 0126285
* RUI: Crystal Growth Speedometry, Micro-Fourier Transform InfraRed (FTIR) Spectroscopy of Minerals
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2005
* Phillip Ihinger, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 11/30/2005
* USD 164,466.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0126285&lt;br/&gt;Ihinger&lt;br/&gt;University of
Wisconsin-Eau Claire&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this proposal
is to use H-species defects, incorporated into hydrothermal crystals during
crystallization, to determine the relative growth rates of different
crystallographic faces, which in turn may be used to derive the absolute time
for in situ crystal growth, with appropriate experimental calibration. Quartz
and kyanite will be investigated. The timescales involved in crystal growth
processes are poorly constrained and the absolute time involved in the growth of
crystals from either igneous or metamorphic environments is not known. This is a
first order problem in petrology and few new approaches have been proposed to
attack it. Although the theory describing reaction kinetics in the crustal
environment is sound, few quantitative studies exist and the mechanisms
responsible for the variation in size and shape of individual crystal faces are
still not well understood. Published data on natural euhedral quartz crystals
obatined in our laboratory allow quantitative determination of the relative
growth rates of their growth faces throughout their growth histories. The
concentration of water molecules and metal hydroxyl impurities incorporated into
the crystal structure at the time of growth serve as "speedometers" that
directly reflect the growth kinetics of active growth faces. These measurements
provide a new means of imaging the shape and absolute dimensions of crystals
throughout their growth history. A partnership with commercial quartz production
company will provide synthetic samples for experimental calibration of fluid
parameters, which are necessary to quantitatively interpret H-defect data from
natural hydrothermal quartz crystals.&lt;br/&gt;