* 0126131
* Passive Acoustic Measurement of Bedload Transport in Natural Bedrock Channels
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2005
* Rudy Slingerland, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 01/31/2005
* USD 144,000.00

0126131&lt;br/&gt;Slingerland&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
proposal is to design and calibrate a non-invasive, passive acoustic system for
measuring spatially-integrated bedload transport rates in a natural bedrock
channel. We pro-pose to measure the self-generated noise of bedload clasts in
transport. Our experimental design consists of eight hydrophones and eight
geophone deployed along a 100m reach, with data recorded to disk after passing
through a sixteen-channel analog-to-digital conversion board on a laptop
computer. The phones will be epoxied onto bedrock, near the banks, and onto
large boulders in the center of the stream. The hydrophone array and the
geophone array will be compared to determine which, if either, is preferable and
to eliminate signals from fluid turbulence, cavitation, and bubble collapse.
Both broadband and narrowband amplitudes will be analyzed for predictive power
of bedload transport. The purpose of the streamwise array is to exploit the
presence of downstream propagating waves of bedload transport and to determine
an optimal sampling design. The system will be calibrated using bedload
transport rates observed at low flows by conventional techniques such as
chickenwire traps and Helley-Smith samplers, and at high flows by multiple
surveys of a delta where the stream empties into a standing body of water The
delta surveys will be accomplished using a shallow-water echosounder. Key
hydraulic variables also will be measured in the study reach in order to relate
these variables to measured bedload fluxes. The result will be a non-invasive
method for measuring cross-sectionally-integrated bedload transport rates in
bedrock reaches at very short time intervals.