* 0126167
* Science Achievement and Health Behavior: High School Curriculum, Social Context, and Opportunity to Learn
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Pedro Reyes, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 08/31/2006
* USD 1,752,756.00

A three-year research project is proposed with the following goals:&lt;br/&gt;1.
To fully describe the science and mathematics curricular exposure of high school
students and&lt;br/&gt;differences resulting from curricular variations, social
context and opportunities to learn, and&lt;br/&gt;students
background.&lt;br/&gt;2. To analyze how curricular exposure and social structure
influence students persistence through&lt;br/&gt;the science and mathematics
pipeline.&lt;br/&gt;3. To analyze how curricular exposure and academic progress
through the science pipeline affect&lt;br/&gt;students choice to major in
science-related fields, including teaching.&lt;br/&gt;4. To analyze how science
curricular exposure shapes students health behavior and health-
related&lt;br/&gt;science literacy.&lt;br/&gt;Three major areas that influence
students progress through the science and mathematics&lt;br/&gt;pipeline and
their health choices and literacy even if they leave the pipeline are identified
and&lt;br/&gt;analyzed: (1) curriculum content, performance expectations and
perspectives (2) formal,&lt;br/&gt;structured opportunities to learn and (3) the
informal social contexts of students
learning&lt;br/&gt;environments.&lt;br/&gt;Quantitative methods are employed.
This study takes advantage of a unique and timely&lt;br/&gt;opportunity to
analyze nationally representative, longitudinal data from the 1990s, the
National&lt;br/&gt;Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health) and its
transcript supplement. A third&lt;br/&gt;wave of Add Health is currently being
gathered, and students high school transcripts and&lt;br/&gt;supporting school
documents (course catalogues, syllabi, textbook lists) are being collected
and&lt;br/&gt;coded. For this study, course curriculum (content, performance
expectations, and perspectives)&lt;br/&gt;will also be coded and analyzed along
with the transcript data and longitudinal survey data
from&lt;br/&gt;approximately 19,000 respondents who were in grades 7 through 12
in the1994-1995 school year.&lt;br/&gt;This data set contains extensive measures
of many sources of influence from the contexts of&lt;br/&gt;students lives that
can be linked to adolescents health behavior, academic performance,
and&lt;br/&gt;science and teaching aspirations.&lt;br/&gt;This study is set
within Quadrant III of the ROLE program: irResearch on SMET learning
in&lt;br/&gt;formal and informal educational settings,ll and has major
implications and links to Quadrants II&lt;br/&gt;and IV. The study directly
targets the question of how recent mathematics and science&lt;br/&gt;educational
reforms in approaches and curriculum materials affect students academic
progress&lt;br/&gt;and learning. It explicitly distinguishes between formal and
informal processes to assess the&lt;br/&gt;effects and interactions of each. The
study addresses the concentration of Quadrant II since the&lt;br/&gt;research
questions are framed to recognize how the complex, multilevel aspects of
students&lt;br/&gt;backgrounds and lives interact with the structure and social
context of schools to affect learning.&lt;br/&gt;The concentrations of Quadrant
IV are also addressed by the multilevel approach to analysis
of&lt;br/&gt;longitudinal, nationally representative data. The data sets depth
allows for analysis of how&lt;br/&gt;reforms in curricular content (including
textbook adoptions) and structure are related to students&lt;br/&gt;progress
within the context of schools and curriculum-based subsets of students (such as
tracks).&lt;br/&gt;Consistent with common themes across ROLE concentration
areas, this study will model these&lt;br/&gt;processes and analyze large-scale
effects of curricular and social structuring inherent in&lt;br/&gt;mathematics
and science reform efforts. Finally, it assesses how science education is
related to&lt;br/&gt;the everyday lives of the U.S.s diverse population by
examining how exposure to science in&lt;br/&gt;high school is related to health
choices and behaviors.