* 0126209
* Cosmogenic Isotopes Produced In Situ in Terrestrial Rocks: Quantifying the Effect of Altitude and Depth on the Production Rates
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Marek Zreda, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 04/30/2006
* USD 264,876.00

Zreda&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0126209&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the general
systematics of in-situ produced cosmogenic isotopes has been understood based on
theoretical and experimental work, new quantitative information in several areas
is needed to refine cosmogenic dating methods. Recent research on experimental
production rates and effects of paleomagnetic intensity has shown that the
production rates determined at one location and time cannot be transferred to
other locations or times without introducing systematic errors that are
estimated to be on the order of twenty percent. There are many specific reasons
for these uncertainties, all revolving around a fundamental general problem of
the distribution of the cosmic-ray intensity on earth. To improve our
understanding of the distribution of neutrons, we started a neutron monitoring
program, under which we are measuring the neutron intensity and cosmogenic
isotope production rates as a function of latitude and elevation. The currently-
funded one-year project will determine the attenuation lengths in the air for
fast neutrons and for cosmogenic 36Cl (produced by fast and thermal neutrons)
and 3He (produced by fast neutrons). These measurements are three out of eight
that are necessary for a full characterization of altitude and depth dependence
of cosmogenic production rates. The proposed project will provide the remaining
five: the attenuation length in the air for thermal neutrons, and attenuation
lengths in the rock for fast and thermal neutrons and for cosmogenic nuclides
produced by fast and thermal neutrons. The goal of this proposal is to determine
the relationships between the attenuation lengths obtained from measurements of
cosmic-ray neutrons and of cosmogenic nuclides accumulated in rocks. This goal
will be achieved by conducting the following measurements. (1) The thermal
neutron intensity as a function of elevation, from sea level to 4000 m (top of
Mauna Kea). To avoid the air-ground boundary, which affects thermal neutrons,
the measurements will be conducted 300 m above the ground using bare neutron
detector attached to a small pressure balloon. (2) The fast and thermal neutron
intensity as a function of depth, from 0-100 cm in the rock. These measurements
will be conducted in horizontal access holes drilled into the rock and by
shielding the top of the instrument by slabs of basalt. (3) Cosmogenic 14C, 36Cl
and 3He concentrations in shallow (100 cm) vertical cores. Two cores will be
studied, with 15 samples per core; sampling will concentrate in the top 20 cm.
Three specific objectives are: to determine the attenuation length for
cosmogenic isotopes produced by fast neutrons; to define the depth function for
thermal-neutron-produced isotopes; and to determine whether fast-neutron-
produced isotopes are affected by the air-ground boundary. Isotopic and neutron
data will be compared in order to define the relationship between the neutron
intensity and cosmogenic production rates. This assessment is critical for
developing the ability to calculate reliable cosmogenic production rates for
locations where isotopic data are lacking. The results of this work will be used
to construct an improved altitudinal scaling formulation for cosmogenic
production rates, which will be an important contribution to the improvement of
all cosmogenic dating methods.&lt;br/&gt;