* 0126763
* GC/MS for Chemistry and Biology
* EHR,DUE
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2005
* David Smith, DOANE UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Eileen L. Lewis
* 01/31/2005
* USD 47,438.00

Chemistry (12)

At Doane College, we use a gas chromatograph/mass spectrometer (GC/MS) to
significantly increase the opportunities for students to acquire sophisticated
data in its chemistry and microbiology courses, as well as in undergraduate
research in those areas. The students are learning to critically evaluate the
data from this instrument and to integrate that data with other data from
currently available instruments and techniques to solve progressively more
difficult problems in their coursework and research. The goal is to help our
students develop deductive reasoning and problem solving skills and gain hands-
on experience with common modern instruments. We are adapting a number of
experiments from the J. Chem. Educ. and from the microbiology literature such as
the J. Microbiol. Methods for inclusion into our chemistry and biology
curriculum to achieve our goal. The instrument gets its greatest use in organic
chemistry and in microbiology courses and research. In most organic chemistry
experiments, each student gets a unique set of starting materials and has to
determine the outcome of the reaction by analyzing the often-complex product
mixtures. In Bacteriology and in Environmental Microbiology, the phospholipid
fatty acid (PLFA) method of analysis is used to explore mixtures and consortia
of bacteria form both laboratory and field samples. In both areas, the GC/MS
provides information that allows more complex and meaningful experiments to be
performed. We are also developing new undergraduate experiments that will be
used in both chemistry and biology courses.