* 0126502
* The Children's Research Initiative -- Integrative Approaches -- CRI: The Ecology of Early Language Development
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,05/31/2004
* Cristina Schmitt, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 05/31/2004
* USD 83,892.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Ecology of Early Language
Development&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Marguerite Barratt&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Establishing proficient communication skills in early childhood provides a
critical foundation for social and emotional development and for subsequent
academic achievement. The vast individual differences in early language skills
that emerge in the context of children's families, cultures, and communities are
important because of their long-term implications for children's school
readiness and subsequent adaptation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The goal of the
planning grant is to bring multidisciplinary perspectives to bear on the causes
and consequences of individual differences in early language development. Some
aspects of language are particularly fragile, particularly vulnerable to
deprived conditions. Decades of excellent research within individual
disciplines, including psychology, education, linguistics, family ecology,
medicine, genetics, nursing, and speech and language science have described
early language development. However, the explanations of processes that are
emerging necessarily cross disciplinary boundaries (Chapman, 2000). Each
discipline uses different theoretical frameworks, different vocabularies, and
asks different questions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The ecological and
developmental framework that will guide this research will bring together the
perspectives of the various disciplines of 16 faculty scholars from Michigan
State University. The planning process will (a) build the multidisciplinary
context for the work through sessions with nationally prominent visiting
scholars and (b) through planning sessions focused on development of a Center
for the Study of the Ecology of Early Language Development. (c) The effort will
integrate the domains of biology, family, culture, and community through
research clusters that work to refine and integrate their science, with a focus
on assessments, research designs, sampling strategies, and pilot research.
During the planning period, (d) linkages will be strengthened with other
research institutes and departments at MSU and with other Michigan institutions
of higher education, particularly community colleges that provide certificates
and degrees in early childhood education. (e) A Community Forum will solicit
information about early language development from a broad coalition of Michigan
partners. (f) Dissemination linkages are already in place with MSU Extension,
collaborations with the state networks for child care and Head Start, the human
service planning groups in each county, and the 53 Intermediate School
Districts. (g) Policy linkages are in place with the Michigan legislative
Children's Caucus, the state departments addressing social services, community
health, and education, and several state level advocacy organizations. (h) A
National Advisory Committee and a Community Advisory Committee will be
assembled.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The Institute for Children, Youth, and Families
(ICYF), within the College of Human Ecology at Michigan State University, has a
30-year history of multidisciplinary research and outreach that serves as the
foundation for this proposal. The research on the ecology of early language
development will explicitly link to MSU's 10-year-old multidisciplinary
Interdepartmental Graduate Specialization in Infant Studies. It will also link
to MSU multidisciplinary graduate training programs in applied developmental
science, cognitive science and neuroscience. &lt;br/&gt;