* 0126151
* Occipital Visual Dysfunction and Its Consequences in Hungarian Williams Syndrome Children
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Thomas Papathomas, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Paul A. Klaczynski
* 08/31/2005
* USD 234,272.00

Williams Syndrome (WMS) is a genetic condition in which a relatively consistent
neurobehavioral phenotype is produced by a genetic deletion. The syndrome has
high potentials in bridging genes and behavior because of the genetic
specificity and the consistent cognitive features in WMS. The crucial link
between the genetic and behavioral levels is likely to be provided by cortical
neuroanatomy. Recent neuroanatomical studies indicate that the most severe
volumetric reductions in WMS are in the occipital lobe involving especially the
primary visual cortex (V1). Furthermore, V1 is the only cortical area where
anatomical observations have shown signs of abnormal neural connectivity. These
anatomical findings call for studies addressing early levels of visual
processing in WMS. The current study, in response to the NSF Children's Research
Initiative, will be the first systematic behavioral investigation of low-level
visual processing in WMS.&lt;br/&gt;The primary visual cortex not only carries
out a local analysis of the retinal image along the main feature dimensions
(such as color, texture, depth), it also participates in the integration of
local information, primitive figure-ground segmentation, and visual contextual
integration. V1 also remains plastic and dynamically changing even in adult
life, and takes part in visual short-term memory. How are these functions
affected by the anatomically indicated abnormal connectivity in V1? The first
objective of the study is to assess the development of local and integrative
visual functions, and their plasticity related to occipital cortical areas in
WMS. The assessment involves psychophysical measurements to estimate (1)
orientation discrimination abilities, (2) contour integration abilities, (3)
contextual sensitivity, and (4) perceptual learning in WMS subjects. All these
procedures are based on the PI's previous work in visual spatial integration,
visual plasticity and development. The PI's previous work also provides normal
developmental trends in the studied visual functions, enabling the research
group to evaluate developmental dispositions in WMS from the perspective of
normal development. &lt;br/&gt;How does occipital visual dysfunction affect the
development of higher-level cognitive functions, such as language? The cortical
areas mediating language are not as severely involved anatomically as the low-
level visual areas, and language seems to be preserved in WMS. However, abnormal
visual processing might interfere with the normal development of some linguistic
functions, such as visuo-spatial language. It has recently been indicated that
the link between low-level vision and language might be visual memory. The
second objective of the study is to assess the consequences of occipital
dysfunction on the development of higher-level cognitive functions. The
assessment involves behavioral studies on (1) visuo-spatial working memory and
(2) visuo-spatial long-term memory, and (3) visuo-spatial language. Correlations
between memory and language related task performances are evaluated. The
conjecture is that abnormal connectivity in the visual cortex leads to memory
limitations, and language impairments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is
novel in that it offers a systematic investigation of (a) the development of
occipital functions, and (b) consequential memory limitations, and language
impairments in WMS. It also offers to test the whole population of Hungarian WMS
children and young adults, therefore the whole range of patients with a genetic
disorder within an isolated population. Experiments are designed to ensure age-
matched (normal), mental-age matched (normal), and IQ matched (Down Syndrome)
controls. In addition to its potential to reveal neurobehavioral developmental
rules in WMS, the research is significant in terms of a better understanding of
both psychological functions (e.g., contextual integration, working memory,
visuo-spatial language), and the neural circuits underlying these. &lt;br/&gt;