* 0126521
* The Childrens Research Initiative: Integrative Approaches - CRI: A Longitudinal Study of Relational Aggression in Preschoolers
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2004
* Nicki Crick, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Amy L. Sussman
* 08/31/2004
* USD 227,102.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A Longitudinal Study of Relational Aggression in
Preschoolers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nicki R. Crick&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Longitudinal investigations have demonstrated that childhood aggression is one
of the best known social predictors of future maladjustment. Although many
important advances have been made in our understanding of aggression, much of
this knowledge has been gained through an empirical and theoretical focus on
aggressive boys only. The lack of attention to aggressive girls has likely
occurred because the study of physical aggression has been emphasized, a form of
aggression that is more characteristic of boys than of girls. In an attempt to
rectify this inequity, a relational form of aggression has been recently
identified that has been shown to be more typical of girls than physical forms.
Although great strides have been made in our understanding of relational
aggression, the significant gaps in our knowledge are too numerous to outline.
One of the most critical gaps is the lack of attention to the early development
of relational aggression and its consequences, information that is crucial for
informing early prevention and intervention efforts. The proposed study was
designed to address this issue through the longitudinal study of preschool-age
children. Four objectives will be addressed: (1) to evaluate normative,
developmental changes in relational and physical aggression in young children;
(2) to assess gender differences in observed relational aggression among young
children; (3) to assess the stability of individual differences in physical and
relational forms of aggression for both boys and girls; and (4) to compare the
concurrent and future social-psychological adjustment status associated with
relational aggression for young children of both sexes. A total of 80
preschoolers (40 girls; 40 boys) between the ages of 2 and 4 years will serve as
participants. During each of four assessment periods (Year One: Time 1 &amp; 2;
Year Two: Time 3 &amp; 4) naturalistic observations plus teacher-, peer-, and
self-assessments of children's social behavior (relational aggression, physical
aggression, and prosocial behavior) and social-psychological adjustment (social
adjustment, internalizing difficulties, and externalizing problems) will be
conducted at the preschools. A variety of statistical techniques will be used to
evaluate the proposed hypotheses including descriptive analyses, linear growth
modeling, ANOVA, hierarchical multiple regression, and path analyses. Findings
of the proposed research have great potential for enhancing our understanding of
a vastly underrepresented group, aggressive girls, and for drawing attention to
theoretical shortcomings that have promoted the lack of attention to this group.
Without the ability to assess and identify aggressive behavioral problems among
young girls, we cannot understand the etiology and developmental trajectories of
later adjustment problems for females. Early prevention and intervention efforts
are also impossible without adequate information to identify at-risk girls
during their childhood years. &lt;br/&gt;