* 0126170
* Oligocene and Lower Miocene Calcareous Nannofossil Biostratigraphy and Paleoceanography of the Ross Sea
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2004
* David Watkins, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 01/31/2004
* USD 90,242.00

0126170&lt;br/&gt;Watkins&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award, provided by the
Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the Office of Polar Programs,
provides funds for a study of calcareous nannofossils in cores from the Ross
Sea. Much of the direct evidence of the early history of Cenozoic glaciation on
Antarctica comes from cores that were drilled in the waters of the Ross Sea. One
set of these cores was drilled by rigs mounted on the fast ice that rings the
southern part of the Ross Sea, just to the north of the Ross Ice Shelf. These
include the CIROS-1 hole and Cape Roberts Project (CRP) holes 2 and 3, which
cored thick sections of Oligocene and lower Miocene sedimentary rocks deposited
within about 15 km offshore of the glaciated coast of Victoria Land. These
clastic rocks include sandstones, siltstones, mudstones, conglomerates and
diamictite that indicate glaciers reached sea level by the Oligocene and were
very close (or actually on top of) the site of deposition for all or part of the
Oligocene and early Miocene. A second set of cores, drilled by the Deep Sea
Drilling Project (DSDP) drilling vessel Glomar Challenger includes Site 270,
located at the same latitude (77 degrees) as CIROS and CRP, but more than 300 km
away from the nearest source of glacial sediment. The Oligocene - lower Miocene
sedimentary sequence at this site is thinner and more fine-grained, but contains
abundant evidence of nearby ice in the form of ice rafted debris (IRD). A second
DSDP Site (274), located some 8 degrees latitude north, contains a Oligocene and
lower Miocene dominated by diatomaceous sediment including mud and ooze,
reflecting its largely open oceanic position. These four drill-holes form a
latitudinal and paleoenvironmental transect to investigate the surface water
history of the Ross Sea using calcareous
nannofossils.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Calcareous nannofossils, the fossil remains
of coccolithophorid algae that secrete calcite skeletal plates, will be used in
two ways to examine the Ross Sea: 1) Paleoceanographic reconstruction - The
distribution of the coccolithophorid algae is strongly controlled by the thermal
structure of the surface water mass, making their fossils sensitive indicators
of past water mass temperature. This is especially useful in an area that is
dominated by sediments with too little calcite to use isotopic methods of
estimating water temperatures. Analysis of the calcareous nannofossils by
statistical paleoecologic methods will provide a temperature history of the Ross
Sea surface waters for a period of geological time characterized by fluctuating
ocean temperatures and partial or ephemeral continental ice sheets. In addition,
because of the sensitivity these phytoplankton are known to have to abnormal
salinity, the analysis of the assemblages from deep ocean to the mouths of the
Victoria Land glaciers may provide a new way to estimate the meltwater outflow
of the evolving East Antarctic Ice Sheet. 2) Biostratigraphy - The rapid rate of
evolution of the coccolithophorid algae through the mid-Cenozoic, coupled with
their widespread distribution in the oceans, provides the means of age dating
the sediments that contain their fossils. The numerical ages of extinction and
speciation events have been well documented, providing a means to accurately and
precisely date the sedimentary sequences in the Ross Sea and, thus, the events
responsible for the deposition. Because of the excellent calibration of
calcareous nannofossil biostratigraphy to the time scale, these fossils offer
the possibility of constraining the paleomagnetic stratigraphy and other fossil
biostratigraphies (such as the largely endemic Antarctic shelf diatoms) that
occur in these Oligocene and lower Miocene sections. If successful, this work
will have important, and wide reaching ramifications to paleoceanographic
research that seeks to understand the role of the Antarctic ice sheet in global
systems.&lt;br/&gt;