* 0126955
* Discovering Science through Microbiology: Biology for Majors, Non-science Majors, and High School Students
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Julia Reed, University of Richmond
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 12/31/2004
* USD 144,813.00

Biological Sciences (61)&lt;br/&gt;Through implementation of investigative and
collaborative learning, using&lt;br/&gt;pedagogy established by BioQUEST, our
goal is developing critical thinkers in three&lt;br/&gt;populations: biology
majors, and non-science majors at the University of Richmond, and&lt;br/&gt;high
school students from the Richmond area, particularly underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;To realize these goals, we are using microbiology as the
subject with the laboratory&lt;br/&gt;component focused on antibiotic resistant
bacteria isolated from freshwater sources. We&lt;br/&gt;are teaching not only
what we know from science (i.e., content), but more importantly
how&lt;br/&gt;that knowledge is acquired (the process of science) and its
relevance to real-world&lt;br/&gt;problems. We are adapting BioQUEST's inquiry-
based model for our Biology major's&lt;br/&gt;Microbiology course, the
development of two new courses, Unseen Life (non-science&lt;br/&gt;students) and
Microbes: Life's Small Beginnings (high school students), and a research-
based&lt;br/&gt;course, Exploring the Basics of Biotechnology: Teaching
Investigative and Deductive Experimentation (EBBTIDE), which is an investigative
experience designed for high school students. The goals of these microbiology
courses, regardless of the student population, differ only in regard to science
literacy (e.g., understanding primary literature versus review articles).
Through investigative and collaborative learning experiences, using currently
available technology, we are teaching students critical thinking, how to: (1)
ask questions, (2) solve problems, and (3) articulate their findings. These
courses culminate in opportunities for scholarly activities for undergraduates
and some high school students. By engaging students in independent
investigations with connection to current events, students should leave the
academic setting as life-long learners, excited about science and their
environment.