* 0126472
* The Scotia Arc GPS Project: Focus on the Antarctic Peninsula and South Shetland Islands
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2005
* Ian Dalziel, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 03/31/2005
* USD 59,778.00

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
Office of Polar Programs, provides funds and field support to continue a study
of plate motions in the Antarctic Peninsula and Scotia Sea region. The principal
aim of the original "Scotia Arc GPS Project (SCARP)" was to determine motions of
the Scotia Plate relative to adjacent plates and to measure crustal deformation
along its margins with special attention to the South Sandwich microplate and
Bransfield Strait extension. The focus of the present proposal is confined to
the part of the SCARP project that includes GPS sites at Elephant Island, the
South Shetland Islands and on the Antarctic Peninsula. The British Antarctic
Survey provides data from two sites on the Scotia arc for this project. The
northern margin of the Scotia Plate is not included herein because that region
is not covered under Polar Programs. A separate proposal will request support
for re-measuring SCARP GPS stations in South America. With regard to the
Antarctic Peninsula area, continuously operating GPS stations were established
at Frei Base, King George Island (in 1996) and at the Argentine Base, South
Orkney Islands (in 1998). A number of monumented sites were established in the
Antarctic Peninsula region in 1997 to support campaign-style GPS work in
December 1997 and December 1998. Because of the expected slow crustal motion in
the Bransfield Strait and expiration of the initial grant, no further data
collection will be done until enough time has passed so that new measurements
can be expected to yield precise results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary aim
of this work is to complete the measurements required to quantify crustal
deformation related to opening of the Bransfield Strait, the South Shetland
microplate, and to identify any other independent tectonic blocks that the GPS
data may reveal. The measurements to be completed under this award will be done
using ship support during the 2002-2003 season. This would be five years after
the first measurements and would provide quite precise horizontal velocities.
This project will complete the acquisition, processing, and interpretation of a
single data set to continue this initial phase of the NSF-funded project to
measure crustal motions along the southern margin of the Scotia plate. A
principal investigator and one graduate student from the University of Texas
will perform fieldwork. A graduate student from the University of Hawaii will
process the new data consistent with previous data, and all of the SCARP
investigators (Bevis, Dalziel, Smalley, Taylor: from U. Texas, U. Hawaii, and U.
Memphis) will participate in interpreting the data. The British Antarctic Survey
(BAS) and Alfred Wegener Institute (AWI) also recognized the importance of the
Scotia plate and the Bransfield system in both global and local plate tectonic
frameworks. They, too, have used GPS to measure crustal motions in this region
and duplicate a number of our sites. They began earlier than we, have taken data
more recently, presumably will continue taking data, and they have published
some results. The collaboration between SCARP, BAS, and AWI begun earlier, will
continue into this new work. Joint and separate publications are anticipated.
The existing SCARP network has several advantages that justify collection and
analysis of another set of data. One is that SCARP has established and measured
GPS sites on Smith, Low, and Livingston Islands, where other groups have not.
These sites significantly extend the dimensions of the South Shetland microplate
so that we can determine a more precise pole of rotation and recognize any sub-
blocks within the South Shetland arc. Smith and Low Islands are near the end of
the Bransfield Basin where relative motion between the South Shetland Microplate
must somehow terminate, perhaps by faulting along an extension of the Hero
fracture zone. Another advantage is that measurements under SCARP were made
using fixed-height masts that eliminate all but a fraction of a millimeter of
vertical error in exactly re-occupying each site. Vertical motion associated
with postglacial rebound should be on the order of several mm/yr, which will
eventually be measurable. Mid-Holocene shorelines that emerged to more than 20m
on some South Shetland arc islands suggest that vertical motion is significant.
Thus, this work will contribute to understanding both plate motions and post-
glacial rebound from ice mass loss in the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;