* 0126234
* Integrating Research with Undergraduate Education through a Petrotectonic Study of Casco Bay, Maine
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Rachel Beane, Bowdoin College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 04/30/2005
* USD 38,158.00

Geology (42)&lt;br/&gt;The Casco Bay project brings research into the classroom.
Recent pedagogical studies and reports recommend that undergraduate courses
create opportunities for students to "do" science by engaging in research that
provides them with life-long learning skills in problem-solving, quantitative
reasoning, and communication. In essence, science and the skills learned by
"doing" science are integral to everyone's life, regardless of background or
(future) occupation. The Casco Bay region of Maine is readily accessible to
Bowdoin College and it lends itself to multi-disciplinary studies, because the
region includes felsic and mafic volcanics, pelites, and limestones that have
undergone deformation and been variably metamorphosed from chlorite to
sillimanite grade. Research on the Casco Bay region is being integrated into
undergraduate geology courses and student thesis research. This project adapts
and implements the successful practices of other educators by using regional
geologic studies and by integrating research into courses. The Casco Bay project
incorporates petrological, geochemical, structural, and geochronologic research
in four undergraduate courses: Introduction to Physical Geology, Structural
Geology, Igneous and Metamorphic Petrology, and Mountain Belts. Data are shared
between students using a Geographical Information System's (GIS) database.
Through the project, students become familiar with the geology that surrounds
them and engage cooperatively in multidisciplinary research. In so doing,
students make connections between geologic disciplines, recognize the benefit of
approaching problems from different angles, and improve their field,
quantitative, and communication skills.