* 0126106
* Collaborative Research: Emplacement of the Ferrar Mafic Igneous Province:  A Pilot Study of Intrusive Architecture and Flow Directions in Southern Victoria Land
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Thomas Fleming, Southern Connecticut State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 05/31/2005
* USD 54,090.00

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
Office of Polar Programs, provides funds for a study to investigate the Ferrar
magmatic province toward understanding of the formation of this province and its
role in the breakup of the Gondwana supercontinent. The dispersal of Gondwana
represents one of the largest supercontinent breakup events in the Phanerozoic.
Breakup was associated with the emplacement of a very large Jurassic mafic
igneous province extending across the Karoo (southern Africa), Ferrar
(Antarctica), and Tasman (Australia) regions, comprising continental flood
basalts and extensive intrusive dolerites.

Models linking development of the >3,000 km Ferrar province to a mantle plume, a
major magma conduit, or multiple sources, make testable predictions about magma
transport patterns within the Ferrar province. This project is a pilot study
using several different techniques aimed at evaluating these models and
providing a greater understanding of the emplacement mechanisms, flow
directions, and magmatic architecture associated with the Ferrar mafic intrusive
province in southern Victoria Land. Our research tools will include mapping
intrusive geometry based on structural field studies and geochemical correlation
techniques. Magma flow directions within the intrusive complex will be evaluated
using anisotropy of magnetic susceptibility, and mesoscopic and petrofabric flow
indicators. These results will help resolve outstanding questions concerning the
geometry, propagation, and flow patterns of magma during emplacement of sills
and dikes in mafic large igneous provinces. It will also provide a deeper
understanding of the relationships between mantle plumes, basaltic magmatism and
continental breakup.