* 0126746
* Thirteenth International Workshop on Operator Theory and Applications (IWOTA2002), August 6-9, 2002, Blacksburg, Virginia
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2003
* J. William Helton, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 04/30/2003
* USD 15,000.00

0126746&lt;br/&gt;Ball&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Workshop on
Operator Theory and Applications &lt;br/&gt;(IWOTA) has been held biannually
since 1981 and more frequently in &lt;br/&gt;recent years (starting in 1995) in
eight countries in North America, Europe &lt;br/&gt;and Asia. The IWOTA
conferences offer a rich program on a wide range &lt;br/&gt;of the latest
developments in operator theory and its applications. In a
&lt;br/&gt;combination of plenary lectures by eminent mathematicians and
parallel &lt;br/&gt;sessions of invited and contributed talks, the plan is for
this year's &lt;br/&gt;conference (to be held August 6-9, 2002 on the Virginia
Tech campus in &lt;br/&gt;Blacksburg, Virginia) to cover a wide range of topics,
including &lt;br/&gt;operator/system theory, operator/scattering theory,
operator &lt;br/&gt;theory/numerical analysis, operator theory/wavelets and
signal processing, &lt;br/&gt;operator theory/harmonic analysis as well as
topics in Krein space &lt;br/&gt;operator theory and core engineering. These
topics form a core of the &lt;br/&gt;basic science behind a variety of
applications, including control of &lt;br/&gt;industrial processes or high
performance aircraft, tomography and image &lt;br/&gt;reconstruction, pulse
propagation in optical fibers, seismology, data &lt;br/&gt;compression and
reconstruction, and identification of only approximately &lt;br/&gt;known
parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The original concept of IWOTA was as a
satellite conference for operator &lt;br/&gt;theorists to the broader based
international symposium on Mathematical &lt;br/&gt;Theory of Networks and
Systems (MTNS), to be held August 12-16, 2002 &lt;br/&gt;at the University of
Notre Dame. While this concept is still in place, the &lt;br/&gt;scope of IWOTA
has broadened considerably in recent years and IWOTA &lt;br/&gt;has now attained
an independent identity as a world-wide conference for &lt;br/&gt;recent
developments in core operator theory and its applications. IWOTA's
&lt;br/&gt;primary objective is to bring together major researchers in the area
of &lt;br/&gt;operator theory and related fields. These meetings provide
opportunities &lt;br/&gt;for all participants to present their own work in
contributed talks, to &lt;br/&gt;interact with other researchers from around the
globe, and to broaden their &lt;br/&gt;knowledge of the field by hearing the
invited lectures of eminent &lt;br/&gt;mathematicians. In addition IWOTA
emphasizes cross-disciplinary &lt;br/&gt;interaction among mathematicians,
electrical engineers and mathematical &lt;br/&gt;physicists, and encourages
participants to continue on to the MTNS &lt;br/&gt;conference for a further
broader interdisciplinary interaction. In addition, &lt;br/&gt;IWOTA encourages
and financially supports the participation of young &lt;br/&gt;researchers,
i.e., advanced graduate students and recent Ph.D. recipients, &lt;br/&gt;for
whom the opportunities offered by expert conferences are particularly
&lt;br/&gt;important&lt;br/&gt;