* 0126326
* Enhancing Experiential Learning and Research-based Instruction by Integrating Fluorescent and Phase Microscopy Across the Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Roy Ventullo, Wartburg College
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 05/31/2004
* USD 60,306.00

Biological Sciences (61) The goal of this project is to strengthen the ability
of students to use microscopic approaches to solve problems. The objectives are
to integrate fluorescent and phase-contrast microscopy into all levels of the
Wartburg College biology curriculum and to enhance student access to the
instrumentation and their ability to use microscopic techniques in student
research projects. Students are introduced to the use of fluorescent and phase-
contrast microscopy in the introductory Biology course, and gain expertise in
subsequent courses, Microbiology, Microbial Ecology, Cell Biology, and Student
Research. These courses provide other opportunities for the use of these
microscopes in inquiry-based labs and undergraduate research. Inquiry-based lab
exercises are being developed as adaptations from the contemporary research
literature. The students are also be trained in still-frame and video-capture
techniques so they can document, present, and publish their results. The impact
of the project on student learning is being assessed using cumulative digital
image portfolios and lab practicals. The results of the assessment and student-
generated projects will be disseminated through a Web site and presentations at
national meetings.

