* 0126557
* The Children's Research Initiative: Integrative Approaches - CRI: Center for Research on Culture, Development and Education
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,05/31/2003
* Catherine Tamis-LeMonda, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Marguerite Barratt
* 05/31/2003
* USD 140,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New York University: Center for Research on
Culture, Development and Education&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Joshua Aronson, Diane
Hughes, Catherine Tamis-LeMonda, Niobe Way &amp; &lt;br/&gt;Hiro
Yoshikawa&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite thousands of research studies, hundreds
of remedial programs, and decades of being considered a crisis for American
society, the chronic academic underachievement of numerous ethnic minority
groups continues to perplex educators, social scientists, and policy makers.
Three trends add weight to the crisis. First, within the next 50 years, people
identified currently as "minority" will comprise half of the U.S. population.
Second, particularly in large urban centers like New York, new waves of
immigrants are arriving, ensuring fundamental, but unknown changes to the
structure and dynamics of schools and other contexts. Third, the U.S. continues
to evolve into a "knowledge-driven" economy, making a solid education vital for
an increasingly large sector of the workforce. More than ever, a sizable
proportion of our nation's children are at risk of academic failure and economic
hardship. &lt;br/&gt;Faculty from multiple scientific disciplines at New York
University will use NSF funding to support planning activities over a 6- to
9-month period pertaining to research that will be pursued under the proposed
Center for Research on Culture, Development and Education. The central aim of
the Center will be to examine how homes, schools, peers, work, and the media
jointly contribute to the engagement, learning, and school performance of
children from diverse cultures. &lt;br/&gt;Three steps are needed to accomplish
this mission. First, we propose to describe the experiences of minority children
within each of the educationally relevant contexts. Many social scientists focus
on determining the predictors of children's academic outcomes without a deep
understanding of children's everyday experiences. Such descriptive work is
notably absent in research focused on ethnic minorities. We need systematic
knowledge regarding how contexts such as home, peers, school, parents' work, and
the media differ or are experienced differently by children from different
cultures, ethnicities or social classes. Second, we seek to understand how these
experiences shape children's engagement, learning and performance in school, and
whether and how such connections may vary by culture, ethnicity, and social
class. Third, our ultimate goal is to advance an understanding of how home,
peer, school, work, and the media work together in explaining children's
academic achievement. &lt;br/&gt;The second mission of the Center is
educational: to transmit its research findings, through training and
dissemination, to three communities: (1) a new generation of scholars of diverse
backgrounds who are engaged in research on culture and its role in child
learning, engagement, and performance; (2) the broader research community; and
(3) policy makers and practitioners in education. This will occur through an
intensive and rigorous training program and a variety of dissemination
strategies of both research findings and lessons for policy and educational
practice.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed Center is situated within a School of
Education, in the vibrant, incomparably diverse context of New York City, making
it an unparalleled locale for studying culture and schools, and an ideal place
to establish a think tank capable of attracting additional scholars and students
of the highest quality. Through the work of the Center, we aim to bring about a
deeper understanding of the interplay of culture, development and education, and
thereby enhance the nation's response to the academic underachievement of ethnic
minority children. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;