* 0126319
* Community Dynamics in a Polar Ecosystem: Benthic Recovery From A Large Scale Organic Enrichment in the Antarctic
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Stacy Kim, San Jose State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 04/30/2006
* USD 429,343.00

Kim&lt;br/&gt;0126319&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Antarctic marine ecosystems differ
from other polar, temperate and tropical systems at the level of individuals,
populations and communities. The environment is characterized by extreme
seasonality in light and food availability, along with cold stenothermal
conditions. Additionally, human impacts are more limited in Antarctica than in
highly populated or exploited areas. A unique research opportunity will occur in
2003 with the installation of a sewage treatment plant at McMurdo Station. This
will allow for the conduct of a large-scale experiment on community recovery
from organic enrichment and physical disturbance. This research will test
whether major hypotheses related to community structure and disturbance
recovery, which were formulated and demonstrated in more accessible marine
communities, applies to Antarctic ecosystems. This research will build on a ten-
year time-series that follows benthic community degradation resulting from
emplacement of a sewage outfall. A complicating factor in the local McMurdo
ecosystem is the input of fecal matter from the abundant populations of marine
mammals and large fishes. Sampling will span the implementation of sewage
treatment and the data will be incorporated in a meta-analysis of community
recovery from organic disturbance in a variety of habitats, to test the
generality of recovery patterns. Experimental manipulations will compare the
potentially complex roles of burial and patch size in recovery dynamics. The
knowledge gained from this research can be applied to other examples of high
organic loading in polar habitats. Significant anthropogenic inputs in high
latitudes include pulp mills and increases in human occupation and visitation as
well as natural sources including woody debris in river outputs and carcass-
falls from the productive surface waters above also present significant carbon
inputs to high latitude environments. This study will significantly further the
understanding of anthropogenic impacts in polar environments using an integrated
approach to evaluate the recovery of the infaunal and epifaunal assemblages
after a substantial carbon-loading perturbation sustained over ten years.