* 0126818
* Computing History Resource Adaptation (CHRAD)
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* JAN Lee, Hofstra University
* Standard Grant
* Mark James Burge
* 05/31/2006
* USD 74,995.00

Computer Science (31)

This project focuses on the "history approach" to teach an overview course in
computer science for non-majors. History is an ongoing theme throughout the
course through the adaptation of relevant historical materials. Where
appropriate, the project leaders are developing digital conversion of materials
to enhance the course delivery. The project team is working closely with the
Charles Babbage Institute, the Computer Museum History Center, the IEEE History
Center, and the Computing History Center at Virginia Tech. Each of these centers
has already identified, preserved, and in many cases catalogued a vast quantity
of the exemplary materials pertaining to computing history.

The project team is also creating a dedicated website solely for this activity.
Students will have direct access to digitized material emanating from this
project, to the collection of course-related historical materials, and to links
to other useful and related sites. The expectation is that there will be a
dramatic change in the course from one of sterile factual content to one
containing dynamic interludes involving people, places, and events. In this
manner, the computing course for non-majors will be much more interesting. It
will stimulate more students to consider computing as their major, will
contribute to students' life-long learning experiences, will encourage students
from diverse and minority communities to appreciate computing, and will increase
student retention. Students will also gain a better sense of the nature of
inquiry, the processes of innovation, the constraining and driving factors
involved, and the human dimension.