* 0126789
* Comprehensive and Coordinated Curriculum Development of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2002,11/30/2004
* Joseph Sachleben, Otterbein College
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 11/30/2004
* USD 66,850.00

Biological Sciences (61) This project is a collaborative effort of biology and
chemistry faculty to develop curricula in Molecular Biology and Biochemistry.
Objectives are to: 1) enhance the complementary nature of these two programs via
team teaching and the utilization of state-of-the-art equipment for DNA and
protein analysis, thereby effecting reform and refinement of courses throughout
the four years of the programs; 2) integrate problem solving investigative
approaches to learning in a developmental fashion throughout the four years, and
in so doing encourage student research; 3) bring curricula into the 21st century
of genomics and proteomics. To accomplish these goals the project is adapting
successful approaches of several NSF funded projects. The activities in this
proposal include development of new courses including an integrated Molecular
Biology and Biochemistry senior seminar, implementation of new inquiry based
laboratory experiences in a variety of courses across the curricula, team
teaching, enhanced coordination of the two programs, acquisition of state-of-
the-art equipment for teaching and research. A major focus is to promote
undergraduate research in these areas, encouraging students to participate in
interdisciplinary projects that involve faculty from chemistry and life
sciences. Workshops to disseminate the results of the project include one for a
general audience of high school teachers and college faculty, and one for a
specialized audience of science students and faculty. The expected outcomes
include complementary state-of-the-art curricula that encourages and enables
excellence in student research in Molecular Biology and Biochemistry and fosters
the development of students who will go on to graduate work and employment in
the burgeoning fields of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry.