* 0126430
* The Children's Research Initiative -- Integrative Approaches -- CRI: Planning For a Center for Integrative Development Science Focused on Development During Key Transitions
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,05/31/2002
* Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 05/31/2002
* USD 89,692.00

Abstract

Planning Grant for a Center for Integrative Developmental Science Focused on
Development During Key Transitions

J. Lawrence Aber & Jeanne Brooks-Gunn

The well-being of children and families remains a prominent issue on public
agendas across the political spectrum. But problems in this area - child
poverty, child abuse and neglect, violence, and unequal access to health care or
education, to name a few - have outlasted numerous policy initiatives aimed at
relieving them. The Institute for Child and Family Policy (ICFP) at Columbia
University marshals the interdisciplinary resources of a leading research
university to confront problems that have eluded the grasp of isolated
disciplines. The National Science Foundation's Children's Research Initiative
will allow ICFP to create a Working Group on Integrative Developmental Science.
The purpose of the Working Group is to bring together scientists from a broad
range of disciplines at Columbia (developmental psychology, educational
psychology, social psychology, psychiatry, epidemiology, economics, sociology,
and social work) in order to design and plan new and more integrative forms of
scientific inquiry into children's learning and development. To understand - and
develop solutions for - the intractable problems facing children and
adolescents, the focus of inquiry will be on "turning points in children's
development during key periods of transition." Independently, Columbia
scientists and affiliates are already studying children during four key
transitions over the first two decades of life: (1) Prenatal to Toddler years,
(2) Preschool to Middle Childhood, (2) Middle Childhood to Adolescence, and (4)
Adolescence to Young Adulthood. These transitions represent periods of dramatic
growth and qualitative change in children's biological, social-emotional, and
cognitive processes. They are also periods of important changes in the structure
and meaning of children's interpersonal relationships and social and learning
contexts.

During these key periods of transition, children's development is especially
open or receptive to influence, positive and negative. The Working Group of
scientists at Columbia proposes to design new studies of how certain experiences
or events function as critical "turning points" (moments of decisive influence)
in development. In order to pose and answer the most important scientific
questions, it is necessary to effectively integrate both theories and methods
across a range of disciplines. No single discipline or current cross-
disciplinary collaboration is sufficiently integrative to arrive at the most
important new scientific breakthroughs.

Over a nine-month planning period, the Working Group will: (1) hold the first
Columbia Conference on Integrative Developmental Science to broaden and deepen
the theoretical and analytic approaches scientists take to their studies; (2)
organize and support 2-3 smaller research planning subgroups to design new
multidisciplinary, integrative research on aspects of "turning points in
development;" and (3) prepare a proposal for the National Science Foundation to
create a Columbia University Center on Integrative Developmental Science that
will conduct the studies designed by the subgroup(s).