* 0126966
* Microcontroller/Mechatronics Education of Non-Electrical Engineering Students
* EHR,DUE
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2004
* Jed Lyons, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Roger Seals
* 12/31/2004
* USD 71,000.00

Engineering - Mechanical (56)&lt;br/&gt;The project is adapting educational
materials, concepts, and methodologies from successful
mechatronics/microcontroller courses developed at Georgia Institute of
Technology (GIT) and Ohio State University (OSU). The components of these
courses regarding manufacturing applications of mechatronics systems, and
controls and Actuators are being adapted to the specifics of South Carolina
industry. The adapted course components will be incorporated into the
engineering curriculum in the form of updated and enhanced laboratory
equipment/procedures, advanced programming and simulation software, and state-
of-the-art instruction delivery/training methods. Mechatronics/Microcontroller
teaching laboratory is being equipped with new 16-bit microcontroller hardware,
state-of-the-art microcontroller programming and simulation software, Digital
Signal Processor (DSP) development kit, mobile robots hardware, and PC-based
data acquisition and process control functioning units. All these result in
offer state-of-the-art educational and instructional environment to the USC
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Self-teaching instructional modules are being
developed around the programming and simulation software. These modules,
consistent with web-based delivery, are going to greatly enhance teaching and
education productivity in the area of Mechatronics/Microcontrollers. These
activities complement the current USC effort to introduce information technology
across the campus. The University of South Carolina has formed a campus-wide
task force on "informatics" under the leadership of the College of Library and
Information Science. The self-teaching modules to be developed through this
project support the campus-wide initiative and have the potential for being
extended to other campuses. The project targets a special audience consisting of
a large proportion of women (22%) and minorities (30%).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;