* 0126334
* Collaborative Research: Improved Cenozoic Plate Reconstructions of the Circum-Antarctic Region
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2005
* Joann Stock, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 03/31/2005
* USD 200,393.00

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
Office of Polar Programs, provides funds for a project to make use of ship-
repositioning transit cruises to gather geophysical information relating to
plate tectonics of the Southern Ocean and to support student training
activities. Well-constrained Cenozoic plate reconstructions of the circum-
Antarctic region are critical for examining a number of problems of global
geophysical importance. These problems include, e.g., relating the plate
kinematics to its geological consequences in various plate circuits (Pacific-
North America, Australia-Pacific); a dynamical understanding of what drives
plate tectonics (which requires well-constrained kinematic information in order
to distinguish between different geodynamic hypotheses); and an understanding of
the rheology of the plates themselves, including the amount of internal
deformation they can support, and the conditions leading to the formation of new
plate boundaries through breakup of existing plates. By obtaining better
constraints on the motion of the Antarctica plate with respect to these other
plates, and by better quantifying the internal deformation within Antarctica
(between East and West Antarctica), contributions will be made to solving these
other fundamental problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, existing data
will be analyzed to address several specific issues related to plate motions
involving the Antarctic plate. First, work will be done on four-plate solutions
of Australia-Pacific-West Antarctica-East Antarctica motion, in order to most
tightly constrain the rotation parameters for separation between East and West
Antarctica for the time period from about 45 to 28 Ma (Adare Basin spreading
system). This will be done by imposing closure on the four-plate circuit and
using relevant marine geophysical data from all four of the boundaries. The
uncertainties in the resulting rotation parameters will be determined based on
the uncertainties in the data points. These uncertainties can then be propagated
in the plate circuit for use in addressing the various global geodynamic
problems mentioned above. Second, rotation parameters for Pacific-West
Antarctica during Tertiary time will be determined using recently acquired well-
navigated Palmer transit data and any additional data that can be acquired
during the course of this project. These parameters and their uncertainties will
be used in assessments of plate rigidity and included in the plate circuit
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the framework of this project, new collection
of marine geophysical data will be accomplished on a very flexible schedule.
This will be done by collecting underway gravity, magnetics, and swath
bathymetric data on Palmer transit cruises of geological importance. This has
been successfully done on eight previous Palmer cruises since 1997, the most
recent four of which were funded under a collaborative OPP grant to CalTech and
Scripps which is now expiring. On one of the suitable transits, a formal class
in marine geophysics will be conducted that will afford an opportunity to 12 or
more graduate and undergraduate students, from CalTech and Scripps as well as
other institutions. In this way, educational activities will be integrated with
the usual scientific data collection objectives of the research
project.&lt;br/&gt;