* 0126051
* Strain Partitioning and Active Faulting During Oblique Convergence, Northern Andes, Ecuador
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Anne Meltzer, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2004
* USD 38,075.00

The Andes are the type example of ocean-continent collision. The Nazca plate
subducts beneath the South American continent, giving rise to the high mountains
along the coast and the great plateaus of the Central Andes. In Ecuador, the
imposing Andean arc divides into two volcanic chains that define the eastern and
western margins of the Inter Andean Valley, a long, north south oriented
topographic low at high elevation. Quito, Ecuador's capital city, sits within
the Interandean valley between the two chains. Its 1.5 million citizens live
amidst some of the Earth's more active geologic processes and hazards, including
active, complex faulting, explosive volcanism, and rapid and extreme erosion and
sedimentation driven by the high elevations in the
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Interandean Valley of Ecuador is an excellent
place to study strain partitioning and fault dynamics during oblique
convergence. The geology is well mapped and the region is extremely active
tectonically making it easy to observe and quantify deformation. A major fault
system, the Delores-Guayaquil Megashear, a transpressive dextral strike-slip
system, trends onshore at Guayaquil and passes into the Inter Andean Valley. The
Delores-Guayaquil Megashear is similar in scale and seismic activity to San
Andreas Fault system in California. Like the San Andreas, the Delores-Guayaquil
Megashear is a composite fault system, composed of a number of individual fault
strands. While portions of the fault system have been identified using offset
geomorphic features, sag ponds, and fault scarps, the fault system has not been
systematically mapped at the surface. In many places the location of the fault
is masked by active erosional and depositional processes. Nowhere has the fault
or associated deformation been imaged in the subsurface. There is no coherent
framework for integrating the numerous faults and the development of fault-
controlled structures into a kinematic model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We are
conducting a pilot project to acquire high-resolution seismic reflection
profiles in three strategic locations in the Inter Andean Valley to determine
subsurface fault/fold geometry and deformation history within the Delores-
Guayaquil Megashear. The results of this study will improve our understanding of
strain partitioning in transpressional settings and are immediately relevant to
assessing the seismic hazards for Quito, Ecuador. This project is a
collaborative effort between Lehigh University and the Instituto Geofisico at
the National Secular Polytechnic National, Quito, Ecuador.