* 0126767
* New Course Development - Introduction to Bioinformatics
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Barbara Chapman, Sonoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 04/30/2005
* USD 99,948.00

Biological Sciences (61) There is a well-documented national need for
development of curricula in bioinformatics, especially at the upper-division
undergraduate level. This project is establishing a foundation course in
bioinformatics for third-year undergraduates, articulated with the biological
science major, and available as an elective course for chemistry, computer
science, and physics majors interested in bioinformatics. Materials available
through the California State University Program in Education and Research in
Biotechnology (CSUPERB) Bioinformatics Consortium and the National Center for
Biotechnology Information are being adapted for use in the course. The project
also addresses the need to identify students having inadequate preparation for
bioinformatics instruction and to provide just-in-time review materials. The
objectives are: 1) to assemble, implement and field test a computer-based module
for diagnostic pretesting and remediation for enrolling students, 2) to develop
a set of problem-based instructional units to be used in a discussion/laboratory
format with laptop computers and web browsers 3) to implement and evaluate an
introductory course in bioinformatics using these materials, and 4) to share the
results with faculty at other undergraduate institutions. The objectives are
being accomplished using a systems approach to design, create and test materials
appropriate for undergraduate bioinformatics. These materials are used with
problem-based learning, enabling students to apply the strategies and tools of
bioinformatics to topical problems drawn from current academic and commercial
research. Basic computation, chemistry, biology, analytical and problem-solving
skills are emphasized. The project involves several campuses of the California
State University (CSU) system with the support from the CSU Program in Education
and Research in Biotechnolgy (CSUPERB)Bioinformatics Consortium, which is
committed to integration of technology and faculty development in the area of
bioinformatics education.