* 0126841
* Calvin-Rehoboth Robotic Twin Telescopes
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Deborah Haarsma, Calvin University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 07/31/2005
* USD 129,991.00

Astronomy (11)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is adapting and implementing a
model of complementary telescopes--one local and one remote--pioneered at the
University of Iowa. The investigators are installing a pair of 16-inch
telescopes, one at Calvin College in Grand Rapids, Michigan, where observing is
sometimes hampered by poor weather and light pollution, and one at the Rehoboth
Christian School near Gallup, New Mexico, a remote location with clearer and
darker skies. The choice of the remote site builds on a century-old relationship
between the college and the high school, which serves primarily Navajo and Zuni
students. A teacher at the school is assisting with the installation and
maintenance of the telescope there and is integrating it into the school's
physical science curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students and faculty at Calvin
College use their local telescope in a hands-on and a training mode, and use the
nearly identical, robotic telescope at Rehoboth Christian School to make
observations remotely. Both telescopes provide individual data for many
students, including research-quality data for upper-level
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This arrangement provides a flexible but
reliable system, in which the local telescope at the college can be switched
between eyepiece, camera, and spectroscopic modes, and in which skills gained by
students using the local telescope immediately transfer to data acquisition on
the remote telescope in New Mexico. Efficient queue operation of the remote
telescope supplies large quantities of high-quality data, enough for individual
students to pursue a wide range of physically interesting experiments with their
own data sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outcomes of the project include sequential
installation and reliable operation of the local, and then the remote,
telescope; training in the new equipment and procedures for Calvin College
faculty who teach astronomy courses, as well as their student assistants;
training in the new equipment and assistance in curriculum development for the
participating teacher at Rehoboth Christian School; integration of new observing
capabilities into the college's lab curriculum and existing and newly developed
courses; enhanced recruitment of Native American students (at Rehoboth Christian
School) into careers in science; conference presentations that disseminate the
college's model for astronomy labs; and the development of relationships with
the college's "feeder" high schools (in addition to Rehoboth Christian School),
so that they can incorporate use of the new telescope in their science
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;