* 0126245
* Improving a Microscopy Course: Integrating Electron Microscopy with Scanning Probe Microscopy
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Da-Ming Zhu, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 07/31/2004
* USD 72,500.00

Physics (13) With its capability of visualization and manipulation at atomic and
molecular&lt;br/&gt;levels, scanning probe microscopy (SPM) has become one of
the most important&lt;br/&gt;advancements in science and technology in the past
decade. This project is adapting and integrating&lt;br/&gt;SPM into a two-
semester Electron Microscopy (EM) course that has been taught at
the&lt;br/&gt;University of Missouri-Kansas City (UMKC). The addition of SPM
instrumentation to&lt;br/&gt;the course gives students a broader view and
experience on the cutting edge&lt;br/&gt;microscopy technologies. The
integration also allows a more efficient approach in&lt;br/&gt;teaching the
subject, because the course covers a wider range of techniques used
in&lt;br/&gt;microscopy and emphasizes the application of these techniques in
various fields. The&lt;br/&gt;improvement of the course is being achieved by
introducing, in addition to the existing&lt;br/&gt;hands-on experiments on EM,
two verification-type experiments using SPM to visualize&lt;br/&gt;atomic
structures on well-defined crystalline surfaces in the first semester. This
is&lt;br/&gt;followed, in the second semester, by three inquiry-based
experiments that involve both&lt;br/&gt;SPM and EM. The improved course enhances
the interdisciplinary education&lt;br/&gt;in science, mathematics, engineering
and technology at UMKC.