* 0126331
* High Temperature and Pressure Equation of State Models for Natural Fluids in the System NaCl-KCl-CaCl2-H2O-CO2-CH4
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2005
* Nancy Moller, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 01/31/2005
* USD 300,000.00

Weare and Moller&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0126331&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
program will contribute the development of an equation of state (EOS), which can
be used to accurately predict thermodynamic properties (e.g., liquid-vapor phase
coexistence, enthalpy and free energy) in the NaCl-KCl-CaCl2-H2O-CO2-CH4 (SWG)
system over the wide PTX ranges associated with Earth processes. Many important
geochemical processes, such as mineral deposition, metamorphism and chemical
fractionation via phase separation, are controlled by the thermodymanic behavior
of aqueous formation fluids with compositions approximately in this system.
Unfortunately, most experimental data available for development of an EOS for
this system are confined to much smaller PTX ranges than those encountered in
Nature. To overcome these important limitations in data availability, our
research approach will use recent advances in the theory of dense fluids and
molecular simulation methods to: (1) support the construction of an EOS that not
only correctly summarizes data but also reliably extrapolates to desired regions
of PTX space (e.g., deep crustal and magma conditions); and (2) supplement the
experimental data by direct simulation at the molecular level.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed EOS will be based on thermodynamic
perturbation theory. In this theoretical method the free energy is written as a
sum of contributions from an ideal reference system and from a perturbation
correction. In the proposed research program we will concentrate on developing
reference systems that optimally represent the behavior of the subsystem under
study. Our objective is to lower the complexity and magnitude of the
perturbation corrections needed to represent the measured behavior in order to
maximize the extrapolation properties of the EOS. Molecular dynamics simulations
of model systems will provide useful tools for testing reference system
improvements and mixing rules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Special functional behavior
(scaling behavior) is required to correctly describe thermodynamic properties in
the critical region. We will apply scaling methods to improve critical region
predictions and examine how scaling can be generalized to calculate other
thermodynamic properties, such as heat content and free energy. In addition, we
will develop crossover EOS, which provide accurate predictions both in and away
from the critical region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To reproduce thermodynamic
properties via simulation at the molecular level, we will continue to develop
simulation methods [e.g., first principles ab-initio (AIMD) and classical
molecular dynamics (MD), Gibbs Ensemble Monte Carlo (GEMC)]. A main objective of
the proposed research is to significantly improve the accuracy of ionic solution
simulations by developing better intermolecular effective potential
representations of ions in solution. We will test new methods to improve the
performance of GEMC methods and prediction in the critical region. AIMD methods
will be applied to guide intermolecular potential development and to study
important effects on these interactions of system properties such as local
polarization. These methods will be used to establish the forces for systems
with little data, such as ion-neutral interactions.&lt;br/&gt;