* 0126422
* Integration of Research into Behavioral Neuroscience Instruction
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Stephen Siviy, Gettysburg College
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 05/31/2005
* USD 29,886.00

Psychology - Biological (71)&lt;br/&gt;This project is enhancing learning
experiences in behavioral neuroscience at the undergraduate level by providing
opportunities for students to conduct sophisticated empirical research projects
from the introductory level through senior-level independent research. This
project is adapting an approach successfully developed in an NSF-funded project
and used by Dr. Michael Kerchner of Washington College. Dr. Kerchner teaches
students how to use an acoustic startle system in their projects, and makes
research experiences more accessible at several levels of instruction. The goal
of the current project is to provide the means by which students collect
behavioral data efficiently and objectively. Students are able to collect more
data in less time and focus more on the process of doing hypothesis-driven
systematic research. By actively engaging in the scientific enterprise, students
better understand concepts being covered in class and are better prepared for
conducting advanced research in behavioral neuroscience. Two behavioral assays
that are more commonly used in dedicated research environments are being adapted
for use in several undergraduate courses in behavioral neuroscience. One of
these systems allows for the video-tracking of individual animal movements as
well as social interactions among pairs of rats (BM Spruijt, T Hol, &amp; J
Rousseau, "Approach, avoidance, and contact behavior of individually recognized
animals automatically quantified with an imaging technique," Physiology and
Behavior, Vol. 51: 747-752, 1992). The other assay assesses pre-pulse inhibition
of the acoustic startle response. These systems allow students in courses with
and without a dedicated laboratory component to actively engage in the research
process, working in small groups. Examples of research topics are age-related
differences in social interactions and responsiveness to novelty (see LP Spear,
"The adolescent brain and age-related behavioral manifestations," Neuroscience
and Biobehavioral Reviews, Vol. 24: 417-463, 2000); the role of brain monoamine
systems in sensorimotor gating (see C Johansson, DM Jackson, J Zhang, &amp; L
Svensson, "Prepulse inhibition of acoustic startle, a measure of sensorimotor
gating: Effects of antipsychotics and other agents in rats," Pharmacology
Biochemistry and Behavior, Vol. 52: 649-654, 1995); and assessing animal models
of schizophrenia (MA Geyer, K Krebs-Thomson, DL Braff, &amp; NR Swerdlow,
"Pharmacological studies of prepulse inhibition models of sensorimotor gating
deficits in schizophrenia: a decade in review," Psychopharmacology, Vol. 156:
117-154, 2001). Each of the pieces of equipment used to support this project are
linked to the campus network and students take advantage of a web-based
classroom support environment to load their data directly into a course web-
site, where it is shared by the entire class. Creation of individual web-sites
and on-line discussion about the data also occurs in this support environment.
As students progress through the curriculum, they become increasingly familiar
with the behavioral assays supported by this grant and the experiments that they
work on become more open-ended and are more likely to yield novel findings.
Consequently, students are more likely to experience the excitement associated
with scientific discovery. The project is leading to changes in other courses in
the curriculum and provides a model for other institutions that plan to
integrate research experiences into undergraduate training in behavioral
neuroscience. &lt;br/&gt;