* 0126440
* Language and Literacy:  Developmental, Cultural, and Brain Mechanisms
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2001,06/30/2003
* Henry Wellman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Marguerite Barratt
* 06/30/2003
* USD 83,303.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Language and Literacy: Developmental, Cultural,
and Brain Mechanisms&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Henry Wellman, Frederick Morrison, and
Twila Tardif&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Being able to talk, to read and to profit from
instruction are core cognitive competencies of older children and adults. Much
of our lives are spent talking with, reading about, learning from and teaching
others; in short, in communicating and learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Core
abilities to communicate and to learn develop in the preschool years and then
set the stage for the transition to school and more focused learning. For
example, during the preschool years children acquire communicative competence,
vocabulary, knowledge about people and about the world, initial abilities to
reason logically, and very early literacy skills. How do they do so? How can we
best help them do so? How do such early skills make possible later school-based
learning? To answer these questions requires consideration of a variety of
processes-development and learning, informal and formal instruction, language
and literacy. It requires consideration of several levels of analysis-brain
mechanisms, childhood experiences, formal and informal lessons provided by
others, cultural and instructional practices. Changes in language and literacy
in the preschool years thus provide a remarkable window of opportunity for
researching the complex developmental, cultural-institutional, and
neurocognitive mechanisms responsible for cognitive growth. This Children's
Research Initiative planning grant will design research needed to exploit this
window of opportunity. The eventual aim of this project is the establishment of
an integrative research center to undertake the needed
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Initially, the investigators will focus on
combining three different research approaches to address these complex
questions. One concerns cross-cultural comparisons, in this case comparisons
between Chinese and English cultures and practices (specifically, US, Hong Kong,
and mainland Chinese). Chinese and English contrast as languages in intriguing
ways--not the least of which is differences in writing and reading systems.
Moreover, Hong Kong, China and the US offer different types of socialization
experiences with regards to language, literacy, and
schooling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A second approach disentangles the influences of
age (maturation) and experience (especially school experiences) by using school
cutoff methods. In school cutoff studies, children who just made versus just
missed the cutoff for school entry (and thus who are of identical age but
different experiences) will be compared on growth of cognitive, language, and
literacy skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A third approach is to apply cognitive
neuroscience methods of brain imaging to developing preschool children. Such
research can yield important insights about both the maturation of brain
structures and the role of experience in developing language and literacy
skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combinations of these research approaches and
results promise to illuminate the development of essential human abilities, in
particular those involved in being able to talk, to read, and to
learn.&lt;br/&gt;