* 0126578
* Development of an Undergraduate Laboratory-Based Biotechnology Program for the Next-Stage Post-Genomic Era
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2004
* Sheryl Fuller-Espie, Cabrini University
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 12/31/2004
* USD 84,176.00

Interdisciplinary (99)&lt;br/&gt;This project is developing a multidisciplinary
B.S. Program in Biotechnology that places a heavy emphasis on both methodology
and ethical, socio-political and economic outcomes to provide students with the
necessary skills required for (1) entry-level laboratory positions in the
pharmaceutical industries and academia, and (2) placement into research-based
graduate programs. We are adapting materials from institutions offering a B.S.
in Biotechnology including: Cedar Crest College, Clarion University of
Pennsylvania, Eastern Washington University, Elizabethtown College, Ferris State
University, Moorhead State University, University of Southern Maine, University
of Wisconsin and Worcester State College. A newly-approved B.S. in Biotechnology
is providing cutting-edge technology training for biotechnology students within
a framework of a core curriculum, community service, internships in
biotechnology laboratories, and small faculty/student ratios. Cabrini College is
constructing a state-of-the-art building to house a new Center for Science,
Education and Technology. The Biotechnology Program is to be housed in the new
Center.&lt;br/&gt;In its first stage, this program is being offered to
traditional undergraduate students, and concentrates on outreach, recruitment
and admissions . As it matures, additional students will be drawn from non-
traditional students and transfer students. Area high school teachers
participating in a Cabrini-taught summer course," DNA and the New Millennium",
will be part of the feeder school process for locating new students for the
program.