* 0126272
* U.S.-Argentina Program:  Harmonic Analysis and Numerical Analysis Problems in MRI and PDE
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Ricardo Nochetto, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 12/31/2006
* USD 24,000.00

0126272&lt;br/&gt;Nochetto&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This US-Argentina award will
fund a collaborative project between Dr. Ricardo H. Nochetto, University of
Maryland, College Park (UMCP), in collaboration with Drs. Hugo A. Aimar and
Eleonar O. Harboure, Instituto de Matematica Aplicada del Litoral (IMAL),
Universidad Nacional del Litoral in Santa Fe, Argentina, and Dr. Carlos Cabrelli
of FCEyN, Universidad de Buenos Aires in Argentina. Their research is a mix of
classical and functional analysis as applied to the practical, numerical
solution of partial differential equations (PDE). The problem is one of
approximating solutions by means of mathematical objects that can be computed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will build upon the strengths and
complementary interests of each group, to collaborate on the topics of harmonic
and numerical analysis. UMCP has expertise on adaptivity for linear and
nonlinear PDE as well as basic wavelet theory and applications. The IMAL has
expertise on wavelet applications to PDE and Besov spaces. They will facilitate
an ongoing collaboration by bringing both sides together for six visits over two
years. In addition, they will include advanced graduate students and postdocs.
This pairing will promote the cross-fertilization of ideas and techniques
between the two research areas, institutions and countries.&lt;br/&gt;