* 0126958
* Revision of Undergraduate Chemistry Laboratory Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2006
* Henry Brenner, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Pratibha Varma-Nelson
* 04/30/2006
* USD 147,096.00

Chemistry (12)

The laboratory curriculum for chemistry majors is being restructured with a
focus on inquiry-based experiments in the areas of modern chemical research.
Three major educational goals are being addressed: (1) stimulating student
interest in chemistry through projects in contemporary chemical issues; (2)
providing students with the opportunity to apply modern instrumentation in
experimental investigations; and (3) fostering collaborative interaction among
students across different courses in the laboratory sequence.

A sequence of three laboratory courses is being implemented to fill the niche in
the undergraduate curriculum normally occupied by second semester organic,
advanced inorganic, and physical chemistry laboratories. These courses are
emphasizing modern themes from contemporary chemistry research and development
and include topics in nanotechnology, combinatorial chemistry, chiral
technology, and biophysical chemistry. Seven topic modules were developed that
emphasize these themes and seventeen experiments from the research and
educational literature are now being adapted and implemented across the three
courses. Thus, the courses are "integrated" thematically if not experimentally,
and this is enhancing the interest and motivation of students as they proceed
from one course to another in the sequence. Modern, high-quality instrumentation
and equipment is available for use by undergraduates in these courses. Students
in a prerequisite course are collaborating with students enrolled in advanced
courses of the sequence. For example, students in a module focussed primarily on
synthetic chemistry are providing samples to students in advanced modules for
product characterization or to perform experiments of a more physical nature
requiring a more extensive theoretical background. Such cross-course
collaborations emulate interactions between investigators working in different
sub-disciplines of chemistry.