* 0126814
* The Integration of DNA Microarray Technology in the Undergraduate Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2005
* Michael Bruist, University of the Sciences in Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 01/31/2005
* USD 51,000.00

Biological Sciences (61)&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates DNA microarray
technology and the application of bioinformatic data analysis as a core
technology in the undergraduate Biology, Biochemistry and Bioinformatics
curricula at USP. Microarray technology is an important biotechnology tool for
the study of gene expression and in molecular diagnostics and has launched a
paradigm shift in the way pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries approach
drug discovery and development. An entire industry of microarray instrument,
reagent and bioinformatic companies have developed to meet the current and
future needs of the biological science community. Recently, instrumentation has
been developed for making microarrays ("gridders") and microarray readers
("scanners") that are marketed and priced for the small laboratory environment.
Students who graduate with a Life Science degree in the 21st century need to
know the scientific principles and practical technological skills of microarray
technology. Our cross-disciplinary curriculum program adapts microarray
technology and develops microarray specific exercises in three courses,
Molecular Biology (BI-290), Genetics (BS-466), Bioinformatics (BI-450) and
supports undergraduate research in our Directed Research program (BS-499 and
CH-450). This program is part of the educational foundation for our new Bachelor
of Science degree in Bioinformatics and gives students in the Biology and
Biochemistry programs the opportunity to experience microarray technology in
their 2nd , 3rd or 4th years of study. Students carry out gene expression and
DNA diagnostic experiments, and work with the bioinformatic software that is
used to organize and mine microarray data. Successful implementation of this
proposal is leading to the expansion of DNA microarray exercises to other
courses and programs (eg. Microbiology). This project is providing a curricular
template that leads to protocols and data sets for other undergraduate
institutions.