* 0126265
* ROLE Proposal: Understanding in Science:  Eyetracking  Studies
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Jennifer Wiley, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 12/31/2005
* USD 849,586.00

&lt;br/&gt;Habits of mind that support the analysis, evaluation, synthesis, and
integration of information are increasingly important in the information age.
This project focuses on how, when, and why such habits of mind might be acquired
and developed. Prior research has shown that inquiry-based learning environments
can support deeper understanding of science content, but there is little
systematic work thus far on the process by which students achieve deep
understanding in these contexts. Even less is known about how to support the
development of a critical stance. A critical stance supports the active
evaluation of information and the detection of inconsistencies that in turn help
direct deeper processing of information through explanatory reasoning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores the role of learning environment and
task in supporting a critical stance toward scientific information. We go beyond
current efforts by employing a variety of processing measures that tap on-line
representation and understanding, including verbal reports (gathered by having
students think out loud as they read and write) and eye movement patterns
(monitoring the fixations of the eye on different parts of texts as students
read). In combination, these measures along with a number of comprehension
measures will provide a particularly rich set of data as we pursue two lines of
research. Our goal in the first line of research is to examine when people
develop a critical stance toward scientific subject matter, and the specific
behaviors that promote better understanding. In the second set of studies, we
are interested in whether the adoption of a critical stance toward scientific
subject matter can be supported through a computerized collaborative
tutor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These studies represent an important first step in
identifying the cognitive processes that are enabling understanding as students
read scientific web pages, and the contexts and tasks that will allow novice
readers to become critical consumers of scientific communications in both formal
and informal learning contexts.&lt;br/&gt;