* 0126544
* Center for Culture, Health and Human Development
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,05/31/2003
* Sara Harkness, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 05/31/2003
* USD 88,294.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for the Study of Culture, Health and
Children's Development:&lt;br/&gt;Proposal for a Planning
Grant&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sara Harkness and Charles Super&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
The majority of issues affecting children's health, development and well-being
today demand a more interdisciplinary approach than has been characteristic of
developmental research in the past. Rapidly increasing awareness of cultural
variability in the environments of children's development has led to a call for
more contextually oriented research paradigms; but the continuing pressures of
disciplinary constituencies make it difficult to build collaborative work across
their boundaries. The present project is to support planning and development for
a Center for the Study of Culture, Health and Children's Development at the
University of Connecticut, Storrs. The proposed Center will build on existing
interdisciplinary collaborative relationships among researchers, educators,
practitioners and students, with the goal of increasing understanding of
children's health and development in cultural context. We expect that the work
of this Center will make significant contributions to scientific knowledge and
to the improvement of the lives of children and their families in a variety of
circumstances.&lt;br/&gt; Although the principal investigators have extensive
research experience in the area of culture, health and human development, a
planning grant is needed to support the development of a larger, coordinated
program of research projects on the cultural mediation of children's healthy
development. Specifically, we are requesting funding for three related
activities: &lt;br/&gt; 1) A major planning conference, to be held in October
2001 at the University of Connecticut, which will bring together the 25 faculty
members associated with this proposal, plus selected graduate students. The
purpose of the conference will be to explore common areas of interest and
expertise in the intersections of culture, health and children's development,
and to define focal topics or issues for the development of new research. One
outcome of this conference will, consequently, be the formation of several (we
anticipate four) working groups who will continue to collaborate together in
preparing specific research proposals that will involve coordination and funding
through the proposed Center.&lt;br/&gt; 2) Four smaller working conferences, to
be held during the winter of 2001, focused on each of the focal research topics
defined at the major fall conference. Based on previous work and current
interests of participating faculty, we anticipate that these topics will include
the cultural regulation of sleep and arousal in infancy, goodness of fit between
young children's temperaments and their culturally constituted environments of
care, attentional and stress-related disorders of middle childhood across
several ethnic and cultural groups, and cultural/social factors in school
success (or lack thereof) for children as they approach the transition to
adolescence. Although research in each of these areas will require special
expertise (e.g. measurement of biological markers of stress and reactivity for
research on infant sleep and arousal), the projects will be linked through the
use of a common theoretical framework for integrating diverse developmental,
biological and cultural data (e.g. the "developmental niche" of Super and
Harkness or the "developmental microniche"of Worthman). Efforts will be made,
thus, to ensure that the structure of inquiry and the methods of data collection
and analysis for each project are as consistent as possible, creating a synergy
among them.&lt;br/&gt; 3) Because the proposed Center will be a context for
training as well as research, we will bring in speakers for a faculty/student
research seminar, to be held bi-weekly throughout the spring semester 2002. This
seminar, modeled on the Culture, Health and Human Development seminar that has
been held for the past three years, will provide an ongoing context for
communication and mutual education among the diverse faculty and students
affiliated with the Center. We anticipate that at least some of the speakers in
this seminar will also contribute to the development of thinking related to the
selected focal research topics.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;