* 0126625
* Digital Imaging Array Detector Experiments in Undergraduate Physics
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* James McCarthy, Loyola Marymount University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 07/31/2004
* USD 58,693.00

Physics (13)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is improving an upper-division
advanced physics lab course through the adaptation and implementation of a
cohesive set of experiments built upon digital imaging array detectors. These
experiments were originally designed as part of a lab course in optical
astronomy instrumentation at Caltech, which was funded by NSF's Instrumentation
and Laboratory Improvement (ILI) program (Award No.
9250725).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The six experiments being adapted focus on
geometric optics and aberrations, CCD electronics, CCD characteristics,
fundamentals of spectroscopy, applications of spectroscopy, and imaging using an
IR array camera. These experiments give students hands-on experience with IR and
CCD array cameras and detectors, optics, and spectrographs as tools for making
experimental measurements. By analyzing the collected digital data, students
gain competence in the areas of analog-to-digital conversion, computer data
acquisition, statistics, and modern computer image-processing
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new equipment is also being used in a
chemistry course on instrumental analysis; in physical chemistry lab experiments
pertaining to spectroscopy; and in introductory physics and astronomy courses to
demonstrate concepts such as visible light, infrared radiation, and
temperature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Loyola Marymount University serves a diverse
student population. Typically, about one third of the students enrolled in the
advanced physics lab course are members of underrepresented groups, and 65% of
the students in introductory astronomy are female. As the investigators
implement the new equipment in these courses, they are not only improving the
quality of the educational experience for all students but also attempting to
excite women and ethnic minorities about pursuing careers in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of assessing the effectiveness of the
improved advanced physics lab course, at the end of the course, students are
giving demonstrations based on the experiments, and explaining the physics
involved, to high school physics classes. The feedback from the high school
teachers and students provides a gauge of how well the LMU students have grasped
the advanced lab material.&lt;br/&gt;