* 0126443
* Technology Enhancement of Microscope Capabilities with a Digital Imaging System for Cell and Molecular Biology Undergraduate Curriculum and Research
* EHR,DUE
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2004
* Colette Witkowski, Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 12/31/2004
* USD 50,538.00

Biological Sciences (61)&lt;br/&gt;This project outlines the needs, equipment
and implementation plans to integrate digital imaging technology into the Cell
and Molecular Biology (CMB) curriculum at SMSU. This technology is currently
used in biomedical and biotechnology fields. Adapting this technology to
teaching laboratories is expected to enhance student learning and job
opportunities available to SMSU students. This instrumentation is to be
retrofitted on an existing shared microscope, an Olympus BX60, used for
undergraduate courses and research. The technology enhancement of this
microscope 1) provides for collection and analysis of data in laboratory courses
and student research to allow use of learned computer skills to develop
knowledge in the scientific process of data analysis; and 2) provides for
faculty opportunities to become current with skills in digital imaging
technology to allow for integration into the undergraduate laboratory curriculum
and research projects. This experience benefits all CMB majors, those interested
in basic science and in allied medical careers, by providing the opportunity to
obtain the skills and knowledge base in digital imaging techniques required to
be competitive for jobs and positions within the growing biomedical field. This
request for instrumentation updates and enhances the capabilities of existing
equipment in use within the program, and enhances the career opportunities for
the mostly rural and female students in the CMB program at SMSU.