* 0126004
* Architecture and Evolution of an Accretionary Orogen
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Scott Johnson, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 08/31/2005
* USD 130,083.00

Much of Earth's continental crust comprises Precambrian through Cenozoic
orogens, where preexisting rocks have been variably modified by metamorphism and
deformation. Owing to the association between collisional tectonic events and
mountain building, this long record of orogenesis provides the most accessible
means of reconstructing paleotectonic settings and events that have shaped our
planet. Although the Appalachian mountains are widely used to illustrate Earth's
tectonic evolution and associated orogenesis, collisional processes and events
that drove the Ordovician Taconian orogeny in the Quebec Maine segment of the
northern Appalachians remain enigmatic. Deformational features in this region
cannot be satisfactorily related to a specific convergent setting or collisional
event(s) because the nature of the eastern (present coordinates) Laurentian
margin during the early Paleozoic is poorly understood. Interpretations are
divided as to whether the orogeny was caused by ophiolite emplacement, island-
arc collision, or microcontinent collision. Because the Taconian orogeny
initiated the Appalachian mountain-building cycle, understanding its
architecture and evolution is essential for understanding the Appalachians as a
whole.

The PI proposes to investigate structural, metamorphic, and temporal
relationships among the rock units that make up the Chain Lakes massif and Boil
Mountain ophiolite in order to test competing models and hypotheses for the
Taconian orogeny in the northern Appalachians. Their multidisciplinary approach
incorporates mapping, structural, microstructural, metamorphic, and
geochronological studies. Integrating field and laboratory studies, the PI will
establish: (a) the relative and absolute timing of metamorphic and deformational
events within the Chain Lakes massif, (b) the crystallization age of the mafic
portion of the Boil Mountain ophiolite, (c) the age and kinematics of ophiolite
emplacement, (d) whether mafic volcanic rocks near the ophiolite represent a
genetic part of the ophiolite, and (e) the age of possibly rift-related mafic
dikes in the Chain Lakes massif. The geochronology portion of the project will
include in-situ U-Pb analyses of monazite to provide high temporal resolution
for metamorphic events, small-number multigrain U-Pb analyses of zircon or
baddeleyite from gabbro to determine the crystallization age of the ophiolite,
U-Pb analyses of zircon to establish the age of the dikes, and laser step-
heating 40 Ar- 39 Ar analysis of muscovite to determine the minimum ophiolite
emplacement age. The PI will compare his results with existing interpretations
of the Thetford Mines ophiolite and overlying units in southern Quebec, the
Maquereau Dome in the Gaspe Peninsula, and the Dashwoods Subzone in Newfoundland
in order to evaluate temporal and spatial relationships among these potentially
correlative units. Because the extents and boundaries of terranes are
fundamental components of the tectonic models, testing the terrane relationships
will test the models. The work will clarify the nature of the Taconian orogeny
in the northern Appalachians, and will bear on conceptual models describing
Iapetan paleogeographic reconstruction and collisional accretionary processes.