* 0126205
* Collaborative Research: Geodetic and Geologic Study of the Kinematics of Late Cenozoic Displacement Transfer, Central Walker Lane, Western Great Basin
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2005
* John Oldow, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 12/31/2005
* USD 285,485.00

Late Cenozoic deformation is broadly distributed across the North American plate
margin of the conterminous western United States and stretches from the San
Andreas fault system eastward across the Mojave Desert and into the Basin and
Range. The eastern California shear zone and Walker Lane of the western Great
Basin form an active belt of structures accommodating about 25% of the relative
motion between North America and the Pacific plate. From the Mojave Desert, the
displacement is carried north, east of the southern Sierra Nevada, in a narrow
zone of deformation bound on the west and east by the Owens Valley and Furnace
Creek fault systems. North from the latitude of the central Sierra Nevada, the
zone of deformation broadens to include the Walker Lane and
central&lt;br/&gt;Nevada seismic belt in the northwestern Great Basin. The
Sierra Nevada behaves as a coherent tectonic block with a northwest-directed
motion of 10-14 mm/yr and forms the western boundary of the zone of distributed
deformation in the Great Basin. A complex pattern of active structures underlies
west-central Nevada where displacement is transferred from the eastern
California shear zone to the Walker Lane and the central Nevada seismic belt.
Integrated geologic, seismological, and GPS geodetic results indicate that the
central Walker Lane serves as an displacement transfer system linking stepped
northwest-trending transcurrent faults. Within the central Walker Lane
displacement partitioning is active and may be accommodated by differential
motion of tectonic blocks. A GPS velocity field exhibits a systematic increase
in magnitude from east to west across the central Walker Lane and is consistent
both with block translation and vertical-axis rotation. Zones of divergent,
transcurrent, and convergent motion are observed across suspected block
boundaries. The observed velocity field is not easily reconciled with the
current understanding of fault displacements and points out the difficulty in
comparing geodetic and geologic displacement fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PI's propose an integrated geodetic and geologic investigation of the central
Walker Lane to address two questions: (1) Is displacement transfer between
transcurrent structures wholly accommodated by kinematically coordinated slip on
throughgoing faults, and (2) are the kinematics of active displacement transfer
derived from GPS geodesy consistent with the displacement field estimated by
earthquake seismology and fault-slip inversion? The central Walker Lane is
ideally suited for this study for three reasons: (1) the region is seismically
active and well defined earthquake focal mechanisms exist for the displacement
transfer fault system, (2) the faults are well exposed and have produced
preliminary fault-slip estimates of deformation kinematics, and (3) a complex
present-day displacement field with ~10 mm/yr of differential slip is recorded
by a GPS geodetic network. These elements will allow characterization of the
kinematics of displacement transfer and offer the opportunity to directly
compare different means of measuring deformation kinematics. The PI's primary
interest is to characterize the kinematics of deformation in the active
displacement transfer stepover and to compare the geodetically determined
displacement field with that derived from earthquake focal mechanisms and fault-
slip inversion. To achieve their research objectives, several aspects of the
extensional stepover system exposed in the central Walker Lane must be examined
in greater detail. The primary tasks set out in this project are: (1) to
establish the spatial distribution of active high-angle faults linking the
bounding transcurrent faults, (2) to document the detailed geometry and slip
history of fault systems that transfer displacement between transcurrent faults,
and (3) to deploy a GPS network with sufficient density to differentiate between
continuous versus discontinuous variations in the present-day velocity
field.&lt;br/&gt;The PI's will address the tasks listed above with an integrated
study utilizing detailed geologic mapping, structural analysis, and GPS geodesy.
The investigators (Oldow and Satterfield) each have substantial experience
working in the area and by building on previous studies, geological mapping and
structural analysis will establish the areal limits of the transtensional fault
system, document variable geometric relations between major and secondary fault
systems, define the kinematic history of fault motion, and develop first-order
estimates of recent slip magnitude by documenting offset landforms. Combined
with other ongoing or proposed studies in the central Walker Lane, the results
of this research should contribute to an unprecedented view of active
transtensional displacement transfer and yield critical insight into the
comparison of geologic and geodetic measures of deformation
kinematics.&lt;br/&gt;