* 0126634
* Connecting Research Experiences And Teacher Excellence (CREATE) in Introductory Biology Laboratories
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Nancy Artus, West Chester University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 06/30/2005
* USD 187,026.00

Biological Sciences (61)&lt;br/&gt;The Biology Department of West Chester
University (WCU) has a rare opportunity to redesign both the physical space and
the curriculum for our three introductory biology laboratories, General Biology
(Bio 110), Botany (Bio 215) and Zoology (Bio 217). By adapting materials from
Northern Arizona University and Hampshire College, the emphasis in the
laboratory moves from activities that primarily serve to reinforce lecture
material to student-driven research investigations that stimulate critical
thinking and an appreciation of the scientific method. To enhance and coordinate
our introductory biology curriculum, we are: 1) developing new laboratories that
include open-ended components, 2) increasing the use of technologies that
enhance the learning experience, 3) linking concepts and creating spiraling
connections between the sub-disciplines, 4) encouraging collaboration among
students and faculty through the use of pedagogy designed to foster cooperation,
and 5) providing a research-rich learning environment as a training ground for
our future secondary school teachers. Students in our Secondary Education
Program (BS Biology, Education) are actively involved with the development and
implementation of the inquiry-based laboratories. With the help of Dr. Lesley
Welsh, an assessment expert from the School of Education at WCU, we are
evaluating the effectiveness of these changes.