* 0126007
* Measurements and Improved Parameterization of the Thermal Conductivity and Heat Flow through First-Year Sea Ice
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Hajo Eicken, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 04/30/2006
* USD 413,395.00

This study will derive the thermal conductivity of first-year antarctic sea ice
as a function of ice microstructure, temperature, temperature gradients,
salinity, and other environmental parameters. Measurements will be carried out
by freezing thermistor arrays into the fast ice of McMurdo Sound. &lt;br/&gt;The
thermal conductivity of sea ice determines the magnitude of the heat flow
through the ice, and hence the exchange of heat between the ocean and
atmosphere, for a given ice temperature gradient. General circulation models
(GCMs) and large-scale sea-ice models currently include overly simplistic
parameterizations of the ice thermal conductivity, developed several decades
ago, that are likely to contribute significantly to errors in estimating ice
production rates.&lt;br/&gt; The results from this work will feed into improved
parameterizations of sea ice parameters for collaboration with the Sea-Ice Model
Intercomparison Project (SIMIP2) Team established under the auspices of the
World Climate Research Program. The research will advance and improve: (1) our
understanding of processes and parameters controlling heat transfer and thermal
conductivity of first-year sea ice, (2) measurement techniques for the
derivation of thermal conductivity and heat flow data from thermistor arrays,
(3) our understanding of sea-ice processes and heat flow through the ice cover
in the McMurdo Sound region, (4) parameterizations of thermal conductivity for
use in large-scale and high-resolution one-dimensional simulations, and (5) the
representation of first-year ice antarctic and arctic thermal properties in
GCMs.&lt;br/&gt;