* 0126546
* Planning Grant Proposal: A Virtual Center for Child Language Acquistion Research
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Barbara Lust, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 08/31/2006
* USD 98,162.00

Abstract

A Virtual Center for Child Language Acquisition Research: A Planning Grant
Proposal

Barbara C. Lust

We aim to create a Virtual Center through the use of the internet to exchange
materials and data across laboratories currently concerned with the study of
language acquisition. The purpose of this Planning Grant is to initiate planning
to develop the Infrastructure for this Virtual Center. In the planning stage,
six US laboratories at six institutions that are concerned with children's first
language acquisition, including childhood bilingualism, will form the core of
this Virtual Center. The Cornell Language Acquisition Lab, as the lead
institution, is in turn linked to the Sackler Institute for Developmental
Psychology at the Cornell University Weill Medical College.

The proposed infrastructure is to be executed through the development and
dissemination of new World Wide Web materials to support and develop
collaborative cross-linguistic scientific primary research in all areas of
language acquisition. These materials comprise a Virtual Linguistics Lab (VLL)
which will include a set of internet-available materials to guide primary
linguistic research in the area of language acquisition through a web-based
graphical user interface. These materials provide the basis for exchange of
knowledge and data across laboratories leading to collaborative research and
educational initiatives which can allow each individual laboratory at each
institution new power and scope through interaction with the Center.

Ultimately, the proposed Virtual Center will be extended to networking with
other labs which focus on second or multi-language acquisition in the adult, and
to other labs which are practicing neuroscientific methods of study of language
acquisition. In addition, it will be networked with several international labs
in India, Peru and Taiwan, as well as other countries, which will allow a wide
expansion of the exchange of knowledge (including both data and scientific
methods) in the field.

The Virtual Center is designed to allow infinite and open-ended dissemination
of materials and data. The Planning Grant is intended to establish the
prototypes for the required infrastructure and the necessary preliminary
interaction among collaborators in order to design and construct this
infrastructure.

