* 0126277
* Rheological Behavior of Clinopyroxene and Clinopyroxene-Olivine Aggregates under Hydrous Conditions: Implications for Dynamics of the Lower Crust and Upper Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* David Kohlstedt, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2005
* USD 320,222.00

Kohlstedt&lt;br/&gt;0126277&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators propose a
laboratory investigation of the high-temperature, high-pressure rheological
properties of clinopyroxene, an important mineral in both the lower crust and
the upper mantle. Because even a small amount of water dramatically weakens
nominally anhydrous minerals, emphasis will be given to the contribution of
water to the viscosity of aggregates of clinopyroxene and clinopyroxene +
olivine. In most studies, the water-weakening effect has been treated as an 'on-
off' process - if water is present, rocks are weak; if water is absent, rocks
are strong. Recently, however, the investigators demonstrated that the viscosity
of olivine-dominated aggregates is inversely proportional to OH concentration.
The proposed research builds on this observation and on recently reported
experiments on the deformation behavior of dry clinopyroxenite. Water
concentration will be determined by micro-FTIR analysis, and deformation-
produced microstructures will be analyzed using optical and electron microscopy.
In order to extrapolate from laboratory to geologic conditions, a major goal
will be to determine detailed flow laws describing viscosity as a function of
water concentration as well as differential stress, grain size and temperature
in both the diffusion creep and the dislocation creep
regime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent analyses of the depth of earthquakes in
continents and of the correlation between crustal thickness and elastic
thickness have led to the conclusion that the lower crust, at least in some
places, is stronger than the uppermost mantle. This point of view is contrary to
most models of continental rheology such as the jelly-sandwich construction in
which a weak lower crust lies between a strong upper crust and a strong upper
mantle. Many models take the strength of the continental lithosphere to lie in
the mantle beneath the Moho. Certainly, the relative strength of lower crust and
upper mantle will depend on the presence or absence of water. Little is known
about the strength of clinopyroxene relative to that of olivine, even when the
two phases are present in the same rock as in the mantle. Our recent experiments
suggest that these two minerals have similar strengths under anhydrous
conditions but that clinopyroxene is weaker when water is present. A careful
investigation of the dependence of viscosity on water concentration for
aggregates of clinopyroxene and clinopyroxene + olivine is critical in order to
address these issues and to model the dynamical behavior of the lower crust and
upper mantle.&lt;br/&gt;