* 0126475
* The Children's Research Initiative: Integrative Approaches - CRI: The North Carolina Child Development Research Collaborative
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2007
* J. Steven Reznick, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Amy L. Sussman
* 08/31/2007
* USD 2,524,880.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NORTH CAROLINA CHILD DEVELOPMENT RESEARCH
COLLABORATIVE&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Martha J. Cox, Principal
Investigator&lt;br/&gt;J. Steven Reznick, Co-Principal Investigator&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The North Carolina Child Development Research Collaborative (CDRC)
proposed here builds upon ongoing multidisciplinary activities across
departments at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and neighboring
institutions of Duke, University of North Carolina at Greensboro and North
Carolina State. Investigators from disparate areas of developmental inquiry-from
behavioral genetics and developmental neuroscience to life-course sociology,
anthropology, public health, nursing, social work, education and developmental
psychology-will participate in the research and training at the CDRC. The CDRC's
efforts are informed by an interdisciplinary approach to understanding the
development of youth that includes investigation of cultural and societal
factors studied by anthropologist and sociologists to the neural and genetic
levels studied by biologists and neuroscientists. The work of the CDRC will
transcend a "main effect" model of development that sees each influence as an
independent contribution and will embrace a model in which influences from
various levels (the community, the family, neural and genetic factors etc.) are
seen as working together. &lt;br/&gt;The CDRC will increase the capacity of
faculty and students to conduct interdisciplinary research. This will be
accomplished by launching a new longitudinal, collaborative research study
focusing on early childhood. From birth to school entry, children show
remarkable linguistic, intellectual, emotional and social change while going
through successive transitions between social contexts such as from family to
day care or nursery school, annual changes from one peer group to another, and
later changes from preschool to kindergarten. This study will tap levels of
analysis relevant for understanding early development, extending beyond the
individual and dyad to include assessments of biological functioning, cognitive
competence, personality and emotion, social relationships, neighborhood,
community, and culture in which persons and interactions are embedded. Beginning
in the first year of life, we will track these multiple levels of analysis
during periods of transition to elucidate both the constraints posed by the
child's environment as well as illustrating the ability of the child to adapt to
new environments and conditions. A representative sample of 200 children born
during a 3-month period will be recruited into the study from birth records in
Durham, North Carolina. Durham is a mid-size city with typical characteristics
of cities around the United States: a diverse population in terms of family
ethnicity, income, and education; a declining city center with large pockets of
poverty and limited employment opportunities; and wide variation in the quality
of child care and school settings. Durham has an almost equal representation of
African-American and Euro-American families and a rapidly increasing Hispanic
population. Moreover, Durham has a large African-American middle class
population, thus making it possible to study ethnicity disentangled from
socioeconomic status among both African-American and Euro-American groups.
Children will be tested initially within a 2-week period on either side of their
first birthday and followed longitudinally through their fourth birthday.
Additional assessments will be conducted at the second and third birthday and
midway between birthdays (i.e., at 18, 30, and 42 months). &lt;br/&gt;Integrated
working groups of researchers will implement multiple levels of measurement. Six
working groups focus on: biological processes; temperament and emotional
regulation; memory, language, and literacy; peer relations as contexts; family
and intergenerational relationships; child care, community, and culture. A
seventh working group provides expertise on quantitative approaches to
longitudinal analyses. &lt;br/&gt;The CDRC will also initiate and support other
linked endeavors including: 1) conducting workshops, seminars and course
development to increase cross-disciplinary knowledge, 2) developing new methods
for interdisciplinary research, and 3) training a diverse cadre of young
scholars who are equipped to pursue collaborative interdisciplinary research.
&lt;br/&gt;