* 0126478
* Acquisition of an FTNMR Spectrometer for the Transition to an Investigative Laboratory Program in Chemistry
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* David Schedler, Birmingham Southern College
* Standard Grant
* Harry Ungar
* 05/31/2005
* USD 170,721.00

Chemistry (12)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the Chemistry Department of Birmingham-
Southern College, we are enriching the learning experience of our students by
developing a new chemistry curriculum which includes more experiential,
investigative laboratory exercises across the chemistry program. FT-NMR and
other instruments in the department are used to demonstrate scientific problem
solving through the use of modern instrumentation. Our goal is to improve
students critical thinking skills by adapting and developing laboratory
experiments that require them to develop protocols, collaborate in groups, and
defend results in oral presentations. To accomplish this, we are adapting a
number of experiments form the chemical education literature and implementing
them as collaborative laboratory projects into the Organic, Physical,
Biochemistry, Inorganic, and Advanced Analytical courses. Our department has
already made significant progress in incorporating investigative laboratories
into our curriculum and developing an active undergraduate research program. A
second goal is to further continue this trend. An NMR spectrometer is critical
for fulfilling this goal since it has become an essential tool in chemistry. Our
students are exposed to NMR spectroscopy at all levels beginning with organic
chemistry and culminating with independent research. With the completion of the
Elton B. Stephens Science Center in the spring of 2002, and its significantly
enhanced teaching and research facilities that better reflect our new way of
teaching, we expect to see an increase in the number of students involved in the
sciences and thus impacted by the new chemistry curriculum. We are also making
the instrument available to Miles College, a small, historically black college
in Fairfield, Alabama, for use in both teaching and research.&lt;br/&gt;