* 0126060
* Uplift and Exhumation of the Transantarctic Mountains and Relation to Rifting in West Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2002,04/30/2004
* Dennis Harry, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 04/30/2004
* USD 187,864.00

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
Office of Polar Programs, supports research to apply numerical modeling to
constrain the uplift and exhumation history of the Transantarctic Mountains. The
Transantarctic Mountains (TAM) are an anomalously high (&gt;4500 m) and
relatively broad (up to 200 km) rift-flank uplift demarcating the boundary
between East and West Antarctica. Dynamics of the East Antarctic ice-sheet and
the climate are affected by the mountain range, and an understanding of the
uplift history of the mountain range is critical to understanding these
processes. This project will constrain the uplift and denudation history of the
Transantarctic Mountains based on thermo-mechanical modeling held faithful to
thermochronological, geological, and geophysical data. The research will be the
primary responsibility of post-doctoral researcher Audrey Huerta, working in
collaboration with Dennis Harry, 1 undergraduate student, and 1 graduate
student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermochronologic evidence of episodic Cretaceous
through Cenozoic rapid cooling within the TAM indicates distinct periods of
uplift and exhumation. However, a more detailed interpretation of the uplift
history is difficult without an understanding of the evolving thermal structure
and topography of the TAM prior to and during uplift. These aspects of the
mountain range can best be constrained by an understanding of the evolving
regional tectonic setting. Proximity of the TAM to the West Antarctic Rift
System (WARS) suggests a link between uplift of the TAM and extension within the
WARS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will integrate two techniques:
lithospheric-scale geodynamic modeling and crustal-scale thermal modeling. The
lithospheric-scale deformational and thermal evolution of TAM will be modeled by
a finite element model designed to track the thermal and deformational response
of the Antarctic lithosphere to a protracted extensional environment. Previous
investigators have linked the high elevation and broad width of the TAM to a
deep level of necking in which mantle thinning is offset from the location of
crustal extension. In this study, a three-dimensional dynamic model will be used
to track the uplift and thermal evolution of the TAM in a setting in which
necking is at a deep level, and in which extension within the crust and
extension within the mantle are offset. Velocity boundary conditions applied to
the edges of the model will vary through time to simulate the extensional and
transtensional evolution of the WARS. Because the model is dynamic, the thermal
structure, strength, and strain field, evolve naturally in response to these
initial and boundary conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamic models are
uniquely suited to understanding lithospheric deformational and thermal
evolution, however kinematic models are best suited for addressing the detailed
thermal and exhumation history of crustal uplifts. Thus, a 2-dimensional
kinematic-thermal model will be designed to simulate the uplift history of the
TAM and the resulting erosional, topographic, and thermal evolution. Uplift will
be modeled as normal-fault movement on a set of discrete fault planes with
uplift rate varying through time. Erosion will be modeled as a diffusive process
in which erosion rates can be varied through time (simulating climate changes),
and vary spatially as a linear function of gradient and distance from the
drainage divide. Synthetic time-temperature (t-T) histories will be calculated
to compare model results to thermochronologic data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;