* 0126904
* Implementing a Nanofabrication Concentration into the Applied Physics Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Michael Cohen, Shippensburg University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 06/30/2004
* USD 96,008.00

Physics (13) The project is adapting and developing new courses in material
science and nanotechnology in a traditional physics curriculum to better meet
the interests, needs, and employment opportunities of majors. The adapted
courses are 200 level Material Engineering classes taught in a single semester
at the NSF National Nanofabrication Users Network (NNUN), Penn State
Nanofabrication Facility. These courses are taught by the Pennsylvania
Nanofabrication Manufacturing Technology (NMT) Partnership under the joint
auspices of the Nanofabrication Facility and the State of Pennsylvania. The NMT
classes are a unique opportunity for students to study the techniques and
processes involved in state of the art micro- and nanofabrication at a premier
research facility. Two new courses in the physics curriculum offer the
theoretical foundations for the techniques and process courses offered by the
NMT center. This project addresses the lab component of the new courses. The new
course offerings, with the addition of the NMT courses, form the basis of a
Bachelors of Science Applied Physics Degree with a Nanofabrication
Concentration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program offers significantimprovement
to all three physics degree programs: 1) B.S. Physics majors interested in
continuing on to graduate school have an opportunity to work with state-of-the
art equipment and to fabricate devices for their undergraduate research
projects, 2) B.S. Physics Ed. majors have an opportunity to gain understanding
and experience in modern materials and fabrication, which they can take to the
classroom to inspire future generations of students, 3) Applied Physics /
Engineering majors have a viable four year alternative to the five year program
currently offered.&lt;br/&gt;