* 0126032
* Online Weather Studies:  National Dissemination and Collegial Professional Development Activity With Undergraduate Faculty in Minority-Serving Institutions
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2007
* Joseph Moran, American Meteorological Society
* Continuing grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 02/28/2007
* USD 365,675.00

Atmospheric Sciences (41) The American Meteorological Society (AMS) in
cooperation with the US National Weather Service and the Department of the
Geosciences of North Carolina's Elizabeth City State University is providing
professional development opportunities for 100 faculty at minority institutions
with the goal of increasing minority student participation in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). Over a 4.5-year period, this
project will attain this diversity-enhancing goal by making available to
minority-serving colleges and universities Online Weather Studies, an existing
AMS-developed distance- learning course on the basics of atmospheric science
partially delivered via the Internet. Greater minority student participation in
STEM requires greater access to scientific learning experiences that engage
student interest and develop their critical thinking skills. Critical thinking
and associated reasoning skills are considered essential for student success in
STEM. Online Weather Studies is designed to meet this goal through electronic
delivery of highly motivational investigations written to current weather
conditions. To facilitate adoption and implementation of Online Weather Studies,
the project provides professional development experiences for faculty (25 per
year for 4 years) via a 5-day summer workshop at the National Weather Service
Training Center (NWSTC) at Kansas City, MO plus a series of two-day workshops
treating science content, pedagogical, and diversity issues as a regular feature
of the AMS Annual Meeting held each January.