* 0126657
* Hands-on Learning in an Interdisciplinary Material Science Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Douglas Cleary, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara N. Anderegg
* 05/31/2005
* USD 68,920.00

Engineering - Materials Science (57)&lt;br/&gt;In this project we are
developing four hands-on interdisciplinary experiments from a variety of
engineering laboratories within Rowan University. Our project is providing a
model for hands-on interdisciplinary experimentation for use in introductory
materials science courses. The development of these hands-on laboratory
experiments are addressing concerns expressed by ABET and the Engineering
Education Coalitions. The experiments will be incorporated into the curriculum
at Rowan University. Our testing machines has been interfaced with computer data
acquisition and control systems. Rather than purchasing new equipment this
project is adapted from the work done by McDonald, Adams, and Mahajan. Our
equipment will be modernized in a similar fashion to help our students perform,
observe, and analyze the measurements that characterize the behavior of
engineering materials. As a compliment to this laboratory experience we have our
undergraduate students working with industrial sponsors in material science
related research. By combining the two experiences, laboratory studies and
fieldwork, students are gaining an appreciation for the practical aspects of
materials characterization. The results of our project are being disseminated
through relevant journals and through the use of an Engineering Clinic that
emphasizes hands-on learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;