* 0126402
* Atomic Scale Imaging Implemented Into Undergraduate Science Education
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2005
* Maria Hepel, SUNY College at Potsdam
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 02/28/2005
* USD 122,264.00

Interdisciplinary (99)&lt;br/&gt;In this project, four science departments
(Chemistry, Biology, Physics, and Geology) at SUNY Potsdam are using Atomic
Force Microscopy and Scanning Tunneling Microscopy (AFM/STM) to continue their
ongoing efforts to incorporate advanced technologies into laboratory experiences
for science majors. While examples of atomic imaging techniques in new textbooks
have enhanced student's visualization of atoms and molecules, the lack of an AFM
and appropriate related laboratory experiences has limited student learning in
this area. Bridging the gap between coursework and the laboratory, a number of
new experiments based on AFM/STM use are being developed, some of which are
integrated across the curriculum.&lt;br/&gt; The ability to engage students in
experiments using AFM/STM is creating possibilities for designing innovative
courses and is advancing undergraduate research. This equipment enables students
in chemistry and biology classes to (1) measure the forces between molecules,
including antigen/antibody interactions (V.W. Jones, J.R. Kenseth, M.D. Porter,
C.L. Mosher, and E. Henderson, "Microminiaturized Immunoassays Using Atomic
Force Microscopy and Compositionally Patterned Antigen Arrays," Anal. Chem.,
1998, 70, 1233-1241), (2) explore phospholipid and drug interactions (T.H. Ha,
C.H. Kim, J.S. Park, and K. Kim, "Interaction of Indolicidin with Model Lipid
Bilayer: Quartz Crystal Microbalance and Atomic Force Microscopy Study,"
Langmuir, 2000, 16, 871-875), (3) examine structure of polymer films (D.
Raghavan, M. VanLandingham, X. Gu, and T. Nguyen, "Characterization of
Heterogeneous Regions in Polymer Systems Using Tapping Mode and Force Mode
Atomic Force Microscopy," Langmuir, 2000, 16, 9448-9459), (4) observe pitting
corrosion and to study the effect of inhibitors on metal corrosion, imaging the
surface of nanoelectrocatalytic materials used for methanol oxidation, (5)
examine microporosity and mesoporosity in different carbon materials, (6)
observe adherence of bacteria to surfaces, (7) examine the structure of
biological molecules at very high resolution, and (8) study the viral infection
process. Biology and chemistry students are now able to study the actions of DNA
binding proteins and ligands, including restriction enzyme mapping and gene
localization (H.B. Sun, L. Qian, and H. Yokota, "Detection of Abasic Sites on
Individual DNA Molecules Using Atomic Force Microscopy," Anal. Chem., 2001,73,
2229-2232). The data generated through AFM analysis of these processes are then
compared with those generated through traditional methods, and demonstrate the
evolution of modern chemistry and molecular biology, while providing the
students with a glimpse of the future direction of the science. &lt;br/&gt;