* 0126315
* High Resolution Studies of the Earthquake Source
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Rachel Abercrombie, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2006
* USD 147,349.00

The aim of this work is to obtain higher resolution, more precise source
parameters of small earthquakes than are currently available. To accomplish
this, the highest quality existing data are being analyzed using techniques that
compare closely located earthquakes to improve the precision of both relative
and absolute source parameters. Small earthquakes do not in themselves present a
major natural hazard, but they provide much of our understanding of the source
processes of larger damaging earthquakes. Many models of earthquake nucleation
and rupture dynamics, and earthquake triggering require assumptions about small-
scale behavior, for example, whether there is a minimum sized earthquake or
nucleation patch. Observations to constrain these parameters are therefore
critical. To date, studies using shallow and deep borehole recordings containing
high frequency signals have shown that the static stress drop is constant down
to the smallest earthquakes we can measure, but the scatter and uncertainty in
the individual measurements are large. Measurements of seismic energy, which are
fundamental to understanding the rupture dynamics have even larger
uncertainties. These uncertainties severely limit the use of such observations
to constrain models of the earthquake source process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this study, new techniques are used that take advantage of closely-located
earthquakes to obtain significantly more precise source parameters of small
earthquakes than in earlier studies. The data analyzed first are from the deep
borehole recording at Cajon Pass, California where local earthquakes were
recorded with seismometers between 1 and 3 km depth over a total of four years.
These seismograms remain the cleanest, least attenuated recordings of small
earthquakes available. In previous work source parameters were estimated for
some of the earthquakes recorded at 2.5 km depth, simply to address long
standing scaling controversies. Since then, the importance of more precise
measurements of energy and stress drops, as well as quantification of the onset
of the seismograms has become clear for solving fundamental questions about
earthquake rupture processes. Earthquakes recorded by the borehole network at
Parkfield, California, (where there is considerable controversy about small
earthquake stress drops), and a high frequency network at Acu Dam, northeastern
Brazil, installed to monitor reservoir-induced seismicity, are also being
analyzed for comparison. At each location, the catalogues are searched for
similar earthquakes, including foreshocks and aftershocks. The waveforms and
spectra of the clustered earthquakes, which can be assumed to have identical
path effects, are compared to obtain high-resolution relative source parameters.
Detailed study of the onsets of the waveforms is also performed to investigate
the earthquake nucleation process and determine, for example, whether it differs
with magnitude. These measurements are then used to improve the constraints on
models of the nucleation and dynamics of earthquake
rupture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will improve our understanding of the
earthquake source process, which is fundamental to any improvements in hazard
minimization. It funds a graduate student and also undergraduate assistants to
enhance education.