* 0126009
* Chemistry of the Earth's Deep Mantle and Core
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Ho-kwang Mao, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2004
* USD 350,477.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0126009&lt;br/&gt;Hemley and Mao&lt;br/&gt;Carnegie
Institution of Washington, Geophysical Laboratory&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this project is to determine the chemical properties of lower mantle and core
materials at relevant deep Earth conditions in order to obtain direct
experimental constraints on the chemical composition, formation, and evolution
of the planet's interior. The research takes advantage of numerous new
developments in situ high-pressure techniques, including synchrotron x-ray
diffraction and spectroscopy, infrared and optical techniques, neutron
diffraction, and new high diamond-cell methods. The project will start by
improving both pressure and temperature calibration at deep mantle and core
conditions. With this improved accuracy, in-situ x-ray diffraction studies will
be performed to resolve current questions about the post-spinel phase boundary
as a function of pressure-temperature and composition (P-T-X). The defect
structure and concentration of iron and aluminum-bearing magnesium silicate
perovskites will be characterized by detailed compositional studies and by
direct site-occupancy measurements with neutron powder diffraction. A series of
complementary synchrotron x-ray spectroscopic techniques used to characterize
the spin and oxidation state of iron in these phases throughout the P-T range of
the lower mantle. The question of additional, very high P-T phases of Fe and Fe-
Ni alloys will be investigated using diamond gasket double-sided laser
heating/synchrotron x-ray diffraction techniques. High-resolution x-ray
emission, nuclear resonant forward scattering, and optical Raman spectroscopies
will be used to identify possible pressure-induced changes in electronic,
magnetic, and vibrational properties of iron alloys to core pressures. High P-T
x-ray diffraction measurements in the lower pressure range will also allow
investigations of structural changes in the liquid state of Fe. The problem of
the light element in the core will be examined in a few pseudo-binary systems
with Fe-Ni, starting with oxygen and then moving to sulfur and hydrogen using
the same battery of diffraction and spectroscopic
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;