* 0126306
* Introducing Unsaturated Flow Phenomena into an Undergraduate Civil Engineering Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Denwood Griffiths, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Susan Burkett
* 04/30/2005
* USD 70,000.00

Engineering - Civil (54)&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is to
introduce unsaturated flow phenomena in soils in undergraduate civil engineering
education at the Colorado School of Mines by introducing unsaturated flow
phenomena in soils. The project responds to a pressing need in civil engineering
practice by filling the gap between current textbooks and engineering practice.
Over the last two decades, geotechnical engineering, a sub-discipline of civil
engineering, has experienced radical changes. Traditional foundation design
methodology, which is based strictly on soils under saturated conditions, is now
being supplemented with the considerations of unsaturated soil conditions in
many structural foundation problems such as construction and operation of dams,
natural slope stability and landslide analysis, underground waste containments,
and expansive soil damages to houses and civil infrastructures. As a result,
today's geotechnical engineers must deal with soils under unsaturated conditions
in engineering practice; a subject typically excluded from many formal
undergraduate education curricula. Furthermore, all soil mechanics and
laboratory textbooks currently in use at the undergraduate level in the United
States cover little, if any, material on unsaturated flow phenomena in soils.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental concepts of unsaturated flow phenomena in
soils are being incorporated into "Soil Mechanics" and "Soil Mechanics
Laboratory" courses by adapting and implementing two experiments which
illustrate unsaturated flow phenomena in soils. These experiments consist of
"Soil Water- Suction Characteristic Curve Test" for quantifying dependency of
soil suction head on water content, and "Coefficient of Permeability Test" for
quantifying dependency of soil permeability on water content. Comprehension of
the working principles for both experiments is critical for the full
understanding of unsaturated flow in soils, and application of these principles
to structural foundation design and other pressing geotechnical engineering
problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;