* 0126365
* The Children's Research Initiative: Integrative Approaches: Building Capacity for a Research Center on Mediated Learning
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Catherine Sophian, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 08/31/2002
* USD 15,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building Capacity for a
Research Center on Mediated Learning&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mary Martini
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Higher-order thinking skills are important in enabling
young people to prepare for our rapidly changing society. The proposed project
will establish the groundwork at the University of Hawaii for a collaborative
research center on the role of socially mediated learning in the cognitive
development of children. The proposed center will facilitate and sustain a
research program focused on determining how children develop higher order
thinking and problem-solving abilities and how adults mediate this learning in
everyday social interactions and cultural and learning activities. The center
aims to advance our knowledge in this area by encouraging collaborative projects
that combine different but potentially complementary research approaches-
specifically those of ethnographic observation, experimental cognitive
development research, and developmental neuroscience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Two
models of such integrative work are: 1) to initially study learning and teaching
processes in their natural contexts in homes, classrooms, lessons, playing
fields, etc., using observational and ethnographic methods, and then to evaluate
hypotheses about the processes operating in those settings using experimental
research designs; and 2) to initially study cognitive and learning processes in
laboratory settings, and then seek to deepen our understanding of how those
processes take shape through more naturalistic, observational research. A major
goal of the planning year will be to examine the potential applicability of
these two models, as well as of other possible models, to the study of
children's socially mediated learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Center research
will focus on the effects of adult (and peer) guidance on cognitive and neuro-
cognitive processing. Some research questions will be: How do children take on
the problem solving strategies presented by others? How do children generalize
the strategies learning in one domain and context to others? How do adults
mediate learning in different settings-at home, in classrooms, in work settings,
in lessons or sports activities? Can effective mediation styles used in one
setting transfer to other settings to enhance learning?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A
workshop will be held to develop the activities that will be incorporated into a
center proposal, including: 1) developing a shared knowledge base and set of
research models among the participating researchers; 2) providing a working
forum in which participating researchers can develop specific research
proposals; 3) developing collaborations among University of Hawaii, mainland and
community researchers; and 4) developing the infrastructure for the envisioned
research center at the University of Hawaii. &lt;br/&gt;