* 0126491
* Integrating Applied Geophysics into a Student-Centered Undergraduate Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2006
* Mary Beth Gray, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 01/31/2006
* USD 65,444.00

Geology (42) We are developing a new Applied Geophysics course that represents
an adaptation of a pedagogical model developed at the University of
Massachusetts. We are also creating new opportunities for undergraduate research
in geophysics. The lab component of our Applied Geophysics course includes six
modules dedicated to seismic refraction and reflection, ground-penetrating
radar, gravimetry, direct-current electrical methods, magnetic surveying, and
cross-hole geophysics. Two four-hour field labs are devoted to each module. The
instructor designs the first survey using each method, for the purposes of
demonstrating proper survey design, data collection, safety measures, and data
reduction. Alternating groups of students lead the second lab in each module,
thus calling on student groups to take leadership roles in designing surveys,
assessing the limitations of various methods through forward modeling, and
organizing data collection efforts. The instructor-led experiments take
advantage of diverse sites off campus. Student-led surveys are being conducted
at various locations on campus, including our Geophysical Test Site and adjacent
Experimental Well Field. Interpretations incorporate complementary data sets
from multiple geophysical methods. New access to state-of-the-art geophysical
equipment is having a major positive impact not only on the preparation of
geology majors, but also on other physical science and engineering students.