* 0126341
* Collaborative Research:  Affinity Directed Mobility for Location Independent Data Access
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2005
* John Bennett, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2005
* USD 346,995.00

Information is currently accessed and manipulated using a variety of fragmented
tools. The researchers use a desktop computer as our primary information tool, a
server, network of servers, or an ISP to provide file system support,
computationally intensive computing, and other system support functions. They
use a notebook computer, which may or may not have network access, when they
desire a portable information tool. When information needs are modest, and
mobility needs most apparent, the researchers use a variety of other devices
such as handheld computers, personal digital assistants, cellular telephones,
and pagers. Software version management in this situation is inefficient, and
licensing is complex. Ensuring that the same (and latest) version of each
desired application program is installed on a large number of computers can
consume a significant amount of system support staff resources, even if these
computers are accessible from the same network. The protection of information
from unauthorized access is similarly difficult.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The result
of this fragmentation of data, applications, and devices is an increasingly
complex and unmanageable collection of information tools that communicate with
each other ineffectively. The convergence in time of substantial need,
substantial communication infrastructure, and high performance, low power
computing resources challenges the researchers to explore a better alternative.
The Bifrost location independent computing project seeks to provide a flexible
and comprehensive information access environment. The function of Bifrost is to
provide location and device independent access to data. Data in Bifrost
encompasses both information and the applications used to manipulate that
information. Bifrost uses affinity between data, and between users and data, to
make appropriate decisions about when and where to move data. We refer to this
approach as affinity directed mobility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core research
issues of the project are mobility management (how we move data and threads to
support user and device mobility), data management (how we represent, access,
update, and protect information), and application management (how we provide a
common applications base across a variety of devices). In contrast to previous
approaches to mobile data management, Bifrost anticipates that in 3-5 years
network connectivity will be the norm, even for highly mobile computing devices.
In this situation, the problem of how users can access remote personal data,
regardless of location or computing device, becomes at least as important as
planning for a possible disconnection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers
propose to design, implement, deploy and evaluate a two-campus prototype of the
Bifrost location independent computing system. The Bifrost design represents a
new paradigm for information access and manipulation. We propose to integrate
the way in which information is managed with the way in which the applications
that access this information are managed. One of the design principles of
Bifrost is that the ability to access data should be consistent across all
platforms, including portable computing devices. This approach is in stark
contrast to the stripped down operating system plus stripped down applications
plus limited data set computing model currently associated with most hand-held
computing devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the educational benefits
to the students directly involved in the project, the researchers intend that
this project contribute in broader ways to the academic community. They will
incorporate this research into the operating systems and distributed systems
classes taught at the University of Colorado and Cornell University. All
software and other research products of this project will be made readily
available via the world wide web.