* 0126832
* A Dual-Level, Inquiry-Based Experimental Structural Dynamics Course in a "Roving" Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Douglas Adams, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Roger Seals
* 02/29/2004
* USD 67,955.00

Engineering - Mechanical (56) Engineering undergraduate and graduate students
are rarely asked to design, set up, carry out, and interpret their own
experiments. Although prearranged laboratory experiments are used very
effectively to reinforce theoretical concepts, they follow a fixed format and do
not give students an opportunity to develop their own experimental planning
skills.

The overall objective of this project is to give students more control of the
learning process. Experiments in an on-campus laboratory or test-trips to an
off-campus site, i.e. the "roving" laboratory, are going to create an
interactive, student-driven learning environment where instructors serve as
learning coaches. Analytical and experimental structural dynamic course
materials are going to be adapted from a proven set of course notes to meet the
needs of this environment. Industrial partners, who serve on an advisory
committee as third-party evaluators, are going to donate structural specimens or
data to be used in experimental student projects.

The project is going to better educate students in experimental structural
dynamics within the roving laboratory, encourage lifelong self-learning,
establish an educational link between university classrooms and industry,
promote and support curriculum innovation where this approach is warranted, and
provide other educators and industrial sponsors with information needed to
implement this approach elsewhere.