* 0126676
* A Challenge for the New Millennium: Incorporating Hands-on Robotics into a Computer Science Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2004
* Charles Winton, University of North Florida
* Standard Grant
* Mark James Burge
* 12/31/2004
* USD 63,306.00

Computer Science (31)&lt;br/&gt;Advances in microtechnology have increased the
possibility for providing robotics&lt;br/&gt;instruction emphasizing computing
requirements rather than hardware requirements.&lt;br/&gt;Curricula for a first
course in robotics have been published to take advantage of
this&lt;br/&gt;technology. The purpose of this project is to take advantage of
the existing work, adapting&lt;br/&gt;it as necessary to produce an effective,
hands-on course in robotics within the computer&lt;br/&gt;science curriculum at
the University of North Florida. To realize this objective,
an&lt;br/&gt;appropriate robotics laboratory is needed and a set of robotics
laboratory projects must be&lt;br/&gt;developed.&lt;br/&gt;No general standards
have as yet been developed for robotics technology. A major&lt;br/&gt;inhibitor
for introducing robotics courses within computer science has been the
uniqueness&lt;br/&gt;of the fabrication requirements, which has largely confined
the subject to engineering-&lt;br/&gt;related programs with resources for
robotics construction needs. Corresponding software&lt;br/&gt;has been in short
supply, and generally has relied on base-level programming in C or
in&lt;br/&gt;machine language. Existing robotics curricula for computer science
that have been&lt;br/&gt;developed have been constrained by the need to develop
a lab and produce a viable lab&lt;br/&gt;maintenance plan, all complicated by
the fabrication issues. On the other hand, significant&lt;br/&gt;progress has
been made in reducing the complexity of electro-mechanical
requirements,&lt;br/&gt;allowing software issues for producing effective
autonomous robots to receive increased&lt;br/&gt;attention.&lt;br/&gt;Robotics
kits developed by the KISS Institute for Practical Robotics (KIPR)
and&lt;br/&gt;incorporated into this proposal at least partly redress the
logistical issues and form the&lt;br/&gt;basis for a robotics lab suitable for
supporting a first course in robotics. To conduct the&lt;br/&gt;course of
instruction, an incremental series of hands-on exercises using the
laboratory&lt;br/&gt;facility must be developed and tested. The KISS Institute
will be called upon to both&lt;br/&gt;evaluate overall project outcomes and to
promulgate materials developed for the project&lt;br/&gt;(the Institute is a
non-profit national corporation that among its objectives seeks
to&lt;br/&gt;advance the state of robotics education).