* 0126788
* Seeing the Big Picture: Linking the Sciences and the Humanities
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2004
* Ellen Goldey, Wofford College
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 01/31/2004
* USD 199,952.00

Interdisciplinary (99)&lt;br/&gt;This institutional initiative for curriculum
improvement is establishing freshman residential learning communities (LC) for
non-science majors. Two sets of existing freshman courses, laboratory science
for non-science majors (Science-104) and humanities seminar (Humanities-101),
are being linked by a common theme to create multidisciplinary learning
experiences. The project is an adaptation of several noteworthy educational
innovations:&lt;br/&gt;(1) Learning communities, such as the type described by
the Association of American Colleges and Universities (AAC&amp;U), "Use of
Learning Communities in General Education." &lt;br/&gt;(2) The Wagner Plan (of
Wagner College in NY), which stresses the general education program of a college
as its learning keystone, and provides interdisciplinary, experiential learning
in learning communities during the freshman year to help students integrate
their knowledge and develop their academic priorities. &lt;br/&gt;(3)
Multidisciplinary courses bridging science and the humanities. Some of these are
derived from earlier NSF-NEH joint awards made under a program known as "Science
and Humanities: Integrating Undergraduate Education." An example is courses
developed and taught at Holyoke Community College under a 1993 grant
"Interdisciplinary Learning Communities in the Humanities, Social Sciences, and
Natural Science Courses." Others are derived from course materials being taught
at SENCER workshops sponsored by the AAC&amp;U. (SENCER = Science Education for
New Civic Engagements and Responsibilities.)&lt;br/&gt;A total of six learning
communities (representing 12 new courses) are being developed and implemented
during the two-year grant period. The "teaching team" for each LC consists of a
scientist, a humanist, and two undergraduate teaching assistants. The three
learning communities offered in the Fall of 2002 are "The Nature and Culture of
Water (taught by faculty in biology and English), Cosmology and Ultimate
Questions (physics and philosophy), and The Impact of Breakthroughs in Science
and Medicine (biology and philosophy). Three new learning communities are being
offered in the Fall of 2003. Two of these are Madness: Scientific and Literary
Perspectives (taught by faculty in psychology and English), and Scientific
Sleuthing and the Social Impact of Crime (chemistry and philosophy). A sixth
learning community is being planned. Each LC will include open-ended scientific
inquiry, experiential learning (emphasizing outreach to K-12 students), and
extensive use of educational technology.&lt;br/&gt;The program objectives are to
1) dispel the discipline-specific compartmentalization of knowledge and help
students integrate information across disciplines, 2) acknowledge and further
develop the creativity and teaching skills of gifted upperclassmen by including
them as teaching partners, 3) inspire the freshmen to be active learners and the
instructors to provide a more interactive learning environment, 4) emphasize the
importance of the General Education program, 5) help first-year students focus
their academic priorities, and 6) integrate student and faculty use of
technology throughout the program. Each teaching team is participating in a two-
week summer workshop followed by six weeks of collaborative course development.
The workshops guide the teams in building successful learning communities and
using the program evaluation plan. Each LC is maintaining a continuously
evolving web page documenting the development, implementation, and evaluation of
the program.