* 0126263
* Advances in Modern Performance Analysis:  A New Approach
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Khosrow Sohraby, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2006
* USD 230,000.00

The future high-speed networks are expected to support a variety of services
such as data,&lt;br/&gt;voice, image, and video with diverse traffic flow
characteristics and Quality-of-Service (QoS)&lt;br/&gt;requirements. Developing
a framework for the design, control and management of wide&lt;br/&gt;area packet
networks which can effciently support such QoS requirements is a
fundamental&lt;br/&gt;challenge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conventional frameworks
for the teletraffic analysis of networks and QoS guarantees are&lt;br/&gt;either
deterministic or probabilistic. In the deterministic approach, the worst-case
traffic&lt;br/&gt;envelopes are used. This most likely will lead to conservative
resource allocation policies&lt;br/&gt;and inefficient usage of the network
resources. In the standard probabilistic frameworks,&lt;br/&gt;the traffic is
usually modeled as a variant of Poisson process, e.g., MMPP, MAP, etc.
Such&lt;br/&gt;models are amenable to traditional teletraffic analysis but only
capture simple and limited&lt;br/&gt;correlation structures in the
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers propose to significantly expand the
analytical methodology in solving complex teletraffic problems arising in modern
computer and communications networks. Their approach&lt;br/&gt;which is rooted
in classical ballot theorem handles a large class of arrival processes
including&lt;br/&gt;the standard Markovian processes, general periodic
processes, processes described by&lt;br/&gt;time-series (auto-regressive and
moving average), or even general processes described by the&lt;br/&gt;joint
distribution of number of arrivals in equally-spaced non-overlapping discrete
intervals.&lt;br/&gt;Special attention will be paid in deriving algorithmic
solutions which are numerically robust&lt;br/&gt;and efficient even when the
system utilization is high.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers proposed
approach is unifying, it avoids root-findings, and unlike the matrix analytical
approach or recently introduced state-space spectral decomposition method, it
does not&lt;br/&gt;involve potentially expensive iterations. Further, it is
transform-free and may provide a&lt;br/&gt;simple form of solution amenable for
further analytical studies such as tail behavior or&lt;br/&gt;asymptotic
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers general arrivals processes could
be used for the end-to-end performance analysis once the departure process from
a network node is appropriately approximated or
probabilistically&lt;br/&gt;bounded. Since they are not limited to traditional
Markovian models, such an approach&lt;br/&gt;appears to be
viable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers propose to implement our general
algorithms and make them available as a scientific package to the research
community.