* 0126438
* Using State-of-the-Art Surveying Technologies to Strengthen Civil and Environmental Engineering Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Chris Johnson, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Sheryl A. Sorby
* 06/30/2005
* USD 109,628.00

Engineering - Civil (54)&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this project is to
strengthen the sophomore-year experience in civil and environmental engineering
by using advanced surveying measurements to solve real-world engineering
problems and to introduce concepts of engineering design. The project adapts and
implements the experiential learning concepts of the "Sooner City" project. The
project targets the sophomores and uses real-world problems to engage students
in engineering design early in the curriculum. The content of CIE 272 "Civil and
Environmental Engineering Measurements" is being altered to include more (and
different) surveying laboratories, and to integrate the surveying labs with the
use of AutoCAD. Also, a new sophomore-level course CIE 372 "Project Layout and
Site Planning" is being developed and initiated. Finally, faculty members in
other programs at Syracuse University are using the equipment purchased for this
project for undergraduate teaching in basin analysis, geomorphology, field
ecology, geographic information systems, and architecture. With support from
NSF, Syracuse University is acquiring advanced optical and satellite- based
surveying equipment for hands-on use by undergraduate students in civil and
environmental engineering, earth sciences, geography, biology, and other
programs. As a result of this project, undergraduate students are learning how
to make state-of-the-art optical and satellite-based surveying measurements, and
how to work with the resulting data on the Computer. Students completing CIE 272
and 372 are developing highly marketable skills in surveying and computer
applications, which will enhance their opportunities for summer jobs,
cooperative education placements, and permanent employment. Engaging students in
the hands- on solution of real-world engineering problems fills a void in the
traditional sophomore-year curriculum. Collaboration with faculty in other
departments stimulates cross-disciplinary teaching and encourages students to
take additional courses outside their majors.&lt;br/&gt;