* 0126347
* Algorithm for Networked Peer-to-Peer Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Ramesh Govindan, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 03/31/2006
* USD 279,939.00

A Peer-to-peer networked system is a collaborating group of Internet nodes which
overlay their own special-purpose network on top of the Internet. Such a system
performs its own application-level routing on top of IP routing. These systems
share some of the same characteristics as the Internet in that they can grow to
be quite large, need to utilize distributed control and configuration, employ a
naming scheme that allows them to address a node without knowing its exact
whereabouts, and possess a routing mechanism that allows each node to
meaningfully communicate with the rest of the system. Typically a peer-to-peer
network performs a very specific purpose such as distributed data storage, cache
replication, multicasting etc. and uses normal Internet functionality for all
other purposes. These systems are diverse enough that it would not be desirable
to make modifications to the IP routing/naming protocols to support each
instance of such a system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Peer-to-peer systems such as
Napster and Gnutella have, of late, received a fair amount
of&lt;br/&gt;attention in the non-technical literature. More importantly,
several research groups have recently&lt;br/&gt;designed a variety of peer-to-
peer systems as infrastructure for flexibly evolving the Internet,
for&lt;br/&gt;large-scale network storage, for anonymous publishing, and for
application-level multicasting. At&lt;br/&gt;the core of many of these systems
lie innovative and novel distributed algorithms for
disseminating&lt;br/&gt;content. The principal investigators classify these
systems into structured systems where there is&lt;br/&gt;global consensus on
where a document is stored, and unstructured systems where no such consensus
exists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Peer-to-peer systems have a rich theoretical
structure, and sophisticated algorithmic techniques&lt;br/&gt;have been employed
in the systems currently under development. In preliminary work, the
princi-&lt;br/&gt;pal investigators use the small-world model to improve the
performance of a specific unstructured&lt;br/&gt;system called Freenet.
Motivated by their preliminary work, this proposal plans to take a
principled&lt;br/&gt;look at the properties of various algorithms proposed in
the peer-to-peer literature. Some of the&lt;br/&gt;specific questions that the
principal investigators intend to address are understanding the
funda-&lt;br/&gt;mental bounds on the performance of peer-to-peer systems,
designing algorithms that allow these&lt;br/&gt;systems to perform at peak
availability and minimum latency, studying the impact of topology
and&lt;br/&gt;caching on latency, and understanding the role that the small-
world model might play in improving&lt;br/&gt;the performance of these
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall attention that the peer-to-peer
technology has garnered in the recent past, and the&lt;br/&gt;various proposed
businesses based on this model, point to the potential broad impact that this
work can have. The principal investigators hope that this work will provide the
systems community with the theoretical tools necessary to rigorously understand
the behavior of some of their designs as well as rules of thumb to choose
between alternative architectures, protocols, and
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigators intend to integrate
some of this material into a graduate course&lt;br/&gt;on \Algorithmic Issues in
Communication Networks". Their classroom treatment of these
topics&lt;br/&gt;will be formal, but with clearly indicated motivations from and
applications to real systems. The&lt;br/&gt;lecture notes and course projects
developed by the principal investigators will be made
publicly&lt;br/&gt;available.