* 0126163
* Collaborative Research: Socialization of Preschoolers' Beliefs across Parent and Peer Relationships
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Brian Vaughn, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 08/31/2006
* USD 500,612.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Socialization of Preschoolers' Beliefs Across
Parent and Peer Relationships&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Brian E. Vaughn &amp; Bryan
B. Korth&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Family relationships are the crucible
within which children's social competencies are forged and honed, however, the
payoff for the child's social competence is derived from interactions in the
peer group. Children well equipped (by virtue of the quality of their family
relationships) with interaction skills, beliefs about the desirability of social
activities, and convictions that social initiations will lead to positive
outcomes tend to become central, accepted members of their peer groups during
childhood. Furthermore, these children frequently accumulate social power in the
peer group that can be parlayed into preferential access to the physical and
social resources available in the group. These facts form the crux of a paradox
because parent-child relationships tend to emphasize affiliation, coherence, and
nurturance/protection at the expense of competition, conflict, and deception
whereas this balance is often reversed in the peer group. The question arises:
What is learned in the family that prepares children for the very different
social demands imposed by the peer group during early childhood? In this
project, we will collect data that can begin to answer this question.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigators from Auburn University and the University of
Illinois pool their expertise in parent-child and peer relationships for this
4-year longitudinal study. A total sample of 100 families (50 at each site) will
be recruited. Insofar as possible, two-parent families will be recruited (a
minimum of 50% for the total sample) so that assessments of both mother-child
and father-child relationships can be obtained. Assessments of sibling
interactions and relationships will be obtained when possible. Because
attachment theory proposes the most well articulated characterization of parent-
child relationships available in the developmental sciences, assessments of both
child and parent will emphasize the 'secure base' aspects of their relationship.
Parents will be assessed in terms of their demonstrated ability to serve as a
secure base for their child and in terms of the availability of a 'secure base
script' in assessments of the adults themselves. Starting in the second project
year (as the children turn 3.0-3.5 years of age) assessments will take place
also in their peer groups. A standard battery of social competence assessments
will be collected and friendship and social dominance status also will be
ascertained. Between 3.5- 4.0 years of age, the availability of secure-base
scripts in child-parent narratives will be assessed, using tasks developed for
this purpose. Both classroom and parent-child assessments will continue in the
third project year (as the child turns 4.0 to 4.5 years of age).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data analyses will test hypotheses concerning the
stability of attachments to both parents, the organization of attachment scored
from behavioral and narrative protocols, and the specific value of parent-child
attachments to forming and maintaining relationships with age peers. Age
appropriate measures of cognitive and personality status will also be obtained
and tested both as main effects (direct predictors) and as intervening variables
in the analyses testing hypotheses posed above.&lt;br/&gt;