* 0126678
* Integrating Hands-On Access to High Field NMR Across the Undergraduate Chemistry Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Maria Curtin, Stonehill College
* Standard Grant
* kristina parsons
* 06/30/2004
* USD 108,625.00

Chemistry (12)&lt;br/&gt;Stonehill College is integrating high field FT-NMR
across the entire chemistry curriculum in order to strengthen the ability of
students to retain what they learn, draw connections between courses, interpret
spectroscopic results, and design experiments. This project is impacting
chemistry, biochemistry, biology, environmental studies, and computer
engineering majors. The incorporation of high field FT-NMR across the entire
curriculum is based on NSF-DUE funded projects (Nolen-DUE008827, Smart-
DUE0087655, Wallace-DUE9952343, McDonald-DUE9850423, Gaede-DUE9750847) and on a
Journal of Chemical Education (JCE) article (Davis-JCE, 99). Most experiments
have been adapted from JCE or NSF-DUE funded projects and implemented into our
curriculum. For example, in General Chemistry, students are investigating
electronegativity as well as the heavy atom effect by obtaining C-13 NMR spectra
of halogenated methanes (Baer-JCE, 99). In Organic Chemistry, C-13 NMR is being
introduced early in the semester (Reeves-JCE, 98), eventually leading to the
introduction of H-NMR. Once the basics are established, NMR is then being used
for structure determination, to determine optical purity (Viswanathan-JCE, 95),
to study Markovnikov verses anti-Markovnikov hydration (Smart-DUE0087655, Nolan-
DUE008827, Blankespoor-JCE, 91), and to determine the stereochemistry of hydride
reduction (McDonald-DUE9850423). In Instrumental Analysis, students are
exploring how different parameters change the appearance of a spectrum (Gaede-
DUE9750847) and investigating the nuclear Overhauser effect (Schmedake-JCE, 96).
In Physical Chemistry students are performing variable temperature NMR kinetic
and thermodynamic studies (McDonald-DUE9850423, Gallaher-JCE, 96). Advance NMR
techniques (two-dimensional, heteronuclear, isotopic labeling, etc.) are
becoming an integral part of Biochemistry, Advanced Organic Chemistry, Advanced
Inorganic Chemistry and student/faculty research.