* 0126372
* Integrative Workstations to Enhance Undergraduate Learning and Research of Metabolic and Physiological Responses
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2002,02/29/2004
* June Kloubec, Gustavus Adolphus College
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 02/29/2004
* USD 11,864.00

Biological Sciences (61)&lt;br/&gt;Exercise physiology is fundamental for
researchers and majors in health fitness, athletic training,&lt;br/&gt;physical
education, and health education. Not unlike other sciences, exercise
physiology&lt;br/&gt;instruction that provides students with iihands-onl.
laboratory experiences creates the most&lt;br/&gt;positive learning climate,
leads to a more complete understanding of basic
physiological&lt;br/&gt;processes, and increases comprehension of scientific
principles, concepts and methods.&lt;br/&gt;Currently, due to lack of metabolic
analyzing equipment, the instruction of many exercise&lt;br/&gt;physiology
laboratory activities has been done via more traditional demonstration methods
than&lt;br/&gt;full and active student participation in the exercises
themselves. The acquisition of key&lt;br/&gt;instructional equipment (metabolic
analyzer and treadmill) will expand and strengthen the&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate
student's experience in exercise physiology and help foster a direct
problem-&lt;br/&gt;solving approach to the learning process in scheduled
laboratory sessions, independent research&lt;br/&gt;or other out-of-class
projects. The objectives of this project are two-fold: a) to provide
expired&lt;br/&gt;gas analyzing instrumentation to enable students to study
several fundamental exercise&lt;br/&gt;physiology principles that cannot be
investigated with the current equipment and b) to promote&lt;br/&gt;and
encourage active learning and student research opportunities. The improved
learning and&lt;br/&gt;research resulting from the integration of the requested
equipment into the curriculum will&lt;br/&gt;advance the college's commitment to
undergraduate research throughout the academic program.