* 0126104
* Toward a Descriptive Science of Learning Practices
* EHR,DRL
* 01/15/2002,06/30/2005
* Timothy Koschmann, Southern Illinois University School of Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 06/30/2005
* USD 490,778.00

&lt;br/&gt;Rigorous understanding of teaching and learning practices requires
the development of a descriptive science that captures multiple cognitive and
social aspects of complex learning situations. This project builds upon
available micro-analytic methods, both cognitive and sociological, with a
careful regard for the established standards of rigor applied within these
traditions. We will explore the promise and limitations of these methods by
analyzing a particular set of practices (referential practices) in a particular
learning situation. Reference is a fundamental feature of all human
communication. It is the means by which we initiate and achieve a common
orientation to objects in our shared environment and as such is an integral part
of learning. By providing an account of how interactants accomplish reference in
a particular situation, we hope to contribute to our developing understanding of
how people do learning. Our intent is to study learning practices in the
operating room (OR) of a busy teaching hospital, focusing on medical students'
early experiences with endoscopic surgery. In such surgeries, surgeons use
fiber-optic lenses to view and operate within the patient's body. This poses
multiple perceptual challenges, particularly to newcomers. Pilot work shows that
this is a rich site for examining referential practices as they relate to
learning. Furthermore, these surgeries represent an analytically compact cycle
of activity, helping to make manageable the highly ambitious task of describing
the content and methods of learning. Preliminary investigations have revealed
that establishing shared reference is not always easily accomplished.
Participants may proceed as if a common reference has been established even
though they are orienting to different aspects of the scene. Post-surgical
interviews highlight some of the complexities of studying how participants
display their understandings in natural settings. This project will consist of a
series of six sequential studies, each involving phases of fieldwork,
participant interviews, and analysis. Standard methods for ethnographic
fieldwork will be employed when taping in the OR. Post-surgical interviews will
be conducted with the participants, using the video from the surgery as an
object for discussion. These interviews will serve both to augment our
interpretations of the referential practices utilized in the OR and to document
the forms of anatomical and professional expertise displayed. Biannual project
teams meetings will be conducted to do collaborative analysis of the data. These
data sessions will be structured to encourage a disciplined form of noticing.
Community building activities are planned to foster the development of
descriptive skills by other researchers working in other learning
settings.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;