* 0126352
* Validities of Standards-Based Science Inquiry Assessments: Implementation Study
* EDU,DRL
* 12/15/2001,11/30/2005
* Edys Quellmalz, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 11/30/2005
* USD 1,824,999.00

&lt;br/&gt;To gather evidence about large-scale assessment practices, SRI
International proposed a research study to NSF to examine the validities of
standards-based science inquiry assessment. In response to negotiating questions
from the REPP program, SRI restructured the scope of work of the originally
proposed study into two phases: Design and Implementation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SRI was funded to conduct the Design Study in July, 1999.
Teams of nationally recognized experts studied the validities of science item
formats used in three of the nation's most influential large-scale science
assessments-NAEP, TIMSS, and New Standards. The research teams conducted three
distinct, but coordinated, studies including an Alignment Study, a Cognitive
Analysis Study, and an Empirical Study. When completed, the Design Study will
integrate methodologies and preliminary findings from the three studies. Results
of the Design Study have contributed to the design and methodologies of the
proposed Implementation Study. &lt;br/&gt;The Implementation Study will permit
an intensive analysis of science items and tasks that have been used in large-
scale science assessments at the national, as well as the state level; an in-
depth examination of the performances of a large and diverse sample of students;
and the application of powerful methodologies that were refined during the
Design Study. The specific goals of the Implementation Study are to: (1) develop
a framework for characterizing the design features of item/task formats that aim
to elicit different types of science learning, (2) conduct a study of the
alignment of selected assessment questions and exercise formats from existing
reference and extended investigation assessments with the National Science
Education Standards, (3) conduct analyses of the cognitive demands placed on
learners when solving different types of items/tasks, (4) conduct an empirical
study of the validities of different types of assessment formats, in particular,
the instructional sensitivity of the different assessment formats, and (5)
develop prototype designs of multi-level assessment systems that would provide
more comprehensive measures of students' science knowledge and inquiry
strategies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Benefits that are likely to flow from the
Implementation Study will include robust methodologies and procedures to support
the conduct of future studies of inquiry-based science assessment. Procedural
pitfalls and item and test design considerations will be identified that can
guide the research community and state and local education agencies in the
design of better validity studies. In addition, we will draw implications of
student learning opportunities for the design of science inquiry achievement
studies. The Implementation Study will provide confirmatory evidence of what
particular items and item/task formats intend to test and student's actual
reasoning and explanations of how assessment formats call on different kinds and
levels of science knowledge and inquiry. Finally, we intend to integrate these
findings to develop guidelines for how educators may combine reference exam
results with data from other exam formats to communicate science achievement
levels and make policy decisions about professional development, curriculum, and
assessment reforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;