* 0126150
* Ultraviolet Radiation Induced Changes in the Patterns of Production and Composition of Biochemical Compounds in Antarctic Phytoplankton
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* JOAQUIM GOES, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 06/30/2006
* USD 357,804.00

Goes&lt;br/&gt;0126150&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is sufficient evidence to show
that present levels of incident ultraviolet radiation (UVR, 280-400nm) are
impairing phytoplankton productivity in the Southern Ocean. Yet, efforts at
extrapolating these findings to allow accurate and unambiguous predictions of
the consequences of UVR on the Antarctic marine food web and biogeochemical
cycles in the sea have been confounded with uncertainty. Estimated impacts to
the Antarctic marine ecosystem range from insignificant to catastrophic. This
disparity has been attributed to lack of information in key areas of UVR
photobiology and photochemistry. Generally, studies have been based on broadband
UVR, and do not take into account competing responses of phytoplankton at
different wavelengths across the UVR waveband. Such information is critical if
we are to understand the consequences of UVR enhancement on carbon assimilation
by marine phytoplankton and its consequences for the food web and biogeochemical
cycles. This is especially true in regions like the Antarctic where
stratospheric ozone concentrations can decrease by about 50% each spring
altering the proportion of UVB (280-320nm) and UVA (320-400nm) radiation that
phytoplankton receive during their growth season. This project will
systematically investigate changes in the production rates and composition of
biochemical compounds within Antarctic phytoplankton cells under spectrally
defined conditions. Investigations of both laboratory cultures and natural
populations of Antarctic phytoplankton will be undertaken to understand 1) how
phytoplankton cellular biochemical processes are impacted by the interplay
between the different UVR wavelengths and visible light, 2) how UVR sensitivity
varies across taxonomic groups of phytoplankton and 3) whether this difference
in sensitivity is responsible for the dominance of one species over the other.
The effect of UVR exposure on nutrient uptake by phytoplankton cells will also
be studied. This information will help ascertain the role of UVR in the
phytoplankton dynamics of the Southern Ocean. &lt;br/&gt;