* 0126631
* Historical Biogeography of Symplocos, an Amphi-Pacific Tropical Disjunct Plant
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Frank Almeda, California Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 12/31/2006
* USD 147,209.00

Fritsch and Almeda 0126631 Drs. Peter Fritsch and Frank Almeda at the California
Academy of Sciences and their colleagues are studying the phylogenetic
relationships of the tropical flowering plant genus Symplocos with DNA sequence
data to test competing hypotheses on the evolution of organisms with "amphi-
Pacific tropical" distributions. These are groups of plants that occur today
primarily or exclusively in the tropical areas of the Americas and the lands
bordering the western Pacific Rim. The means by which these land organisms have
come to occupy areas that are today separated by thousands of miles of Ocean are
not well understood. One hypothesis explaining this pattern proposes
intercontinental dispersion across one or both of the land bridges connecting
North America and Eurasia in the Early Tertiary around the high-latitude regions
of Beringia and the North Atlantic. A competing hypothesis maintains that the
primary avenue for the dispersion of these plants occurred pan-tropically in the
Late Cretaceous/Early Tertiary, when the Atlantic Ocean was much narrower than
today. The investigators will analyze DNA sequence data from Symplocos samples
to estimate both the pattern of species relationships and intercontinental
splitting times of major subgroups. These data will in turn be interpreted in
the context of the extensive fossil record of Symplocos to arrive at a synthetic
view of the biogeographical history of this group. The project will integrate
laboratory work with field collection of samples from several countries, in
Latin America and S.E. Asia. The broader scientific significance and societal
ramifications of this project will benefit both environmental protection and
science education. By facilitating inferences about the past movements of
tropical vegetation, the knowledge derived from this project will contribute to
the broader issues of the ecological effects of climate changes that are
occurring at present. Further, it will help develop and refine conservation
strategies of tropical countries, as many Symplocos species are rare and
endangered. The project will contribute to the support and training of the next
generation of organismal biologists by including undergraduate, Masters, and
Ph.D. students involved in original research projects. Because the proposed
research will be conducted at a major metropolitan natural history museum, ample
opportunities exist to present the results of this research and its implications
to the general public. This will take the form of articles in popular
periodicals, displays in the museum's public venues, adult education courses,
and lectures for visitors.

