* 0126585
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:   Child Temperament and Personality Across Contexts
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,05/31/2003
* Mary Rothbart, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Marguerite Barratt
* 05/31/2003
* USD 18,669.00

Abstract

Child Temperament and Personality Across Contexts

Mary Rothbart

The major objective of this Workshop on Child Temperament and Personality Across
Contexts and the planning project of which it is a part, is to bring together a
collaborative network to plan multidisciplinary, cross-cultural research on the
development of child temperament and personality. Collaborators organized by
James Victor of Hampton University and Mary Rothbart, University of Oregon, will
plan projects enabling the group to develop proposals for individual
investigator, small collaboration and large-scale projects to meet the NSF
objective of integrating child development research across traditional knowledge
domains, cultural contexts, and levels of analysis. The workshop has three
specific aims. First, scientists studying biological, emotional, social, and
behavioral aspects of temperament and personality will plan the development of
uniform temperament and personality measurement scales for children. These
researchers include James Victor and Spencer Baker, Hampton University; Mary
Rothbart and Gerard Saucier, University of Oregon; Michael Posner, Cornell
University; and Charles Halverson and Valerie Havill, University of Georgia.
Second, child development collaborators in the domain of risk identification and
prevention who study issues across a broad array of contexts (family, child-
care, school, community, culture and language) will participate in the project.
These include Mark Roosa, Arizona State University; Guillermo Bernal, University
of Puerto Rico; Wendy Kliewer, Lenn Murrelle and Evelyn Reed-Victor, Virginia
Commonwealth University; Sandee McClowry, New York University; and Lynn Pelco,
College of William and Mary. Third, collaborators from both of these domains
will address ethnic and cultural contexts in temperament and personality
research. Collaborators will plan studies that examine how adult informants in
different contexts, describe, interpret, and accommodate individual differences
in child temperament and personality. The work will be based on bringing
together independently developed measures of temperament and personality. The
initial Planning Workshop is to be held in Eugene, Oregon, no later than
November 15, 2001. This workshop will be an intensive meeting, identifying
dimensions to be studied across contexts in multidisciplinary collaboration.
During day 1 of the workshop, emphasis will be on the common instrument. Dr.
Rothbart will present issues relating to the measurement of temperament,
including computer-administered tasks of temperament dimensions. Dr. Victor will
present results from the Hampton Version personality instrument for developing
appropriate dimensions for a common instrument. Discussants for this session
will be three distinguished researchers, Dr. Charles Halverson, for child
personality from the lexical tradition; Dr. Paul Costa, adult personality; and
Gerard Saucier, the adult lexical tradition. On Day 2, domain specific groups
will prepare feedback on development of common measures from the perspective of
risk and cross-cultural populations, and identify possible across-site
collaborations. The afternoon session will focus on the development of
guidelines for collaboration and the formation of domain work groups. The major
outcomes for the second day are a) achieving further refinement of plans for
development of the common temperament and personality instrument, taking risk
and cultural context issues into account, and b) the formation of collaborative
work groups for work to be completed in the second phase of the planning grant.
After review and feedback, summaries submitted after this meeting will be posted
on the planning project website for review and input from the collaborative
network, and form the basis for future proposals.