* 0126641
* Enhancing Undergraduate Learning in Immunology through Integration of a Research-based Mixed-model Pedagogy
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Matthew Hanson, Wittenberg University
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 08/31/2004
* USD 58,087.00

Biological Sciences (61) Integrating technology and research rich laboratory
experiences into biology curricula clearly fosters creativity and significantly
improves learning. At Wittenberg University we strive to provide hands-on
learning opportunities for our undergraduate students that are inquiry based and
integrate modern scientific equipment. To accomplish this goal in an immunology
course a "research-based mixed-model" approach is being adapted from the
University of St. Thomas, Rider University, Haverford College and St. Mary's
University. The mixed-model approach provides students with 10 weeks of
instructor led exercises followed by a 4 week long directed research project.
This project is providing students with a high quality investigative laboratory
experience as a means of enhancing learning in immunology. The acquisition of
scientific laboratory equipment and training faculty in both equipment use and
integration of a research-based pedagogy into their courses is accomplishing the
objectives of the project. Moreover, the Department of Biology strongly promotes
undergraduate research and believes that student-centered investigative
laboratory experiences fosters the creativity that leads to increased student
involvement in independent research. This adaptation and implementation proposal
targets the DUE themes of integration of technology in education and faculty
development.