* 0126902
* Applied Drug Delivery Throughout the Engineering Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Robert Hesketh, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 03/31/2006
* USD 194,286.00

Drug Delivery is a burgeoning field that represents one of the major research
and development focus areas of the pharmaceutical industry today, with new drug
delivery system sales exceeding 10 billion dollars per year. Chemical Engineers
play an important and expanding role in this exciting field, yet undergraduate
chemical engineering students are rarely exposed to drug delivery through their
coursework. To provide students with the skills directly relevant to the
evolving needs of the pharmaceutical industry, this project is developing and
integrating applied drug delivery coursework and experiments throughout the
Rowan Engineering curriculum. The design and production of new drug delivery
systems requires that the engineer fully understand the drug and know material
properties related to the processing variables that affect the release of the
drug. This requires the engineer to have a solid grasp of the fundamentals of
mass transfer, reaction kinetics, thermodynamics, and transport phenomena. He or
she must also be skilled in characterization techniques and physical property
testing of the delivery system, and practiced in the analysis of the drug
release data. This project provides the Chemical Engineering students at Rowan
University with the necessary foundation materials and fundamental principles.
There are seven modules adapted, implemented and used to introduce students to
the multidisciplinary engineering principles of common drug delivery systems
designs. Each module describes experiments used to support the design,
preparation, characterization, and analysis of that particular drug delivery
system. The seven drug delivery systems explored are: tablets, ointments,
membrane systems, microcapsules, osmotic pumps, Chemical kinetics, and
supercritical fluid-processed particles. The engineering goals of this project
are: --to explore different types of drug delivery systems --to study drug
delivery designs in a quantitative manner using engineering principles --to use
up-to-date industrial techniques for the production, testing, and analysis of
drug delivery systems and to evaluate factors influencing the release of drug
from a delivery system.

To accomplish these goals, this collaborative project maximizes the curricular
impact by vertically integrating the seven modules beginning with the Freshman
Clinic, followed by the fundamental engineering courses, the Junior-Senior
research projects course, and finally, advanced level elective courses on
pharmaceutical topics. These modules employ proven methods in SMET education. To
maintain the quality , recurring meetings of senior project personnel and other
Chemical Engineering Department faculty are planned as necessary. The project is
undertaking both formative evaluations and summative evaluations, and its
dissemination is being accomplished through presentations at national
conferences, CD-ROM and refereed journals.

Keywords: Drug delivery systems, drug delivery methods, pharmaceutical drug
delivery systems

