* 0126910
* Internet-based Unit Operations Laboratories
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2005
* G. Glenn Lipscomb, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Barbara N. Anderegg
* 02/28/2005
* USD 146,829.00

Engineering - Chemical (53) We have developed web-based Unit Operations
experiments in Chemical Engineering. To help in this effort we are adapting
various elements from CCLI web based experiments from existing work started by
other investigators. These include CCLI 0088788 which involved multidisciplinary
instruction in environmental science done by Dr. Krehbiel and his team. We are
also adapting the work of Dr. Asumadu's novel Remote Wiring and Measurement
Laboratory (RwmLab) CCLI 0088361. This project demonstrates how students can
wire up physical electrical and electronics circuits and perform real
measurements through internet access. Finally we are also using some of Dr.
Kamangar's project, CCLI 9950697, where students implement a suitable hardware/
software environment for multi-platform computer-based monitor and control of
the environment. We have developed two Internet-based Chemical Engineering Unit
Operations experiments. The first is a non-isothermal fixed-bed adsorption
remote controlled experiment as well as a dialysis unit operations experiment.
For Internet-based laboratories to be successful, they must be effective
learning experiences. Our plan has been to study the effectiveness of these on-
line experiments relative to a hands-on experience. Building on our work and
that of other researchers we hope to encourage other faculty to use of the
Internet to deliver laboratory experiences. Our model, if emulated, would allow
faculty to develop high quality experiments in their area of expertise and share
them with the engineering community. In addition to this significant pedagogical
benefit, the use of Internet-based laboratories offers the potential to reduce
laboratory costs while simultaneously increasing the number of laboratories
available to students.

The University of Toledo Chemical and Environmental Engineering Department and
The University of Cincinnati Chemical Engineering Department are committed to
maintaining the experiments along with existing Unit Operations experiments.
Finally, upon successful completion of our project, we will pursue a larger
effort to develop Internet-based laboratories with all of the Chemical
Engineering Departments in the State of Ohio.