* 0126231
* Request Routing for Scalable Services
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2005
* Amin Vahdat, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2005
* USD 203,996.00

Clustering technologies enable incremental scaling of Internet server sites at
modest cost. It is increasingly common in cluster-based service architectures to
distribute incoming request traffic among servers using redirecting
intermediaries integrated into the network switching fabric or interposed
between the client and servers. However, Internet services and their delivery
architectures continue to evolve rapidly. This creates new challenges and
opportunities for redirecting intermediaries, and motivates basic research in
both the mechanisms for request redirection and the request routing policies for
specific service environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will undertake a
coordinated research program to expand the potential of redirecting
intermediaries as an enabling technology for scalable Internet services. The
work focuses primarily on integrating service-aware redirection and request
routing as network-level functions in a high-speed switching architecture. The
methodology combines simulation, construction of software prototypes, and
evaluation of prototypes using synthetic and real
workloads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expected outcomes of the work are:
&lt;br/&gt; An improved understanding of the role of request routing as an
enabler for large-scale Internet services, &lt;br/&gt; Simulation results
evaluating these policies in large systems, &lt;br/&gt; Software prototypes that
demonstrate the value of these solutions in practice for Web-based services and
network storage services, and &lt;br/&gt; Opportunities to train students as
participants in this research at both the graduate and undergraduate levels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In summary, the research work has the following basic
objectives:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Define protocol features essential for
redirection at the level of the transport protocol. The switch routes incoming
requests on each transport connection to any active server at the discretion of
a service-specific routing policy; referred to as Anypoint
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Implement an Anypoint-capable transport
protocol that supports features commonly required by service protocols: reliable
communication, ordering and duplicate suppression, and congestion
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Define interfaces and capabilities for service-
specific policy modules in Anypoint intermediaries. This defines an architecture
for decomposing service protocol implementations into a client, a server, and
service module to extend the intermediary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4. Evaluate the
intermediary architecture defined by Anypoint by constructing software
prototypes of virtualized service implementations. The initial targets are HTTP
1.1 application services and NFS.&lt;br/&gt;