* 0126470
* Adaptation and Implementation of Modern NMR Techniques throughout the Undergraduate Chemistry Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Sara Hein, Winona State University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Ungar
* 12/31/2004
* USD 125,847.00

Chemistry (12)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the acquisition of a 300 MHz high-field
Fourier Transform nuclear magnetic resonance (FT-NMR) spectrometer we are
implementing modern NMR techniques, including variable temperature,
multinuclear, and two-dimensional methods, in both teaching laboratories and
undergraduate research projects. The main goal of the project is to update and
improve the chemistry lab experiences afforded to both chemistry and non-
chemistry majors. Other objectives are to improve undergraduate research
experiences, to provide a regional NMR resource, and to provide opportunities
for professional improvement to WSU chemistry faculty. To achieve our
objectives, we are adapting and implementing a set of experiments from the
chemical education literature into our Biochemistry, Organic, Inorganic,
Polymer, and Physical chemistry courses, and into two advanced laboratories; the
Advanced Organic Chemistry and the Instrumental Analysis laboratory courses. In
conjunction with NMR, we are also using molecular modeling in organic chemistry
to enhance the quality of the experiments. The chemistry students' experience
with the FT-NMR techniques begins with the second-year course in organic
chemistry and culminates in capstone research guided by the chemistry faculty.
Students use laptop computers for off-line data processing, thus allowing time-
efficient use of the NMR. We are using standardized student, faculty, and alumni
surveys and course evaluation forms to assess our project. Classroom assessment
techniques from the Field-tested Learning Assessment Guide (FLAG) project are
being used to assess student learning. Project results will be disseminated
through presentations at national professional conferences, submissions to peer-
reviewed journals, and publication on the project web site.&lt;br/&gt;