* 0126712
* Regional Enhancement of Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Instruction in Eastern Kentucky Undergraduate Education
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Ann Macintosh, Morehead State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 12/31/2004
* USD 53,757.00

Chemistry (12)&lt;br/&gt;The effective instruction of Fourier Transform Nuclear
Magnetic Resonance (FT-NMR) theory and its applications is dependent upon the
availability of modern and reliable instrumentation. The goal of this project is
to enhance the understanding and mastery of current FT-NMR applications and
theory at the undergraduate and community college level in Eastern Kentucky
through multiple hands-on experiences. Following the acquisition of an Anasazi-
upgraded NMR, students are operating the FT-NMR instrument as well as
interpreting the data individually and in group experiments. The students are
learning to apply their knowledge of FT-NMR to a variety of standard and
advanced FT-NMR techniques. The level of FT-NMR education is being increased for
students at Maysville and Prestonsburg Community Colleges in Eastern Kentucky by
hosting visits/experiments by those students who in the past did not have
routine access to NMR instrumentation. These students are involved in group
experiments with current Morehead State University students. Students' education
at all levels, freshman to senior, is being impacted by the new instrumentation,
with use of the instrument in organic chemistry courses for both science majors
and nonscience majors, inorganic chemistry, analytical chemistry, and advanced
courses including independent research. Experiments are being adapted from both
the educational literature and the research literature.&lt;br/&gt;