* 0126344
* Cognitive, Sociolinguistic, and Psychometric Perspectives in Science and Mathematics Assessment for English Language Learners
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Guillermo Solano-Flores, WestEd
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 07/31/2003
* USD 516,466.00

This two-year proposed project will investigate the cognitive and
sociolinguistic influencesthat shape the performance of English language
learners [ELLs] on science and mathematicsassessments. It will address the fact
that performance of ELL students in science andmathematics is inconsistent both
across test items and across languages. The knowledge gainedfrom this project
will inform practitioners, researchers, and policy makers about new
approachesfor attaining equitable testing and obtaining valid measures of the
achievement of ELLs in science and mathematics. It will provide valuable
information relevant to both classroom-basedtesting and the inclusion of
linguistic minorities in large-scale testing.&lt;br/&gt;We will compare the
inferred cognitive activities of ELL students, the problem solutionstrategies
they use, and the scores they obtain on the same set of science and mathematics
itemsadministered both in English and their native languages. In addition, we
will investigate whether and how performance differences across languages and
items are reduced when students are tested with locally-adapted versions of
tests that reflect their first languages dialects.&lt;br/&gt;We will examine the
performance of ELLs across languages and items from
three&lt;br/&gt;perspectives: cognitive, psychometric, and sociolinguistic.
These perspectives will allow us to:&lt;br/&gt;(1) determine how the language in
which ELL students are tested influences their cognitive activities and the
problem solution strategies they use on science and mathematics items;
(2)determine whether ELL students perform better on local dialect than standard
dialect versions of tests; and &lt;br/&gt;(3) examine the inconsistency of ELL
student performance across items and across&lt;br/&gt;languages as an
interaction of three sources of score variability: student, item, and language
(i.e., a given ELL student performs better in his/her native language than in
English for some items but better in English than in the native language for
other items).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We expect to improve our understanding of the
cognitive and sociolinguistic processes that operate below the surface as ELL
students interpret and solve problems. We also expect to gain knowledge on how
these processes are reflected in the performance of these students and the
variability of their scores across languages and items. This knowledge will
contribute to improving both classroom-based and large-scale assessment
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Goals&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultimately, our goal
is to contribute to attaining more valid measures of ELL
academic&lt;br/&gt;achievement and more equitable testing practices by offering
a fresh approach to the testing of linguistic minorities. This approach
recognizes the complex relationship between language and cognitive phenomena,
and the social nature of language. From the knowledge we gain in this
investigation we expect to be able to formalize a set of recommendations for
improved testing policies for ELLs.&lt;br/&gt;