* 0126672
* Using Discovery-Based Learning to Explore the Lean Design of Global Supply Chains
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2003
* Sharon Johnson, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Roger Seals
* 06/30/2003
* USD 49,969.00

Engineering - Other (59)&lt;br/&gt;An introductory course in "Supply Chain
Management and Lean Design" is being developed. Lean design is a systematic
approach to identifying and eliminating waste - through continuous improvement
by flowing the product at the pull of the customer. Lean ideas have transformed
process design. The challenge now is to make use of Internet-enabled information
to link processes across global organizations. Lean design is guided by general
principles, which are translated into practice using tactics such as creating
manufacturing cells. The primary objective is to develop students' ability to
apply lean design principles in global, multi-stage processes. The design
process is complicated because in reality not all waste can be eliminated. To be
effective designers, students need to understand how variability affects process
dynamics and to combine this knowledge with analysis of process data. To
accomplish our objective, we are developing this introductory course, which uses
hands-on activities to assist students in discovering theory. It is followed by
experiments in later courses that expand on and reinforce this theory. A variety
of existing manufacturing and supply chain simulations are being adapted, as
well as physical experiments in quality and variability, to the lean design
framework. One contribution of this implementation is the integration of these
activities into a more holistic experience, starting early in an undergraduate
career. The plans are being guided by significant industry interaction and
support faculty development in active-learning pedagogical methods.