* 0126135
* LC/MS to Enhance Project-Based Laboratories
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2002
* George Bennett, Millikin University
* Standard Grant
* Eileen L. Lewis
* 12/31/2002
* USD 85,238.00

Chemistry (12)

The objectives of this project are to promote student understanding of tandem
chromatography-spectrometry as a problem-solving technique that takes advantage
of methodology common to all sciences, to discourage student
compartmentalization of chemical ideas, to facilitate student understanding of
structure-property relationships, to increase student access to modern
instrumentation, to improve faculty collaboration, and to effect evolution in
the chemistry curriculum to include more problem-based laboratory activities.
These objectives are being accomplished by implementing the same instrumental
technique in multiple courses throughout the strata of the chemistry curriculum.
Thus, all chemistry majors and most biology majors are using the LC/MS in
courses over multiple years covering several of the sub-disciplines of
chemistry.

The Department is using the liquid chromatograph/mass spectrometer to adapt and
implement exemplary laboratory experiences originally developed at Duquesne
University. Adaptation of other laboratory experiments and projects from the
educational literature are also being implemented. These adapted experiments and
projects are being implemented into at least seven project-based laboratory
courses, including Organic Chemistry, Instrumental Analysis, General Chemistry,
Biochemistry, and undergraduate research in both Chemistry and Biology. The
enhanced project-based laboratories are aiding students make connections across
the sub-disciplinary boundaries of chemistry.

Once this project is fully implemented, nearly 200 Millikin University
undergraduate students will feel its impact each year.

