* 0126874
* ANIMATION AND VISUALIZATION IN ENGINEERING
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2005
* Howard Turner, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Susan Burkett
* 03/31/2005
* USD 75,081.00

Engineering - Civil (54)&lt;br/&gt;Visualization and animation are areas of
increasing importance in civil engineering practice. The goal of this project is
to adapt concepts developed in the Graphics, Visualization and Usability Center
at Georgia Institute of Technology, and to implement a modification of these
concepts into the civil engineering curriculum at Cal Poly Pomona. The first
objective is to introduce static visualization into lower division courses. A
second concurrent objective is to introduce real-time 3-D visualization and
animation into upper division courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rhinoceros, a 3-D
NURBS solid modeling and static visualization tool, is being utilized to
accomplish the first objective. Static visualization concepts are being
introduced into CE 127 CAD Engine Concepts, a freshman computer graphics class.
More advanced concepts and basic animation are being addressed in CE 134
Elementary Surveying, CE 220 Advanced Surveying, and CE 222 Highway Design.
Objective two is being accomplished by acquiring 20 graphics accelerated SCSI
workstation with static and dynamic visualization software. This equipment is
going to be used to modify the spatial positioning systems, photogrammetry and
GIS classes. Data are being collected in these classes by global positioning
systems and softcopy photogrammetry. These data are going to be used to build
computer models with visualization and animation software currently applied in
industry. Concurrently, this equipment is being used in senior projects and the
comprehensive civil engineering design classes. Students are developing terrain
fly-throughs, building walk throughs, earthquake simulations and civil
engineering equipment simulations. The visualization and animation techniques
are being integrated throughout the curriculum. Students are incorporating these
techniques into most senior projects. These senior projects are presented to
faculty, students, and industry on College Symposium Day. The impact of
visualization and animation techniques on these audiences will assure their
inclusion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is expected to reach 3,700 enrolled
engineering students. This project addresses both upper and lower division
student audiences and integrates new technology into the curriculum of the
Department of Civil Engineering enabling student learning and understanding of
three-dimensional space. In addition, based on current enrollment statistics
approximately 33% or 175 students who are underrepresented minorities are going
to be impacted by this project. Finally, the College of Engineering works with a
consortium of high schools, and Metropolitan Transit Authority Foundation
transportation academies. Through these avenues, the project promises to reach
several hundred high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;