* 0126191
* Enhance Heterologous Protein Production in High-Density Plant Suspension Cultures using Cell-Cycle Engineering and GFP-based On-line Optimization
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2002,12/31/2006
* Wei Wen Su, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 12/31/2006
* USD 249,717.00

The overall goal of this project is to develop plant cell bioreactor cultures
into a more effective system for producing high-value recombinant proteins. The
specific objectives of the present research are as follows: 1) Test inducible
cell-cycle control to maximize the useful culture life and yield of the target
protein; 2) Employ tested molecular strategies that complement the cell-cycle
control to further enhance the level of target protein expression; 3) Optimize
protein production using on-line GFP-fusion monitoring and dynamic process
optimization in high-density cultures. To accomplish these objectives, the
Principal Investigators (PIs) will embark on the following research tasks: (1)
examine the effect of expressing a cell-cycle inhibitor on cell proliferation in
plant suspension cultures; (2) study coordinated expression of the target gene
and the cell-cycle gene to enhance the target protein production; (3) exploit
suitable targeting and endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-retention signals to promote
secretion and to stabilize the target protein; (4) engineer GFP as a dual
function fusion tag for process monitoring and protein purification; (5)
investigate signal processing of on-line detected fluorescence of GFP-fusion
proteins; (6) devise an effective dynamic process optimization scheme that draws
on the on-line fluorescence data; and (7) develop high-density perfusion and
fed-batch cultures integrated with the controlled proliferation technology and
the fusion protein monitoring/optimization schemes. Tobacco will be used as the
model host system. Human granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor
(GMCSF) with GFP fusion is chosen as a model protein in this research. The
proposed research should lead to development of a more effective plant cell
culture process for recombinant protein production. It should also shed light on
regulation of the plant cell cycle and cell-cycle dependence of foreign gene
expression in plant cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;