* 0126311
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Constraining Tertiary Temperatures, Salinities, and Ocean Chemistry: An Isotopic and Trace-metal Study of Serially-sampled Mollusks
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Ethan Grossman, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 09/30/2005
* USD 78,039.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Constraining Tertiary Temperatures, Salinities,
and Ocean Chemistry: An Isotopic and Trace-metal Study of Serially-sampled
Mollusks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;E. Grossman, Y. Rosenthal, and C.
Lear&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The Tertiary Period (55 to ~2 million years ago)
presents our best opportunity to study the transition from an ice-free
"greenhouse world" to today's "icehouse world" and to understand the response of
present and future climates to high atmospheric carbon dioxide levels. This
proposal will take advantage of the superb fossil record of the US Gulf Coast
and two independent measures of ancient ocean temperatures, oxygen isotope
(18O/16O) and strontium/calcium ratios in fossil shells, to characterize this
dramatic change in global climate. These results will address a longstanding
controversy of early Tertiary climate, the "cool tropics paradox". Oxygen
isotope measurements of planktonic foraminifera indicate cool tropical sea-
surface temperatures for a time when high latitudes experienced unusual warmth.
This contradicts model simulations of greenhouse world climates that predict
that both polar and tropical temperatures must have been significantly warmer
than today. A common explanation for the discrepancy is that paleotemperature
data from planktonic foraminifera have been modified by post-depositional
chemical alteration (diagenesis). By analyzing pristine mollusk shells, this
study will obviate this limitation of previous studies. A second objective is to
improve our understanding of the nature and causes of the climatic transition
near the Eocene-Oligocene boundary associated with rapid Antarctic glaciation
and faunal overturn. Recent work using oxygen isotope ratios in fish otoliths
from US Gulf Coastal Plain sediments has linked faunal overturn to increased
seasonality, in particular colder winters in this region. However,
interpretation of such data is limited by poorly constrained estimates of global
ice volume and local salinity variations. This study will use paired
measurements of mollusk Sr/Ca and 18O/16O to examine changes in low-latitude
sea-surface temperatures and seasonality across this event. Lastly, modern
mollusk samples will be collected with temperature, salinity, and seawater
18O/16O data from various sites in the Gulf of Mexico and Eilat, Israel. These
samples will be analyzed for stable isotopes and trace metals (especially Sr/Ca)
to calibrate trace metal-temperature relations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;