* 0126187
* The Thinning of Pine Island Glacier: Model Development and Study of the Importance of Ice-Shelf Drag on Inland Ice
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Richard Alley, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 12/31/2005
* USD 168,974.00

0126187&lt;br/&gt;Alley&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides support for a 2
year modeling effort to study the dynamics of Pine Island Glacier (PIG). The
discharge from the PIG constitutes the largest mass loss from any single West
Antarctic ice stream. Satellite observations indicate that this outlet glacier
is experiencing ongoing thinning and acceleration. The emphasis of this work
will be on understanding the cause and the near-term projection of the observed
thinning of PIG. Model experiments will address the hypothesis that the observed
changes were caused by the loss of a buttressing ice shelf, and that the changes
will continue in the form of an upglacier propagating wave of thinning and
acceleration. To perform this work a numerical model of the coupled mass,
energy, and momentum balance of Pine Island Glacier basin will be developed. The
model will comprise four modular components, which will be coupled and then
benchmarked against the European Ice Sheet Modeling Inititative (EISMINT) model
intercomparison. The model will then be applied to the thinning of Pine Island
Glacier using likely ice-shelf histories and possible basal boundary conditions
to learn which may be accurate and to assess possible future behavior. The
primary expected result will be an improved understanding of the importance of
ice-shelf buttressing and the potential for inland thinning due to the reduction
of ice-shelf drag.