* 0126642
* Quantitative Biochemistry Laboratory Experiments: Introduction of Isothermal Titration Calorimetry and Real Time PCR in the Undergraduate Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2004
* James Boiani, SUNY College at Geneseo
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 12/31/2004
* USD 78,650.00

Chemistry (12) The Department of Chemistry at the State University of New York
College at Geneseo is modernizing its Biochemistry, Inorganic, Physical, and
Analytical Chemistry laboratory curriculum with the purchase of an Isothermal
Titration Calorimeter (ITC) and a Real-Time PCR Thermalcycler/Sequence Detector.
The motivation stems from our strong desire to broaden our students' experience
with modern biochemistry instrumentation, increase inquiry- and discovery-based
laboratory experiments for active learning, and to improve participation in
undergraduate research projects that we believe are an integral part of a
chemistry or biochemistry education. Our ultimate goal is to produce students
who are excited about science and who possess the necessary skills and problem-
solving abilities to solve timely and important problems.

A number of discovery-based experiments utilizing the ITC and the Real-Time PCR
Thermalcycler/Sequence Detector are being adapted from the research and/or
education literature. Experiments utilizing the Real-Time PCR Thermalcycler are
being carried out in the biochemistry laboratory. ITC experiments are being done
in the Biochemistry, Inorganic and Physical/Analytical Laboratories. For
example, ITC experiments on the study of molecular interactions, developed by
Professor Lawrence Kaplan at Williams College (NSF DUE 9850820) and Professor
Timothy Elgren at Hamilton College, NY (NSF-DUE 9951375), are being implemented
into our biochemistry laboratory. Both Professor Kaplan and Professor Elgren
have kindly shared their programs with us and have agreed to serve as test sites
for our inquiry-based laboratories. We believe that inclusion of experiments
using these instruments are significantly enhancing the education of our
students at Geneseo.