* 0126876
* Technology Literacy for Non-technical Majors
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2002,10/31/2005
* David Ollis, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 10/31/2005
* USD 84,989.00

Engineering - Engineering Technology (58) This A&I project seeks to create a
technology literacy lecture course and a hands-on laboratory for non-technical
undergraduate majors in the College of Humanities and Social Sciences (CHASS),
the College of Education, and the College of Management at North Carolina State
University (NCSU). The course structure is based on key elements from a
successful education venture developed and offered since 1995 at Hope College,
Michigan, by Professor John Krupczak. Krupczak's course materials including: (1)
lectures on modern technology; (2) a device laboratory; and (3) writing
assignments on the impact that a technological device has on the social, the
economic, and the cultural of the United States society. The project is to adapt
Krupczak's Hope College model to an earlier laboratory created by the PI. The
laboratory is for first year engineering students who work in teams of two or
three. They READ a technical description of a device or system and then play the
role of: (1) the USER of the system; (2) the ASSEMBLER (dissect the system and
study it); (3) the ANALYST ( analyze and solve particular problems dealing with
the system operation); and (4) TEACHER ( tell others about their system, its
purpose, its principles of operation, and present an illustrative problem
representative of the system's functions) Specifically, the Hope College
component consist of the format of fourteen lectures and a six week laboratory
consisting of six hands-on roles (read, use, dissect, calculate, design, and
present/teach/explain), and two papers on the impact of the particular system on
society. Evaluations include pre/post student attitude surveys, a standard NCSU
student course evaluation, and a new course assessment developed by the College
of Engineering staff. Student outcomes are measured using the Nan Byar's
definition of technology literacy.

