* 0126776
* Creating a Learning Community in a Freshman Design Course through Curriculum Coordination
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Gregory Mason, Seattle University
* Standard Grant
* Roger Seals
* 06/30/2004
* USD 53,770.00

Engineering - Mechanical (56) The importance of developing learning communities,
where students interact with those outside their class, has recently been
emphasized by NSF-DUE initiatives, which encourage interaction between high
schools, community colleges and universities. The proposed project is designed
to develop a learning community in a freshman engineering design course. The
design course is being adopted from an established design curriculum, which
emphasizes hands-on learning. Enhanced teamwork/communication components is
being added by coordinating with a high school technology program, and a
freshman engineering graphics course. Curriculums from all three courses are
being coordinated, creating a learning community. Students from each course are
participating in the design process at different levels. The primary design
responsibility remains with the design class, however, design teams include
students and facilities from the other courses.

The primary objectives of the coordinated curriculum are to: 1. Develop
communication skills necessary for meaningful technical interaction between
colleagues with diverse educational backgrounds. 2. Develop students' awareness
that material taught in one course is related and applied in other courses. 3.
Develop communication and research skills within the design process early in
students' careers. 4. Encourage high school students to pursue careers in
science or engineering by engaging them in the design process.

An implementation of a unique short-term assessment process enables quick
curricular changes in response to student needs. The project had generated much
interest with local community colleges. Dissemination involves presentations at
the regional meeting of universities and colleges, and local workshops.