* 0126043
* Dissertation Grant:  Evaluating Levantine Early Upper Paleolithic Prismatic Blade Technology
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2003
* Kristopher Kerry, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2003
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Steven L. Kuhn, Mr. Kristopher W. Kerry will collect
data for his doctoral dissertation. This research will quantitatively examine
relationships between several different Early Upper Paleolithic stone-tool
assemblages associated with the Early Ahmarian lithic tradition. Found
throughout most of the eastern Mediterranean region known as the Levant, the
Early Ahmarian ranges in age from 25-40,000 years ago, and represents one of the
earliest Upper Paleolithic industries in the world and perhaps the earliest
example of prismatic blade production in Eurasia. This specific method of stone-
tool production, used to produce numerous elongated removals (blades) from a
single piece of stone, differs significantly from earlier stone-working
techniques, and is contemporaneous with broad-scale changes in human behavior
and population dispersal argued to occur throughout Eurasia circa 30-40,000
years ago. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite this distinction, the Early Ahmarian
tradition was not recognized until the early 1980s, when it was distinguished
from another Upper Paleolithic technological tradition. This separation,
centering on the high percentage of blade elements, was a significant
contribution in characterizing Levantine Upper Paleolithic variability. However,
over the past two decades the Ahmarian has become a designation for many, highly
variable assemblages whose only common denominator is a "bladey" appearance.
Understandably, such a classification scheme has made the taxonomic use of the
Early Ahmarian somewhat cumbersome. While prismatic blade technology defines the
Early Ahmarian, descriptions based on quantitative measures associated with the
manufacture of blades are rare. This research will examine relationships between
eight different Early Ahmarian assemblages by evaluating blade production
strategies using quantitative measures. These assemblages form a transect
through south-central Sinai, southwest Jordan, the Negev, central Lebanon, and
south-central Turkey and represent various environmental and site settings.
Additionally, three "out-group" assemblages will also be examined. These out-
group assemblages are included in attempts to identify common themes in Early
Ahmarian blade production strategies by comparing them with prismatic blade
manufacture from southeast Europe and other stone-tool production techniques
considered quite distinct from the Early Ahmarian within the Levant itself. In
quantitatively describing blade production strategies associated with these
eleven assemblages a consistent method of comparison may help distinguish
regional distinctions associated with local environment and site location, as
well as identify common themes within the Early Ahmarian. Only after Early
Ahmarian technological variability is better defined can questions relating to
the dispersal of prismatic blade production throughout Eurasia within the
broader context of behavioral and demographic changes often associated with the
Upper Paleolithic period be explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Archaeologists know
that the earliest anatomically modern humans first appeared in Africa and that
they subsequently spread throughout both Old and New Worlds. Although one might
assume that cultural attributes such as stone tools spread the same way, the
archaeological evidence is far from clear. Mr. Kerry's research will provide
relevant data. It will also assist in training a promising young scientist.&lt;b
r/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&
gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;