* 0126157
* Auburn University Children's Research Center: Planning Grant
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2003
* Brian Vaughn, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Marguerite Barratt
* 09/30/2003
* USD 90,407.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Auburn University Children's Research Center Planning
Grant&lt;br/&gt;PI: Gregory Pettit&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: Brian E.
Vaughn&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a series of activities to
enhance the intellectual, administrative, and social infrastructures at Auburn
University . Specific activities relevant to four broad aims will be supported.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will build institutional capacity at
Department, College, and University levels by (a) initiating and supporting
cross-disciplinary inquiries on the nature and development of children's
relationships and belief systems; (b) identifying and fostering relationships
with nationally and internationally recognized experts in the conduct of this
research; (c) establishing relationships that insure the participation of ethnic
minority scholars in all aspects of research and that insure the participation
of members from ethnic minority communities in research samples; (d) using
existing structures for outreach in place at Auburn University to allow for
efficient translation of research products into meaningful programs; and (e)
laying the groundwork for a Data Center to house data and products from the
Research Center and from national and international datasets concerning
children's relationships. This Data Center will serve as a resource for Center
faculty in terms of consultation and assistance for sampling and analysis and
will serve as a portal to the larger community of developmental and learning
scientists using the Internet. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will assess
research needs pertinent to the construction, maintenance, and elaboration of
Center identity and focus by (a) fostering cross institution collaborations at
national and international levels; (b) developing mechanisms to incorporate
training activities for the next generation of developmental and learning
scientists; (c) designing an administrative structure to guide the scientific
mission of the Center; and (d) developing mission statements for Community and
Scientific/Technical Advisory Panels who will serve as external evaluators of
Center goals, activities, and products. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
support ongoing research programs on interpersonal relationships and social
transitions, plan new, large-scale studies of these phenomena, and identify
mechanisms to support innovative pilot studies by (a) holding workshops with
outside experts to provide training and technical assistance and to identify
specific personnel needs for the Center; (b) identifying means/mechanisms to
streamline and speed up data coding and sharing of large datasets (e.g., using
Internet- 2 protocols to transfer video files) and to use existing facilities
more efficiently; and (c) setting priorities for identifying and supporting
pilot investigations by Center faculty and affiliates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will establish mechanisms for evaluating Center activities and products
by (a) identifying and recruiting a Scientific/Technical Advisory Panel to
evaluate the Center's goals, activities, and products in terms of their impact
on the developmental and learning sciences and on their capacity to nurture a
new generation of developmental and learning scientists from the Human Sciences;
and (b) identifying and recruiting a Community Advisory Panel to provide
guidance and feedback concerning the practical value of the Center's activities
and products, especially with reference to our goal of including ethnic minority
participants in every aspect of research &lt;br/&gt;