* 0126050
* Development of Technology Based Assessments in Chemistry
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2007
* Janet Bond-Robinson, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 02/28/2007
* USD 499,859.00

Chemistry (12)&lt;br/&gt;A major emphasis in science education over the past
decade has been the development of programs to enrich undergraduate
understanding and appreciation of knowledge, and to improve the skills necessary
for continued learning. However the assessment techniques typically employed do
not necessarily assess the kinds of learning emphasized in national standards.
The Interactive Multi-media Exercises (IMMEX) project at UCLA has been
exploiting modern technology to allow educators the opportunity to teach,
observe and assess student performances in realistic settings. More than 10
years of experience with integrating IMMEX learning and assessment technology
into primary, secondary and medical school classrooms suggests to us that there
are ways to overcome the perils of authentic learning and assessment, and to use
these methods to achieve the goals envisioned by the NRC and others. We are
building upon this proven assessment technique by developing a full suite of
IMMEX materials for a two semester general chemistry course. The major partners
in this plan are Learning Chameleon (the licensing organization for IMMEX
software), Clemson University and the University of Kansas. Pilot testing also
is being carried out at Hutchinson Community College and Claflin College, and in
conjunction with the new American Chemical Society General Chemistry text. The
project has three phases: 1. The integration of existing materials (10 problems,
300 cases) into two different general chemistry programs. 2. The development of
new problems (a) to address second semester chemistry content, and (b) an
experimental type of problem that compresses the problem space and concentrates
on one particular concept or skill. These problems are being used both as an
assessment tool and as a diagnostic tool to identify different types of problem
solvers. 3. The development of specific interventions to help students become
more proficient, based on the analysis of the strategies our students actually
employ when solving problems. The outcomes of this project will be a suite of
IMMEX problems suitable for general chemistry courses, a workbook detailing the
program and an instructors manual.