* 0126709
* A Multidisciplinary Control Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2004
* Michael Demetriou, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Susan Burkett
* 04/30/2004
* USD 63,000.00

Engineering - Other (59)&lt;br/&gt;This project is establishing a
multidisciplinary, laboratory based undergraduate control curriculum across
engineering departments at Worcester Polytechnic Institute. The lab is being
shared by students in Electrical and Computer Engineering, Biomedical
Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Manufacturing Program and Aerospace
Program. Due to its flexibility stemming from the modular nature of the
instrumentation comprising the four work stations requested here, the
multidisciplinary controls/mechatronics laboratory borrows and adapts
pedagogical elements that have been successfully implemented at other
institutions. Prevalent themes include controlling physical devices as was
implemented at the University of Urbana-Champaign, and controlling of smart
structures as tested at Virginia Polytechnic Institute. A major influence comes
from a paper by D.S. Bernstein where the important aspects of enhancing
undergraduate control education at the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor were
laid out. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The curriculum is being redesigned to
incorporate an extensive laboratory component using the requested equipment.
This allows students to become proficient in state-of-the-art real-time data
acquisition and processing instrumentation, digital control implementation, and
vibration testing. The physical devices that are controlled change every two
years and are designed by WPI students pursuing their Major Qualifying Project
(MQP). The MQP is a WPI degree requirement that is equivalent to a three course
workload that leads to a written report and oral presentation and which is
equivalent to a Bachelor's thesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project results are
being disseminated at the Project Presentation Day in which graduating seniors
present their MQP projects to the WPI community; during the annual campus visits
of local (inner city) K-12 students which WPI already has established a
leadership in encouraging K-12 students to pursue careers in STEM disciplines;
through presentations/proceedings at control and engineering education
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;