* 0126817
* Integrated Study of Environmental Effects on Organisms
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Christopher Sacchi, Kutztown University
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 05/31/2006
* USD 74,812.00

Biological Sciences (61) The interaction of organisms with their environment is
manifested in biological responses at many scales, from the biochemical to the
ecosystem level. The relationships of organisms and their environments has been
of concern to ecologists in the context of natural environmental variation and
is of growing importance in light of the effects on organisms of human-
influenced environmental change. In this project eight laboratory classes
offered in the Biology department at Kutztown University are being adapted to
introduce students to study of the physiological responses of organisms to
natural environmental variation or to human-influenced environments. The efforts
are an adaptation of and based on the experiences of faculty at Bloomsburg
University, Cornell University, the University of Delaware, and the University
of Illinois at Urbana Champaign. Laboratory exercises focus on measurement of
effects of environments on organisms from the physiological to the whole
organism scale of response. The organisms to be studied include bacteria,
protists, plants, and selected marine invertebrates. The environmental factors
are being studied in controlled environments in the laboratory or greenhouse as
well as under conditions of natural environmental variation in field sites. In
this project: 1) Students are working cooperatively to examine the relationship
between organisms and environment in inquiry-based laboratory exercises, 2)
Students, working in groups, use computer-interfaced physiological equipment to
quantify response to selected environmental factors, 3) Students examine how
selected environmental factors impact organisms at the level of individual
performance, population numbers, or in competitive interactions among species,
4) Students analyze physiological and whole organism data using comparative
quantitative methods from graphical representation to basic inferential
statistics and 5) students present results in manuscript-style laboratory
reports, in posters, or in oral presentations patterned after those typical of a
professional meeting.