* 0126706
* Integration of Stable Isotopes across the Sciences (ISIS): Instrumentation for BioGeoChemistry and Environmental Studies
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Steven Bill, Keene State College
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey G. Ryan
* 05/31/2004
* USD 90,360.00

Interdisciplinary (99)&lt;br/&gt;This project is a multidisciplinary effort to
integrate stable isotope analytical techniques into the science curriculum at
Keene State College as a means to (1) motivate student learning; (2) involve
them into the process of scientific investigation and develop their scientific
and technical skills; and (3) increase their understanding of important concepts
in the biological, geological, and environmental field. The project is designed
to promote science education for students who at Keene State College are
composed of a large proportion of first generation students, and in Biology,
Geology, and Environmental Studies have 54 % women. Adapting exemplary models
from several other institutions (Dartmouth College, Saint Louis University, and
University of Utah) and the literature, student centered inquiry-based field and
laboratory exercises are being designed that use stable isotopes to address
scientifically interesting questions and highlight the interconnection between
classes such as Ecology and Evolution, Environmental Geology, Glacial Geology,
Stratigraphy, Hydrogeology, Paleontology, Geochemistry, Physiological Ecology,
and Community and Ecosytems Ecology. In addition, stable isotope analysis is a
critical component in student-faculty cooperative research projects through
Independent Study and the Environmental Studies Junior/Senior Seminar. The
acquisition of an isotope ratio mass spectrometer along with vacuum sample
preparation lines is necessary because it allows us to complete the stable
isotope analysis within the timeframe of a course (commercial analysis can take
4-12 months) and enables students to participate in the entire process of the
investigation. The project is being evaluated using a combination of pre- and
post-course questionnaires as well as a team of experienced external evaluators.