* 0126451
* Early Salamanders from Northern China
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Neil Shubin, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/2006
* USD 174,977.00

Salamanders are one of the major groups of living amphibians. Unfortunately,
very little is known about their early evolution because early salamander
fossils have not been recovered. Indeed until now, only two species from the
relevant time was known. We are now presented with an unusual opportunity to
investigate major questions of salamander evolution and diversity. Over the past
three years, we have recovered more than 800 superbly preserved salamander
specimens from the earliest parts of salamander history. These sites, from
northern China, contain a highly diverse and well preserved fauna of
salamanders. Access to these sites has been granted and they can readily be
quarried in an effort to recover even more specimens. The importance of these
sites and this material lies in its age (these are among the earliest known
salamanders), its abundance (hundreds of articulated skeletons can be collected
from each site), its taxonomic diversity (several different families are
present), its life-history diversity (many different parts of the life cycle are
are all preserved), and its exceptional preservation (soft-tissue impressions
are often present). Major goals of this project include: 1. to collect new
fossils from and assess the relative age of the exceptional fossil-bearing units
northern China, 2. to describe new fossil salamanders and revise known taxa, 3.
to access the evolutionary and geographic history of fossil and Recent
salamanders, and 4. to use the exquisite preservation of the new salamander
material to address how morphological variation has
evolved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;