* 0126505
* Advanced Microscopy Center for Undergraduate Course Development and Improvement
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Larry Reinking, Millersville University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy J. Pelaez
* 03/31/2006
* USD 121,388.00

Biological Sciences (61)&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in microscopic techniques
have provided scientists with new tools to understand cells and the tissues they
comprise. A wide variety of fluorescent labels are now available to study
cellular structure and function in both living and preserved cells. In addition,
contrast enhancing optics and computerized image analysis provide advanced
microscopy tools needed to prepare, observe and analyze the organization and
function of tissues and cells. These techniques provide the opportunity to
completely reinvent undergraduate courses that involve microscopy (e.g.
Functional Histology) in such a way that will provide for cooperative, inquiry-
based, learning and critical thinking among all students while giving them an
experience in discovery-learning. The knowledge of tissue and cellular
architecture thus gained will be particularly important to students planning to
enter medical school, graduate school, or work as technicians in most biological
laboratories. This project is incorporating these teaching techniques in a
centralized advanced microscopy center that provides students with the facility
and, through training in microtechniques and image analysis, the skills needed
for more critical observation of biological phenomena by using the microscope as
a tool of inquiry. In this way students are encouraged to develop research
interests and are able to design and evaluate experiments in a scientifically
meaningful way. This is being accomplished by incorporating experimentally
advanced microscopic techniques across the undergraduate curriculum and in our
undergraduate research programs for biology majors. The techniques are adapted
from successful programs established at Kent State University (DUE grant #
9551341) and Fort Lewis College (DUE grant # 9980815), both of which have been
established through NSF funding. These exemplary programs are being adapted so
as to integrate these powerful teaching techniques with advanced microscopy
technologies into our curriculum which is being modified for: 1) the
establishment of a new "functional histology" course; 2) specific laboratory
exercises across the biology curriculum; 3) two faculty workshops on advanced
microscopy techniques and modern image analyses; 4) our pre-college teacher
training programs and; 5) our academically talented minority high-school
program.