* 0126594
* Children's Research Initiative: Infant Perception Of Referencing Through Dynamic Gestures During Early Lexical Development
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2007
* Patricia Zukow-Goldring, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 08/31/2007
* USD 174,036.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Proposal: Infant Perception of
Referencing through Dynamic Gestures&lt;br/&gt; During Early Lexical
Development&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Patricia Zukow-Goldring, University of Southern
California&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this proposal
is to test hypotheses from a perceptually-based theory to determine how infants
initially learn to understand what words mean. Underlying this approach is
careful, longitudinal observation of both English- and Spanish-speaking
caregiver practices in ecologically valid environments, an often unacknowledged
but indispensable step in determining hypotheses worthy of testing. These
caregivers pattern what they say and do to mark the correspondence between words
and what they represent as they interact with their infants during very early
stages of word learning. The goal of this investigation is to pinpoint the
relation between this perceptual information and the infants' emergent abilities
crucial to early word learning through a set of experimental studies. These
studies will test the hypothesis that the types of perceptual structure or
information that caregivers present in gesture and speech attract attention by
making the link between a word and its referent perceptually accessible and easy
to notice. This research will examine a set of semantic functions typical of
infants' earliest word learning that includes nouns (objects), verbs (object
motions), and adjectives (object attributes). The sample of Spanish-speaking
families will be comprised of infants whose mothers have received a high school
diploma or a college education. Such a sample will extend the generality of this
theory beyond the usual English-speaking, middle-class population. Students
assisting with the project should gain an appreciation of a scientific approach
to psychology and a greater interest in pursuing graduate studies. For the
Latino student-assistants, this proposal offers the additional opportunity to
contribute their cultural knowledge and native language expertise to the
realization of this research. Findings from this research would have important
implications for theories of language development as well as great potential for
practitioners. A better understanding of how children learn that words refer to
aspects of ongoing events can serve as a basis for refining teaching methods and
enhancing student comprehension in early educational settings. Not only first
and second-language learners might benefit, but language-delayed and
perceptually impaired children as well. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;