* 0126427
* Collaborative Research:  Socialization of Preschoolers' Beliefs Across Parent and Peer Relationships
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2006
* Kelly Bost, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 09/30/2006
* USD 245,644.00

Abstract

Collaborative Research in the Socialization of Preschoolers' Beliefs Across
Parent and Peer Relationships

Kelly K. Bost & Brent A. McBride

Family relationships are the crucible within which children's social
competencies are forged and honed, however, the payoff for the child's social
competence is derived from interactions in the peer group. Children well
equipped (by virtue of the quality of their family relationships) with
interaction skills, beliefs about the desirability of social activities, and
convictions that social initiations will lead to positive outcomes tend to
become central, accepted members of their peer groups during childhood.
Furthermore, these children frequently accumulate social power in the peer group
that can be parlayed into preferential access to the physical and social
resources available in the group. These facts form the crux of a paradox because
parent-child relationships tend to emphasize affiliation, coherence, and
nurturance/protection at the expense of competition, conflict, and deception
whereas this balance is often reversed in the peer group. The question arises:
What is learned in the family that prepares children for the very different
social demands imposed by the peer group during early childhood? In this
project, we will collect data that can begin to answer this question.

Investigators from Auburn University and the University of Illinois pool their
expertise in parent-child and peer relationships for this 4-year longitudinal
study. A total sample of 100 families (50 at each site) will be recruited.
Insofar as possible, two-parent families will be recruited (a minimum of 50% for
the total sample) so that assessments of both mother-child and father-child
relationships can be obtained. Assessments of sibling interactions and
relationships will be obtained when possible. Because attachment theory proposes
the most well articulated characterization of parent-child relationships
available in the developmental sciences, assessments of both child and parent
will emphasize the 'secure base' aspects of their relationship. Parents will be
assessed in terms of their demonstrated ability to serve as a secure base for
their child and in terms of the availability of a 'secure base script' in
assessments of the adults themselves. Starting in the second project year (as
the children turn 3.0-3.5 years of age) assessments will take place also in
their peer groups. A standard battery of social competence assessments will be
collected and friendship and social dominance status also will be ascertained.
Between 3.5- 4.0 years of age, the availability of secure-base scripts in child-
parent narratives will be assessed, using tasks developed for this purpose. Both
classroom and parent-child assessments will continue in the third project year
(as the child turns 4.0 to 4.5 years of age). Investigators at the Illinois site
will place an additional emphasis on collecting, decoding and analyzing data
with respect to the nature and quality of father-child relationships and
children's broader social networks and supports.

