* 0126297
* Residence Time of Nubian Aquifer Ground Water Determined
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2002,02/29/2004
* Neil Sturchio, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 02/29/2004
* USD 90,469.00

126297&lt;br/&gt;Sturchio&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge of the subsurface
residence time of groundwater has a multitude of
important&lt;br/&gt;applications, both scientific and utilitarian. The
determination of groundwater residence time is fraught with complexity because
of uncertainties in aquifer properties, initial conditions, and hydrodynamic
history, as well as possible subsurface production or water-rock interactions
involving the isotopic or chemical tracers used for residence time
determination. Although there are a number of well-developed tools for dating
relatively young groundwaters, there is a paucity of tools for dating relatively
old groundwaters. The most commonly used tool for dating old groundwater is
accelerator-based mass spectrometry of 36Cl, yet this approach is compromised by
the temporal and geographic variability of the initial 36Cl/Cl ratio as well as
the locally variable magnitude of subsurface 36CI production. A more ideal tool
than 36Cl,, yet one which has been neglected because of analytical difficulties,
is 81Kr Resent developments in magnetooptical atom-trapping methods have made
accurate, precise 81Kr analysis possible by using a benchtop-scale apparatus. We
propose to use the prototype instrument for atom-trap trace analysis (developed
at Argonne National Laboratory by Z. T. Lu and colleagues) to perform the first
81Kr measurements of very old groundwater from the Nubian Aquifer of the Westem
Desert of Egypt. The Kr will be extracted and purified from samples of
8,000-10,000 liters each by B. Lehmann and colleagues of the University of Bem
who have developed large-sample noble gas extraction methods for 239Ar analysis
of ground waters. These 81Kr data will be obtained in conjunction with a suite
of other chemical and isotopic data (including solute ion and dissolved gas
analyses; stable isotopes of H, C, N, 0, S, and Cl; and tritium, radiocarbon,
and radiochlorine) and used to address fundamental questions about groundwater
dating and the history of the Nubian
aquifer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;