* 0126468
* Implementing Guided-inquiry Laboratories Utilizing Gas-chromatography Mass-spectrometry in the Chemistry/Biochemistry Majors Sequence
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2004
* Cheryl Longfellow, Philadelphia University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Ungar
* 03/31/2004
* USD 64,312.00

Chemistry (12)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the purchase of a Varian Saturn gas-
chromatograph mass-spectrometer (GC/MS) equipped with electron ionization (EI)
and chemical ionization (CI) capabilities, we are adapting and implementing
GC/MS-based laboratory experiments into four courses, Organic Chemistry,
Physical Chemistry, Instrumental Methods of Analysis, and Environmental
Chemistry at Philadelphia University. In addition, we are developing
disciplinary and interdisciplinary guided-inquiry projects for the four courses.
The GC/MS system is used as the catalyst in the development of these guided-
inquiry projects. In these laboratory projects, students are given chemistry
problems to solve as in an actual research setting. Solution to these problems
requires the students to work as a team to formulate a response and use GC/MS
and other instrumentation to solve the problems. The projects increase in
complexity as students gain experience with the instrumentation. For example, in
organic chemistry a two-component mixture is analyzed by GC/MS to gain insight
into reaction mechanisms. Identification of the compounds in natural and manmade
products with high vapor pressures and unique smells is explored in physical
chemistry. And, in environmental chemistry, a GC/MS required project examining
sediment contamination in the local Philadelphia area will soon be undertaken.
The overcharging goal of our project is to enable our students acquire highly
valued technical skills, develop critical thinking, and improve their
communication and teamwork skills. Furthermore, with the knowledge and expertise
gained working with modern research-grade instrumentation, our students would be
well equipped for entering into chemistry-related industrial positions and/or
highly competitive graduate programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;