* 0126837
* Blurring the Line Between the Teaching and Research Laboratory - Capillary Gas Chromatography and GC/MS Experiments in First and Second Year Chemistry Laboratories
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2005
* Lewis Fikes, Ohio Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 02/28/2005
* USD 57,932.00

Chemistry (12)&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to increase the percentage
of students continuing from introductory chemistry to more advanced courses and
to careers in science. We are accomplishing this by changing students'
perceptions of chemistry laboratory through adding project-oriented experiments
using advanced GC and GCMS instrumentation to solve topical and relevant
problems. A secondary goal is to enhance the preparation of our students by
providing laboratory experiences more similar to those they will experience in
the workplace. The integration into the curriculum of a series of experiments
using four Shimadzu GC-14B series capillary gas chromatographs with data
stations and a QP-5000 GCMS system equipped with autosampler supports a broader
departmental plan to introduce FTIR, UV/Vis, GC, and HPLC techniques into lower
level laboratories. Students are gradually building their skills by repeated
exposure to the GC and GCMS instruments in each of five laboratory sections
accompanying general, organic, and analytical chemistry. Experiments have been
carefully selected from the Journal of Chemical Education and are being adapted
to fit our existing program. Success in meeting our goals is being assessed both
numerically, by tracking the fate of each student entering our general chemistry
program, and more qualitatively through our existing departmental assessment
plan. Results will be shared with the educational community at national meetings
of the American Chemical Society, the Council on Undergraduate Research, and
Sigma Xi, in addition to informal discussions with associates at other Colleges.
Publication in the Journal of Chemical Education of novel or substantially
revised experiments developed to support our mission will complete our
dissemination effort.