* 0126565
* Incorporation of Problem-Based Learning into Two Courses -- Technology Foundations II-Materials and Bioprocessing -- in the Integrated Science, Business and Technology Program
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Nancy Jones, La Salle University
* Standard Grant
* Jill K. Singer
* 07/31/2004
* USD 111,537.00

Interdisciplinary (99)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LaSalle University is enhancing
student learning by incorporating Problem-Based Learning (PBL) into two courses
that are integral components of its new Integrated Science, Business and
Technology (ISBT) Program. Modeled after a very successful program at James
Madison University, ISBT is an interdisciplinary, undergraduate major that draws
on LaSalle's solid traditions in science, technology, and business education to
develop graduates that are uniquely qualified to take active leadership roles in
arriving at scientifically and economically informed solutions to real-world
problems. Funds are being used to purchase two UTMs, one Gas Chromatograph with
auto sampler, and two, 5-liter B. Braun B Fermentation Systems, and to support
faculty and curriculum development for Technology Foundations II-Materials
(sophomore-level) and Bioprocessing (junior-level). Materials are designed
around student use of a Universal Testing Machine (UTM) and students are
learning to use the UTM to test ferrous and non-ferrous metals, polymers and
elastomers, ceramics, composites, and adhesives and to perform tensile,
compression, shear, and flexure testing. This laboratory-intensive approach
affords the investigation of a broad range of material types within a one-
semester course and permits each student to discover a valid taxonomy of
material type and physical behavior. Bioprocessing is designed to integrate
concepts introduced in previous courses and imparts an understanding of
fermentation system fundamentals, knowledge of several different mammalian and
microbial biochemical systems, and an appreciation of the unique requirements of
each system. Students manipulate and use real-time data to keep fermentation
systems under control. PBL is being delivered through facilitated small student
groups and utilize the new equipment.