* 0126825
* Laboratory Adaptations for an Undergraduate Optics Initiative
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Matthew Walhout, Calvin University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 06/30/2006
* USD 42,726.00

Physics (13) A new optics initiative at Calvin College is providing students
with marketable technical&lt;br/&gt;training in the optical sciences and
introduces an optics concentration and an optical-&lt;br/&gt;technology minor
into the physics curriculum. The programs target students in
physics&lt;br/&gt;and engineering, as well as pre-service teachers preparing to
teach science in high school.&lt;br/&gt;Curricular changes include the
reconfiguration of several physics courses and the&lt;br/&gt;introduction of an
intermediate-level course entitled Phys 246: Waves, Optics,
and&lt;br/&gt;Optical Technology. Based on a mentor/apprentice pedagogical
model, this course will&lt;br/&gt;make use of a fully integrated lab-plus-
lecture format, an approach with which Calvin's&lt;br/&gt;science-education
specialists have already had great success in courses for pre-
service&lt;br/&gt;elementary school teachers. The new pedagogical method will
also influence the way in&lt;br/&gt;which students are mentored in a new upper-
level lab course, Phys 383-384: Advanced&lt;br/&gt;Optics Laboratory. The
project involves adaptations of labs for both the intermediate&lt;br/&gt;and the
advanced courses, so that the optics initiative can effectively address its two-
fold&lt;br/&gt;goal of cultivating technological knowledge and skill and
providing a fresh model of&lt;br/&gt;teaching by hands-on inquiry.&lt;br/&gt;The
labs are adapted from labs used at other institutions and from
the&lt;br/&gt;research projects of the PI and Co-PI. The curriculum for Phys 246
is taken largely from&lt;br/&gt;a course at the University of Maryland taught by
Dr. Wendell T. Hill, who is&lt;br/&gt;providing advice on a continuing basis.
Certain individual labs (at both intermediate and&lt;br/&gt;advanced levels) are
based on existing experiments and input from faculty at
Caltech,&lt;br/&gt;Harvard, Harvey Mudd College, and the National Institute of
Standards and Technology.&lt;br/&gt;Still others are a natural outgrowth of the
PI's research on laser-cooled and trapped&lt;br/&gt;atoms and plasma diagnostics
and the Co-PI's research on diode-laser applications
and&lt;br/&gt;spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;