* 0126244
* Studies of Crust and Upper Mantle Structure, Mantle Flow, and Geodynamics of the Chile Ridge Subduction
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2002,01/31/2005
* Raymond Russo, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 01/31/2005
* USD 222,120.00

Subduction of active oceanic spreading ridges has been an important process in
Cenozoic tectonics of the Pacific Basin. The Chile Ridge, the divergent Nazca-
Antarctic plate boundary, is currently subducting beneath continental South
America along the Chile Trench at ~46.5S, forming a plate triple junction in the
vicinity of the Taitao Peninsula. Chile Ridge spreading rate and morphology, and
the history of ridge subduction, are well-known: at least three southern Chile
Ridge segments have subducted beneath South America 14, 6 and 3 m.y. ago. The
current seismicity of the southern portion of subducting Nazca lithosphere
defines the dip of the Nazca slab north of the Nazca-Antarctica-South America
triple junction, albeit poorly. However, south of the triple junction seismicity
diminishes markedly and Antarctic plate slab dip is not known. Nonetheless,
given spreading and convergence histories, and knowledge of the motion of South
America with respect to the deep mantle, the morphology of the subducted Nazca
and Antarctic labs and their associated spreading ridge can be predicted. Thus,
the loci and expected shapes of gaps formed between actively spreading subducted
portions of the Nazca and Antarctic slabs - slab windows can be
determined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Implicit in the slab window idea is the
assumption that spreading between the two sides of the subducted ridge continues
after subduction, but that no new lithosphere is formed after subduction,
leading to formation of a progressively widening gap and asthenospheric mantle
flow between the two edges of the former ridge. Preliminary results from studies
of shear wave splitting and seismic attenuation in the Chile Ridge subduction
region indicate that the upper mantle flow field beneath South America may be
highly variable. Deployment of some 50 passive-source seismic stations in the
Chile Margin triple junction area offers the prospect of direct observation of a
slab window and the possibility that the form and function of the mantle flow
field in this geodynamically unique tectonic regime can be determined. Studies
of crust and upper mantle structure, mantle anisotropy, seismic attenuation, and
tectonics of the Nazca-Antarctica-South America triple junction region are
designed to yield the structure of slab gaps and mantle flow through those gaps.
Targeted tests of mantle responses to the ridge subduction include establishment
of the presence and thickness of mantle asthenosphere beneath the study region,
determination of potentially heterogeneous crustal and lithospheric structure
due to slab window magmatic processes and enhanced tectonic erosion,
observations of mantle flow directions in the vicinity of the gaps, and
estimation of seismic attenuation and associated inferences concerning mantle
temperature fields.