* 0126230
* Permian and Triassic Floras of the Beardmore Glacier Area:  Icehouse or Greenhouse?
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Edith Taylor, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 05/31/2005
* USD 93,750.00

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
Office of Polar Programs, provides funds for research to investigate fossil
plants from the central Transantarctic Mountains toward an understanding of
plant diversity and evolution as well as an improved understanding of the
paleoenvironmental conditions. The terrestrial rocks of the central
Transantarctic Mountains have been a source of outstanding plant fossil
discoveries over the last 30 years, including Permian and Triassic
permineralized peat, fossil forests silicified in growth position, and
compression floras with cuticular preservation. The rare juxtaposition of sites
that include many different types of plant preservation (permineralization,
compression/impression, in situ forests, mummified wood), the exceptional
quality of the plant preservation, and the richness of the sites make this area
unique in the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project centers on the
collection of Permian and Triassic plant megafossils from the Beardmore Glacier
area. Fieldwork is anticipated in the 2003-2004 field season as part of a mini-
camp with other researchers. Collections would include compression floras,
especially those from Graphite Peak, and permineralized peats from Skaar Ridge
and Fremouw Peak, both in the vicinity of Walcott Neve. These permineralizations
represent the rarest form of plant fossil preservation. Since they preserve a
three-dimensional record of the flora, they are important in understanding the
basic morphology and anatomy of fossil plants, as well as detailing
relationships among groups. The additional data provided by the juxtaposition of
plant fossils preserved both as permineralizations and compressions have already
contributed a great deal to our understanding of late Paleozoic-early Mesozoic
plant evolution. This project will address several important phylogenetic
hypotheses through further collection of material, coupled with material already
processed. The Permian and Triassic represent an important time in plant
evolution, and one about which we still know relatively little, especially in
the southern hemisphere. The glossopterid seed ferns in the Permian (leaf type,
Glossopteris), and the corystosperms in the Triassic (leaf type, Dicroidium)
were the dominant plant groups in Gondwana. Since both of these groups bore
seeds which were enclosed in some manner, they have been proposed at one time or
another as possible ancestors of the flowering plants, and have figured
prominently in phylogenetic analyses of seed plants. Only through a combination
of permineralizations and compressions is it possible to reveal a complete
picture of the form and structure of fossil plants, but more importantly, to
understand the position of these plant groups in seed plant evolution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants and silicified logs will be collected from the
section at Graphite Peak, which is believed to contain the Permian/Triassic
boundary. These plant fossils will be used to test several hypotheses concerning
the floral and paleoclimate changes that may have occurred across this boundary.
These include: How early in the Triassic does the Dicroidium flora appear? Does
Glossopteris occur with Dicroidium as it does in several other Gondwana floras?
Is there any evidence of a megaflora dominated by lycopods, as some of the
palynological evidence suggests? Silicified logs have been noted in the lower
Buckley Formation (mid-Permian?) at this site and these will be collected and
examined for paleoclimate data from tree rings. These can also be compared with
tree rings in Late Permian wood (upper Buckley) from nearby Mt. Achernar. The
Late Permian has been assumed to be much warmer than Early-Middle Permian and
this should be reflected in differences in the width and structure of the tree
rings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is expected to lead to significant
improvements in understanding of both plant evolution and paleoenvironmental
conditions during the critical Permian to Triassic
interval.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;