* 0126592
* A Workshop on An Interdisciplinary Exploration of Social Cooperation, Spring 2002 at the University of Memphis
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Joann Keyton, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 08/31/2002
* USD 10,748.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A Workshop on An Interdisciplinary Exploration of
Social Cooperation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Joann Keyton&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of the proposed workshop grant is to develop and execute a small workshop
that promotes interdisciplinary research that identifies the factors that
contribute to, or compromise, children's ability to work cooperatively in groups
critical skill for children's academic and social development. To that end, the
proposed workshop will: (a) bring together scholars in three disciplines--
Communication, Education, and Psychology that can contribute to our
understanding of social cooperation; (b) invite a senior scholar in each of
these disciplines to keynote at the workshop; (c) invite regional scholars
(generally, Alabama, Arkansas, Georgia, Kentucky, Mississippi, Missouri,
Tennessee) to participate in working sessions of the workshop to help explore
this research focus, develop research agendas, and discover potential
interdisciplinary research partners; and (d) invite community leaders and
experts who work with children and adolescents to provide a practical framework
from which research is generated and for which basic research can provide
meaningful answers.&lt;br/&gt;Thus, the workshop is designed to promote exchange
of current knowledge about children's social cooperativeness in each of the
contexts in which children find themselves as group members (families, peer
groups, organized activities, and school settings), and to promote exchange of
knowledge across disciplines. More specifically, the host scholars want to use
the workshop and its activities as a vehicle for articulating a vision for
developing an interdisciplinary research center that would promote collaborative
work among researchers from universities, school districts, and community
agencies throughout the Mid-South region.&lt;br/&gt;