* 0126373
* Structural Engineering Workshop: Experiments In The Structural Engineering Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Richard DeVries, Milwaukee School of Engineering
* Standard Grant
* Susan Burkett
* 07/31/2005
* USD 46,217.00

Engineering - Civil (54) The projects adapts a series of large-scale experiments
into the advanced undergraduate structural engineering courses, and exercises to
enhance continuity between graduate and undergraduate courses. Although the
literature describes several successful efforts to bring physical experiments
into structural engineering courses, the Structural Engineering Workshop is
going to advance this methodology in two important ways: First, most previous
projects were limited to illustrating structural analysis concepts, but the
Structural Engineering Workshop emphasizes failure modes of real structural
components and systems. This is important because many design procedures are
meant to steer us toward some failure modes and away from others, but it is
difficult for students to appreciate why most students never get the chance to
see (and hear and touch!) the difference between the brittle failure of an over-
reinforced beam and the ductile failure of an under-reinforced beam. Second,
while projects reported in the literature were limited in scope to one
particular course, the Structural Engineering Workshop is going to use the
experiments as a means to integrate activities across a range of courses in an
engineering program.

Students of different years and specialties are going to participate in planning
and production of test specimens, testing, and analysis of results. Giving
students the opportunity to revisit the experiments throughout their academic
programs, each time from the shifted viewpoint of a different course, is going
to help them understand the critical links between material/component behavior,
construction methods, and structural design.