* 0126090
* Continuing Operation of the Antarctic Submillimeter Telescope and Remote Observatory (AST/RO)
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Antony Stark, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 04/30/2006
* USD 2,588,889.00

The Antarctic Submillimeter Telescope and Remote Observatory (AST/RO) is
designed to investigate one of the least explored bands of electromagnetic
radiation emitted by astronomical sources. Submillimeter-wave radiation, at
frequencies from about 300 Gigahertz (billions of cycles per second) up into the
Terahertz (trillions of cycles per second) range, is emitted by dense gas and
dust between the stars, and submillimeter-wave observations allow us to study in
unprecedented detail the galactic forces acting upon that gas and the star
formation processes within it. AST/RO is a 1.7 meter diameter single-dish
instrument, which has been operating for six years at South Pole station in
several wave bands with arcminute resolution over regions of sky which are
several square degrees in size. AST/RO's relatively large field of view allows
the observation of interstellar molecular clouds throughout the fourth quadrant
of the Milky Way and the Magellanic Clouds, in order to locate star-forming
cores and study in detail the dynamics of dense gas in our own galaxy. Studies
of molecular clouds with varying heavy element content under a variety of
galactic environments shows us how molecular clouds are structured, how the
newly-formed stars react back on the cloud, and how galactic forces affect cloud
structure. AST/RO is recognized as the test bed and progenitor of planned
instruments which will go on to study how stars form throughout the universe
from the earliest times to the present. Essential to AST/RO's capabilities is
its location as Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station, an exceptionally cold, dry
site which has unique logistical opportunities and challenges. Most
submillimeter radiation from astronomical sources is absorbed by irregular
concentrations of atmospheric water vapor before it reaches the Earth's surface.
The dry air over South Pole Station allows an accurate intercomparison of
submillimeter-wave power levels on the scale of the Milky Way and its companion
galaxies.&lt;br/&gt;