* 0126446
* Lake Watch:Undergraduate Students as Teachers of Satellite Imaging Among Volunteer Lake Monitors
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Richard Blakemore, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 04/30/2005
* USD 147,000.00

Biological Sciences (61)&lt;br/&gt;This project is developing an
interdisciplinary curriculum bringing together two highly successful but
currently separate areas of excellence at UNH. The Lakes Lay Monitoring Program
(LLMP) is a 22-year veteran program wherein citizen stakeholders living on NH
lakes collect water-quality data for analysis and archiving at UNH. The LLMP is
being augmented with the use of remote sensing and geographic information
systems (GIS), drawing from strengths associated with a world-class facility
housed in the Institute for the Study of Earth, Oceans, and Space (EOS). We are
recruiting a cohort of UNH sophomores, including non-science majors, to
participate in the project which is adapting the Blackboard Project to connect
lay lake volunteers and UNH undergraduates. They are learning to use the geo-
spatial technologies (GST) to develop regional algorithms to monitor
lake/watersheds from space, while learning theory and practice of limnology and
microbial ecology. We are engaging the undergraduates as outreach teachers
through adaptation of methods from the Gaia Crossroads Project to train the lay
monitors in GST. This "Lake Watch Project" develops skills for communication,
teamwork and critical thinking through hypothesis-driven, cooperative learning.
The project increases faculty empowerment of undergraduates as a teaching
resource and promotes faculty awareness of lecture-less teaching. It yields,
through a writing- and speaking-intensive Lake Watch Seminar course, a student-
prepared resource manual and a distance-learning model. The suitability of this
model is being evaluated as a means of introducing lake/watershed remote sensing
into other arenas, including K-12 classrooms.