* 0126877
* Integrating New Learning Strategies in a Community College Engineering Science Program
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2006
* Mahmoud Ardebili, Research Foundation of the City University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 01/31/2006
* USD 167,563.00

Engineering - Other (59)&lt;br/&gt; Borough of Manhattan Community College
(BMCC) is using this CCLI-A&amp;I project to redesign its core engineering
science courses by transforming the instructional methodology from one that is
primarily lecture based to one that emphasizes active learning in a laboratory
setting. The aim is to enhance students understanding of engineering theory and
develop their analytical skills. The project is the result of recommendations
made by an outside evaluator, and discussions between our faculty and
engineering faculty from several four year institutions. Our faculty are working
with representatives from The City College of New York (CCNY), the University of
Virginia (UV) and the Louisiana Technological University (LTU) to adapt and
implement exemplary educational materials and pedagogical strategies that have
been successfully tested and implemented at each of these institutions. The
specifically topics are:&lt;br/&gt;1) Circuits--adapt and implement (a&amp;i) a
set of laboratory exercises developed at CCNY School of Engineering. Hands-on
activities are complemented by the use of Electronic Workbench and LabView
software.&lt;br/&gt;2) Graphics--a&amp;i computer based activities such as solid
modeling using Pro/Engineer software as are used at CCNY and other schools.
&lt;br/&gt;3) Mechanics-- a&amp;i a series of hands-on exercises such as Working
Model as was developed at LTU.&lt;br/&gt;4) Thermodynamics--a&amp;i a set of
workshops developed at UV. Simulations and analysis at the workshops are
supported by the CYCLEPAD software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In support of these
curricular reforms, this project is setting up a computer laboratory and an
experimental engineering science laboratory equipped with up-to-date software
and instruments. A training program consisting of workshops conducted by faculty
from the model institutions ensures that our faculty are knowledgeable in the
pedagogical methods of the model institutions and are capable of using active
learning and project based activities. The measurable outcome of the project
will be a manual for the four courses, which will include hands-on laboratory
experiments and computer activities. A separate manual consisting of student
projects will also be an outcome product. These products will be disseminated at
national and regional engineering meetings and will be made available on the
college's web site. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;