* 0126640
* Adaptation and Implementation of Inquiry-Based Genomics Into the Undergraduate Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* David Kass, Eastern Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Udovic
* 08/31/2006
* USD 123,709.00

Biological Sciences (61) The Biology and Chemistry departments at Eastern
Michigan University (EMU) are dedicated to pedagogical innovation and the
development of inquiry-based learning. Genomics is a rapidly advancing
interdisciplinary science with highly projected applicability in the local and
global job markets presenting a unique opportunity for the development of new
pedagogical strategies in this area. This is particularly true at EMU, as many
graduates are subsequently employed at local biotechnology firms. This project,
therefore, adapts from a James Madison University funded NSF award "Integration
of genomics into the undergraduate curriculum" (award #9981099), and implements
new inquiry-based investigations at Eastern Michigan University. This project
promotes new integrative pedagogical strategies in genomics through the
development of a Genome Analysis course and the design of investigative projects
in Biochemistry, Recombinant DNA Technology, Microbial Physiology, and newly-
developed, inquiry-based core courses. Additionally, computational and technical
skills are being developed with the acquisition of new equipment. The developed
courses and modules resulting from this project provide model pedagogical
advancements for universities and colleges nationwide, coinciding with a
national emphasis in genomics and bioinformatics and a need for individuals
knowledgeable in these areas.