* 0126122
* Investigating the Kinematic History of the Kongur Shan Normal Fault System, Western Tibet
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2005
* An Yin, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 01/31/2005
* USD 213,230.00

A first-order feature of the Tibetan Plateau is its triangular geometry on map
view with its north-south width increasing from ~500 km in the west to >1500 km
in the east. This asymmetry has been explained by either eastward extrusion of
Tibet or partitioning of north-south shortening in the Tian Shan and northern
Tibet across the strong Tarim block. To quantify the role of lateral extrusion
in accommodating intracontinental deformation during the Indo-Asian collision,
we must know the timing and magnitude of slip along major Cenozoic strike-slip
faults in Asia. This goal may be achieved by examining the termination
structures of the strike-slip faults where their motion is transferred to dip-
slip structures. In this proposal, we plan to investigate the temporal and
spatial evolution of one of such structures: the 220-km long, north-trending
Kongur Shan extensional system in the eastern Pamirs. In the lateral-extrusion
model, the Kongur Shan extensional system is the northern termination of the
~1000-km long right-slip Karakorum fault, which is thought to have assisted
Tibet to extrude hundreds of kilometers eastward. Because the southern end of
the Kongur Shan system is assumed to link with the right-slip Karakorum fault,
the extrusion model requires that the extensional system has progressively
lengthened northward and its total magnitude of extension decreases from south
to north. Alternatively, the oroclinal-bending model suggests that the
development of the north-trending Kongur Shan system may have been related to
pure bending of the Pamir-Nanga Parbat syntaxis system during Cenozoic northward
indentation of the Pamir promontory. This hypothesis not only explains coeval
east-west extension in the Pamirs and east-west contraction in the Nanga Parbat
region in the western Himalayan orogen, but also predicts specifically that the
Kongur Shan extensional system should have lengthened progressively southward
and its total magnitude of extension decreases along strike to the south. The
distinctive predictions regarding the extensional-magnitude distribution and
propagation direction of the Kongur Shan extensional system by the two competing
models form the basis of this proposal. We plan to conduct field mapping across
the extensional system in four different transects, each is about 20-40 km wide,
which will allow us to construct a series of cross sections for estimating the
magnitude of extension along individual segment of the system. Field mapping
will focus on the question of whether the Kongur Shan extensional system is
actually linked with the Karakorum fault. We will integrate field mapping with
thermobarometric, 40 Ar/39 Ar thermochronologic, and U-Th-Pb ion-microprobe
geochronologic analyses to constrain the P-T-t paths for both the hangingwall
and footwall of the extensional system. The results of this study will provide
two important constraints on the tectonics of the western Himalayan orogen: (1)
the timing and magnitude of eastward extrusion of Tibet, and (2) the dynamic
cause for the initiation and development of coeval east-west extension and
contraction in the western syntaxis system.