* 0126856
* Implementation of the Learning Factory Model in an Upper Division Engineering Technology Program
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2002,09/30/2004
* Mukasa Ssemakula, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 09/30/2004
* USD 116,727.00

Engineering - Engineering Technology (58)&lt;br/&gt;The Learning Factory concept
was first developed as part of the TRP/NSF funded Manufacturing Engineering
Education Partnership (MEEP). The objective of the Learning Factory (LF) is to
integrate a practice-based engineering curriculum that balances analytical and
theoretical knowledge with physical facilities for product realization in an
industrial-like setting. The LF model, which emphasizes practical experience,
moves Engineering programs closer to the Engineering Technology (ET) model;
which by design is oriented to practical applications. Consequently, ET programs
are well suited to implementing the LF. This project's goal is the adaptation of
the LF model for implementation in ET programs. Under this project, five
carefully selected courses in the current programs are being modified. This will
lead to the use of coordinated projects across those courses. The specific
coordinated projects focus on the design and building of functional model
engines. In the various courses, students generate CAD drawings of all the
engine 1components, produce process plans for the engine components, fabricate
the engine components and assembling and testing the engines. This education
process provides the students with a good understanding of engines. That is, the
students gain the exposure to the full range of issues involved in the product
design phase, in the manufacturing planning phase, in the fabrication phase, in
the assembly phase and in the testing phase. Since the implementation component
of the project is modifying of existing courses rather than developing new ones,
it is highly likely that the results of the project will be widely accepted by
the ET community. The results will be disseminated through conferences and
journal publications geared to the Engineering and Engineering Technology
community. There will also be particular outreach to area community colleges to
encourage coordinated implementation of the LF concept.&lt;br/&gt;