* 0126146
* Collaborative Research:  Late Paleozoic-Mesozoic Fauna, Environment, Climate and Basinal History:  Beardmore Glacier Area, Transantarctic Mountains
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Molly Miller, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 05/31/2006
* USD 102,984.00

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
Office of Polar Programs, provides funds for a study to investigate
paleoenvironmental conditions during the late Paleozoic and Mesozoic in central
interior Antarctica. The 4 km thick sequence of sedimentary rocks, known as the
Beacon Supergroup, in the Beardmore Glacier area records 90 million years of
Permian through Jurassic history of this high-paleolatitude sector of Gondwana.
It accumulated in a foreland basin with a rate of subsidence approximately equal
to the rate of deposition. The deposits have yielded diverse vertebrate fossils,
in situ fossil forests, and exceptionally well preserved plant fossils. They
give a unique glimpse of glacial, lake, and stream/river environments and
ecosystems and preserve an unparalleled record of the depositional,
paleoclimatic, and tectonic history of the area. The excellent work done to date
provides a solid base of information on which to build understanding of
conditions and processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a collaborative
study of this stratigraphic section that will integrate sedimentologic,
paleontologic, and ichnologic observations to answer focused questions,
including: (1) What are the stratigraphic architecture and alluvial facies of
Upper Permian to Jurassic rocks in the Beardmore area?; (2) In what
tectonostratigraphic setting were these rocks deposited?; (3) Did vertebrates
inhabit the cold, near-polar, Permian floodplains, as indicated by vertebrate
burrows, and can these burrows be used to identify, for the first time, the
presence of small early mammals in Mesozoic deposits?; and (4) How did bottom-
dwelling animals in lakes and streams use substrate ecospace, how did ecospace
use at these high paleolatitudes differ from ecospace use in equivalent
environments at low paleolatitudes, and what does burrow distribution reveal
about seasonality of river flow and thus about paleoclimate? Answers to these
questions will (1) clarify the paleoclimatic, basinal, and tectonic history of
this part of Gondwana, (2) elucidate the colonization of near-polar ecosystems
by vertebrates, (3) provide new information on the environmental and
paleolatitudinal distributions of early mammals, and (4) allow semi-quantitative
assessment of the activity and abundance of bottom-dwelling animals in different
freshwater environments at high and low latitudes. In summary, this project will
contribute significantly to an understanding of paleobiology and paleoecology at
a high latitude floodplain setting during a time in Earth history when the
climate was much different than today.&lt;br/&gt;