* 0126849
* Collaborative Investigation of Chaos, Exotic Atoms, and Electron Optics in the Advanced Physics Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Martin Johnston, University of St. Thomas
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 07/31/2005
* USD 83,434.00

Physics (13)

In this project, the investigator is building an advanced physics lab course
into an equipment-intensive course where students learn and develop hands-on
skills in the areas of computer interfacing, modular instrumentation, and vacuum
techniques while they learn to work collaboratively, as they would in a
technical job environment.

Recent physics education research has shown the success of the collaborative
approach in teaching introductory physics. This project supports the full-scale
implementation of teaching and learning advanced experimental techniques in a
collaborative environment by adapting the ideas developed by P. Heller and M.
Hollabaugh ("Teaching Problem Solving Through Cooperative Grouping. Part 2:
Designing Problems and Structuring Groups," Am. J. Phys. 60, 637-644 [1992]) and
applying them to an upper-division laboratory course. Specifically, "context-
rich" problems are being developed and student groups are being managed to
foster problem solving skills in the laboratory.

The new advanced physics lab course is structured around three experimental
problems: detecting mechanical chaos, measuring the lifetime of an exotic atom,
and designing and characterizing a simple, low-energy electron gun. The
experiments are adapted from F. Moon's book on chaos, _Chaotic and Fractal
Dynamics_ (Wiley, 1992, pp. 451-456); M. Yuly's paper on positronium decay,
"Positronium in the Undergraduate Laboratory," Am. J. Phys. 67, 880-884 (1999);
and the discussion of vacuum techniques and electron optics in _Building
Scientific Apparatus_, 2d edn., by J. Moore, C. Davis, and M. Coplan (Perseus
Books, 1991, pp. 75-118 and 305-344). The problems were chosen because of the
instrumentation they involve and the skills students can learn from them. By
working on the same problem and discussing the experimental techniques presented
in a closely coordinated lecture, students develop both individual skills and
the ability to work in a group. The collaborative model has been tested with a
mechanical chaos experiment, with excellent results, particularly in terms of
increased student readiness for independent research projects.

The project is being evaluated by students, both formatively over the course of
the project and longitudinally as they progress in the major; by faculty, both
internally and externally; and by presenting for review and comment a detailed
instructor's manual, supporting Web site, and articles in journals such as the
_American Journal of Physics_ and _The Physics Teacher_.