* 0126620
* A Workshop on Sequencing Maize Genic Regions to be held on July 1-2, 2001, in St. Louis, Missouri
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2001,01/31/2002
* Vicki Chandler, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* TEST user
* 01/31/2002
* USD 20,845.00

This workshop will focus on the best approaches to sequencing the gene fraction
of the maize genome and will develop a comprehensive plan for achieving this
goal. Maize is the best studied genetic system in the grasses, with exceptional
strengths in facilitating our understanding of plant development, gene
regulation (including epigenetics), stress tolerance, transposable element
function, and genome evolution. Physical and genetic mapping, mutagenesis,
reverse genetics, transformation, and other molecular tools are reliably
employed in maize research. However, a major limitation to the continued
productivity of maize as a model plant species is the lack of comprehensive
understanding of gene content and arrangement of the maize genome. There are now
technologies for accomplishing this task in a short time frame and at low cost.
Thus, the goal of obtaining a completed sequence of the gene-rich regions of the
maize genome is feasible, worthy and timely.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chief goal
of the workshop will be to bring together experts in high throughput genomic
sequencing and analyses with experts knowledgeable about the properties of the
maize genome. This small group, comprising scientists from academia and
industry, and observers from government agencies, will discuss strategies for
sequencing the maize gene space. The output from this workshop will be a
comprehensive plan for proceeding with sequencing the maize genome, an
estimation of the resources required, and a timetable for action. This document
will be circulated to the wider genetics and genomics communities for comment
prior to finalizing the document. A timetable for follow up activities will also
be developed.&lt;br/&gt;