* 0126269
* Collaborative Research:  U-Series Isotopic Constraints on the Rates of Magma Genesis Evolution and Degassing at Mt. Erebus, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2005
* Kenneth Sims, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 02/28/2005
* USD 117,582.00

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
Office of Polar Programs, provides funds for research on magmatic processes that
are active in the Mount Erebus volcanic system. Magmatism is one of the most
fundamental dynamic processes of planetary interiors, yet our knowledge of the
time-dependent parameters of basalt petrogenesis (e.g. solid mantle upwelling
rate, melting rate, melt transport rate, magma storage time, crystallization
rate, magma recharge rate) is quite limited. Magmatic processes such as melting,
fractional crystallization and magma chamber replenishment can fractionate
parent/daughter ratios of U-decay series isotopes and can thus create isotopic
disequilibrium. Because the half-lives of the U-series isotopes are comparable
to the time-scales of these processes, measurement of this isotopic
disequilibrium in volcanic glasses and mineral separates provides constraints on
the duration and rates of magmatic processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of this project are to assemble a unique geochemical-isotopic-
petrological data set, and use this to evaluate the rate dependent parameters of
magma genesis, evolution, and degassing at Mt Erebus, Antarctica. Mt. Erebus,
the most active volcano in Antarctica, contains a persistent convecting and
degassing anorthoclase phonolite lava lake that has 2-6 small Strombolian
eruptions daily. The lava lake provides a unique window into the magmatic system
and offers a rare opportunity to examine processes occurring deep within the
convecting magma body. The lava lake is continuously degassing and on-going work
is focused on sampling and measuring the gas compositions and emission rates.
The small Strombolian eruptions conveniently eject volcanic bombs thus providing
pristine samples of the magma containing large, well-formed anorthoclase
crystals. These bombs, plus older radiometrically-dated lava flows around the
summit of Mt. Erebus provide a unique opportunity to investigate the timing of
fundamental magmatic and volcanological processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through
measurement of U-series isotopes (as well as isotopic and major- and trace-
element constraints) from the known-age lavas, recently erupted bombs, and gases
collected from Mt Erebus, this project will examine the timescales of: 1) magma
genesis and melt transport from the mantle; 2) magma evolution and
crystallization processes during magma storage in the crust; and 3) magma
degassing and recharge rates into the current erupting magma
chamber.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This integrated study of gases and associated
magma using U-series isotopes should lead to a major improvement in
understanding of the Erebus system, and might yield a significant new insights
about the whole magmatic system from magma formation by partial melting in the
mantle through its evolution and finally to it degassing and open system
behavior in the lava lake.&lt;br/&gt;