* 0127579
* Enchancing Spatial Reasoning and Visual Cognition for Early Science and Engineering Students with 'Hands-on' Interactive Tools and Exercises
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2005
* Yi-Luen Do, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 02/28/2005
* USD 74,984.00

Interdisciplinary (99)&lt;br/&gt;Many problems in science, engineering, and
mathematics are inherently spatial in nature. &lt;br/&gt;Examples are
understanding and reasoning about atoms in a molecule, the design of mechanical
&lt;br/&gt;and electronic systems such as robots, the layout of an integrated
circuit or microelectronic&lt;br/&gt;mechanical chip, and the transmission of
tension and compression forces in a structural&lt;br/&gt;system. These problems
all demand the ability to visualize and reason
spatially.&lt;br/&gt;Surprisingly, students of science and engineering are
seldom taught these skills.&lt;br/&gt;Visual thinking and the ability to reason
spatially can be taught and learned: indeed, this&lt;br/&gt;is a central
component of architectural design education. We teach architects to
manage&lt;br/&gt;and manipulate complex configurations of physical elements in
space, and architectural&lt;br/&gt;educators have developed techniques for
teaching this ability. In the past, the principal&lt;br/&gt;means for teaching
spatial and visual thinking has been drawing and three-
dimensional&lt;br/&gt;model-making. Today interactive media and software tools
augment these traditional&lt;br/&gt;methods. Based on experience with teaching
visual skills to architectural designers we are&lt;br/&gt;developing a series of
exercises that, as part of a course on visual and spatial reasoning,
&lt;br/&gt;can enhance science, mathematics, and engineering education for
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;The exercises include drawing with pencil and
paper as well as computational drawing&lt;br/&gt;media, physical as well as
computer-graphics based three dimensional modeling,&lt;br/&gt;and techniques for
shifting between computational and physical representations. We
are&lt;br/&gt;testing these exercises in a course taught to first-year college
students and assessing the &lt;br/&gt;learning experience using both formative
and summative evaluations.