* 0127139
* Designing a New Learning Environment for Introductory Environmental Engineering and Science Students
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Elizabeth Eschenbach, Humboldt State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Susan Burkett
* 12/31/2005
* USD 84,648.00

Engineering - Other (59)&lt;br/&gt;Two introductory courses-- Introduction to
Environmental Resources Engineering and Science and Introduction to Design-are
being revitalized to better prepare students to solve the difficult
interdisciplinary problems of the 21st century. These courses are being
redesigned to provide integrated, interdisciplinary approaches to solving
environmental problems, including: (1) interdisciplinary presentation of
environmental and human systems via hands-on team projects, field and lab
experiences, (2) clear presentation of course requirements and careers available
to environmental scientists and resource engineers, and 3) development of
computational, technical communication and teamwork skills through projects,
field and lab experiments. These courses are going to give students the
knowledge, skills and attitudes they need to be successful in their majors. The
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute's studio teaching and Just-In-Time Teaching
(JiTT) approaches are being adapted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project approach
consists of modifying existing curricula to incorporate the Studio Teaching
&lt;br/&gt;and Just-In-Time Teaching (JiTT) approaches, and PROMISE Project
materials. WebCT software and the new ERE Design Studio are being used to
integrate technology into the curriculum. The project addresses NSF themes of
diversity and integration of technology in the curriculum. The two PIs are women
in a field where women are underrepresented; the PROMISE curriculum is more
inclusive of underrepresented groups in SMET areas. Both JiTT and Studio
Teaching require the integration of technology in the
classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project dissemination plan consist of making
WebCT course modules containing engineering curricula available through course
web pages, making presentations at national meetings, conducting on- and off-
campus faculty development workshops, and journal publications.&lt;br/&gt;