* 0127072
* Integrating GIS, Remote Sensing and GPS Technologies into Undergraduate Education and Research
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Shunfu Hu, University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 05/31/2005
* USD 39,234.00

Geography (88)&lt;br/&gt;This project supports NSF's goal of integrating
technology into education. It enhances and revitalizes the undergraduate GIS
curricula at University of Wisconsin Oshkosh (UW Oshkosh) by adapting and
implementing high-quality educational materials and effective educational
practices in geographic information science, including the GIS core curriculum
developed by the NSF supported National Center of Geographic Information and
Analysis, and the remote sensing core curriculum being developed by the American
Society for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing. This project is engaged in a
major curriculum renovation that will integrate GIS, remote sensing and Global
Positioning System technologies into undergraduate education and research. In
particular, this proposal demonstrates two major changes in the development of
the new GIS curricula. First, three current geographic technique courses are
being enhanced and two new technique courses developed to provide students with
laboratory-based learning and additional opportunities to enhance their critical
thinking abilities. Students now have the opportunity to learn cutting-edge
technologies in geography. Second, a new GIS Laboratory is being assembled using
high-end personal computers in a network environment for use in the new
technique courses. This lab is also enhancing opportunities for student-faculty
collaborative research. The University of Wisconsin at Oshkosh is a
comprehensive, suburban, commuter campus. These improvements in teaching
geographic information science may serve as a model for many similar
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;