* 0127454
* A Software Package for Teaching Neurobiology Through Interactive Laboratory Simulations
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2005
* William Moody, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 02/28/2005
* USD 409,447.00

Biological Sciences (61)&lt;br/&gt;This project continues an NSF-funded project
to teach undergraduate neurobiology through interactive simulations that mimic
the experience of doing actual experiments in a real wet lab. Our first effort
produced a software framework that allows students to learn basic concepts by
doing simulated experiments in an active exploratory way, and a small set of
interactive laboratories that exercise this framework through explorations of,
e.g. resting potentials, action potentials and simple neuromodulation. Here, we
are undertaking major new efforts which exploit our existing software framework
to: 1) teach students quantitative and analytical skills and methods in the
context of data analysis and experimental design; 2) make our software and labs
broadly available to students from a wide variety of backgrounds and educational
environments (including non-traditional learners) through a series of
interactive tutorials covering fundamental concepts and the use of our software;
and 3) develop new computer-based tools for the objective assessment and graded
testing of student learning. The result will be a second version of our
software, incorporating major new tools for experimental design, data analysis,
and testing/assessment of student learning, together with a collection of 30
fully tested interactive laboratories covering most or all&lt;br/&gt;of the core
concepts in cellular neurobiology.&lt;br/&gt;