* 0127120
* Integration of Gas Chromatography Mass Spectrometry and Fourier Transform Infrared  Spectroscopy into the Undergraduate Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2003
* Richard Hermens, Eastern Oregon University
* Standard Grant
* kristina parsons
* 12/31/2003
* USD 91,320.00

Chemistry (12)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chemistry laboratory curriculum is being
transformed and revitalized by the introduction of context-based experiments
that emphasize critical thinking and that challenge students with real-world
problems. Students are also being provided with service learning opportunities.
From these activities, the students are understanding the role of chemistry in
our society, particularly toward solving environmental issues, the capabilities
and limitations of modern instrumentation and technology, and building
connections with their community. These laboratory experiences are being adapted
from the educational and research literature and are being implemented in part
through the use of a Gas Chromatograph-Mass Spectrometer (GC-MS) and a Fourier
Transform Infrared (FT-IR) spectrophotometer. Teams of students from lower and
upper division laboratory courses including Environmental, Analytical,
Instrumental, and Organic Chemistry and Physical Science for pre-service
teachers are investigating environmental issues related to protecting and
sustaining natural resources on a nearby Native American Reservation. As a
consequence of the inquiry-based laboratories and their service-learning
component, students are focussing on the scientific process and the significance
of results, rather than following cookbook-type experiments.