* 0127491
* Feedback Control of an Acid-Neutralization Reactor:  An Integrated Learning and Student Assessment Module
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Mark McCready, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Bevlee Watford
* 05/31/2004
* USD 74,989.00

Engineering - Chemical (53)&lt;br/&gt;Our work addresses the fundamental
national needs of engineering student retention because it provides a
project/inquiry -based experience for first year engineering students who have
not yet committed to engineering. To address this need we have created a
comprehensive, web-integrated, learning and student assessment module. This
module is based on a feedback-controlled acid neutralization laboratory
experiment. It has been designed for our first year engineering students and
includes topics such as feedback control, which is of interest to many of the
engineering disciplines. Our experiment also incorporates the use of mass
conservation equations (of interest to chemical and environmental engineers) and
modeling of engineering systems with computer - based simulation which is of
interest to all engineers. A key part of our module was the development of a
web-based student (Primary Trait Analysis) assessment tool. This assessment tool
will be "wrapped around" the simulator so that instructors can "observe" and
then provide feedback about how students go through the process of using a
simulations tool to explore, understand, and interpret data from a physical
experiment. From this, instructors would gain crucial insight into student
learning pathways and thus determine both how, and how well students are
learning. Further it endeavors to show how to integrate web-based information
and the use of an engineering simulator to explore and understand a physical
experiment. The details necessary to reproduce the experiment, the simulator,
the web-based information and the assessment procedure are available for testing
and implementation at other institutions. &lt;br/&gt;