* 0127926
* Studies in Statistical Mechanics
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2002,03/31/2005
* Joel Lebowitz, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 03/31/2005
* USD 487,500.00

This grant is supported by the Divisions of Materials Research, Physics, and
Mathematical Sciences. The research covers a broad program in statistical
mechanics with an aim to better understand macroscopic phenomena originating in
the collective behavior of its microscopic constituents. The methods used range
from rigorous mathematical analysis to computer simulations. Topics to be
studied include: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(i) Symmetry breaking transitions leading
to the formation of spatial (temporal) patterns are fascinating and important
examples of collective phenomena. They are paradigms of emergent behavior, with
no counterpart in the properties of individual atoms or molecules. They occur in
very diverse situations, ranging from crystallization in equilibrium systems,
the development of rolls and cells in fluids heated from below to the formation
of patterns in morphogenesis. For equilibrium systems the state observed with
overwhelming probability is the one which maximizes the entropy: the logarithm
of the number of microscopic states (with given constraints) corresponding to
the macroscopic structure. This translates into minimization of the free energy
at a fixed temperature, etc. For nonequilibrium systems there is no such general
principle. We have however recently found a rigorous generalization of free
energy to a model nonequilibrium system. Extending this work to more realistic
systems will provide a framework fo rpattern formation in nonequilibrium with
some of the generality now enjoyed by equilibrium. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(ii)
The behavior of alloys and fluid mixtures following a quench from a uniform high
temperature phase into the coexistence region continues to offer challenging
problems. Of particular theoretical interest and practical importance is the
case of alloys with elastic interactions where the kinetics determine many of
the important physical properties. Our approach to these problems includes
analytic derivations of macroscopic equations describing phase segregation from
microscopic models; investigations of the solution of these highly nonlinear
equations; and, computer simulations. An important simplification occurs when
the interactions giving rise to the phase segregation are long range Kac
potentials. These systems permit the investigation of detailed properties of the
interface (soliton) between different phases. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;(iii) Work
on other aspects of nonequilibrium phenomena include dynamical systems approach
to current carrying systems in which the time evolution is described by
thermostated deterministic non-Hamiltonian dynamics; the study of very large,
formally infinite, Hamiltonian systems which can be divided into a subsystem and
reservoirs; microscopic derivation of macroscopic (hydrodynamics type) equations
for realistic systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(iv) A surprisingly large number of
macroscopic phenomena, such as boiling and freezing, can be treated as if the
atomic world was (effectively) classical. This is no longer so at low
temperatures or ano sizes. There one is in the world of the quantum where the
phenomena is much richer and calculations much harder. Work will continue on
both equilibrium and nonequilibrium systems which are intrinsically quantum
mechanical. The Schroedinger time evolution of even the simplest model system is
exceedingly complex and fascinating once one goes beyond perturbation theory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(v) Biological systems are now at the frontier of science.
There have already been many applications of statistical mechanical ideas to
biology. These range from ecological and epidemiological systems to neural
network models of the immune system and the brain. While only a few of these
applications have really been on target, the methodology of statistical
mechanics does seem to provide the right framework for describing how higher
level patterns or behavior emerge from the activity of a multitude of
interacting simpler entities. Research will be carried out on a number of these
topics. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This grant is supported by the Divisions of
Materials Research, Physics, and Mathematical Sciences. The research covers a
broad program in statistical mechanics with an aim to better understand
macroscopic phenomena originating in the collective behavior of its microscopic
constituents. The methods used range from rigorous mathematical analysis to
computer simulations.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;