* 0127052
* Clemson's Experimental Engineering in Real-Time (EXPERT) Program
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2005
* William Park, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Bevlee Watford
* 04/30/2005
* USD 459,542.00

Engineering - Other (59)&lt;br/&gt;We have developed a number of real-time
experiments as an approach to improving student understanding of the graphical
representation of a variety of concepts. The project builds on successes by
Physics educators (primarily with motion sensors) in combining the use of
technology and hands-on engineering experiments to achieve visual analysis of
phenomena in real-time in the classroom. Our approach has expanded greatly by
using a wide variety of inexpensive sensors that are easily interfaced with PCs.
This enables our students to measure many different physical phenomena. We have
developed a series of modules in one-page, and use a 20-minute activity format.
We hope this format more readily enable faculty to incorporation our modules
into their curriculum. Our best modules are being distributed and marketed with
the assistance of the manufacturer of the sensors. Our modules have been
designed to be appropriate for high school students. It has been our goal to
implement our modules across multiple classes. The modules and the format we
have created holds promise for students to make connections between courses and
thus support curriculum integration. Students are encouraged to learn more
effectively and both students and instructors are expected to enjoy the learning
process. A multiple-intervention assessment protocol will be used to determine
the comparative benefit to learning effectiveness of the following
interventions: (1) presentation of concepts with time for reflection, (2)
reflection guided by instructor demonstrations using the sensors, and (3)
guided, active experimentation with the sensors. A pre-test / post-test design
will be used to account for the effect of differences in the initial preparation
of the different study populations.