* 0127541
* Physical Chemistry in Practice: An Interactive Multimedia Web-DVD Companion for the Physical Chemistry Course
* EHR,DUE
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2007
* Gabriela Weaver, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Eileen L. Lewis
* 12/31/2007
* USD 495,038.00

Chemistry (12)

With funding from an NSF CCLI-EMD grant, we have successfully developed a proof-
of-concept prototype DVD (digital video disk) for physical chemistry. We are now
creating a full version of the DVD, with developing 8 new modules and updating
the 2 modules created for the prototype. The complete 10-module DVD would be a
multimedia program that will allow students in undergraduate physical chemistry
to see the practical, experimental applications of the concepts they are
learning in the course. Each module of the DVD would explore a scientifically
significant research project being carried out in a research laboratory in
academia or industry, with current and relevant applications. The video medium
would be used to provide high-quality programs about the research that include
lecture information by the principal scientist and laboratory footage to
demonstrate the research in action. The video program is supplemented with
numerous high-end 3-D animations and graphics to assist in teaching the
concepts. In addition, a unique Web interface to the DVD allow us to include
HTML documents containing background theory and interactive problems for the
students. These problems are based on the actual research being carried out,
including authentic data from those experiments for the physical chemistry
students to analyze. This Web-DVD interface is the first of its kind for an
educational application, and would serve students with different learning styles
by providing a combination of approaches for learning the material.