* 0127529
* CRI: The Longitudinal Effects of Racial Identity on Parenting Styles and Racial Socialization of African-American Children
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Marva Lewis, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 08/31/2002
* USD 10,000.00

Abstract

The Longitudinal Effects of Racial Identity on Parenting Styles and Racial
Socialization of African American Children

Marva L. Lewis

This is a project to evaluate the long-term impact of African American parents'
ethnicity and racial identity on their parenting styles with infants and
toddlers. The project expands Ron Rohner's theory of parental acceptance and
rejection to include the racial context of African American children's
development. The Principal Investigator argues there are intense emotions
associated with being accepted or rejected or teased about phenotypic racial
features by various members of the child's family and social networks.
Phenotypic racial features -- skin color, hair texture, nose and lip size -- may
have been an ongoing source of ridicule, pride or shame to during the parent's
early childhood. These early intense emotional experiences associated with race
compose the parent's ethnobiography. Their ethnobiography includes their ethnic
identity, early childhood experiences of racial acceptance and rejection and
internalized stereotypes. We also propose that the best culturally valid context
to study the interactions between parents and children is to use the racially
charged task of hair combing. Several exploratory and pilot studies have been
conducted by the P.I. over the past several years using a questionnaire based on
this theory and using the hair-combing task. The findings from these pilot
studies suggest that early experiences of racial acceptance and rejection are
associated with depression and anxiety, feelings of security and insecurity,
self-esteem, and racial identity and racial pride in adult African American
mothers. Further, early experiences of racial rejection were associated with
higher levels of internalized stereotypes about Blacks. A pilot study funded by
a grant from the National Institute of Mental health was conducted with 41
mother-child dyads and examined the robustness of Hair Combing Task (in
conjunction with a teaching task and free play task) as a viable context to
evaluate parenting styles. The current project is to plan research and to
develop the measures. The primary research questions to be addressed are: 1)."Is
there a relationship between African American parents' ethnobiographies and
their current childrearing beliefs and attitudes about children? 2). What is the
relationship of African American parents' early experiences of racial acceptance
and rejection with their parenting styles with their children?" The goal is to
develop a scientifically rigorous project to replicate and expand the previous
research findings.

