* 0127751
* Assessing Cognitive Components of Design for Course-based Improvement
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Judith Sims-Knight, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Bevlee Watford
* 08/31/2006
* USD 487,923.00

This project is developing, implementing, and evaluating assessment tools and
methods that support continuous improvement in student preparation in electrical
and computer engineering design and related areas. Educational research has
developed findings which suggest that engineering education would be improved by
deliberately and carefully assessing important educational outcomes and building
continuous improvement loops around courses and curricula. One of the most
important goals of engineering education is preparing students to succeed in
developing solutions to large-scale, ill-structured design problems that are
typical of senior capstone design project courses and the professional world of
engineering practice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is using the knowledge
of expert functioning provided by cognitive science and instructional research
to identify crucial aspects of the design process. It is developing multiple
measures and gathering data to verify that these aspects are significant
components of design skill. In broad terms, the components of expertise that are
being addressed are declarative knowledge, procedural knowledge, and
metacognitive processing knowledge. These are being illuminated by the
development of quantitative ways to measure quality of design. Declarative
knowledge (including "facts") tends to build and become refined with experience,
and its structure tends to become organized in more abstract schemas with
experience, allowing it to be applied confidently to a greater range of
problems. Procedural knowledge is understanding how to address problems
efficiently. Metacognitive processing knowledge is particularly significant for
developing lifelong learning skills. It is developed as students learn to think
broadly about how they are solving particular problems and seek better or more
efficient approaches for future use. This is knowledge that requires planning,
self-monitoring, and reflection. Its growth responds to deliberate efforts to
develop it by instructors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach is being class
tested in sophomore design courses and senior project design courses in two
engineering areas, electronic and computer software design. Participating
instructors are evaluating the assessments, writing improvement plans, and
implementing these over a period of three years. The project is producing three
distinctive products. First, it is producing assessments of various components
of design skill, with reliability and validity findings. Second, it is
evaluating the effectiveness of these assessment measures for use in course-
based continuous improvement of student learning. Finally, the assessments of
sophomore knowledge in the first year of the project is being used to predict
their performance in their senior design courses.