* 0127561
* The Mind Project Online Curriculum and Archive for the Cognitive &amp; Learning Sciences
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2007
* David Anderson, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Continuing Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 05/31/2007
* USD 573,230.00

Psychology - Biological (71)&lt;br/&gt;The Mind Project is developing a rich
array of interactive, web-based curriculum modules in the cognitive and learning
sciences. Each module is designed for students who have no prior knowledge of
the cognitive and learning sciences. Given the interdisciplinary nature of the
cognitive sciences, many modules are suitable for use in a variety of different
subjects, even at the freshman level. This strategy of "cognitive science across
the curriculum" is providing a way of introducing students to this exciting
field early in their academic careers. When linked together in sufficient
numbers, the growing number of completed modules can be used to create an entire
introductory course to cognitive science.&lt;br/&gt;One of the central design
features of many of the modules is their capacity to introduce students to a
particular research methodology and to provide interactive experiences that
invite the student to employ that methodology first-hand. Rather than merely
reading about what cognitive scientists do, students can actively engage in
scientific inquiry, exploring the nature of mind and cognition with newly
acquired methodological skills. Because the research expertise is built into the
modules, a single instructor is able to teach an introduction to cognitive
science with the kind of serious commitment to a variety of research
methodologies that is typically found only in team-taught courses.
&lt;br/&gt;The modules are being housed and maintained in The Mind Project
Archive, the official repository for the Consortium on Cognitive Science
Instruction CCSI). This archive uses a powerful server, allowing instructors to
create customizable tables of contents (with the underlying materials) for use
in specific courses. This project seeks to make it possible to integrate Mind
Project modules and any other resources stored in the Archive.&lt;br/&gt;