* 0127291
* Quantum States of Atoms and Molecules:  A Linked and Layered Resource for Collaborative, Technology-Based Learning in Physical Chemistry
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Theresa Zielinski, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Harry Ungar
* 12/31/2004
* USD 288,645.00

Chemistry (12)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We are developing a complete Linked and
Layered Resource for Collaborative, Technology-Based Learning in Physical
Chemistry. The resource, Quantum States of Atoms and Molecules, is grounded in
progressive pedagogical methods, uses appropriate computer technology, and makes
firm connections between fundamental principles, physical reality, physical
models, and mathematical descriptions of reality and the models. The resource
would be unconventional in both form and structure. It is designed to engage
students in the process of learning and help them develop skills in information
processing, critical thinking and problem solving. It also takes advantage of
existing knowledge on how adults and young adults learn. The product would
consist of two parts: an inexpensive soft-cover text and a comprehensive
multimedia CD. The text would present the core concepts linked to spectroscopy
in an easy to understand prose style. The entire text would be on the CD with
active hyperlinks to web and computer-based activities that engage students in
active learning. Some hyperlinks would point to animations and simulations to
provide dramatic visualization of concepts, chemical processes, and molecular-
level phenomena. Other links would connect to concept and math supplements to
provide greater depth, detailed derivations, and review relevant math concepts
within a chemistry context. Such linking should make it easy for students to
review material on a need to know basis as they advance through the text without
having pages and sections that interrupt the narrative. A final set of links
would point to Mathcad symbolic math templates that will be used in both a
guided-discovery mode and as a resource for students in building their own
Mathcad documents for assigned problems and activities. An instructor's manual
and sets of numerical solutions to exercises and problems are also being created
for the project.&lt;br/&gt;