* 0127681
* Mardu Foraging, Food Sharing, and Gender
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* Rebecca Bird, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 07/31/2003
* USD 135,950.00

Among Aboriginal people in Australia's deserts, as among all humans, food
acquisition is not simply about eating: practices related to what types of foods
are acquired, who obtains the food, how food is treated and distributed, are
infused with value other than simple nutrition. Often these practices are
attached to gender roles. Traditional explanations have assumed that gender
differences in foraging and food sharing are bound by a common goal of
provisioning--that like a mini-economy of scale, a household will be better
provisioned through gender specialization. But recent work among other people
that hunt and gather suggests that under some circumstances critical aspects of
gender differences in labor may arise from the ways in which different
strategies of food acquisition and distribution meet different foraging goals,
some of which can conflict with household provisioning. This is especially the
case when the activity of acquiring food can provide public goods that are
distributed widely, or when food contains symbolic value beyond its simple
caloric content. This research proposes to quantitatively test the predictions
of hypotheses that examine factors influencing food acquisition, sharing, and
their link to gender differentiation among the Mardu of Western Australia. To
what extent are different (sometimes conflicting) foraging goals influencing a
sexual division of labor? To what extent are Mardu foraging decisions designed
to more effectively provision themselves and their households, and to what
extent are they influenced by the ways that different activities can honestly
signal underlying qualities of the acquirer? How do changes in household
composition, environmental dynamics, and social dynamics affect male and female
foraging strategies? Answering these questions will involve quantitative
measures of the economics of resource patch utilization, prey selection, food
transfers, and Mardu camp composition and ecology. Delineating these and how
they structure subsistence decisions will have broad relevance for our
understanding of basic features of human family organization in small scale
economies.

