* 0127439
* Intra-Curriculum Software Engineering Education
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2002,12/31/2003
* James Fenwick, Jr., Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen R. Cunningham
* 12/31/2003
* USD 74,919.00

Computer Science (31)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The academic setting of an
undergraduate software engineering course imposes fundamental obstacles to the
goal of providing students practical experience and skills development. Some
major differences between an academic and industrial setting include motivation,
amount of available time, and the size and scope of projects. Furthermore, the
academic environment requires ensuring a certain level of competency in all
students. We accept these differences and are developing a software engineering
methodology tailored to the academic setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One objective
of this methodology is to increase the size and scope of the software
engineering course project in a way that affords students practical experience
in project management and system design without increasing their workload. We
also wish to insure an individual level of competency, particularly in the
programming skills of lower division students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve
these objectives, we are devising a project methodology as the centerpiece of an
upper division software engineering course. This methodology is unique in that
it will use an intra-curriculum approach involving multiple courses at different
levels in the curriculum. The software engineering course will simultaneously
cooperating with introductory CS courses, data structures courses, as well as
with advanced, specialized elective courses like database, Human Computer
Interface, and networks. Software engineering students will focus on design and
management activities while the implementation burden is shared with other
courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An automated testing and management system has
been developed as part of this project. This system tracks individual skills
competency, particularly of lower division students, and assists in coordination
between the various courses.