* 0127360
* Analysis of Convective Water Transports During Cirrus Regional Study of Tropical Anvils and Cirrus Layers (CRYSTAL)
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* William Frank, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* James R. Huning
* 12/31/2005
* USD 381,004.00

This grant supports the participation of Dr. Frank and his Co-PI, Johannes
Verlinde, in the CRYSTAL-FACE project, which stands for Cirrus Regional Study of
Tropical Anvils and Cirrus Layers - Florida Area Cirrus Experiment. This is an
interagency field program to be conducted in and around southern Florida in the
summer of 2002 with the goal of studying the formation, evolution, and radiative
properties of the cirrus anvil clouds created by large convective clouds in the
tropics. Dr. Frank will use an NRL P3 aircraft fitted with the NSF ELDORA radar
to document the life cycles of deep convective cloud systems from the time of
their inception until the development of widespread cirrus anvils. The main
objective is to estimate the convective transport of total water substance
(vapor plus condensate) into the cirrus cloud layer. This is accomplished by
first computing the vertical air velocity from the profile of horizontal
divergence derived from Doppler radar observations, and then inferring the water
flux by combining the estimated mass flux of air with results of large-eddy
simulations that include parameterized precipitation. The results will be
synthesized to assess the influence of convective water transports on the global
population of cirrus clouds, including estimates of their effect on the Earth's
radiation budget.