* 0127401
* Integrating Computing with Geometry into an Upper-Level Computer Science Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* John Lowther, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Mark James Burge
* 05/31/2005
* USD 290,041.00

Computer Science (31)

Since this world is built around geometric objects, we should not be surprised
that many areas in computer science and engineering focus on representing,
processing, and modeling geometric objects. These familiar areas include
computer graphics, computer-aided design, 3D vision, visualization, robotics, NC
machining, molecular modeling, terrain modeling and GIS. However, a typical
computer science curriculum has a little or even no discussion about computing
with geometry.

This project addresses this deficiency in the training of future computer
professionals, especially at a time that more and more applications require
highly trained programmers with geometric and modeling skills. This project is
an extension of a previous very successful proof-of-concept project, Geometric
Computing in the Undergraduate Computer Science Curricula. A web-based textbook
and a software tool DesignMentor were developed and used worldwide and are
highly regarded. The project builds on the lessons learned in this previous
project and on the experiences of instructors and users from all over the world.

The primary goal of this project is to design and develop a set of
comprehensive, elementary, and flexible course materials for teaching topics in
computing with geometry that can be used in a dedicated course or across several
courses (e.g., computing with geometry, computer graphics, computer-aided
design, geometric modeling, and visualization).

A secondary goal is to develop tools with which students can experiment and
visualize the concepts, geometric algorithms, and skills in an intuitive, non-
mathematical, and learning-by-doing way.

With a set of well-organized contemporary course materials and pedagogical
tools, we expect that students will be familiar with the state-of-the-art of
computing in the geometric world, acquire basic knowledge and skills, know how
to handle geometric problems in different applications and environments, and be
well-prepared to approach geometric applications and their software development
with confidence. Moreover, this project may also improve the retention rate of
students, especially those geometric-minded students who may not perform well in
traditional courses, in computer science. On the other hand, this project may
also help students who are weak in visualization and geometry to improve their
skills. Most importantly, this project impacts the future by preparing computer
scientists, mathematicians, and engineers for professions that need a solid
foundation in computing with geometry.