* 0127725
* Assessing Student Learning and Evaluating Faculty Capacity Development in the NSF-Funded Regional Workshops Project
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2007
* Barbara Senft, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2007
* USD 637,898.00

An NSF-funded national dissemination project, "Disseminating Successful
Strategies for Fieldwork in Undergraduate Science Curricula" (DUE 0088217), also
known as the "Regional Workshops Project" (RWP), began a 5-year effort in 2001
that will eventually conduct 15 regional workshops for 300 undergraduate faculty
at the rate of 3 per year. The RWP is engaged in establishing professional
learning communities of faculty who 1) create and deliver undergraduate SMET
courses that demonstrate that environmental problem solving is an integrative,
challenging, effective way to engage undergraduate majors and non-majors, 2) use
concepts and field/ laboratory techniques suitable for teaching undergraduates
how science is done in a real-world, problem solving context, and 3) use
research-based knowledge of how to assess student learning and support their
capacity for development as educators on an environmental problem solving-based
curriculum for undergraduate SMET courses. This ASA project is simultaneously
examining the effects of the NSF-funded Regional Workshops Project (RWP) on
improved faculty capacity to foster increased student learning. The approach is
to study both the faculty capacity development initiated by the RWP workshops
and sustained by interactions and resources (both planned and unplanned)
available to faculty following their workshop experience, and the effects of
these faculty capacity building processes on student learning. More
specifically, this project is studying: 1) the development of RWP participants'
capacity to use research on SMET learning and assessment practices in ways that
result in changes in the participants approaches and attitudes toward teaching;
2) the extent to which faculty are supported while undertaking significant
change in their curriculum and pedagogy (where pedagogy includes assessment
activities) in ways that result in improvements in the participants' abilities
to develop, sustain, and institutionalize their new environmental problem
solving-based courses; and 3) the extent to which students in SMET courses : a)
learn SMET concepts in a meaningful way (as defined by Novak, 1999); b)
construct a view of SMET disciplines that is consistent with views held by
experts in those disciplines; c) construct integrative conceptual frameworks to
facilitate their understanding of SMET disciplines; and d) develop positive
attitudes and perceptions about SMET disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;The project is
providing the RWP PIs and regional workshop leaders with formative evaluation of
the effectiveness of the regional workshops, and tested instruments and an easy-
to-use analysis and report process that workshop leaders can use to undertake
formative evaluation of other faculty development workshops with similar goals.
These formative evaluations will be designed to help workshop leaders improve
the format, content, delivery, and "climate" of the workshop. A tangible outcome
will be a tested longitudinal assessment/evaluation process that SMET faculty
can adapt to gather credible, dependable, transferable, and confirmable feedback
that 1) guides course changes in support of improved student learning and 2)
fosters their own professional growth and development.