* 0127070
* A Cooperative Research-based Course on Genes and Development
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2003
* John Gergen, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 01/31/2003
* USD 82,786.00

Biological Sciences (61)&lt;br/&gt;This project is supporting an advanced
Laboratory Course in Developmental Genetics. The course provides a cooperative,
research-based learning experience that complements upper level lecture courses
in genetics, cell biology and developmental biology. The critical reasoning and
problem-solving strategies that student are exposed to in this laboratory course
are expected to have a broad impact on their overall intellectual development.
This laboratory course uses Drosophila and Xenopus, two important model systems
for current research, to explore a number of fundamental principles in
developmental biology and genetics. Research grade microscopes are used to
enhance the students ability to obtain hands-on experience with embryological
experimentation in these two biological systems. Digital-imaging equipment is
being used for both the purpose of demonstration and for student collection and
analysis of experimental results. This laboratory course is adapting exercises
in vertebrate experimental embryology from Harvard University (MCB116) and from
an EMBO Practical Course in Drosophila Embryology. An important feature of the
course is an inquiry-based approach that strongly encourages cooperative
learning by the students. This laboratory course is an innovative addition to
the curriculum and is helping to formalize a new paradigm for integrating
research and education at Stony Brook.