* 0127338
* Collaborative Research: Network-based Interactive Laboratory Modules for the Study of Movement Biomechanics, and Coordination and Control
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* James Cauraugh, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Daniel Udovic
* 06/30/2006
* USD 316,875.00

Biological Sciences (61) The objective of this project is to develop a set of
interactive laboratory modules utilizing a previously developed Internet-based
video digitizing system. The modules allow students to quantify the motion of an
object or the human body by acquiring coordinate data from video images. The
kinematic parameters resulting from the processing of coordinate data can be
used for the learning of basic mechanical concepts and the study of movement
coordination and control. Specifically, laboratory modules are being developed
for the learning of basic mechanical concepts (e.g., linear and angular
kinematics, muscle mechanics) that are usually taught in undergraduate level
biomechanics and physics courses. The modules for the learning of concepts in
motor coordination and control (e.g., inter-limb coordination, postural control)
utilize a multidisciplinary approach, integrating concepts from biology,
psychology and engineering. The use of the Web provides students unlimited
accessibility in terms of both time (when) and location (where) to complete the
laboratories. The modules have applications for distance learning courses and
for educational settings where resources for specialized undergraduate
laboratories are limited or unavailable. The project provides a unique
integration of information technology and education for laboratory environments
and the laboratory modules developed will be made available to the public.
Teachers/Professors can selectively incorporate some or all of the modules in
their courses. This is a collaborative effort with the University of Illinois-
Urbana-Champaign (DUE 0127221).