* 0127081
* Integrating Modern Design and Manufacturing Equipment into Engineering Curricula
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Richard Hale, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Roger Seals
* 05/31/2004
* USD 87,299.00

Engineering - Other (59)&lt;br/&gt;One of the greatest challenges facing
engineering education is to provide realistic and engaging learning experiences
for undergraduates that properly reflect the concerns and needs of industry.
Technology in the areas of product design and manufacturing is increasing at a
rapid pace and education must keep up to produce engineers capable of
contributing effectively to cost-driven projects with significantly reduced
cycle times. This project adapts the integrated use of modern rapid prototyping
and CNC machining equipment into the curricula of three engineering departments:
mechanical, aerospace, and civil. Both technologies are being used in the design
sequence of mechanical engineering, similar to their use at Purdue University
and MIT. Students are able to quickly fabricate design concepts and working
models, reinforcing the design sequence taught in class. Aerospace engineering
students are using the equipment during a course sequence to design, build, and
test student created aircraft. Where current methods of production are slow and
out-dated, the proposed equipment provides individual learning experiences
similar to those found in industry. Civil engineering students are using the
equipment for stress analysis and enhanced visualization in the classroom. This
project is providing a hands-on learning environment for students, and enabling
the implementation of modern engineering practices in design and manufacturing
to produce future leaders in industry. Assessment involves industrial advisory
panels. Educational resources, quality assessment data and machine capabilities
are being shared with local and national educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;