* 0127299
* C++ For Example
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2004
* Dale Reed, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Stephen C. Cooper
* 01/31/2004
* USD 75,000.00

Computer Science (31)&lt;br/&gt;An undergraduate education is a critical link
between high school and a society increasingly dependent upon computer
technology. SMET majors increasingly need computer programming as a fundamental
skill. Students effectively learn computer programming by using examples, yet
the number of examples that can be presented in class and in a textbook is
limited. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cognitive approaches of collaborative and
discovery learning supported by the intellectual scaffolding of a robust set of
examples can give students a deep understanding of concepts they discover on
their own. Assignment of computer programming problems just beyond a student's
current skill level functions as the 'leading question', where carefully
constructed examples give the student the information necessary to construct a
mental model leading to the solution to the problem. This can help overcome the
cognitive bottleneck where too few students negotiate the transition from lower-
level skills to higher-level skills, from basic rote memorization and re-telling
skills to more abstract knowledge synthesizing and transforming
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The difficulty lies in getting a complete set of
the right examples. This project creates a web-based system which gives
intuitive access to between 300 and 500 examples illustrating the main points in
the C++ programming language. A prototype is being implemented in a pilot study
over two years, being used with 300 undergraduate students taking an
introductory programming course at UIC. Evaluation will use both web-based
statistics and evaluation forms, comparing student skill levels and attitudes
before and after the system's implementation.&lt;br/&gt;