* 0127028
* Implementation of an Active Learning Pedagogy into the General Physics Curriculum at Towson University
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2004
* David Schaefer, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 05/31/2004
* USD 30,464.00

Physics (13) The Physics Department at Towson University is restructuring the
calculus&lt;br/&gt;based general physics courses in order to a) provide a more
effective learning&lt;br/&gt;environment for the students, b) provide
appropriate course content in the service&lt;br/&gt;courses, c) increase the
retention of declared physics majors in the general physics&lt;br/&gt;courses,
and d) teach the general physics courses in such a manner so as to
recruit&lt;br/&gt;additional students. This is accomplished by offering two
sequences of calculus&lt;br/&gt;based general physics; one acts as a service
course to other science disciplines, and&lt;br/&gt;the other is an Honors
Physics course. The Honors Physics sequence not only&lt;br/&gt;has students from
the Honors College enrolled, but all declared physics majors take&lt;br/&gt;the
course. Placing the physics majors in a class&lt;br/&gt;with highly motivated,
interested students such as from the honors college helps to&lt;br/&gt;increase
the retention rate of the majors. Additionally, this low enrollment course
is&lt;br/&gt;taught using adaptation of Workshop Physics techniques. This highly
interactive, active learning&lt;br/&gt;environment has been demonstrated to be a
more effective method of teaching physics&lt;br/&gt;than traditional lectures,
and students are expected to retain their enthusiasm&lt;br/&gt;and interest in
physics. Additionally, by separating the physics majors from the
present&lt;br/&gt;calculus based general physics courses, the department can
modify the content of the courses&lt;br/&gt;to suit the needs of the other
science disciplines. Equipment is being used&lt;br/&gt;in both the Workshop
Physics honors course and the regular general physic course. In
the&lt;br/&gt;regular general physics course, the equipment allows the faculty
to&lt;br/&gt;explore implementation of a calculus-based version of Realtime
physics.