* 0127331
* Conversion of the Macintosh-Only Dynamic Digital Map Template to a Web-Enabled Cross-Platform Program
* EHR,DUE
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2006
* Christopher Condit, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 01/31/2006
* USD 300,039.00

Geology (42) High quality color maps that plot the location of and display
analytical datasets, descriptions, images, or movies are difficult to publish in
a format that facilitates their easy access, distribution and use. The need for
them is clear: most professional geologic meetings start and end with map-based
field trips, students are taught using them, and they form the backbone of many
geologic research projects. With previous NSF funding, the PI developed a proof-
of-concept solution on the Macintosh, called the Dynamic Digital Map. DDMs
display data using several methods, including point-and-click at icons pin-
pointing locations on maps, from lists of samples or sites, and by linked text.
The data displayed by a DDM come from spreadsheets, or files created in CAD or
GIS programs by any author who inserts or links it into a DDM Template,
following instructions in a "DDM Cookbook". The finished DDM becomes a freely
distributable "stand alone" program, running with no additional software. This
project continues and accelerates the Macintosh-only DDM conversion to a cross-
platform program (Win32, Macintosh, Linux) that is web enabled and allows
information to be expressed at different user levels (e.g. from the professional
to the junior high earth-science class) in one DDM, thus encompassing a wide
audience. Dissemination is by WWW (including DLESE) and CD, with reviews and
testing in several institutions. The first workshop on how to create and use
DDMs is being held at the Geological Society of America Northeast Sectional
meeting March 24, 2002.