* 0127219
* Thermofluid Dynamics: CD-ROMs for Engineering Education
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2006
* Gary Settles, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 01/31/2006
* USD 299,054.00

Engineering - Mechanical (56)&lt;br/&gt;This is a Full-Scale-Development
Proposal based on a successful Proof-of-Concept Grant&lt;br/&gt;(NSF Award No.
9952653) demonstrating an innovative approach to materials for
upper-&lt;br/&gt;division undergraduate engineering education. The value of
visual materials in conveying &lt;br/&gt;technical concepts is very well
established, and is here applied in a multimedia form to &lt;br/&gt;the topic of
thermofluid dynamics (i.e. convective heat transfer, thermodynamics, and gas
&lt;br/&gt;dynamics), with strong emphasis on experimentation and optical flow
visualization. The &lt;br/&gt;results are materials captured on one or more CD-
ROMs that can be used by instructors &lt;br/&gt;and students as a visual
supplement to any of the standard textbooks on these topics. &lt;br/&gt;The
suitability of such materials for national dissemination has already been
demonstrated.&lt;br/&gt;This approach makes use of the ubiquity and low-cost of
CD-ROM technology, &lt;br/&gt;which makes it especially important for small and
minority universities that sometimes &lt;br/&gt;lack the facilities to convey
the laboratory experience directly to their students. The&lt;br/&gt;major SMET
challenge being addressed is that of enhancing traditional engineering
&lt;br/&gt;education with highly-visual material not currently available, and
thus conveying to &lt;br/&gt;students a sense of the research-laboratory
experience. One DUE theme also addressed &lt;br/&gt;here is faculty development,
by providing faculty with an unusual supplementary &lt;br/&gt;teaching tool,
thus broadening their preparation beyond what is traditionally
available&lt;br/&gt;in textbooks. Integration of technology is also a component
part of this project. That is,&lt;br/&gt;during the learning, the course
materials require the students to use computers and to &lt;br/&gt;interface with
multimedia systems environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Keywords: Multimedia,
multimedia fluid mechanics, optical flow
visualization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;