* 0127249
* Development and Evaluation of a Multimedia Instructional Package for Astronomy
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2004
* Stephen Schneider, Amherst College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 06/30/2004
* USD 75,000.00

Astronomy (11) The project is developing a prototype and evaluating Interactive
Astronomy, a multimedia instructional package for a widely taught undergraduate
science course: Introductory Astronomy for Non-Science Majors. This course
serves a great number of college students, including many future teachers, and
has great potential for improving their science skills and influencing their
understanding of and appreciation for science. The multimedia package includes
software which incorporates two innovative elements: the revolutionary
improvements in instruction offered by information technology, and the emerging
paradigm of inquiry-based learning. Utilizing the high degree of interactivity
which computers make possible, students are led to discover things for
themselves, as opposed to learning them passively. Utilizing the dynamical
simulations which computers make possible, students can live in the world of
science, yielding a vivid experience of its normally abstract world. Two
important elements of the package are Guided Discoveries, which are extensive,
highly interactive instructional exercises, designed with careful attention to
pedagogical issues; and Intelligent Tutors, which customize their instructional
strategies, based on an assessment of the student's learning needs. Design of
seven of the Discoveries has already been completed. In this project, three are
being fully implemented, and then a proof of concept test is conducted of their
effect on student learning. This formative evaluation (to be conducted in the
Fall at Greenfield Community College and Amherst College, and in the Spring at
the University of Massachusetts) runs parallel to, and be interactive with,
further software development.