* 0127388
* Teaching Issues and Experiments in Ecology(TIEE):  Disseminating web- and CD-ROM-Based Educational Materials Through the ESA
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Charlene D'Avanzo, Hampshire College
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 549,193.00

Biological Sciences (61)&lt;br/&gt;TIEE (Teaching Issues and Experiments in
Ecology) is a web and CD-ROM&lt;br/&gt;resource designed to help faculty
incorporate more student-active approaches in ecology&lt;br/&gt;courses. TIEE is
composed of 3 interrelated parts: 1) inquiry-based experiments, 2) controversial
issues for lecture and 3) linked and interwoven teaching resources. TIEE also
addresses the reward system for educational innovation because Experiments or
Issues submitted by faculty are peer reviewed by TIEE editors. During 1999-2000,
with CCLI-EMD Proof-of-Concept support, we built a model TIEE website and CD-ROM
which we evaluated in a workshop at the annual meeting of the Ecological Society
of America (ESA) in Aug. 2000. Faculty applied and worked in small groups with
the CD-ROM; they evaluated the overall product plus assigned Experiments or
Issues. The evaluation of the workshop and of TIEE was very positive and helpful
to the current project. We also established a TIEE board of editors who we met
with at this meeting. In this full submission we are building on our successes
with the proof. The ESA is publishing an annual issue of TIEE on its website and
distributing the CD-ROM. We are training faculty to write and use Issues and
Experiments at Introductory and Author workshops at ESA plus AIBS and AAAS
meetings. In this proposal we describe the guidelines and structure for
submissions of Issues and Experiments to TIEE, the processes for peer and
editorial review, and the sustainability of TIEE following this granting period.