* 0127451
* Web-based Instrumentation and Control - An Undergraduate Course with a Companion Lab
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Hanqi Zhuang, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 12/31/2004
* USD 74,999.00

Engineering - Electrical (55)&lt;br/&gt;Instructional materials that fit
undergraduate classroom teaching and laboratory experiments for the subject of
web-based Instrumentation and Control (WIC) are scarce. The literature has a few
examples of previous efforts to build virtual web-based laboratories, but most
of these are very specialized and the support software is very expensive. It is
the goal of this proof-of-concept project to offer an undergraduate course with
a companion laboratory that teaches students to design and develop web tools for
WIC. The idea is a result ot the research the PI conducted for Siemens and
Motorola.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the project are to demonstrate
that (a) it is practical and feasible to offer engineering undergraduate
students a course on WIC that involves recent technological innovations; (b) the
proposed course can be effectively conducted with two integrated components--
classrom lectures and hands-on practices through a remote setting; and (c) the
course materials can also be offered after modification to gifted high school
students and thus be used as a vehicle to attract students to the engineering
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The plan is to reinforce the process by
regularly evaluating the project progress based on gathered data and
information, and disseminating the project findings through conference
presentations, scholarly publications, preparation of a textbook based on the
lecture notes and laboratory materials.