* 0127800
* Mathematics And Science Teacher Education Program (MASTEP): Follow-on Activities
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Dan Walker, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 12/31/2005
* USD 599,988.00

The MASTEP (Mathematics And Science Teacher Education Program), funded under the
NSF Collaboratives for Excellence in Teacher preparation program is continuing
three crucial activities of the large and successful project. Under the
leadership of San Jose State University, MASTEP includes San Francisco State
University (the other teacher preparation program), four Community Colleges
(City College of San Francisco, College of San Mateo, Evergreen Valley College,
and San Jose City College), several local school districts, several local
institutions for informal education, and several local supportive industries
within the San Francisco Bay area. The project is evaluating the lasting impacts
of MASTEP while also sharing experiences with colleagues nationwide through
dissemination activities. In order to evaluate the teaching practices and
leadership roles of MASTEP mathematics and science teacher graduates through
their first 3-5 years in classroom teaching, the project is continuing the New
Teacher Support Networks at both San Jose and San Francisco State Universities.
Network activities include teaming the new teachers with local mentoring
teachers, partial day workshops on relevant topics to teaching and leadership,
and one residential workshop per semester to further network the new teachers
together while promoting additional reform strategies. Dissemination activities
consist of expanding the project's website to include rich descriptions of all
of the major course revisions that have been funded by MASTEP. Accompanying many
of these descriptions will be evaluation data on the impact of the course
revisions or other activities. Faculty presentations on reform efforts are
targeting Arts and Science faculty to inform such faculty of the project's
successes and to encourage other faculty to embark on similar reforms.
Evaluation efforts are leading to a summative assessment of the lasting impacts
of MASTEP on students, instructors, and institutions. The evaluation is
coordinated with the CETP Core Evaluation effort . The anticipated outcome of
this project is a well documented assessment of the features of MASTEP that have
had important and lasting impacts, especially on the new teachers produced and
on the college/university faculty related to teaching practices, leadership
roles, advances in personnel careers, and institutional reform.