* 0127221
* Collaborative Research: Network-Based Interactive Laboratory Modules for the Study of Movement Biomechanics, and Coordination and Control
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Les Carlton, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Udovic
* 06/30/2006
* USD 131,704.00

Biological Sciences (61) In science education, laboratory sessions are valuable
for reinforcing concepts introduced in lectures. However, it has become
increasingly difficult to acquire equipment, space, and personnel resources to
manage laboratory classes in higher education. The objective of the project is
to develop a set of interactive laboratory modules utilizing a previously
developed Internet-based video digitizing system. The developed modules will
allow students to quantify the motion of an object or the human body by
acquiring coordinate data from video images. The kinematic parameters resulting
from the processing of coordinate data can be used for the learning of basic
mechanical concepts and the study of movement coordination and control.
Specifically, laboratory modules will be developed for the learning of basic
mechanical concepts (e.g., linear and angular kinematics, muscle mechanics) that
are usually taught in undergraduate level biomechanics and physics courses. The
modules for the learning of concepts in motor coordination and control (e.g.,
inter-limb coordination, postural control) utilize a multidisciplinary approach,
integrating concepts from biology, psychology and engineering. The use of the
Web provides students unlimited accessibility in terms of both time (when) and
location (where) to complete the laboratories. The modules have applications for
distance learning courses and for educational settings where resources for
specialized undergraduate laboratories are limited or unavailable. The project
provides a unique integration of information technology and education for
laboratory environments and the laboratory modules developed will be made
available to the public. Teachers/Professors can selectively incorporate some or
all of the modules in their courses. This is a collaboartive effort with the
University of Florida (DUE 0127338).