* 0127025
* Computer Instrumentation and Visualization in an Interactive Studio Environment: Eliminating the Boundary Between Lecture and Laboratory in Undergraduate Chemical Education
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2003
* David Chesney, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 12/31/2003
* USD 82,454.00

Chemistry (12) The project is addressing known and significant deficiencies in
the way undergraduate students are educated in the chemical sciences by
implementing a teaching and learning environment in which the boundaries between
lecture and laboratory are eliminated. Building on our preliminary work, we are
modifying the Studio-Laboratory concept pioneered by Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute and California Polytechnic State University, and elements from NSF-
CCLI awards (9951346; 9950501; 9952732; 9972293) for our analytical and honors-
level chemistry courses. This provides a teaching and learning environment which
addresses our students' difficulty in making higher-level connections between
theory and practice, and improves the laboratory technique they exhibit in
quantitative experimentation. Central to this endeavor is the change from
supervision and assessment of "canned" experiments to an inquiry-based study of
real-world problems and laboratory techniques. A number of novel technological
features are being incorporated into our version of the Studio-Laboratory which
is divided into stations. Each station, serving up to four students, supports
two computers and data interfaces (Vernier Lab Pro) and a diode-array UV-VIS
spectrometer. Each group of four stations (a cluster) shares an FT-IR
spectrophotometer. The instructor serves as an "expert-mentor" and "guide" to
provide an inquiry-based learning environment rich in real world content and
laboratory techniques. WebCT augments the instructor by serving as the gateway
to the educational media under development. On-demand video, conceptual
animations, and self-paced learning assignments are being designed specifically
to help our students build higher-level connections between theory and practice,
particularly those who are more visual learners and those requiring additional
reinforcement or support. Workshops are being offered to faculty and staff from
all universities and colleges in Michigan's Upper Peninsula in order to
introduce the university community to the Studio-Laboratory concept. Additional
workshops will be held for high school teachers.