* 0127017
* Cohort and Problem-Based Learning in an Undergraduate Environmental Science and Policy Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Christopher Pennuto, University of Southern Maine
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 05/31/2004
* USD 91,203.00

Interdisciplinary (99) This project supports the acquisition of an Inductively
Coupled Plasma Emission Spectrophotometer (ICP), the centerpiece for
establishing a five-course sequence that integrates problem-based learning, and
faculty development for implementation of the integrated courses. The course
sequence tracks majors through Environmental Communication and Problem-solving,
Research and Analytical Methods, Environmental Statistics, Environmental Impact
Assessment, and Senior Seminar. The interdisciplinary environmental themes and a
hierarchical course model are adapted from successful programs at Montclair
State University (NSF-DUE 9952667), Middlebury College (NSF-DUE 9980911)
Evergreen State College (NSF-DUE 9972501), and Governor's State College (NSF-DUE
0088831). The Environmental Science and Policy Program at the University of
Southern Maine is strengthening its curriculum by adding a new B.S. degree to
the existing B.A. degree. The B.S. degree was approved in 2001 and is being
implemented during the 2002 academic year. The addition of a B.S. degree option
modifies the current interdisciplinary curriculum model and requires revising
and transforming two courses (Environmental Communication and Environmental
Impact Assessment) and creating three new courses (Research and Analytical
Methods, Environmental Statistics, and Senior Seminar) to form an integrated,
cohesive course sequence. Students are first introduced to dominant
environmental themes, their causes, and potential solutions while also
developing a research proposal to guide their future activities. Next they gain
hands-on training in data collection and generation in both the field and
laboratory and are introduced to data quality objectives focusing on their
selected theme. Students then use the data they generated in an environmental
statistics course. Student teams next synthesize their prior studies through
comprehensive impact assessment approaches. Lastly, students culminate their
research through a professional presentation at either a college-wide research
symposium, regional, or, if appropriate, national meeting. The collective
outcomes from each course will result in a comprehensive and evaluative student
research portfolio. Introducing students and faculty to a range of environmental
themes across a sequenced course structure strengthens the interdisciplinary
learning goals for the curriculum as a whole. In addition, the weave of a focus
environmental theme across a five-course sequence engages and interests students
while allowing them to build problem-solving skills, communication abilities,
and analytical competence. In particular, this approach attracts and improves
the science skills of a large non-traditional USM student body (predominately
female, older, and part-time). Student outcomes are expected to improve
understanding of environmental scientific knowledge, increase practical skills
relating to communication, laboratory analysis, data collection, and research
writing. This project is being implemented over a 24-month period and the
curriculum modifications are being evaluated at two levels: course-specific
successes and overall sequence outcomes. The results are being disseminated to
science peer groups within our institution, our region, and at national meetings
and WWW provides access to our results through our Program homepage.