* 0127085
* Enhancement of Digital, Control, and Microelectronics Courses for a New Manufacturing Engineering Program
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Karl Stephan, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Roger Seals
* 06/30/2004
* USD 139,237.00

Engineering - Other (59) In Fall 2000, the Department of Technology at SWTSU was
authorized to begin the first engineering program on campus, a curriculum
leading to a B. S. in Manufacturing Engineering. Present courses in digital
electronics, controls, and semiconductor manufacturing are suitable for a
technology curriculum but need substantial upgrading and enhancement to support
the new engineering program. The objective of this proposal is to provide
hardware and software to implement a number of new educational initiatives in
several courses which are going to support this new program. These initiatives
are adapting ideas from institutions such as Texas A&M and Virginia Polytechnic
Institute (VPI) to develop a curriculum suited to SWTSU environment, which draws
heavily from rural, minority and female population pools in Central Texas.

The courses targeted for improvement are in Digital Electronics, Control Systems
and Instrumentation, and Microelectronics Manufacturing (a two-semester
sequence). The strengths of the hands-on teaching approach that is common in
technology programs is being applied to develop laboratory-intensive course
modules suitable for modern manufacturing engineers. Such a hands-on
applications approach to engineering education is intended to cater to the
learning styles of all students. The experience gained through faculty
development and implementation of these changes helps to establish the
manufacturing engineering program on a firm foundation, adding to the pool of
skilled engineering personnel which are badly needed in this region.