* 0127183
* Inquiry Tools for Case-Based Courses in Human Biology
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Neil Stillings, Hampshire College
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 02/29/2004
* USD 74,951.00

Biological Sciences (61)&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the need to engage
introductory biology students in critical thinking and problem solving and to
make topics in biology more exciting and relevant for all students. The products
from this project include 1) the Human Biology Case Library, an undergraduate
interface to a powerful suite of medical school case studies and 2) a set of
inquiry-based curricular materials based on the use of the cases. These products
foster active learning experiences, promote collaborative learning and increase
the inquiry-orientation of science education. We aim to make accessible a
tremendous variety and quantity of cases that have been collected at Harvard
Medical School and adapted for undergraduate education. The Human Biology Case
Library brings the advanced computational infrastructure to any student with a
web browser and provides a suite of interactive tools based on a number of human
biology cases. This access to a multiplicity of human cases, source documents
and analysis tools provides a rich environment for promoting student inquiry.
Introductory biology classes serve a great number of college students, including
non-majors&lt;br/&gt;and many future teachers. Medical school cases in non-
electronic form have been adapted for undergraduate classes for six years at
Hampshire College. The software being developed will support inquiry activities
in the original classroom and is being tested in additional classrooms. Three
cases are being implemented as a proof of concept, and their effectiveness is
being tested in a variety of post-secondary institutions (e.g., a community
college and large university) and within a variety of teaching styles (e.g.,
traditional large lecture-based and small case-based classes). We are examining
the difficulties of comparing student performance across institutions. Close
communication with faculty is facilitating the use of the modules and testing
their effectiveness through student and faculty outcome studies, interviews and
evaluation of changes in attitude and content learning. Rigorous methodologies
are being used among well-defined populations to analyze outcomes. This material
will be submitted to and reviewed by BioQUEST.