* 0127828
* Development of Faculty Collaboratives to Assess Achievement of Student Learning Outcomes in Critical Thinking in Biology Core Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2002,09/30/2007
* Judith Kandel, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 09/30/2007
* USD 444,005.00

The Department of Biological Science at California State University Fullerton
(CSUF) is implementing a major curricular revision of the biology major's
program in fall 2002. Planning for this revision involved the majority of the 24
faculty in the department working as collaborative teams and was based on
explicit identification of student learning outcomes for the entire curriculum
and for each of the four new core courses that replace the eight core courses
previously offered. Faculty worked in groups called Teaching Collaboratives,
according to their expertise, to develop the four new core courses. The new core
courses incorporate active learning and inquiry-based activities in both the
lecture and laboratory sections. The Faculty Collaboratives are now developing
and adapting assessment instruments and techniques (such as those developed at
Kean University, Reid, B et al, 1992, "Outcome Assessment as a Context for
Evaluating the Biology Curriculum", BioScience, 42:536-542) for critical
thinking and problem-solving skills, linked to the major concepts and themes
within the courses. Faculty teaching the same core courses (members of the
Teaching Collaboratives) are sharing their assessment items and developing new
ones with the guidance of assessment software and in collaboration with an
assessment consultant and process facilitator. In addition, sample student work
resulting from these assessment items are being examined by the Teaching
Collaboratives to identify strengths and weaknesses of the assessment items and
of the learning environment. The end result is development of: an informed
faculty; an electronic system for gathering the data to monitor the impact of
curricular changes on student achievement, attitudes, and retention; and an
accessible but secure database that allows faculty to share assessment items and
to monitor student profiles throughout the biology program. &lt;br/&gt;