* 0127164
* Video and Image Data Access (VIDA) for Science Inquiry During Teacher Preparation
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2002,08/31/2006
* David Fromson, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 08/31/2006
* USD 75,000.00

Biological Sciences (61)&lt;br/&gt;Future teachers are expected to understand
how past and current research fits together into a structure of knowledge, at
the same time as they learn how to model scientific inquiry. This project
bridges science research and teaching practice with Video and Image Data Access
(VIDA), a collection of digital science images for prospective K-6 teachers. The
VIDA database of annotated science research images builds upon knowledge from
CIELO, a database for art history courses at California State University, to
create a science image project that is partnering with BioSci Education Network
(BEN). Project objectives are to (1) identify content areas where images can
best support learning by prospective K-6 teachers, (2) build a database of
digital images from research that can be shared and analyzed in an inquiry
approach, (3) catalogue the images into a meaningful hierarchy with text
annotations to make them searchable, (4) assist prospective K-6 teachers to
achieve subject matter information competence in science, (5) provide a
prototype database that can be adapted by other institutions to link prospective
teachers with the science research community through the use of images from
modern research. The VIDA images serve as a starting point to develop
questioning strategies about systems, scale, constancy, and change. VIDA gives
prospective teachers a role in contributing annotated images using a controlled
science vocabulary by providing a clearly defined database structure and a
cataloging manual written for K-6 teachers. VIDA helps K-6 teachers understand
how a database can be used for inquiry, while making it possible to share the
excitement of current research and complement hands-on inquiry through the use
of images.&lt;br/&gt;