* 0127689
* GOALI:  Microalloying and Improvement of the Solidification Characteristics of Nickel-Base Single Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2005
* Tresa Pollock, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 03/31/2005
* USD 375,000.00

This project is aimed at greater understanding of the mechanisms responsible for
the breakdown of single crystal solidification and their dependence on alloy
chemistry of nickel-base superalloy single crystals that find technological
applications in improving performance and efficiency of aircraft engines. Carbon
additions represent a promising new approach to improving the solidification
characteristics of a broad range of alloys. However, the underlying mechanisms
are not well understood. Careful control of carbon and other microalloying
constituents could have a substantial impact on the production of large single
crystal components. The main goals of the project are to determine the influence
of microalloying additions, including boron, zirconium, nitrogen, hafnium and
magnesium that affect the carbide precipitation process, the liquidus
temperature and partitioning of major elements during solidification. The
project examines the influence of these additions on freckling, segregation
during solidification and precipitation processes near the liquidus. Directional
solidification experiments are conducted in a Bridgman apparatus with
conventional radiation cooling and with the use of liquid metal tin as a
coolant. The role of alloying is examined with the use of segregation mapping
techniques, differential thermal analysis and electrochemical extractions of
precipitates. The work is performed in close collaboration between University of
Michigan and General Electric Company (Corporate Research and Development, GE-
CRD and General Electric Power Systems, GE-PS). GE-CRD will provide support for
an extended sabbatical visit of the co-P.I. to the University of Michigan, to
facilitate the interaction with student(s) supported on the program.
Additionally, student(s) will jointly design experiments with GE-PS personnel as
well as visit their engineering and manufacturing
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research develops new understanding of the
mechanisms involved with solidification of nickel-base superalloy single
crystals for improved performance and efficiency of aircraft engines. The
research will lend significant opportunity for academic personnel and students
to interact with industrial counterparts.&lt;br/&gt;