* 0127245
* Using Physiology to Teach Physics
* EHR,DUE
* 04/15/2002,01/31/2006
* Nancy Haegel, Fairfield University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 01/31/2006
* USD 63,017.00

Physics (13) Providing interesting and rigorous undergraduate physics
instruction for biology and health science majors is a significant and
challenging problem. An increasing body of physics education research literature
supports the claim of McDermott and colleagues that "Teaching by telling is an
ineffective mode of instruction for most students". This growing realization has
placed renewed emphasis on active learning and laboratory components of physics
instruction.

Yet the laboratory experiences are often routine exercises in data taking on an
apparatus designed to demonstrate a physical principle with little regard for
life-experience relevance. There is limited motivation to acquire conceptual
understanding and reasoning or opportunities to relate physics to life
experiences. The objective of the project is to develop modules for the
introductory level laboratory and lecture that address the need for physics
experiments and lecture demonstrations performed in a physiological venue.
Students rarely encounter frictionless inclines or force tables with pulleys.
They routinely are aware, however, of their anatomy, blood pressure and
respiration, hearing and vision.

Initially four modules are being developed and integrated into a yearlong
laboratory sequence. Specific experiments include: 1) the study of force, torque
and rotational equilibrium via the measurement of the vertical location of the
center of mass of the entire human body and its dependence on the attitude of
body parts; 2) the study of fluid mechanics via the measurement of variations in
blood pressure with vertical location and the maximum expiration and inspiration
pressures of the lungs; 3) the study of waves and sound via the measurement of
the ability of a human listener to discern the direction of a sound source; and
4) the study of geometric optics via the measurement and correction of common
imaging defects of the human eye.

Interdisciplinary participation of the physics and biology departments is
included throughout this project. This project is directed by both physics and
biology faculty advisors working with a team of two to four students to design,
fabricate and test the experiments and develop the laboratory modules. A
significant benefit of this program is the opportunity for the funded research
students who represent the "target community" to become a part of the
"pedagogical process development." This opportunity should be especially
valuable to aspiring educators.

Assessment of the project includes pre- and post-laboratory testing and specific
evaluation of laboratory report discussions of concepts and their application to
related physiological applications. These experiments are of interest to a wider
population and selected modules are being utilized in the University's "Upward
Bound" program, a weekend/summer program in science for promising high school
students from local, urban school districts. Additionally, the lecture
demonstration derivatives are used in a non-science major core course entitled
Physics of the Body. Finally, the modules are being disseminated to other
universities and made available nationally by publication and web presentation
of laboratory materials. The successful program outcome is a challenging,
interdisciplinary and relevant physics learning experience for a large
undergraduate student population.