* 0127078
* Multiple Track Modern Physics Laboratory for Developing Experimental and Analytical Skills
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2002,06/30/2005
* Timothy Grove, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 06/30/2005
* USD 97,315.00

Physics (13)

This project is restructuring the modern physics laboratory course at Indiana
University-Purdue University Fort Wayne to provide students with experience with
in-depth investigations. Six tracks of four experiments each are being
developed. These tracks are (1) Lasers and Spectroscopy I, (2) Interferometry
and Fourier Analysis, (3) Lasers and Spectroscopy II, (4) Magnetic Resonance,
(5) Nuclear Spectroscopy, and (6) Molecular Spectroscopy. The experiments within
a track use the same, or similar, equipment and concepts throughout. This allows
students to become sufficiently familiar with the concepts and equipment so that
they can be given more responsibility and freedom as they proceed through the
track to design the investigation, collect appropriate data, and analyze the
data.

The project is adapting and implementing four major elements. (1) It is adapting
procedures for fostering independence in experimental design and analysis
learned from a Course, Curriculum, and Laboratory Improvement (CCLI) project
conducted by co-PIs Masters and Maloney (Award No. 9950511, "Improving
Conceptual Understanding and Complex Problem Solving in General Physics"). (2)
From professional practice, the project is adapting the practice of having
students present poster sessions to classmates and faculty. (3) Also from
professional practice, the project is implementing LabView software to introduce
students to a standard of the industrial workplace. (4) The project is adapting
much of the software from the Visual Quantum Mechanics project (Award No.
9452782) as an independent study resource for students.