* 0127015
* Incorporation of GC/MS into the Undergraduate Analytical Chemistry Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2005
* Alanah Fitch, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* kristina parsons
* 01/31/2005
* USD 49,589.00

Chemistry (12)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Loyola University of Chicago is integrating
three laboratory experiments that are utilizing GC/MS as the principal component
into the undergraduate analytical laboratory curriculum. Chemistry majors in the
Quantitative Analysis course are using electron capture ionization (ECI) in
conjunction with GC/MS to quantify a model aromatic amine, aniline, at the
femtogram/picogram level. Undergraduates in the newly-established Environmental
Chemistry course are analyzing low levels of chlorinated phenols in
water&lt;br/&gt;samples. Students in the Instrumental Analysis laboratory are
comparing a GC/MS-based method for the determination of lead to inductively-
coupled plasma (ICP) mass spectrometry and other analytical methods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experiments have been adapted and implemented from the
research and educational literature and are emphasizing the development of
skills associated with handling and extracting small quantities of analyte.
Analytical chemistry students are becoming acquainted with the power of GC/MS to
detect and quantify very small (femtogram level) amounts of analyte,
particularly through the use of electron capture as the ionization technique for
GC/MS. Once the students are familiar with the GC/MS, they are applying their
knowledge to the analysis of real-world samples, including water from Lake
Michigan and paint chips from housing projects in the Chicago area.&lt;br/&gt;