* 0127944
* NSF/USDOT Partnership for Exploratory Research - ICSST: Decentralized Surveillance, Control  and Data Transmission for Transportation Applications
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2003
* Benjamin Coifman, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Heller
* 09/30/2003
* USD 109,906.00

PI:Coifman Institution: Ohio State University Research Foundation. Decentralized
surveillance, control and data transmission for transportation applications This
research will reexamine the control and data transmission systems used by
highway operating agencies to reduce the combined surveillance and
communications costs, without sacrificing traffic management effectiveness.
These agencies rely on automated surveillance tools to monitor conditions
throughout the road network. Under conventional operation, the fixed-point
surveillance systems transmit data at constant intervals to allow for a rapid
response when conditions change. Yet most of the time, the response to the data
is simply that no action is necessary. The required communications network and
transmission costs can become significant. Some states spend several million
dollars each year to cover the associated communication expenses. This problem
will intensify as new traffic management surveillance technologies are deployed
in the future.

The research will develop distributed control algorithms to make decisions in
the field and the systems will only transmit data when it would be beneficial
for wide scale control. The research will focus on the decision to transmit
data, based on prevailing conditions at the detector station, to reduce the
costs of surveillance. Key to this event driven approach is the recent emergence
of new communication technologies, such as cellular digital packet data. With a
slight increase of processing power in the field, the detector station could
initiate communications as soon as conditions warrant reporting. The fundamental
contributions of this research include quantifying the benefits of information,
modeling various communication network topologies to optimize system
performance, developing efficient communication and distributed control
algorithms for these networks, and demonstrating the work in a detailed case
study.