* 0127941
* NSF/USDOT - ICSST: Development of an Information Technology Based Advanced Monitoring and Inspection System for Air Brakes in Commercial Vehicles Systems for Air Brakes
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2002
* Kumbakonam Rajagopal, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Heller
* 12/31/2002
* USD 84,899.00

Darbha Swaroop &lt;br/&gt;Texas Engineering Experiment
Station&lt;br/&gt;NSF/USDOT: Development of an information technology based
advanced monitoring and inspection system for air brakes in commercial vehicles
systems for air brakes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal research goal of this
project is to design novel fault detection algorithms for air brake systems in
commercial vehicles with a view towards applying them in the development of
automatic maintenance and enforcement inspections and in the development of
real-time, on-board monitoring systems. This proposal is motivated by
considerations of preventive and active vehicle safety, since no such diagnostic
and monitoring system currently exists for air brakes in trucks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs intend to develop a mathematical model of an air
brake system for diagnostic purposes and adopt the analytical redundancy
approach for Fault Detection and Isolation (FDI). Using the air brake model,
brake pressure will be predicted from the measurements of the pedal position and
wheel speed; the difference between the measured and predicted values of brake
pressure will be used to assess the degradation in braking performance. The air
brake system model will be experimentally validated and the diagnostic
algorithms will be implemented on the test bench developed by the PI with the
support of Bendix CVS Inc., at Elyria, OH and the SWUTC program of the Texas
Transportation Institute. The tools developed in this project will be applicable
to a wide variety of industrial machinery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate and
undergraduate students will be engaged in the development and implementation of
FDI algorithms. Finally, the test bench, models and the diagnostic algorithms
will be integrated into relevant undergraduate and graduate courses.&lt;br/&gt;