* 0127118
* Acquisition of a Supercritical Fluid System for Diverse Undergraduate Curricular Activities
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2002
* William Evans, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Iraj Nejad
* 12/31/2002
* USD 29,289.00

Chemistry (12)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Supercritical fluid (SCF) technology is
being introduced into the undergraduate curriculum to complement many
traditional topics already discussed and to enhance chemical education to
prepare students for a variety of work environments. This environmentally-
friendly medium is often mentioned only briefly in current undergraduate
curricula, usually without any hands-on laboratory experience, even though the
diversity of applications involving SCFs continue to mount in virtually every
sector of the scientific workplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A SCF system is being
introduced into five different undergraduate chemistry laboratory courses - two
analytical, one inorganic, one physical, and one materials courses. Experiments
are being adapted primarily from the research literature and implemented into
these courses. Analytical experiments are utilizing the system for extraction of
analytes from difficult matrices using environmentally-friendly solvents.
Inorganic experiments are exploiting the properties of SCFs to isolate novel
complexes possessing labile ligands, and other compounds that are traditionally
difficult to synthesize/purify. Physical experiments are examining solubility
and phase behavior of various co-solvents/SCF mixtures. In addition,
thermodynamic and kinetic parameters for a variety of reactions are monitored
around the critical point to determine the effects of such media. Semi-empirical
and DFT calculations are being carried out to predict speciation within a SCF
medium and to compare experimental results. Materials experiments are invoking
this technology for polymerization, crystallization, nanoparticle deposition,
and thin-film growth applications.&lt;br/&gt;