* 0127348
* A Novel Laboratory Based Introduction to Electrical and Computer Engineering for Sophomores
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Mehmet Ozturk, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 08/31/2006
* USD 304,643.00

The reviewers found this project to be meritorious. I have read the summary and
individual reviews and concur with their assessment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
is a full development proposal that will develop, evaluate, and disseminate
material for an alternative first-course in electrical engineering. In addition
to teaching some of the fundamental concepts, the course introduces the
discipline and provides a set of experiments in various areas tied to real
applications. The applicant has tested a pilot version of the course material
with good results and asks for funds to continue their work. The assessment plan
is excellent and will address learning outcomes. The dissemination plan involves
textbook publishers, letters to other departments, on-line material, and a
faculty workshop. He also arranged to have the material tested at North Carolina
A &amp; T, a minority institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The reviewers rated this
proposal very highly. They indicated that the existing parts of the new course
and labs looked very good and were impressed by the institutional support in the
initial development. They noted that the breadth of the material provided an
excellent overview and that the labs would be fun for the students. The low cost
of the lab modules, the objective nature of the assessment plan, and the quality
of the assessment consultants impressed them. They listed the following minor
weakness: (1) The applicants should consider adding a minority or open
enrollment institution to the project to pilot the material as a way of
broadening the user population and increasing diversity in engineering. (2) A
seminar or workshop could easily be added to the dissemination plan to
facilitate adoption at other universities. (3) A commercial educational
equipment supplier should be approached concerning offering the experimental
modules fabricated at a reasonable cost, but the publication of the
documentation for do-it-your-selfers should not be sacrificed. I contacted the
PI and suggested that he consider modifying his project to include work with a
minority institution, a faculty workshop, and a possible commercial supplier
(see my email dated 10/12/01). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI did followed through
on each of the three suggestions as indicated in his email dated 11/27/01 and
his FAX dated 11/28/01. He arranged to have North Carolina A &amp; T participate
by offering a version of the course in their EE program with a small increase in
the budget to support this effort. He added a faculty workshop, again with an
increase in the budget to support the participants' travel and so on. Finally,
he made arrangements with TCI Works, a nonprofit agency that provides work
oriented rehabilitation services for disabled and disadvantaged individuals by
providing light, short run electronic assembly, to produce the
modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a well-written proposal that addresses the
nature of the first course in electrical engineering. In place of a rigorous
course on circuit theory, the applicants have developed and offered a course
that provides an overview of the discipline and laboratory experiences related
to several applications. Evaluation results of several pilot offerings were very
positive and they want to refine and expand the course material and develop a
web-based virtual lab for off-campus use. The evaluation study of the pilot
offering was excellent and planned future assessment work is solid. The
dissemination plan will be effective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;I recommend funding
at the revised level. &lt;br/&gt;