* 0127777
* Assessment of Student Achievement in Undergraduate Education (ASA)
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2002,09/30/2005
* C. Jones, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 09/30/2005
* USD 493,156.00

This project is developing improved practices and tools for the use of Web-based
assessment in SMET courses. The University of Nebraska-Lincoln (UNL) is
singularly well suited for such a project. For more than five years faculty and
students have been making increasing use of a Web-based assessment system,
Enterprise Diploma (EDU), based on software created at UNL. The level of
activity with Web-based assessment at UNL, in pedagogical content development,
software development, and institutional commitment, makes this campus a fertile
site for groundbreaking advances in this area. During the 2000 - 2001 academic
year, the EDU software was in use in more than 30 courses, and was used by more
than 8,500 students. In addition, earlier versions of this web-based assessment
system have been published nationally and adopted by a diverse range of
postsecondary institutions. &lt;br/&gt;This project is engaged in assessing,
expanding, and enhancing the use of this assessment system. Thus it is
contributing to the improvement of student learning and satisfaction with basic
math, statistics, physics, astronomy, and geology, and enabling instructors to
improve instructional practices and course design as a result of increased
knowledge of their students' skills and abilities. The objectives of this
project are to: &lt;br/&gt;1) Assess the effects of systematically varied use of
Web-based assessment on student learning and motivation; &lt;br/&gt;2) Develop
and test new question suites and types of questions that allow more complex
assessments, and conduct detailed item analysis on the archives of questions and
student assessments; &lt;br/&gt;3) Develop an implementation program that
includes individual coaching and training workshops to prepare instructors to
use EDU.&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate products of this project will be Web-based
pedagogical assessment materials for introductory&lt;br/&gt;SMET courses that
will be disseminated nationally through the proposing team's established links
with traditional text-book and software publishers, and/or through open-source,
"authorshare"- style Web-based means. The project also will produce educational
research leading to recommendations for improved practice of Web-based
assessment, with the potential to improve SMET teaching and learning in
undergraduate institutions nationwide. Web-based assessment allows students to
practice, fail, succeed and develop proficiency in a student-centered
environment and enables instructors to assess and respond to student needs and
tailor instruction accordingly. Yet, despite the attractiveness of the idea and
the popularity of&lt;br/&gt;EDU at the University of Nebraska - Lincoln (and of
similar products at other schools), most of the evidence of its effectiveness,
or possible lack of effectiveness, is anecdotal. It is vital to experimentally
measure and test its effectiveness as an assessment tool in SMET
courses.&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on assessing the validity and use of
EDU in large foundational courses, first- and second-year classes with
enrollments of 100 or more students. These classes are often the first encounter
undergraduates have with SMET disciplines. The experience of undergraduates in
them can shape their attitudes and expectations about science, math and
engineering in profound ways.