* 0127467
* The Nanoscience Education Resource: Translating Current Research into Educational Tools
* EHR,DUE
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2007
* Morton Hoffman, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Pratibha Varma-Nelson
* 01/31/2007
* USD 499,313.00

A major goal of science curriculum standards is to provide students with an
opportunity to understand macroscopic features in terms of the microscopic
interactions that give rise to those features. Our cross-disciplinary project
team has developed a set of instructional materials that help to achieve this
goal. A key feature of these materials is the use of molecular dynamics, a
technique developed in recent years that programs the motion of atoms and
molecules based on the laws that govern their motion. Thus, a student can
observe, in real time, the microscopic behavior and, using split-screen software
programs, can simultaneously see the corresponding macroscopic behavior. By
changing the conditions of the system (e.g., volume, pressure, or temperature),
the student can better understand how both microscopic and macroscopic
properties depend on these conditions. These interactive materials are being
used across a continuum of intellectual depth, from the demonstration of
qualitative concepts to a full-edged tool of exploration and self-discovery, and
they are being used to teach a topics such as mathematics, chemistry, biology,
and physics as well as applied topics in engineering and medicine. This project
is enhancing existing materials by development of new multidisciplinary
curriculum modules that integrate current nanoscience molecular modeling
research with science education. Topics such as nanotubes and buckyballs,
molecular motors and molecular machines, protein folding, aggregate formation
and dissociation such as atherosclerosis and Alzheimer's disease, crystal
growth, and designer membranes are being developed. Through existing research
collaborations, the team is (1) developing new undergraduate science curriculum
modules (curriculum and software tools) that focus on the treatment of nanoscale
concepts that unite various scientific and engineering disciplines, (2)
classroom-testing materials through laboratory-based extensions to existing SMET
courses at Boston University, (3) fostering Web-based community-building and
support, and (4) implementing a prototype teacher development program for
faculty at 2- and 4-year undergraduate institutions. The project is being
evaluated in terms of student learning, classroom practice, and impact on
underrepresented populations.