* 0127753
* An Affordable Model Laboratory for Undergraduate Mechanical and Civil Engineering Programs
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2003
* Bijan Sepahpour, The College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Krishna Vedula
* 12/31/2003
* USD 74,963.00

Engineering - Mechanical (56)&lt;br/&gt;This project is developing fourteen
experiments and building seventeen apparatuses for an undergraduate laboratory
designed for conducting experiments in Mechanics of Materials and Dynamics of
Machinery. The experiments and the apparatus being developed through this
project may be utilized as starting points for the new laboratories or used to
strengthen the existing laboratories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate
students are participating in research, design and development stages of the
project in materializing all components of a "Model Laboratory". The project is
helping them to improve their skills in working in teams, and their appreciation
for cost-effective and superior designs. The outcomes of the project consist
of:&lt;br/&gt;1. Developing blueprints for fabrication of apparatuses necessary
for precision experimentation in the areas of Mechanics of Materials and
Dynamics of Machinery.&lt;br/&gt;2. Creating detailed laboratory manuals for
distribution to students.&lt;br/&gt;3. Building a comprehensive plan for putting
together an affordable model laboratory that successfully addresses the
fundamental requirements of undergraduate laboratories in civil and mechanical
engineering as well as engineering technology programs.&lt;br/&gt;4. Enhancing
the capabilities of future engineers/educators by involving them in the process
of research, design, and development of experiments and equipment.&lt;br/&gt;