* 0127130
* Implementation of Field Laboratory and Fieldwork Curriculum in Physical Geography and Geotechniques
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Hans-Joachim Spaeth, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 04/30/2006
* USD 100,028.00

Geography (88)&lt;br/&gt;Field experience is vital for the development of
qualified and effective practitioners in all aspects of geography.
Unfortunately, the availability and easy access to secondary data over the past
two decades has resulted in the de-emphasis of fieldwork, which now threatens to
produce a generation of geographers inadequately prepared to apply and teach
field methods. This project is working to correct this deficiency through the
development of a field laboratory dedicated to student-led, inquiry-driven
instruction. Our premise is that students learn best by doing. Our goal is to
provide students the opportunity to acquire hands-on experience in an
intellectually exciting environment wherein problems are investigated that they
themselves have formulated. This approach is a modification of the guided-
inquiry, learning-by -doing approaches created and described by Barbara
Tewksbury (see B. Tewksbury, editor, "Innovative and Effective Teaching in the
Geosciences," National Association of Geoscience Teachers, 1997), developed and
implemented with success at Hamilton College (Geology) and Dickinson College
(Geology, Geophysics), and elsewhere in Europe (see M. Kent et al, "Fieldwork in
Geography Teaching: A Critical Review of the Literature and Approaches," Journal
of Geography in Higher Education, Vol. 21, No. 3, 1997, pages 313-332). To
facilitate experiential learning, we are working in a 14,200 acre field site
belonging to the University of Oklahoma. Field activities throughout the
geography curriculum are being planned for this field station. Students first
become acquainted with the field lab in lower division courses, when they are
introduced to fundamental field techniques and instruments. Upper division
courses are building on these experiences, and we are implementing a course of
guided autonomous investigation. Small teams of students are working with
faculty and representatives from state and federal agencies. The role of faculty
is to stimulate, encourage, and guide students through the research process and
advise them on the merits and the suitability of chosen field methods.
Scientists from state and federal agencies are being used to provide unique
insights from practical local perspectives. The students are collecting original
data, performing appropriate analyses, and reporting their results in
departmental colloquia. Outstanding students are provided with support to
present their results at national meetings and they are encouraged to publish in
appropriate journals. By experiencing the complete spectrum of problem
formulation, experimental design, data analysis, report writing and
dissemination of results, students are developing skills in problem-solving,
critical thinking, and research collaboration. All project activities are being
placed on a web site created for the purpose and are freely accessible to
everyone.