* 0127521
* Student Learning through Virtual Archaeology: the "Like a Fishhook" Native American Village Site
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2006
* Brian Slator, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 06/30/2006
* USD 420,000.00

Anthropology (81)&lt;br/&gt;Archaeology is the discipline that provides humans
with a conduit of sorts to the past: it is our way to travel through time.
Although archaeologists can only dream of time travel as an ultimate check on
their reasoning and interpretations, modern technology can make virtual time
travel possible in virtual reality. In this project, by combining immersive
role-based technology with the principles and data of archaeology, ethnography,
and history, we are developing an environment for teaching generations of
students about all of these disciplines. The project is creating a virtual
archaeology site based on a real Indian village with a somewhat unusual history.
"Like-a-Fishhook" was first established in the 1830s following a smallpox
epidemic in the Dakota Territory which so depleted native Americans that the
survivors of three tribes banded together to establish this village. The project
is creating a virtual village as it existed in 1854 and then 100 years later in
1954, following an extensive archeological dig and documentation of this
village. Immediately after this exploration, this the area was flooded following
the construction of a dam. Evidence from research on earlier projects indicates
that there are potential learning advantages to the approach developing and
using synthetic environments in an active learning context. We believe that
student learning of scientific knowledge and problem-solving skills in our
virtual environment matches student learning from participation in a real
archeological "dig." The objective of this project is to produce an educational
software product for national distribution. The prospects for the success of
this effort are being strengthened by evaluation research that we expect will
support our belief that this instructional approach both enhances student
learning of traditional curriculum and expands the scope of student learning
through other curricular connections. This project is being undertaken through
collaboration between the Department of Computer Science and the Department of
Sociology and Anthropology at North Dakota State University, in cooperation with
teachers at Minnesota State University - Moorhead (MSUM) and Jamestown College,
a private four-year liberal arts college. &lt;br/&gt;