* 0127470
* The Virtual Manufacturing Environment as a Capstone for Systems and Industrial Engineering Undergraduates
* EHR,DUE
* 03/15/2002,08/31/2003
* Eileen Way, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Krishna Vedula
* 08/31/2003
* USD 58,993.00

Engineering - Other (59) Industrial and systems engineers go on to jobs that
often involve the design and/or management of complex large-scale projects. Such
projects require exceptional skills in knowledge integration, teamwork and
decision-making. Unfortunately, there are few cost-effective ways for developing
the necessary skills for working on projects of this scale and complexity. As a
result, students rarely see more than unrealistically simplified problems and
finish their undergraduate engineering education with a collection of disjoint
tools, techniques and skills without the necessary experience to unify and
integrate them. Engineering schools often use capstone classes with projects in
industry to culminate undergraduate education. While this can be a valuable
experience, students rarely get the kind of projects that integrate their
technical skills. This project develops a different kind of capstone class: one
that takes advantage of Active Learning, where the students are immersed in
realistic experiences of designing and running a virtual manufacturing floor.
The manufacturing environment consists of compiled documents, role-playing, and
a software virtual floor. Unlike many other manufacturing simulations that
concentrate on the details of the machines and products, this product focuses on
the experience of designing and running fairly generic large-scale process
projects. In this capstone project, the students draw on all of their
engineering skills, apply them to a wide range of problems, and face the
consequences of their decisions.