* 0127765
* Conceptual Understanding of Three Dimensions of Earth Processes in General Education and Introductory Courses: Test Development and Validation
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2001,03/31/2004
* Philip Sadler, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Continuing Grant
* John Dwyer
* 03/31/2004
* USD 498,984.00

This project falls into the New Development track of the program guidelines. An
assessment tool is being developed that can be used as both a diagnostic tool
and a measurement of instructional effects, with primary focus on student
conceptual understanding in the geosciences. Conceptual understanding and change
are being targetted for two reasons. First, conceptual understanding implies
both a familiarity with content and the ability to apply it to complex
questions. Second, a number of studies have suggested that prior knowledge can
be as important to understanding as pedagogy. As such, students' personal
understanding of Earth systems may impact the way in which they understand and
retain the formal geoscience they are exposed to. The primary goal of this study
is the dissemination of a reliable and valid assessment tool to geoscience
faculty around the nation, for use in general education and introductory
geoscience courses, as a means of both diagnosing student preconceptions and
assessing one aspect of course effectiveness. This test can thus be used as a
cross-course, cross-university assessment instrument and as a means for
comparing a variety of instructional styles and other variables, including
disparate student outcomes related to characteristics such as age and gender.
This goal will be achieved by: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Identification of
alternative conceptions of geological processes through a comprehensive
literature search and interviews with students. Geoscience covers a range of
interdisciplinary studies, and we have narrowed our focus to three dimensions:
Earth's crust (including topographic expression and geographic expression),
Earth's interior, and Earth through time. Roughly 70 student interviews will be
conducted at four different institutions with dissimilar student
populations;&lt;br/&gt;2. Development of a multiple-choice conceptual assessment
tool using commonly held misconceptions as distractors. These misconceptions
will be catalogued from the student&lt;br/&gt;interviews described above;
and&lt;br/&gt;3. Qualitative and statistical validation of the assessment tool,
to ensure robustness as a comparative instrument. We will ensure both validity,
the ability of a test to measure a specific characteristic, and reliability, the
internal consistency of the test items and test reproducibility, of this test.
Reliability and validity will be ensured through initial piloting with novice
students, educators and expert geoscientists, and Item Response Theory
statistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The availability of an assessment tool
involving fundamental conceptions in geology will be invaluable for university
faculty interested in assessing introductory and non-major courses in the
geosciences. Additionally, the use of misconceptions as distractors allows
interested faculty to use the pre-test as a diagnostic tool, to determine the
kinds of alternative ideas held by their students. Teachers can then modify
course structures to specifically target these preconceptions. Finally, the
availability of a standard test will allow geoscience faculty to compare courses
at different universities, and in so doing allow a basis by which different
instructors, teaching methodologies, curriculum, and technologies can be
compared. This type of evaluation is critical if we are ever truly going to
answer the question "What works in the geoscience classroom?"