* 0127255
* Laboratory Course Integrating Synthetic and Biomacromolecules
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2005
* Haskell Beckham, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bevlee Watford
* 02/28/2005
* USD 190,482.00

Engineering - Materials Science (57)&lt;br/&gt;Our recently developed
undergraduate laboratory course has been designed to provide a balanced and
integrated treatment of synthetic and biomacromolecules, while providing
students with essential hands-on experience in their synthesis and analysis. Our
course has relevance for undergraduate programs in polymer and materials
science. In addition, such laboratory exercises also have value in either
organic or physical chemistry lab courses, in which the integration of
fundamental chemical concepts can be demonstrated using intrinsically
interesting materials: macromolecules. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our pedagogical
approach for the course is to convey the macromolecular concept, that the
science and engineering of macromolecules can be presented as a set of general
principles and fundamentals, regardless of source. We have achieved these
objectives by creating a suite of new multicomponent laboratory experiments,
each with a dual purpose: (1) introduce a particular macromolecular concept, and
(2) introduce one or more particular laboratory techniques. Each of these
laboratories will be developed around macromolecules derived from both synthetic
and biosynthetic pathways. A special feature of the new course has been
molecular modeling of macromolecules as an undergraduate laboratory exercise,
thus providing students with an avenue for conducting experiments even if they
find themselves without access to traditional laboratory facilities. If faculty
wish to adopt our course we have created a laboratory manual textbook, complete
with introductory material, detailed experimental procedures, and supporting
reference materials as a comprehensive set of appendices. Through our laboratory
course, undergraduates have built firm foundations for industrial practice,
graduate education, and graduate research in macromolecular science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;