* 0127298
* Collaborative Project: Core Integration of the National SMETE Digital Library
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2001,09/30/2004
* Terence Smith, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Cooperative Agreement
* Lee Zia
* 09/30/2004
* USD 3,060,542.00

A team of institutions is developing the technical capabilities and executing
the organizational responsibilities of the core integration component of the
National SMETE Digital Library program. Collaborators include: UCAR, Cornell
University, Columbia University, the University of California at Santa Barbara,
the Center for Intelligent Information Retrieval at the University of
Massachusetts, and the San Diego Supercomputing Center. The project is bringing
together many efforts already underway, and engaging new efforts as well, in
support of a comprehensive large-scale digital library that promises to enhance
every aspect of education in science, mathematics, engineering and technology.
The organizational and technical underpinnings of the proposed work fall into
three categories of effort, each within the overall context of educational
excellence: 1) engaging the community, 2) providing technology, and 3) operating
core services. To promote the vision of a strong NSDL community that sees itself
as owning the program and having major influence on the character of the
library, the project team is working with all NSDL-funded projects, helping to
integrate their work into the library. Additional partnering with efforts such
as those funded by the NSF's Digital Library Initiative and by the Institute of
Museum and Library Services, and independently developed collections and
services, is also taking place. Development and support of models for
intellectual property and digital rights management are being undertaken, as
well as promotion of a library evaluation framework, administration of an NSDL
program advisory group, and development of an overall governance mechanism for
the NSDL. A robust, flexible information technological infrastructure is being
implemented based on two themes: a spectrum of interoperability and "one library
with many portals". Technical components include a flexible portal architecture,
a central metadata repository, an open source tool kit for access to rich
content, and a database for authentication and user profiles, all emphasizing
openness and long-term evolution. Finally, support is provided for a very wide
array of educational and library services, emphasizing in this initial phase:
operation of the primary portal and specialized portals for the NSDL community
and the NSDL partners, comprehensive information retrieval services to search
for collections or individual items, and an optional service for user profiles
and authentication. The other two awards in this collaborative project are
0127308 and 0127520.