* 0127191
* Development of a 3-D Interactive Mineralogy Textbook
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2002,02/29/2008
* Melinda Dyar, Mount Holyoke College
* Continuing Grant
* Jill K. Singer
* 02/29/2008
* USD 417,244.00

&lt;br/&gt;Geology (42)&lt;br/&gt;This project creates a Mineralogy textbook
that is accessible and relevant to students by presenting the material in accord
with modern learning theory. The chapters are integrated with a CD-ROM focused
on active learning by students. Every text illustration is reproduced in color
3-D and includes animations, interactive exercises, and narration by the
authors. A second accompanying CD-ROM provides an all-inclusive mineralogical
database that can be used for mineral identification, movies of crystal
structures, optical properties, etc. Sections of the text and its animations
will be incorporated into DLESE, with metatags provided for direct searching and
browsing of much of the material. The textbook reflects the experience of both
authors' in industry and their years of teaching geoscience, science education,
planetary science, and materials science. The textbook addresses a diversity of
student perspectives ranging from science teachers to geologists, across the
broader earth sciences, to connections with cognate disciplines like chemistry,
physics, mathematics, and biology. This project involves collaboration among
authors at Mount Holyoke College and the University of Idaho. Educators at the
University of Idaho are performing evaluations. Tasa Graphic Arts, Inc. is
producing the illustrations and the CD-ROMs. Support is requested to facilitate
production of a low-cost textbook that incorporates state-of-the-art pedagogy
and computer animation that may be used by students in the geosciences as well
as science education programs. The textbook incorporates innovative methods
(such as the use of spiral and inductive learning, as well as concept maps) that
have the potential for improving the quality of science teacher preparation,
adding diversity to the textbooks in this field, and providing for integration
of technology into earth science and related curricula.&lt;br/&gt;Significant
co-funding of this project is being provided by the Division of Earth Sciences
in the NSF Directorate for Geosciences in recognition of the importance that
this innovative textbook and accompanying CD-ROM has for undergraduate students
and faculty. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;