* 0127622
*  Incorporating Structural and Image Analysis Investigations Across the Biology Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Daniel Sutherland, University of Wisconsin-La Crosse
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 05/31/2004
* USD 74,126.00

Biological Sciences (61) This project is incorporating digital imaging and image
analysis technology across the biology curriculum so as to more fully implement
investigative pedagogical approaches. The project adapts several key features of
curriculum-wide imaging projects successfully implemented at other universities,
most notably Franklin and Marshall College, Kutztown University, and Kent State
University. However, the scope of the project is larger than those at other
institutions in that digital imaging is being used extensively in the largest
General Education lab science class, Introductory Biology. This course serves
non-science majors, science majors, and pre-service K-12 teachers. The project
is organized to provide Biology majors proficiency with this technology by
introducing them to it in their first year and incrementally increasing their
use of digital imaging and analysis in their upper division core and elective
courses and undergraduate research. To accomplish these goals, the project is
using a two-tiered approach. In the first tier students use workstations
consisting of basic digital cameras, student compound and stereo microscopes,
and computers to answer guided-inquiry questions in both Introductory Biology
and upper division labs. At the second tier, two low-light level CCD cameras
attached to high-quality microscopes are being used by all Biology majors in a
centralized microscope facility to perform more sophisticated digital imaging
and quantitative image analysis in classes and research projects. Faculty
development is being accomplished through instructor training on equipment
acquired.