* 0127965
* NSF/USDOT Initiative: Dynamic Cargo Assignment and Route Planning in the Trucking Industy
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2002,05/31/2003
* Randolph Hall, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Suvrajeet Sen
* 05/31/2003
* USD 99,933.00

This project will investigate methods for improving the scheduling of intermodal
trucks with the objective of reducing empty miles improving customer service. In
the real world, truck operations in any traffic network contain a fairly high
degree of uncertainties including arrival of new orders, cancellation of
existing orders, variable waiting times and variable travel times due to traffic
congestion. To fully capture the capabilities of these technologies in the
trucking industry, quick and efficient algorithms, capable of providing good
solutions in real time, are still needed. In this one-year exploratory grant,
the focus will be on the problem of scheduling trucks serving a centralized port
area with many feeder/end customers. This dynamic hybrid solution methodology
consists of a fast dynamic program in conjunction with a search technique (such
as genetic algorithms). Theory and methodology developed in this research can be
expanded in later years to solve more general dynamic routing problems. The
researchers will validate the dynamic approach using actual data that contains
several truck depots, container terminals, intermodal facilities and end
customers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The elimination of international trade barriers,
lower tariffs and shifting centers of global manufacturing and consumption, has
lead to new dynamics in intermodal shipping. Worldwide container trade is
growing at a 9.5% annual rate, and the U.S. growth rate is around 6%. Every
major port is anticipated to at least double its cargo by 2020. As a
consequence, truck traffic in the vicinity of the nation's ports is likely to
grow substantially, leading to increased roadway congestion, and delays for both
ordinary drivers and for the import and export of goods.&lt;br/&gt;