* 0127208
* Using Live-Thru Case Histories to Motivate and Teach Software Engineering to Computer Science Students
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2002,11/30/2005
* Aaron Klappholz, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mark James Burge
* 11/30/2005
* USD 75,000.00

Software Engineering (34)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We have devised a novel pedagogic
methodology, Live-Thru Case Histories, for motivating and teaching Software
Engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computer Science students are often excited
about learning technology (State of the Art), but uninterested in its
critically-necessary adjunct, software development process (variously known as
Software Engineering, State of the Practice, or Best Practice). Our methodology
brings undergraduate Computer Science students to the realization that without
an appropriate appreciation for and facility in using State of the Practice,
they are likely to fail, not in their course work, but in the real-world
software development projects to which they are planning to devote their
careers. We have conducted a pilot study in a Senior Project/Software
Engineering course, and have obtained, and published, encouraging results.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A publisher who read our results has approached us,
unsolicited, with a request to develop additional Live-Through Case History
materials. Colleagues at Rutgers, New Jersey Institute of Technology, University
of Michigan Dearborn and University of Maryland University College have agreed
to use Live-Thru Case Histories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Members of our team
include: a former Vice President of AT&amp;T with thirty-five years of
experience performing and managing industrial and governmental software
development; a technology researcher with twenty-seven years experience teaching
computer science and performing and supervising research sponsored by such
organizations as NSF, DOE, and IBM Research; a psychologist whose specialty is
the development and assessment of educational programs; and a political
scientist whose specialties include web-based outcomes assessment and the design
and analysis of surveys.