* 0127650
* Real-Time Multi-Dimensional Assessment of Student Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2004
* David Hanson, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 12/31/2004
* USD 565,404.00

A web-based assessment instrument that provides real-time, multi-dimensional,
formative assessment of student learning is being developed. This instrument
provides measures of learning by topic and by level of mastery. The levels of
mastery are defined as the information level, the algorithmic level, the
conceptual level, and the problem solving level. The information level is
characterized by memorization and the ability to recall, repeat pieces of
information, and identify information that is relevant. The algorithmic level is
&lt;br/&gt;characterized by the ability to mimic, implement instructions; and
use memorized &lt;br/&gt;information in familiar contexts. The conceptual level
is characterized by the ability to visualize, rephrase, change representations,
make connections, and provide explanations. The problem-solving level is
characterized by the ability to use material in new contexts; to analyze
problems; to identify the information, algorithms, and understanding needed to
solve them; to synthesize these components into a solution; and to evaluate the
quality of this solution. Four products are resulting from the project: 1) A
web-based assessment system founded on a coded database of questions; 2) A coded
database of questions for use in measuring student learning in introductory
college chemistry, calibrated to reproduce measurements generated through
student interviews; 3) Protocols for developing and calibrating databases for
use in other SMET courses; and, 4) Quantitative and qualitative analyses of the
use of this system by both students and teachers, including the impact of the
instrument on the users learning and teaching strategies and the impact of the
instrument on student performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students are using the
instrument to self-assess their learning after each assignment, to clarify
expectations for their performance particularly with regard to conceptual
understanding and problem solving, and to identify strategies for improving
their achievement. Faculty are using it to prepare formative and summative
assessments, to target particular practices and topics for improved instruction,
to identify groups of students who need immediate assistance, and to assess the
effectiveness of new teaching strategies and materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Important co-funding of this project is being provided by the
Division of Research, Evaluation and Communication. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;