* 0127595
* The Hidden Earth Curriculum - A Visual, Interactive Approach to College Geology
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2005
* Stephen Reynolds, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 01/31/2005
* USD 499,989.00

Geology (42)&lt;br/&gt;We are developing interactive computer-based materials -
unlike any that previously existed - to help students learn geology, improve
their spatial visualization abilities, and engage in critical thinking. This
proposal is to fully develop these innovative materials to create a lab-based
curriculum, integrated with technology and focusing on the visual aspects of
geology, such as visualizing geologic structures hidden beneath the Earth's
surface. This project is placing these visual materials in a web-friendly
framework and in the context of authentic, complex problems. We are using 3D
programs to create arguably the next generation of interactive visual materials
for introductory college geology courses. We are constructing QuickTime Virtual
Reality (QTVR) movies that enable students to interactively rotate topographic
and geologic terrains, slice into geologic blocks or reveal the internal
geometry of layers, and erode the uplifted side of a fault block to see how this
would be expressed on the land surface. We have piloted these movies in our
introductory geology labs and upper-division geology courses, all to rave
reviews. This curriculum contains integrated modules that can be used in
introductory college courses and upper-level SMET courses, and by the general
public. To evaluate the curriculum, students are pre-tested, selectively
interviewed while training on the materials, and post-tested. Experimental
methods include both experimental and quasi-experimental, and data are
qualitative and quantitative. Proposed duration of the project is 36 months.
Materials are being distributed via the Internet (http://reynolds.asu.edu) and
via commercial publishers who already are interested.