* 0127155
* Scaffolding Scientific Inquiry Within a Natural Resources Bachelor of Science Degree Program: From Asking Testable Questions to Developing Ecosystem Models
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Ruth Smith, Paul Smith's College of Arts and Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 12/31/2004
* USD 94,624.00

Biological Sciences (61) Paul Smith's College (PSC), located in the Adirondack
Park of New York State, offers students the opportunity to pursue a
baccalaureate degree in Natural Resources. We are actively re-evaluating our
course curricula to provide students with a set of science experiences and
research challenges that build upon one another across a course sequence. This
project will develop a series of hierarchical research and modeling activities
that effectively scaffold the process of scientific inquiry across the sequence
of courses leading to a degree. Data collected by classes throughout this
process will be added to a data repository and will be accessible to future Paul
Smith's College students. These data will also be available to other interested
members of the Adirondack community. Several activities designed for
introductory courses will improve question development, and hypothesis testing
skills. Activities designed for second and third year courses will introduce
simulation models that allow students to expand their research ideas across
larger spatial and longer temporal scales. Finally, in the third phase, students
will work with STELLA, and other computer models to build and parameterize
simple ecological models, explore model assumptions, and conduct sensitivity
analyses. In all phases, oral and written presentation skills and collaboration
will be emphasized. At the onset of the project, PSC faculty will be involved in
a two-day workshop to field-test activities, discuss project implementation with
science education experts, and work with new computer programs.