* 0127326
* Interactive Virtual Environments for Science and Engineering Education
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2002,11/30/2003
* Mehdi Setareh, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Ernest L. McDuffie
* 11/30/2003
* USD 74,824.00

Interdisciplinary (99)&lt;br/&gt;This project is developing modules within an
immersive virtual environment (VE) in &lt;br/&gt;order to examine whether or not
such environments provide an effective venue for education. &lt;br/&gt;The
environment being developed is based upon four principles. First, a high level
of &lt;br/&gt;interactivity is necessary to allow students opportunities for
active learning. Second, &lt;br/&gt;VE technology is used as a supplement to
other methods of learning. Third, the environment &lt;br/&gt;contains many types
of information and presents links between them. Finally, the 3D
&lt;br/&gt;visualization realistically portrays information that is abstract or
normally not visible in &lt;br/&gt;the physical world. The modules being
developed are in structural engineering, computer &lt;br/&gt;networks, and
computer graphics and we are integrating them into the curriculum in order to
&lt;br/&gt;evaluate their effectiveness. The results of this work include a set
of well-tested &lt;br/&gt;educational VE applications, guidelines for designing
educational VEs, and principles for &lt;br/&gt;deciding when a VE is an
appropriate choice for an educational goal and it is intended to
&lt;br/&gt;provide a real and substantial improvement to the learning
environments of many students as &lt;br/&gt;well as innovative VE research.