* 0127066
* Enhanced Scientific Literacy Using Project-Based Biology Laboratory Exercises
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2004
* Alison Morrison-Shetlar, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 01/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

Biological Sciences (61)&lt;br/&gt;A growing body of literature amply documents
the low levels of scientific literacy&lt;br/&gt;among the American public. To
address this issue we are providing a framework in which&lt;br/&gt;large numbers
of undergraduates can achieve basic scientific literacy. We
are&lt;br/&gt;accomplishing this goal through development of a general biology
laboratory course for&lt;br/&gt;approximately 2325 students per year including
non-science majors, underrepresented&lt;br/&gt;minorities and future K-16
teachers. This course is adapting materials from Oklahoma State University, New
York University, Sweetbriar College, Wellesley College, and Project Kaleidoscope
The new biology course utilizes project-based learning and critical thinking
skill development to introduce and allow discussion of relevant scientific
concepts. Expected project outcomes include: graduates able to engage in
scientifically aware behavior and informed citizenship, improved scientific
knowledge, and an appreciation of the connections between science and "real-
world" problems. The project is yielding innovative hands-on, minds-on
laboratory activities suitable for large numbers of students that are available
for adaptation by other institutions through a published laboratory manual.
Dissemination is being accomplished through a project web site, presentations at
national meetings, faculty development workshops, publication of laboratory
materials and professional articles. This model is one that can be easily
adapted by other institutions and, therefore has excellent potential for other
universities who teach large numbers of students.