* 0127167
* Integration of Inquiry-based Undergraduate Laboratory Modules throughout a Core Biology Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Darren Sandquist, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Udovic
* 06/30/2006
* USD 199,000.00

Biological Sciences (61)&lt;br/&gt;Inquiry-based laboratories are an important
means of providing students with the opportunity to learn through a process of
exploration and discovery. Inclusion of inquiry-based laboratories is a critical
feature of the curricular reform currently underway in the Department of
Biological Science, California State University, Fullerton. This project
involves the development and support of multiple inquiry-based laboratory
modules integrated throughout a new four-semester series of foundational courses
in the biology major. Eight modules are being developed using model organism
systems drawn from the Research Link 2000 Institute. The courses served by these
modules include: Biodiversity &amp; Evolution, Cellular Basis of Life, Genetics
&amp; Molecular Biology, and Principles of Physiology &amp; Ecology. Modules,
using Aiptasia palladia (sea anemone) and Wisconsin Fast Plants, follow themes
of symbiosis and stress responses, respectively, from the distinct perspective
of each core course. The key innovation of this project is the creation of an
iterative inquiry-based laboratory experience. Student laboratory experiences
more closely resemble authentic science. We propose that students gain 1)
confidence in the care and manipulation of the organisms, 2) facility in
experimental design, 3) appreciation of the integrative nature of biology, and
4) a greater depth of knowledge. Student learning goals and preparation for
upper-division course work, including independent research, are being evaluated.