* 0127513
* WORKSHOP:   Tether-free Technologies and e-Manufacturing; Milwaukee, WI., October 1-2, 2001
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2001,12/31/2002
* Jay Lee, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 12/31/2002
* USD 40,000.00

This grant provides funding to conduct a workshop to focus on tether-free
technologies in manufacturing. The focus of the workshop is to address
underlying issues in emerging tether-free technologies and their applications in
manufacturing equipment, processes, and enterprise system, and ultimately
provide better direction for researchers and practitioners. It is hoped the
results of this workshop can impact both manufacturing research and education
activities in academia. The potential areas that would benefit, if embedded
within a tether-free environment include, but are not limited to: manufacturing
(wire free sensor/actuator systems for closed loop feedback systems, enhance
quality control and preventative maintenance of equipment, the remotely
controlled factory floor); wireless sensors and/or actuators for environmental
sensing and control; smart defense systems in mobile power, command &amp;
control on the move); smart materials and structures for closed-loop monitoring
and control; new tether-free infrastructure (ultra-wideband techniques, data
compression, security of sensitive data/information, etc).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is to organize a collaborative workshop among
industry, academia, and government agencies to discuss the needs and emerging
technologies, as well as to make recommendations to the National Science
Foundation and the research community on the direction of interdisciplinary
research and education in the areas of tether-free technologies and their
impacts to e-manufacturing. The results of the workshop will be used to define
industry/university collaborative needs as well as to serve as an potential
roadmap for researchers and practitioners to advance the state-of-the-art
technologies and practices in applying tether-free technologies in next-
generation manufacturing equipment, processes, and enterprise systems for U.S.
manufacturing industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;