* 0127465
* A virtual tornadic thunderstorm to enable student-centered learning about complex storm-scale atmospheric dynamics
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2005
* Carolina Cruz-Neira, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 01/31/2005
* USD 74,949.00

Atmospheric Sciences (41)&lt;br/&gt;A visually-realistic virtual tornadic
supercell thunderstorm is being developed with data probe capabilities,
providing students from K-12 through graduate with opportunities to learn as
scientists learn in a constructivist manner. The virtual storm is a proof-of-
concept for later creation of other virtual geoscience systems. The virtual
storm addresses the NSF goal of providing all students access to excellent
undergraduate science education, with learning based upon direct experience with
methods and processes of inquiry. This research is being built upon a simple
prototype of the virtual storm, already developed with internal funds at Iowa
State University. Although the prototype storm, lacking data probe capabilities,
was developed in a fully-immersive virtual CAVE, a version has been disseminated
to linux-based PCs, improving student access. We are creating a Windows-based
version for wider dissemination. The numerous small-scale details within a super
cell thunderstorm that reflect the wide range of important atmospheric processes
occurring make the storm an especially useful model to serve as a proof-of-
concept. An assessment of the impact the virtual storm has on science education
is being made by comparing student answers to questions on the topic in a large-
lecture introductory course in year 1 (no exposure to the virtual storm) to
those from year 2 when students are exploring the virtual storm. Successful
completion of the project should demonstrate that exciting laboratory-type
experiences of phenomena previously off limits to students within classroom
laboratories can be brought to students everywhere by virtual reality
simulations.