* 0127915
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Craniodental Form, Functional Convergence, and the Evolution of Dietary Preferences
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2001,10/31/2002
* Matthew Ravosa, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 10/31/2002
* USD 6,996.00

Researchers have long sought to understand the environmental variables
underlying behavioral and anatomical evolution in early primates. While
disagreement persists over which factors were of greatest significance, diet is
widely thought to have played an important role. Therefore, efforts to
illuminate trends in early primate evolution will require the ability to
reconstruct diet from fossils. To this end, investigators over the past two
decades have attempted to identify features of the skull and dentition that can
be used to achieve this. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While these studies have
identified many such features, significant gaps remain. First, to ensure that a
structure and function are consistently linked in a specified manner, they must
be evaluated in ecologically similar, yet distantly related groups. As few
predictions have been tested in nonprimates, it is unclear whether patterns
observed in these animals can confidently be extrapolated to their distant
fossil relatives. Second, the study of jaw or dental form alone is not
sufficient to discriminate among all diets. Since previous studies have
considered these separately, the usefulness of evaluating both to fully
characterize a species feeding habits remains largely unexplored.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to fill these gaps by using
marsupials as a natural experiment to test the hypotheses that dental and
mandibular form reflect a species' diet. Specifically, ten predictions relating
tooth surface features and the internal and external proportions of the lower
jaw (determined from x-ray film) to the physical properties of a species' diet
will be evaluated. By testing these predictions in a group that extensively
overlaps primates in most aspects of feeding ecology, this study will not only
allow greater confidence in the utility of these variables for inferring diet in
extinct primates, but it will also greatly expand our understanding of the
ecological bases of evolution in mammals in general.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;