* 0127711
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:   Child Temperament and Personality Across Contexts
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,05/31/2004
* James Victor, Hampton University
* Standard Grant
* Amy L. Sussman
* 05/31/2004
* USD 95,391.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Child Temperament and Personality
Across Contexts&lt;br/&gt;James B. Victor, Hampton University&lt;br/&gt;Mary K.
Rothbart, University of Oregon&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will merge two
previously independent strands of research in the study of child temperament and
personality. During the project year, child personality and temperament research
teams at Hampton University, a Historically Black University (HBCU) and the
University of Oregon will develop a collaborative network to build capacity for
multidisciplinary, cross-cultural research about the development of child
temperament and personality across contexts (CTPC). Child development
collaborators who study child development issues across a broad array of
developmental contexts (family, child-care, school, community, culture and
language) will participate in the project. The overall project goal will merge
two previously independent strands of research in the study of temperament and
personality. The project's three specific aims are related to three domains as
follow. &lt;br/&gt;Aim 1: Domain 1: Biological, social and behavioral aspects of
measuring temperament and personality in children. We have chosen collaborators
who will help us consider issues related to child temperament, child personality
development (both the lexical approach and the NEO-PI Facet approach), and adult
personality research. This group of collaborators will consider conceptual and
measurement issues in developing facets for common instruments across the
biological, emotional, social, and behavioral aspects of temperament and
personality. In addition, collaborators will plan a multi-site study to validate
the facet measures that have been developed. &lt;br/&gt;Aim 2: Domain 2: Risk
identification and prevention in temperament and personality development. We
have chosen collaborators who represent a broad array of scientific interests in
child development to assist in developing an integrative approach to studying
temperament and personality development from a common perspective. These
collaborators will review the collected materials and analyses from Domain 1
activities. They will provide input and recommendations from their research
prospectives on the measurement issues presented to them. In addition, they will
plan collaborative studies using the common facets, based upon their programs of
research. &lt;br/&gt;Aim 3: Domain 3: Ethnic and cultural contexts in
temperament and personality development. We have chosen collaborators to address
important ethnic and cultural issues and provide research access to a broad
spectrum of populations of American Children to include African American and
Latino children. These collaborators will plan studies to confirm and validate
the common temperament and personality facets across culture and language
contexts. &lt;br/&gt;Work to complete the three aims will include a fall
workshop at the University of Oregon on child temperament and implications for
facilitating collaborators working groups. In the spring workshop at Hampton
University collaborators will present plans to submit proposals, gain funding,
and conduct individual investigator, small collaborations and large-scale
projects to meet the objective of integrating child development research across
traditional knowledge domains, cultural contexts, and levels of analysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;