* 0127540
* NSF/USDOT Partnership for Exploratory Research - ICSST: A Zero Public Infrastructure Vehicle Based Traffic Information System
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2002
* Athanasios Ziliaskopoulos, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Heller
* 09/30/2002
* USD 94,080.00

Athanasios K. Ziliaskopoulos&lt;br/&gt;Northwestern
University&lt;br/&gt;NSF/USDOT : A Zero Infrastructure Vehicle Based Traffic
Management System &lt;br/&gt;This research project introduces and studies an
innovative, fully decentralized traffic information system that is based only on
data exchanged by equipped vehicles. It does not require any infrastructure to
be installed on the network by government agencies. Vehicles exchange traffic
information as they move through the network, which allows drivers to adjust
their routes and avoid or be prepared for congestion, incidents or other
hazards. Since the system is solely based on in-vehicle devices, it will be
market-driven and self-maintained and it will work on all types of roadways, if
there is sufficient market penetration (freeways, arterials, rural and dirt
roads). It will be upgraded as newer cars, with more advanced technological
capabilities for obtaining, exchanging and processing information, are
introduced into the market-similar to the to that of the computer hardware and
software industry today. While the concept is outside of the current policy
philosophy of government agencies, the investigated system is quite simple:
participating vehicles equipped with on-board computing and communication
devices will be able to determine the vehicle's current location and past
spatio-temporal trajectory as they traverse the network and exchange traffic
measurements with other equipped vehicles. Equipped vehicles moving in opposite
directions on the same roadway or at intersections will exchange traffic
information. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will use analytical
probabilistic and simulation based methods to answer questions, such as what is
the necessary market penetration to have effective information generated and
propagated throughout a street network, the relationship between shockwave and
information-wave propagation, and the functional and algorithmic requirements of
online routing algorithms to convert the data exchanged into meaningful routing
information. The analysis will consider benefits for equipped and non-equipped
drivers under various scenarios of recurrent and non-recurrent congestion. If
the above analysis demonstrates potential for significant benefits, we intend to
work with major communication and auto manufacturing companies that have strong
ties with Northwestern University to develop a preliminary assessment of the
technical feasibility of the system and potentially deploy a pilot. &lt;br/&gt;