* 0127488
* National Computational Science Institute
* EDU,DUE
* 11/15/2001,12/31/2006
* Robert Panoff, Shodor Education Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Mark James Burge
* 12/31/2006
* USD 2,757,944.00

Interdisciplinary (99)&lt;br/&gt;This project builds upon the successful
regional Shodor Computational Science Institute&lt;br/&gt;(SCSI) to create a
National Computational Science Institute (NCSI). Reaching more
than&lt;br/&gt;1000 undergraduate faculty per year for three years, NCSI offers
a proven, modular set&lt;br/&gt;of in-person, video-conferenced, and web-
accessible workshops, seminars, and support&lt;br/&gt;activities to introduce
the hands-on use of computational science, numerical models and&lt;br/&gt;data
visualization tools across the undergraduate curriculum. This project represents
a &lt;br/&gt;partnership with the Education, Outreach and Training Partnership
for Advanced&lt;br/&gt;Computational Infrastructure, the National Computational
Science Education Consortium,&lt;br/&gt;the Burroughs Wellcome Fund, and more
than two dozen undergraduate institutions, high&lt;br/&gt;performance computing
centers and vendors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The target audience for NCSI is teams
of faculty from predominantly undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;institutions, minority
serving institutions, and community colleges whose students are&lt;br/&gt;either
the next generation of scientists and engineers, the next generation of K-12
teachers,&lt;br/&gt;or both. NCSI participants then assist other faculty on
their own campuses and at neighboring&lt;br/&gt;institutions to introduce
computational science in their own classes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main work
of NCSI is accomplished through three synergistic but distinct efforts
that&lt;br/&gt;can be modeled as PULL, PUSH, and PERMEATE. Regionally
distributed workshops PULL &lt;br/&gt;faculty within a reasonable travel
distance for a week of intense interdisciplinary
training,&lt;br/&gt;collaboration, and curriculum development in computational
science. Participants explore&lt;br/&gt;the use of modeling and visualization
tools in existing courses, while stimulating creation&lt;br/&gt;of new courses
and promoting new modes of undergraduate research. NCSI staff
and&lt;br/&gt;participants proactively PUSH computational science education onto
the agendas of&lt;br/&gt;numerous annual meetings of professional and
discipline-specific societies, by offering&lt;br/&gt;workshops, conducting
tutorials, presenting papers and posters, and serving on
program&lt;br/&gt;committees. To sustain these efforts, NCSI PERMEATEs on-going
and proposed&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate curriculum efforts providing
interdisciplinary and discipline specific&lt;br/&gt;web-accessible courses for
faculty enhancement, and resources for interactive
exploration&lt;br/&gt;including curriculum, problem-based modeling modules,
tools, and tutorials, leveraging&lt;br/&gt;Shodor's award-winning Computational
Science Education Reference Desk. &lt;br/&gt;