* 0127381
* WEAVE : Web-based Educational Framework for Analysis, Visualization and Experimentation
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2006
* Earl Dowell, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 04/30/2006
* USD 349,385.00

Engineering - Civil (54)&lt;br/&gt;Our team at the Pratt School of Engineering
at Duke University has previously developed and documented a prototype web-based
instructional system for solid mechanics. Our basic goal has been to promote an
inquiry-based style of modern engineering analysis, experimentation, and design
into undergraduate solid and fluid mechanics courses. A central effort of our
team's work has been the design and evaluation of a modular and portable
framework so that faculty can create a diverse set of experiments based on our
web- based model. To help guide faculty toward adoption of our model a workbook
and accompanying CD-ROM is being published.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through our
project Web-based Educational Framework for Analysis, Visualization, and
Experimentation (WEAVE) faculty will have the option of complimenting
traditional labs with module-based projects designed to encourage students to
compare, contrast, and improve models of actual physical experiments. An
interactive web-based tutorial for each module will be developed in conjunction
with Shodor, a non-profit educational research foundation based in Durham, N.C.
The deployment of WEAVE across the engineering curriculum enables students to
follow interactive tutorials, execute numerical simulations, and conduct
physical experiments. In these self-paced labs, students explore concepts of
fluid and solid mechanics through trial and error iterations by directly
controlling and modifying the physical experiments and their associated
numerical simulation. The dissemination of our materials and findings has been
promoted on our campus, and at the state and national levels through oral
presentations, publications in educational journals, and via the Internet. We
also plan to present at the Frontiers in Education in 2003.&lt;br/&gt;