* 0127160
* An Inquiry and Standards Based Earth System Science Course for Pre-service K-8 Teachers and Others
* EHR,DUE
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2004
* Oswaldo Garcia, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey G. Ryan
* 12/31/2004
* USD 98,121.00

Earth Systems Science (40) In this project we are adapting problem-based
learning (PBL) and other inquiry-based approaches to a new integrated geoscience
course for K-8 pre-service (preK-8) teachers. The motivation for this effort is
to address the problem where our preK-8 pre-service teachers were taking a
course that did not meet the content and pedagogy standards and that was not
designed for them. With this new integrated geoscience course, we are trying to
improve the students' attitudes toward science, understanding of science,
ability to "do" science, understanding of science concepts, and ability to use
instructional technology to learn about science. We also aim to increase the
number of preK-8 teachers who choose to emphasize science, increase the
diversity of science K-8 teachers, and provide university faculty and graduate
student development to ensure high quality instruction. To accomplish these
goals, we are creating an earth system science course that meets state and
national educational standards for earth/space science content, science
pedagogy, assessment and evaluation, and effective use of instructional
technologies. The course is being designed around topical units that integrate
multiple disciplines, that lend themselves to inquiry-based teaching and
learning strategies, and that are socially relevant and interesting to students.
The PBL approach is a student-centered approach that uses concrete, real-world
problems to enhance student learning. In the course students investigate
carefully framed geoscience problems via online explorations and visualizations
of real-world data, small-group collaborations, and hands-on experiments. We are
working with an elementary science educator to design effective assessment and
evaluation methods.