* 0127455
* Development and Assessment of Interactive Online Homework for Introductory Chemistry
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2002,05/31/2005
* David Yaron, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* kristina parsons
* 05/31/2005
* USD 418,536.00

While a large body of educational research advocates active learning, practical
constraints hinder changes in large introductory courses. Online homework
systems help bypass some of these constraints by integrating easily into common
course structures, automatically grading of student assignments, and providing
timely&lt;br/&gt;feedback. However, the online assignments continue to be
largely quantitative problems. This proposal is creating a variety of
interactive online homework activities that is enhancing students' conceptual
learning and increasing their interest in science. These problems pose goals
more closely resembling the work of practicing chemists, focus on designing
simple experiments, and put chemical concepts into meaningful, real-world
contexts. This work is impacting students in introductory courses since homework
serves as the primary means through which students practice applying new
concepts. This project builds on previous NSF-funded work that has produced a
Virtual Lab, now used by three universities and 500 students to date, and a set
of authoring tools (CREATE) to facilitate interactive educational software
development. We are developing 5-10 problems, varying in difficulty, for each of
at least 10 chapters of introductory chemistry. The quality of these materials
is being ensured through intensive assessment -- first by interviewing students
to identify likely difficulties and later by including conceptual and attitude
questions in the online homework system to compile ongoing data across
universities. Dissemination through several course management systems, our own
web site, a CD, and professional meetings are enabling instructors to browse the
problems, their solutions, and their difficulty.&lt;br/&gt;