* 0127577
* Using Technology to Transform Teaching and Learning:  Data-Driven Inquiry and Collaborative Learning in Introductory Astronomy
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Gregory Bothun, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/2006
* USD 479,809.00

Astronomy (11) This project expands development of data-driven interactive
exercises and simulations for use in a collaborative learning environment to
cover virtually all topic areas in introductory Astronomy. The motivation is to
a) use the naturally engaging character of Astronomy as a vehicle to promote
science literacy by integrating research into the curriculum to transform the
passive lecture mode into an active learning system that emphasizes scientific
process and methodology, b) explicitly create a collaborative learning
environment where student teams solve problems and analyze data and c) offer a
more engaging interface to science learning so that it becomes an effective
recruiting tool for future K-12 science teachers. These goals can be
accomplished by the development of robust software, based on real astronomical
data sets, that runs in the Web browser environment. Previous work by the team
on this project has already produced some of these learning tools. Assessment
and evaluation of that effort shows that the methodology is sound. New
objectives will be accomplished via further software development and beta-
testing in local classes. This will involve approximately 700 students annually
on four different campuses. The overall goals of this effort are for the
students to be exposed to science methodology by engaging them in the actual
practice of science and for them to develop excellent collaboration skills.
These outcomes will serve the students far better than the traditional mode of
rote memorization of syllabus-driven material that currently constitutes the
pedagogy.