* 0127434
* Virtual Labs, Real Data, Including Biological Materials  for Statics and Mechanics of Materials
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2003
* Alan Zehnder, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 12/31/2003
* USD 73,101.00

Engineering - Mechanical (56) A proof-of-concept is being undertaken for the
development of web-based laboratory modules for statics and mechanics of
materials, two foundational courses for Mechanical, Civil, and Biological
Engineering students. Two modules are being developed. The first module is a
very preliminary experiment using the pressure in a soda can as a demonstration
of thin-walled pressure vessel theory. The second module and principal activity
of the project focus on the torsion of both engineered and biological materials.
This module features web-based instructions which combines audio, text and video
of the sample preparation process and the process of conducting the actual
experiments. Furthermore, this module also provides data from real tests, which
includes data from biological materials that the students download and analyze
as part of their laboratory reports. One goal of the project is to develop a
web-based laboratory that serves a variety of educational needs. As a
consequence, this second module is being developed in consultation with
colleagues from several schools including two-year community college. Once
developed, the module will be implemented and evaluated at Cornell and at the
other schools. The approach to web-based laboratories, which combines web-based
instructions with real data, serves as a model across many engineering
disciplines. It is also a step towards making web-based instruction more active
by requiring substantial analysis by the student in addition to providing
visualization and explanation of the processes. The project will have immediate
impact on the large number of students who are taking the statics and mechanics
of materials classes at Cornell and at other institutions. If successful, the
project will lead to a full deployment proposal and to exploration of the
commercialization of the laboratory materials. If commercialized, the laboratory
materials could impact a larger number of engineering and technology students,
since statics and mechanics of materials are taught at many institutions other
than the ones involved in the project.

Key Words: Web-based laboratory modules, Web-based instructions for statics,
Web-based instructions for mechanics of materials

