* 0127423
* Adaptive Teaching and Learning Environments in Science and Mathematics Education
* EHR,DUE
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2004
* Matthew Hudelson, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 03/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

Interdisciplinary (99) Adaptive Teaching and Learning Environments (ATLes) is a
project that is providing undergraduate science, mathematics, engineering, and
technical students with problem-based, authentic learning activities designed to
help them develop problem-solving skills and master content. The ATLes project
is founded on constructivist learning theory and peer-to-peer faculty
development while using technology to bridge learning goals and promote problem
solving. Adaptive Teaching and Learning Environments is a collection of
collaborative communication tools and content tutorials in science and
mathematics education embedded into generative adaptive tutorials based on
progressive disclosure of key concepts, facts, and data. Regardless of the
course or topic, ATLes requires students to write hypotheses, sketch problem
analyses, and prepare summaries or reports using the same technology-based tools
recent graduates are using in the workplace. Additionally, the learning path a
student takes through an ATLes course is being tracked, allowing instructors to
identify successful learning pathways, and of equal importance, those areas that
are not successful, where students struggle with material. Finally, this project
incorporates a unique research design that assesses the effect ATLes has on
student critical thinking and command of discipline specific knowledge. ATLes
development is broken into three major themes: 1) adaptive software "engine"
design, 2) ATLes lesson module design, and 3) comprehensive assessment of the
effects of ATLes on student critical thinking and mastery of discipline-
specific knowledge.