* 0127938
* SBIR Phase I:  OODLE: An Object-Oriented Design Learning Environment
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2002
* Eric Domeshek, Stottler Henke Associates
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2002
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to develop
and evaluate a software prototype to assess the technical and commercial
feasibility of an Object-Oriented Design Learning Environment (OODLE) that will
help software engineers acquire expert-level object-oriented design skills
rapidly and economically. Unlike earlier tutoring systems that help novices
learn to write short programs that generate "merely" correct results, OODLE will
help software engineers learn to design more complex software systems by
appropriately balancing factors such as the importance of each functional
requirement, time and space efficiency, simplicity, flexibility, clarity, and
code modularity. Because complex design problems have no single correct
solution, the tutoring system will assess the strengths and weaknesses of each
student's design and then "converse" with the student within a Socratic dialog
to clarify understandings, intentions, and rationales, as well as point out
additional facts, issues, and experiences that suggest design alternatives worth
considering. Although OODLE will teach object-oriented software design skills,
many of the findings of this research may also apply to other engineering
disciplines. Thus, this research would significantly advance our ability to
create curriculum development and learning assessment tools that help student
and professional engineers enhance their design skills.

Software engineers require better methods of acquiring the extensive experience
and instructional feedback needed to become proficient designers. Ideally, the
engineers would receive individualized instruction in one-on-one or small group
mentoring situations. In practice, however, mentored instruction can be
difficult to achieve because expert mentors are an expensive resource that is
infrequently available. To satisfy this market need, the company will develop an
object-oriented design skills tutor that can be marketed to software vendors and
IT organizations. Initially, the OODLE technology will be packaged within semi-
custom solutions sold directly by the firm to large end-user companies or
indirectly via licensing or reseller arrangements with software training and
consulting companies.