* 0127174
* Learning through Writing about Environmentally Significant Analysis using Atomic Absorption Spectroscopy
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Lawrence Margerum, University of San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Harry Ungar
* 05/31/2005
* USD 67,951.00

Chemistry (12)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemistry students at the University of San
Francisco (USF) complete many traditional wet chemistry techniques in their
introductory lab courses. With this project, we are making use of an atomic
absorption spectrophotometer (AAS) and web-based writing-to-learn technology
(Calibrated Peer Review, CPR) to explore environmental chemistry problems in
general and analytical chemistry courses. We are adapting a number of
environmentally significant chemistry experiments from the chemical education
literature to improve conceptual understanding of technical subjects, to develop
skills in reading for content and in scientific writing, and to link the writing
assignment to hands-on experiments using atomic absorption
spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;On-line source material on environmental problems and
published experiments using AAS are being adapted for pre-lab and post-lab
writing assignments using the web-based Calibrated Peer Review (CPR) program
developed by the NSF-funded Molecular Science Project. First and second year
science students in general and analytical chemistry, plus a group of non-
science majors in a general education course are impacted by the project.
Assignments are designed to explore how quantitative analysis by AAS can help
identify environmental problems. The immediate impact includes (i) a deeper
understanding of an environmental problem via the CPR pedagogy of reading for
content and peer-review of writing assignments, (ii) exposure of introductory
students to high quality analytical instrumentation, and (iii) more confidence
and interest in quantitative chemistry. We are assessing student confidence and
learning by conducting surveys tracking their exam performance, their writing
assignments and by arranging informal discussions with students.&lt;br/&gt;