* 0127422
* Adapting and Implementing Studio-Based Learning for Undergraduate Biomedical Engineering
* EHR,DUE
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2005
* Richard Foulds, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Burkett
* 02/28/2005
* USD 100,963.00

Engineering - Other (59)&lt;br/&gt;The project adapts and implements the studio-
learning approach to undergraduate education that has been developed by the
Rennselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI). NJIT understands that a research
university must offer an undergraduate experience that incorporates active
learning and promotes critical thinking among students. Studio courses integrate
the traditional lecture/recitation/laboratory into studio sessions in which
faculty serve as mentors for students engaged in scaffolded exercises. The RPI
approach has been successfully adapted at other universities in physics,
chemistry, mathematics, and introductory engineering. Evaluations have shown
that studio learning increases student retention of the subject material,
improves student and faculty satisfaction, builds scholarly communities among
students, and engages them in active discovery. NJIT's piloting of two
introductory courses in 2000-2001 demonstrated the potential of studio courses
in biomedical engineering. This proposal is matched with funding from the
Whitaker Foundation and from the New Jersey Commission on Higher Education.
These funds enable NJIT to design and equip a studio classroom. Activities
specific to this grant include the adaptation of RPI's studio method and the
conversion of three introductory biomedical engineering courses to studio
courses. The project also integrates technology into these studio courses.
Project outcomes are going to be validated through external evaluation. A
comprehensive dissemination program is being used to support faculty, student,
and K-12 teacher development.&lt;br/&gt;