* 0127121
* Transforming the Biology Curriculum Using Research-based Experimental Systems
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Thomas Weiss, Christopher Newport University
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 04/30/2005
* USD 0.00

Biological Sciences (61) The Transformation 2005 Program of the Department of
Biology, Chemistry and Enviromnental Science is impacting the entire four-year
biology curriculum at Christopher Newport University (CNU). Research-based
experimental systems (RBES) developed by Research Link 2000 are forming the
backbone of this transformation, providing fast-growing plants and biologically
informative animals with which the concepts learned in lecture can be explored
in an engaging, investigative, open-ended format. The sea anemone and Wisconsin
Fast Plant RBES are the initial systems that will be introduced. Additional RBES
are being investigated and incorporated as an ongoing aspect of the project. The
transformation begins with the general biology lab course that is taken by over
700 majors and nonmajors each year, engaging students in the process of science
from their first semester. It moves in steps through each level in the biology
curriculum until courses in all four undergraduate years are changed and
independent research opportunities are varied and readily pursued. Simultaneous
with the transformation of the curriculum is the training of doctoral candidates
who aspire to university careers. These candidates, six selected from regional
doctoral programs each year and awarded Bartholomew Gosnold Instructorships, are
being mentored in the use of RBES and guided in becoming exciting and productive
college faculty. The lessons of Transformation 2005 are being extended to
regional college biology faculty and to local middle and high school biology
teachers in a series of intensive workshops.