* 0127426
* A Community to Develop Materials for an Engineering Learning Environment
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Joseph Tront, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Burkett
* 08/31/2005
* USD 460,001.00

Faculty members attempting to create materials for collections of engineering
education&lt;br/&gt;content in a digital library face several challenges. Lack
of training in sound pedagogical&lt;br/&gt;practices, a shortage of training in
the effective use of educational technology, short&lt;br/&gt;supply of required
resources and time to produce completed and tested works, and a
lack&lt;br/&gt;of emphasis on improved teaching in the university faculty
rewards systems are the major&lt;br/&gt;obstacles to materials development. To
remedy this situation, this project endeavors to&lt;br/&gt;create an active,
engaged, and sustained virtual community of engineering educators
who&lt;br/&gt;energetically contribute to and share materials from a common
collection of courseware.&lt;br/&gt;The virtual community is taking form as an
incubator in which faculty are trained in&lt;br/&gt;sound pedagogical practices
e.g., developing learning goals and assessment techniques.&lt;br/&gt;Next,
participants are schooled in the effective use of technology in many
different&lt;br/&gt;teaching/learning situations including: classroom
presentation, self-study, distance and&lt;br/&gt;distributed learning,
experiential learning, etc. Once trained, faculty then develop
a&lt;br/&gt;portion of a collection of courseware modules in their area of
expertise. Guidelines are &lt;br/&gt;provided so that modules can be integrated
with each other from both the standpoint&lt;br/&gt;of technology mix as well as
the pedagogical approach being used. Members of the virtual&lt;br/&gt;community
of contributors subsequently become the testers of the courseware
modules,&lt;br/&gt;with each of the contributors using a subset of modules to
conduct courses at their&lt;br/&gt;home campuses. As soon as a baseline
collection in a topic area is established the project &lt;br/&gt;personnel will
present national workshops on how to adopt and adapt the materials in the
collection.&lt;br/&gt;NEEDS will be used to catalog and make the collections
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Keywords: Virtual community, NEEDS, digital
library