* 0127320
* Development and Evaluation of a Curriculum in Scientific Computing for Mathematical Science Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Marilyn Carlson, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 07/31/2004
* USD 49,982.00

Mathematical Sciences (21)&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a prototype course in
scientific programming that is aimed at majors in the mathematical sciences (as
distinct from engineering and computer science) and provides a comprehensive
introduction to software development tools for large codes in scientific
computing. The undergraduate computer science curriculum typically includes one
or more courses in which students work on a large software project, often as
part of a team, that requires them to develop, document, and respect functional
interfaces and to compile and link the final product from multiple files and
libraries. In contrast, majors in mathematics, physics, and similar disciplines
usually do not learn such skills in the introductory programming and numerical
analysis courses that typically are part of the curriculum. As a result, majors
in the mathematical sciences often are at a disadvantage, relative to their
peers in computer science, when they seek employment after completing their
baccalaureate degrees or when they continue on to graduate study in fields that
involve the development of large scientific codes. The course provides
mathematical science majors with experience in developing and prototyping
software for applications that involve large data sets or large amounts of CPU
time.