* 0127429
* Development of an Interactive Aerosol Dynamics Simulation Program for Undergraduate Education
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Pratim Biswas, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Krishna Vedula
* 07/31/2003
* USD 74,994.00

Engineering - Other (59)&lt;br/&gt;Aerosol science and engineering (ASE) has
"applications in several fields ranging from environmental engineering, public
health, medical sciences, mechanical engineering, chemical engineering, and
materials science". The National Science and Technology Council lists ASE as one
of the "Inherently Interdisciplinary" areas. ASE is also linked to the National
Nanotechnology Initiative. However, teaching of the subject matter has been
primarily restricted to graduate level resulting in shortage of professionals in
this field. To ensure further development in this area and to explore its true
potential, it is essential that the subject be introduced in a broader manner at
undergraduate level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the project is to
develop integrated and interactive aerosol dynamics computer programs to enhance
the understanding of aerosol science and engineering (ASE). To achieve this
objective, three stand alone modules are going to be developed to be included in
courses that cover aerosol topics, i.e. ENV 4121 Air Pollution Control Design,
ChE 368 Transport Phenomena, and the dual level course ENV 518 Aerosol Science
and Engineering. These modules are going to consist of (1) Cyclone for
particulate control, (2) Optical Particle Counter for particle size
characterization, and (3) Respiratory Deposition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CD-ROMs
are going to be prepared and disseminated utilizing the network of American
Association for Aerosol Research (AAAR). Formative and summative evaluations are
going to be conducted in addition to the pilot evaluations in several aerosol
related undergraduate classes. Full development is going to be designed based on
the feedback obtained from the current project.&lt;br/&gt;