* 0127006
* Actively Engaging Undergraduates in Geologic Problem Solving by Integrating Petrographic Microscopy and Digital Image Analysis into an Earth Systems Science Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Jeffrey Templeton, Western Oregon University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 06/30/2005
* USD 40,462.00

Geology (42)&lt;br/&gt;Using the recommendations from a workshop supported
jointly by NSF, AGU, and the Keck Consortium (NSF, 1996), Western Oregon
University recently implemented a broad-based, integrated Earth systems science
approach to undergraduate geoscience education that is a unique program in the
state of Oregon. One of the key objectives of this state-of-the-art curriculum
shift is to engage undergraduate Earth Science majors in the process of "doing
science" (NSF, 1996). The primary objective of this course improvement project
is to adapt and implement an active, inquiry-based approach to teaching
mineralogy and petrology within the context of this new Earth systems science
curriculum. This pedagogical model integrates geologic problem solving with
petrographic microscopy and digital image analysis in an introductory petrology
course that serves as the foundation for the study of Earth materials in the
Earth Science major. Using thin sections as a geologic database, Earth Science
majors become proficient in making observations, identifying scientific
problems, proposing working hypotheses that can be tested using computer-based
technologies, and defending their results in class-wide discussions via multi-
media presentation systems and written reports. To implement this innovative
pedagogical model, a petrographic microscope and digital camera are interfaced
with a computer, digital image analysis software, and a set of student
petrographic microscopes. In addition to the petrology course, this
instrumentation is being widely utilized throughout the broad-based,
undergraduate Earth systems science curriculum and is being used for outreach
activities that are designed to showcase the exciting world of microscopy and
digital image analysis to K-12 students and science educators.