* 0127958
* NSF/USDOT Partnership for Exploratory Research - ICSST: Towards a Systems Integration Urban Network Performance Measure - Scalability and Data Issues of the Two-Fluid Model
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2003
* Qiuming Zhu, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 09/30/2003
* USD 115,875.00

Elizabeth G. Jones &lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Nebraska -
Lincoln&lt;br/&gt;NSF/USDOT: Towards a Systems Integration Urban Network
Performance Measure - Scalability and Data Issues of the Two-Fluid
Model&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To advance the integration of information
technologies in surface transportation systems, this research will experiment
with the utilization of real-time video-based traffic flow data collected from
camera arrays along a street corridor for traffic control and city
transportation system modeling. The research is expected to enable the
transportation control system to interact with the traffic environment, to
acquire and understand the traffic situations based on sensory inputs, and to
make intelligent decisions about the circumstances where the traffic control
tasks are to be performed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
focus on the following objectives. (1) Video handoff and target vehicle
tracking, (2) Traffic flow information extraction, and (3) Vehicle driving
pattern modeling and identification (e.g., identifying individual vehicles that
demonstrate dangerous behavior or potentially at risk). To achieve these
objectives, the research activities of this project will be divided into three
task phases: (1) the image acquisition and pre-processing phase, (2) vehicle
tracking and hand-off processing phase, and (3) the traffic video understanding
(vehicle driving pattern recognition) phase. &lt;br/&gt;