* 0127310
* Collaborative Research: Combining Real and Virtual Professional Development for Current and Future Geoscience Faculty
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2008
* R Macdonald, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Jill K. Singer
* 12/31/2008
* USD 2,643,530.00

Earth Systems Science (40)&lt;br/&gt;The National Association of Geoscience
Teachers (NAGT) and the Digital Library for Earth System Education (DLESE) is
offering a professional development program to improve the quality of
undergraduate geoscience education. The program is designed to enhance the
participants' content knowledge in emerging fields and promote exemplary
teaching practices; develop effective on-line resources to support existing
workshops; provide electronic versions of workshops to extend the influence of
the workshops; and develop an active cohort of educators involved in further
dissemination. The professional development program includes both emerging
topics in geoscience and faculty development workshops. Two emerging topics
workshops are being offered each year, one in an interdisciplinary field related
to Earth systems and one in geoscience pedagogy. Mature topical workshops, based
on successful previous work, include: course design workshops, workshops for
early career faculty, and workshops for graduate students and post-doctoral
fellows preparing for careers in academia. Web resources developed by the
project provide a collection of background resources and are designed to engage
participants in on-going discussion. The project also explores tutorials,
synchronous discussion, and on-line courses for delivering workshop content.
Participants in the workshops are expected to develop course materials based on
the principle of actively engaging students in their own learning, test
materials following the workshop, and ultimately contribute to the DLESE
Collection and Community Center. Integration of workshop planning and web-
resource development are combined in a unique on-line resource aimed at
extending the workshop experience far beyond those who attend the face-to-face
workshops and beyond the lifetime of the grant.&lt;br/&gt;