* 0127498
* Bioinformatics Education Dissemination: Reaching Out, Connecting, and Knitting-together (BEDROCK)
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* John Jungck, Beloit College
* Continuing Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 05/31/2006
* USD 1,414,857.00

Biological Sciences (61)&lt;br/&gt;Bioinformatics is central to biology in the
21st century. The use of computer based&lt;br/&gt;analytical tools on
electronically stored and distributed data is fundamentally
changing&lt;br/&gt;life science research and its application to problems in
medicine, agriculture,&lt;br/&gt;conservation, and forensics. In light of this
"information revolution" undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;biology curricula must be
redesigned to prepare the next generation of informed citizens&lt;br/&gt;and
prepare those who will pursue careers in the life sciences. The BEDROCK
initiative&lt;br/&gt;(Bioinformatics Education Dissemination: Reaching Out,
Connecting and Knitting-&lt;br/&gt;together) is enhancing, expanding, and
empowering a national community of bioinformatics&lt;br/&gt;educators. The
project goals include: 1) Identify and support faculty who can take
a&lt;br/&gt;leadership role in bioinformatics education; 2) Highlight and
distribute innovative&lt;br/&gt;approaches to incorporating bioinformatics data
and techniques throughout undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;biology education; and, 3)
Establish mechanisms for the broad dissemination of&lt;br/&gt;bioinformatics
resource materials and innovative teaching models. To achieve these
goals&lt;br/&gt;we are holding a series of faculty development workshops around
the country; recruiting&lt;br/&gt;and supporting a group of innovative faculty
to implement and disseminate bioinformatics&lt;br/&gt;education materials;
publishing resources for bioinformatics education and building
a&lt;br/&gt;networked collaboratory environment for developing and sharing
bioinformatics&lt;br/&gt;educational approaches. This project builds on the
established pedagogical philosophy and&lt;br/&gt;academic community of the
BioQUEST Curriculum Consortium. Specifically,&lt;br/&gt;BEDROCK extends our work
in bioinformatics education over the last four years during&lt;br/&gt;which we
have established a community of collaborators representing the
diverse&lt;br/&gt;resources required to mount a national dissemination effort.