* 0127583
* Collaborative Chemistry Laboratory Model (CCLM):  Integrating Microcomputer-Based Laboratory with Interactive Multimedia Computer Simulations
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2002,12/31/2005
* Jerry Suits, Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 12/31/2005
* USD 170,987.00

Chemistry (12)&lt;br/&gt;This project is a joint effort between two Louisiana
Universities, Southern University in Baton Rouge and McNeese State University in
Lake Charles. We intend to integrate our resources and develop a Collaborative
Chemistry Laboratory Model (CCLM) for undergraduate chemistry that can address
some common problems. Specifically, poor student performance in the chemistry
gatekeeper courses may be due to poor inquiry skills (methodology and reasoning)
and poor conceptual understanding of chemistry topics. These problems, in turn,
may adversely influence progress in future science courses. The model is based
upon the integration of constructivist learning theory with three interactive
modes of technology that are designed to enhance experiences with a phenomenon
and its representations. Microcomputer Based Laboratory (MBL), i.e., the NSF-
funded LabWorks, allows student design of experiments, simultaneous observation
of a phenomenon and its representations, and graphical analysis of its data.
Interactive Multimedia Computer Simulations (IMCS), the Chemistry Explorer
computer modeling and simulation from Riverdeep, expands student decision-making
opportunities and allows visualization at the particulate level. We are adapting
and integrating the use of the MBL and IMCS systems so that students can emulate
the mental world of chemists when they couple the enhanced methodology of MBL
with the conceptually rich microworld of IMCS. Online cooperative/collaborative
learning methods are providing opportunities for students to share their
experiences and ideas between the two universities. The CCLM is being tested in
freshman chemistry laboratory courses and later will be implemented in advanced
courses. The project involves 800 STEM students distributed within the two
universities. Faculty development workshops are being used to share findings
throughout the LS-LAMP network of 12 universities. Other methods of
dissemination include web publications and professional
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;