* 0127511
* Instructional Materials for Engineering Mechanics Using Problem-Based Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2004
* Gary Gray, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Krishna Vedula
* 01/31/2004
* USD 120,259.00

Engineering - Other (59) &lt;br/&gt;This project develops a prototype package of
educational materials to facilitate the adoption of Problem-Based Learning (PBL)
into sophomore-level mechanics courses. The objective of this project is to
create PBL-based materials sufficient to cover those topics in an undergraduate
dynamics course typically covered in one semester. These new materials are going
to include (i) the relevant sections of a dynamics textbook, and (ii) enough
homework and example problems, with emphasis on motion over intervals of space
and time, to get through a semester. A subset of these materials is going to be
tested in the fall of 2002 on a limited basis, in concert with the textbook that
is currently being used. In the spring of 2003, at least one section of
undergraduate dynamics is going to be taught using the newly created materials
instead of a currently available textbook. Baseline and full assessments are
going to be done during the spring 2002 semester and during the 2002-2003
academic year. In addition, through an agreement with McGraw-Hill, the materials
are going to be reviewed by the mechanics faculty at 10-15 universities. At the
end of the project period, the first draft of the textbook is going to be
prepared. Upon the completion of this project, a proposal to complete the
development of the full package, including substantial web- and team-based
components is going to be submitted.