* 0127013
* Symbiotic Approach to Teaching Process Control and Instrumentation
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Lisa Coffman, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Susan Burkett
* 02/28/2006
* USD 72,067.00

Engineering - Engineering Technology (58) &lt;br/&gt;This project is developing
an interdisciplinary, team-taught block of courses to train engineering
technology students in industrial-level process control equipment and associated
systems integration. These courses are also instilling advanced communication
skills necessary for quality performance in a technical and professional
environment. Target Audience/Diversity consists of students coming from five
counties designated by Congress as part of Appalachia, i.e. a population
underrepresented among the college-going population. This population is largely
comprised of first generation college students of whom about 20% are returning
adult students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is addressing the following
problems:&lt;br/&gt;a. Curriculum provides inadequate training on realistic
industrial-level equipment due to&lt;br/&gt;design limitations, dated
technology, and the large learning curve.&lt;br/&gt;b. Inadequate communication
skills limit students in understanding, recording, and&lt;br/&gt;referencing the
hierarchical concepts needed to negotiate the equipment
complexities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addressing these problems, a three-member
faculty team (two engineering professors/one English professor) will adapt an
interdisciplinary approach implemented by three institutions (Drexel University,
Texas A&amp;M University, and Arizona State University, all members of a NSF-
funded coalition) to improve engineering education. The modified approach
integrates four required and one optional course in engineering technology and
English into a three-semester sequence, with courses collaboratively
taught.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives\outcomes of the project consist
of:&lt;br/&gt;a. Training engineering technology students in industrial-level
equipment and systems&lt;br/&gt;integration.&lt;br/&gt;b. Using technical
writing training to improve learning on technical equipment.&lt;br/&gt;c. Cross-
training faculty on the pedagogical models.&lt;br/&gt;d. Disseminating resulting
course plans and laboratory design materials via
professional&lt;br/&gt;journals, workshops\website, and
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;e. Providing an exemplary approach for writing-intensive
courses in other disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;