* 0127065
* Project Based Learning through Environmental Quality Assessment for Undergraduate Chemistry Majors and Non-Science Students
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2002,02/29/2004
* John Jenkins, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 02/29/2004
* USD 77,263.00

Chemistry (12)&lt;br/&gt;Despite increased emphasis on environmental chemistry
across the curriculum at Georgia Southern University, non-major students and
chemistry majors are not receiving meaningful, real world analysis experience in
this vital area. This project seeks to remedy this situation by providing
portable field instrumentation appropriate for use by lower level and senior
students alike, as well as modern technology for the analysis of regionally
relevant environmental pollutants. The project adapts initiatives undertaken at
Western Carolina University (NSF 9750583), Roanoke College (NSF 9850796) and
Emory and Henry College (NSF 9851010). By allowing students access to these
changes in the curriculum, we:&lt;br/&gt;1. Expose them to modern methods of
environmental analysis,&lt;br/&gt;2. Allow for on-site testing, with all its
inherent challenges, and&lt;br/&gt;3. Stimulate student interest through
examination of local issues/problems and development of critical thinking skills
as they analyze the ramifications on their own lives.&lt;br/&gt;Students gain a
solid understanding of environmental testing techniques, awareness of the
importance of environmental stewardship, and enhanced data analysis and report
preparation skills as they undertake studies on total ecosystem quality. This is
accomplished through intensive field studies, coupled with advanced laboratory
experiences for upper level students. Georgia Southern educates significant
numbers of minority and female students, and a new core requirement in
environmental science ensures inclusion of students of virtually all major
degree programs. The Chemistry Department has established collaborations with
area water treatment plants, wildlife rehabilitation centers, sanitary landfill
operators, and agricultural extension agents, thus providing a variety of
appropriate field locations for student investigations. The newly-acquired
equipment reflects modern technology and thus provides students with current
practical experience.