* 0127438
* Collaborative Research and Development of Prototype Java-Based Learning Materials for the Environment of  Undergraduate Electrodynamics
* EHR,DUE
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2006
* Michael Lee, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 03/31/2006
* USD 36,432.00

Physics (13) This project is developing and field testing a set of companion
materials intended to provide visualization and numerical solutions illustrating
problems and concepts in upper-level undergraduate courses in electricity and
magnetism. The goal is determine how the use of a highly portable and cost-free
implementation of computational and visual learning tool may be brought into
wide acceptance. The subject of electrodynamics has been chosen for this proof-
of-concept project because of the rich opportunity for visualization. This
prototype project involves developing a selection of sample learning aides for
undergraduate electrodynamics with a component of field testing in a classroom
environment. The project materials consist of Java programs with numerical
methods and a visualization interface and are accompanied by descriptive text. A
key component of the prototype concept is the text and discussion materials that
work with the Java visualization and computational tools. This accompanying
material includes subject explanation and description of the use of the
computational/visual tools. Though a significant quantity of learning materials
and software are being produced in this prototype project, one of the major
research question addressed is the design of materials to that they are actually
used in the classroom. The design concept being tested seeks to remove many of
the typical barriers to adapting new material for an existing class. Among the
barriers being addressed are cost, relevance, software compatibility, and the
important issue of time invested by teacher and student in getting started with
the learning tools. Relevance and other design features are the subject of field
tests included in the project design.