* 0127089
* Equipment for an Investigative Introductory Biology Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2005
* Barbara Collins, California Lutheran University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Udovic
* 03/31/2005
* USD 42,486.00

Biological Sciences (61)&lt;br/&gt;Introductory Biology laboratories work best
when students actively engage in genuine&lt;br/&gt;scientific inquiry. We are
following the precedent set by Project Kaleidoscope (PKAL) and transforming the
CLU's Introductory Biology lab course to one that emphasizes the major processes
of science: the formation and testing of hypotheses, observation,
interpretation, experimentation, analysis, and communication (both oral and
written). We are purchasing four functional groups of equipment to develop a new
course, Introduction to Biological Experimentation (IBE). IBE offers lab
exercises that support an inquiry-based approach. Emphasis on investigative
biology at the introductory level better prepares our science students for upper
division courses and research experiences, and enhances their prospects for
success in graduate programs, the health professions, and jobs in research,
clinical, and business settings. Students enrolled in CLU's Science Educators
program (conducted with CLU's School of Education) are receiving better training
in the methods of science as a result of our new IBE course. This project is
contributing to the important national goal of training more capable K-12
science educators. The equipment of this project is also expanding the types of
experiments that young minority students enrolled in our science Upward Bound
summer program (High School minority students) can conduct. We are evaluating
the new labs and disseminating successful experiments through print and
electronic media.