* 0127419
* Developing Case Studies in Failures and Ethics for Engineering Educators
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Norbert Delatte, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Lee Gentili
* 08/31/2004
* USD 74,999.00

Engineering - Civil (54) We have identified a need for failure awareness in the
undergraduate engineering curriculum. Engineers can learn a lot from failures,
and failures play an essential role in engineering design. This need has been
documented in a number of papers and conferences over the past 15 years. Our
work is in response to this situation and aimed at providing a heightened
appreciation of the role failure analysis knowledge can play in higher education
and public safety.

We have produced educational materials on failure case studies for use in civil
engineering and engineering mechanics courses, in print and CD-ROM format. In
addition we have developed a one-day workshop to disseminate these materials to
24 engineering faculty members from across the U.S. During the course of our
project we have developed our educational materials, including review and
feedback by the committees discussed below, and the workshop, as well as a
thorough evaluation of both efforts. Although the majority of the work has been
carried out at The University of Alabama at Birmingham, faculty members and
practicing engineers from across the country have participate in the development
of these materials and the workshop. This work has been accomplished through the
various committees of the American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) Technical
Council on Forensic Engineering (TCFE). Our work has specifically targets the
NSF Division of Undergraduate Education crosscutting theme of Faculty
Development.