* 0127302
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Ritual and Status:  Mortuary Display at the Household Level at the Middle Horizon Site of Conchopata
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2003
* Marc Bermann, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2003
* USD 6,440.00

Ancient Andean empires were communications dinosaurs; information and
&lt;br/&gt;decision-making traveled only as fast as a human could, and the
Andean &lt;br/&gt;peoples did not know writing. Lacking the administrative
technology of &lt;br/&gt;contemporaneous European or Asian states, the native
empires of the Andes &lt;br/&gt;were forced to develop alternative modes of
statecraft, and other &lt;br/&gt;principles to integrate their subject
populations. Archaeologists have long &lt;br/&gt;suspected, based on Spanish
eyewitness accounts of the Inka empire, that &lt;br/&gt;one of the crucial
integrative mechanisms of prehispanic statecraft was the &lt;br/&gt;elaborate
mortuary practices of the politically important. In the Inka &lt;br/&gt;empire,
the carefully kept bodies of deceased rulers served as material
&lt;br/&gt;symbols of dynastic succession and political continuity. Through
periodic rituals and&lt;br/&gt;fine mausoleums mummies were the setting for
public communication of &lt;br/&gt;messages of political legitimization and
imperial authority. While the &lt;br/&gt;role of the dead in Inka statecraft has
been well studied, much less is &lt;br/&gt;known about this topic in early
Andean empires, such as the Wari; in some &lt;br/&gt;ways a fore-runner of the
Inka that dominated the highlands between AD 400 &lt;br/&gt;and 800. Ms.
Charlene Milliken's doctoral dissertation project, conducted &lt;br/&gt;under
the direction of Dr. Marc Bermann, will investigate the site of Conchopata,
&lt;br/&gt;Peru. At its height, Conchopata was a secondary center of the Wari
empire &lt;br/&gt;(A.D. 600-1000) and consisted of residential zones, public
plazas, pottery workshops, &lt;br/&gt;temples, and specialized mortuary
complexes. Excavation will center on &lt;br/&gt;residential contexts associated
with two mortuary &lt;br/&gt;complexes, and research will test the hypothesis
that these mortuary complexes were &lt;br/&gt;used by Conchopata elites in the
veneration of important ancestors. &lt;br/&gt;Conchopata is a particularly good
location for this research because &lt;br/&gt;several intact mortuary structures
have been uncovered; normally these &lt;br/&gt;kinds of facilities were looted
or destroyed long ago. This project will &lt;br/&gt;provide the first
investigation of the potential role of mortuary activity &lt;br/&gt;in Wari
political statecraft as one native means by which authority is
&lt;br/&gt;constructed and expressed in non-literate, non-Western
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;