* 0127644
* Flux Syntheis and Properties of New Crystalline and Glassy Chalcogenides
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Mercouri Kanatzidis, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 12/31/2005
* USD 384,000.00

The goal of this project is to synthesize and characterize new solid-state
materials in the metal thiophosphate and selenophosphate families. The metal
thiophosphate and selenophosphates show a very rich chemistry that is based on
anions that form in chalcophosphate fluxes by simple in-situ fusion, and these
act as fundamental structural building blocks. Areas to be explored include
alkali metal-free ternary metal-and rare-earth-metal- thiophosphates and
selenophosphates, corresponding alkali metal quaternary derivatives and also
glasses formed from the manipulation of these materials. Thioarsenate and
selenoarsenate fluxes will also be explored to discover corresponding arsenic
compounds. Characterization of the new materials will include structural
determinations by single-crystal X-ray scattering methods and the measurement of
physical properties such as optical absorption, thermal behavior and electrical
conductivity. The structure of glasses will be probed with pair distribution
function (PDF) analysis. The molten alkali poly-thiophosphate and poly-
selenophosphate salts, which are the reactive solvents in this project, will be
studied by Nuclear Magnetic Resonance spectroscopy in order to understand the
identity, distribution, and chemistry of the anions that form in chalcophosphate
fluxes. Eventually we wish to control the stabilization and incorporation of
specified building blocks in synthetic target compounds. The ultimate goal of
this research project is to enhance our knowledge of the chemistry of
chalcogenides and render the &lt;br/&gt;chemistry more controllable and
predictable so useful new materials can be designed. This project has a very
strong education component that aims to educate students in the advanced subject
of solid state synthesis including non-oxide materials discovery and novel
state-of the-art laboratory techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The discovery of
new classes of solid state materials with novel composition and structure, as
well as an understanding of their chemical behavior and physical properties such
as optical and electronic behavior are important to industry. For example, the
glass versions of the metal-thiophosphate and -selenophosphates show
controllable amorphous to crystal phase changes and may have potential for
memory storage applications. Students trained in these areas are well poised to
exploit current and future academic and industrial job
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;