* 0127050
* Creating Large Activity-based Introductory Courses for Physics and Chemistry by Adapting the SCALE-UP Approach and Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2005
* Jeffery Saul, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 03/31/2005
* USD 193,186.00

Physics (13) The main project goal is to deliver more effective introductory
science instruction to University of Central Florida's growing, diverse student
population. It is well known that the majority of introductory physics students
learn significantly more from carefully constructed activities than from
traditional lectures. The Student-Centered Activities for Large Enrollment
University Programs (SCALE-UP) project developed at North Carolina State
University offers UCF a way to teach large studio classes where the emphasis is
on learning by inquiry instead of learning by listening. The SCALE-UP approach
is a complete revision of the standard lecture/laboratory. The students work in
groups of 3-4 with computers and lab equipment for 4-6 hours each week in a
large technology-rich laboratory designed to promote collaborative learning.
Evaluations of NC State classes show that this approach is well matched to UCF's
objectives of improving students' conceptual understanding, problem solving
ability, and overall experience with introductory science classes. This project
is developing curriculum materials and purchasing equipment for SCALE-UP physics
and chemistry courses in an 80-student studio classroom. In addition to adopting
activities developed at NC State, the UCF physics and chemistry education
research groups are also developing new activities and instructor materials,
particularly in chemistry where work is just starting. Curriculum development
and evaluation are conducted in close collaboration with the SCALE-UP
developers. This project should demonstrate that other schools can successfully
adopt the SCALU-UP approach, which may lead to widespread changes in
undergraduate math and science classes across the country.