* 0128443
* SBIR Phase I: Real-Time Image Processing Based Motion Detection for Science and Mathematics Learning
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2002,11/30/2002
* Paul Antonucci, Alberti's Window, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 11/30/2002
* USD 88,835.00

&lt;br/&gt; This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)Phase I project will
create image processing based software that tracks objects using real-time video
input for use in the teaching of mathematics and physical science. Image
processing has not previously been used in educational motion detection.
Compared to the currently used methods-real-time graphing and frame-by-frame
analysis of stored video-the proposed innovation will have many advantages, such
as the simultaneous display of video and graphs and the automatic generation of
stroboscopic images. Phase I has two research objectives. To develop a system
that can track one object and display a graph of its motion on a computer screen
in real time, and to investigate with teachers and students the applications of
this system to understanding motion, graphing, shapes, visualization, and
projection.&lt;br/&gt; Used in conjunction with inquiry-based curriculum, the
system proffered by Paul Antonucci &amp; Associates could improve teaching and
learning of physical science and mathematics nationwide, and it expands the
possibilities for exploring motion in real-world situations. This innovation
will create the opportunity to surpass in learning effectiveness and ease-of-use
the technologies now used widely in high school and college physics. In addition
it will potentially reach a much larger market-mathematics classrooms from
middle school through college. &lt;br/&gt;