* 0128545
* SBIR Phase I:  Enabling Sharable Infrastructure for the Human/Computer Interface
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2002
* William Seales, Lumenware LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jean C. Bonney
* 06/30/2002
* USD 112,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses the
challenge of seamless interoperability among computer systems and user interface
components such as displays and keyboards. Today these components are tightly
coupled with the computer, which restricts the utility of both-especially in
mobile computing systems, where users invariably have to choose between usable
displays and reasonable portability. A familiar manifestation of the opportunity
is the "conference display swap" problem. The over-all goal of the project is to
develop and specify robust, efficient and secure interfaces that enable
computers to dynamically discover, connect to and use displays over moderate-
bandwidth network connections. The Phase I investigation will focus on efficient
encoding techniques for an interoperable virtual display interface that can be
run over existing wireless network technologies. The interface will make it
possible for multiple computers to share a projection display serially via
software. In the longer term, it frees mobile computing systems to evolve
independently of display technology, and leads to a model in which user
interface devices are considered public infrastructure.

This research has commercial application in a number of industries where
seamless display sharing is routinely required but is not yet supported, such as
conference management, higher education, and medicine.