* 0128419
* Conference: Recent Progress in Cerebellar Research, November 16-18, 2001, St Louis, Missouri
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2002
* Stephen Highstein, Washington University School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 07/31/2002
* USD 10,000.00

This three-day conference will bring together the international community of
cerebellar researchers to discuss the current status of the field. Progress in
cerebellar physiology has proceeded at a rapid pace and a meeting to exchange
new results and concepts seems timely. This meeting will serve to cross-
fertilize efforts between various factions in the field in the understanding of
cerebellar function. Seven sequential panel sessions, each with an organized and
moderated discussion period, two plenary lectures the history of landmark
discoveries, and a poster session will be presented over a three-day period to
consider the following topics that are important for understanding cerebellar
function. 1) The cerebellum as a device for coordination of movement; 2)
Relative roles of the cerebellar cortex and nuclei; 3) Parallel fiber beams.
What do they do? 4) Climbing fiber inputs to the cerebellum. What is signaled?
5) Cognitive processing by the cerebellum; 6) LTD, LTP and molecular mechanisms
of learning and memory; 7) Models of cerebellar function. It is expected that
attendees of the meeting will be informed of the very latest progress and
research in the cerebellar field. Because cerebellar research is presently
extremely active, and because many of the speakers use state of the art
technology such as optical recording and multiple electrode recording
techniques, attendees will also be informed of the state of the art of
methodology related to the neurosciences. The open format of the poster session
will provide the opportunity for active, intimate discussion.





