* 0128320
* SBIR Phase I:  Assessing Complex Learning Outcomes through Web-based Classroom Assessment Services
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2002
* Steven McGee, The Learning Partnership
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2002
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop database
information technology for constructivist teachers who are dissatisfied with the
limitations of classroom testing for guiding reform. The Learning Partnership
will provide Web-based classroom assessment services that measure a wide range
of complex learning outcomes. Unlike EduTest.com, a test preparation program,
The Learning Partnership's system will be optimized to diagnose student learning
and provide direction for improvements in the learning process. The technical
objectives for this project are as follows: 1. Adapt the discrete assessment
approaches developed at the NASA Classroom of the Future for use with the
Looking at the Environment curriculum, a one-year comprehensive inquiry-based
high school science curriculum that is fully technology integrated that is being
developed at Northwestern University in partnership with the Chicago schools..
2. Create an assessment framework that integrates these discrete assessment
approaches. The framework will track student performance at three levels:
activity level, module level, and course level. 3. Develop database information
technology that will support mass customization of assessment tasks, tracking of
student performance, and reporting of results. These services will address a
growing demand for online assessment materials. &lt;br/&gt; If science education
reform in the U.S. is to succeed, new approaches to assessment are critical. On
the one hand, assessment is essential provide school administrators with
empirical evidence of student learning for accountability purposes; on the other
hand, it is also essential to provide teachers with the depth of information
needed to guide their practices. The Learning Partnership proposes to address
this problem by providing classroom assessment services that bring together
multiple forms of assessment for tracking student progress from the activity
level to the high-stakes testing level.&lt;br/&gt;