* 0128770
* Paleoecological and paleoanthropological excavations of in situ breccias at Makapansgat, South Africa
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2002,10/31/2006
* Jeffrey McKee, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Richard Kay
* 10/31/2006
* USD 183,176.00

Knowledge of our evolutionary past, along with observations of changes in the
ecological community in which our predecessors lived, is vital to helping us
understand how we got here and what the human place in nature is today. The
Makapansgat Valley has yielded a wealth of fossil fauna that reveal past
environments through time, along with an important sample of an early human-like
species known as Australopithecus africanus - our earliest known predecessors of
southern Africa. The Australopithecus fossils from the Makapansgat Limeworks,
considered to between about 2.8 and 3.2 million years old , may be the oldest
from southern Africa. As these fossils are broadly contemporaneous with the
early Australopithecus sample from East Africa, they hold key clues to
understanding the emergence and diversity of human ancestors across the
continent. Moreover, the rich assemblage of fossil fauna from the limeworks has
provided valuable insights into the ecological context of human origins and
evolution in southern Africa, although interpretations have varied. Our plan is
to augment our current knowledge base with a well-controlled excavation from
which the fossils can be studied in a detailed context. We will excavate the
known Australopithecus-bearing layers of the Makapansgat limeworks, as well as
lower levels of the sediments that promise to reveal earlier stages of the
valley's prehistoric changes. In addition, other sites in the Makapansgat Valley
preserve a record of environmental change from the well over 3 million years ago
through to the present. For example, recent excavations at Buffalo Cave have
yielded a rich mammalian sample from between 1 and 2 million years ago. Fossils
and stone artifacts from the Cave of Hearths represent much of the past several
hundred thousand years of human occupation in the area. The Makapansgat Valley
thus provides a valuable opportunity to understand how global and continental
environmental changes were reflected in a tightly constrained local context.
Fossils from Makapansgat have conjured up many images of pre-human behavior,
ranging from our ancestors having been "killer apes" to visions of a more docile
creature at the mercy of a wide variety of predators. Given the significance of
the Makapansgat Valley's sites for interpretations of our past, it is important
to understand that the earliest sequence from the Limeworks has only recently
undergone preliminary systematic excavation of in situ fossils - i.e. those in
their original context. For the past half-century fossil collecting at the site
focused almost exclusively on the waste dumps of breccia (fossil bearing
sandstones) left behind by limestone miners decades ago. This simple fact - that
most of Makapansgat's fossil fauna has been recovered from mine dumps - helps
explain the difficulty in reaching consensus concerning paleoenvironmental and
ecological reconstructions of this important fossil site. For this reason, the
primary objective of the proposed research is to continue and enhance systematic
in situ paleoanthropological excavations of Makapansgat limeworks in order to
recover fossils of known context, and to better analyze how this reflects
ancient environments and ways of life.