* 0128556
* SBIR Phase I:  Decision Support Software for Short-Term Hospital Occupancy Forecasts
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2002
* Steven Littig, Improvement Path Systems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2002
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will address the
problem of short-term hospital census prediction. Fluctuating occupancy can
impact many operational metrics: direct staffing costs, emergency center
ambulance diversions, medical errors triggered in understaffed patient areas,
quality of care, and job satisfaction for the dwindling nursing pool. This
project will result in a computer based decision support system for predicting
short-term patient occupancy at a nursing unit level over 72-hour time horizons.
The short-term forecasts will be tested in a 226-bed community hospital. The
first objective is to quantify sources of error in an alpha-version of the model
and to develop an improved model. The objective is to prove that the improved
model generates accurate predictions of patient census. Next, the research will
quantify the potential impact of short-term forecasts on nurse staffing and
scheduling. Surveys with hospital personnel will gauge the interest in and
utility of the forecast information. The national shortage of nurses demands
better use of this limited resource.

Improvement Path Systems' objective is to build commercial forecasting software
to be licensed to hospitals. The daily forecasts of hospital occupancy will
allow hospitals to make better staffing decisions and operate more efficiently.
The proposed decision support system can be generalized to other dynamic systems
involving people flows.