* 0128379
* STTR Phase I:  NUMBERS: Bringing Statistical Machine Translation into the Real World
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2002
* William Wong, WEAVER LANGUAGE INC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2002
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project concerns R&D
aimed at assessing the feasibility of applying statistical Machine Translation
(MT) techniques to the problem of improving the productivity of human
translators. Currently, human translators use translation memory tools, i.e.,
software packages that provide access to databases of previously translated
sentences. Unfortunately, these tools do not provide significant help in
translating previously unseen sentences and do not improve over time (with the
exception of providing access to increasingly larger databases of previously
translated material). Because automatic translation systems produce low quality
translations that are not tailored to their genre and domain of interest, human
translators refuse to use automatic translation systems. In this program, a
prototype hybrid translation system and computer interface that will permit
humans to translate text by exploiting both a translation memory and an
automatic, statistical-based MT system will be built and the increase in text
translation productivity that is enabled by the use of the hybrid tool will be
measured.

A hybrid translation tool such as that proposed here has the potential to reduce
significantly the costs associated with human translation, and increase
translation productivity.