* 0128820
* Collaborative Research:  The Role of Frequency Dependent Selection in the Evolution of Color Pattern Polymorphism in Guppies
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2002,09/30/2008
* Kimberly Hughes, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 09/30/2008
* USD 279,000.00

Naturally occurring populations of guppies (Poecilia reticulata) exhibit
striking genetically based variability in the color patterns of males. Each male
has a unique color pattern or one that is shared with one or very few other fish
in the population. How this polymorphism is maintained remains a mystery despite
decades of study on this model organism. Laboratory studies have suggested that
the mating success of males may depend on how rare or common their color pattern
is, and theory suggests that such frequency dependent selection could maintain
genetic variation. This study will examine the role of frequency dependent
selection in maintaining color pattern variation in naturally occurring guppy
populations. It will use new techniques for molecular paternity analysis and
permanent marking of fish to examine patterns of survival and mating success of
individual fish in streams. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how genetic
variation can persist in natural populations has long been a goal of research in
evolutionary biology and more empirical study is needed. Dwindling populations
of organisms often suffer from loss of genetic variation. Thus, this is an
increasingly important topic for investigation and application to conservation
strategies. This research involves an international collaboration between
research and undergraduate institutions, and research participation by
undergraduates and a high school teacher.&lt;br/&gt;