* 0128649
* SBIR Phase I:  Feasibility of Using Anonymous Cell Phone Tracking for Generating Traffic Information
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2002
* Randall Cayford, IntelliOne Technologies Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jean C. Bonney
* 06/30/2002
* USD 99,908.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is an
investigation of the feasibility of using anonymous tracking of cellular phones
to generate traffic information on a road network. Delays due to congestion are
expensive both in terms of lost time and in aggravation. Management of
congestion is difficult due to lack of information on current conditions. While
most information is gathered via expensive detector systems installed in the
roadways, it is possible to determine traffic conditions by following the
movements of sample vehicles, called probes. Many vehicles contain a cellular
phone, and, due to a recent FCC mandate, which requires that all
telecommunication carriers be capable of locating a cellular phone to within 125
meters, an opportunity exists to build a system where the movements of a large
number of cell phones can be used to determine conditions on every road in a
road network. This project will determine whether the location systems installed
by the carriers can be used to generate traffic information. The results will
enable the development of an area-wide traffic information system which can be
used for the dissemination of travel information and for the study of traffic
patterns on road networks.

Commercial application of the results of this project fall into 3 areas: traffic
management, fleet operations, and information dissemination. Traffic information
is valuable to the users of the road network. Traffic management includes the
many public agencies around the country tasked to aid in the management of the
roads. Fleet operators consist of large and small delivery vehicles. Information
dissemination includes cellular phones, personal digital assistants, in-vehicle
display systems, websites and radio. All three markets are significantly
affected by traffic congestion, particularly unexpected congestion. Each market
is large and commercially addressable by a traffic information system based on
cell phone tracking.