* 0128395
* SBIR PHASE I: Meshless Petrov-Galerkin Geo-Environ Technology For Wide Scale Field Uses
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2002
* Sumant Gupta, CFEST INC
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2002
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project seeks to develop a
meshless Petrov-Galerkin geo-environ technology for wide scale field uses.
Groundwater supplies are increasingly threatened by organic, inorganic, and
radioactive contaminants introduced to the environment by improper disposal or
accidental releases. Estimates of remediation costs at U.S. government sites
alone range into the billions of dollars. Geo-environ assessment tools play an
important role in design and evaluations of remediation alternatives and long-
term management of groundwater. Proposed mesh free geo-environ technology will
open a new era for easy simulation of large complex systems without grid
generation. Node density will adjust dynamically for accurate solution. A
Petrov-Galerkin based model will provide stable robust technology for
contaminant transport and remediation alternative evaluations. Interfaced 2D and
3D displays and animations will provide efficient means for easy communications
within project team, decision-makers, and regulators. Consultants for
Environmental System Technologies' proposed technology has applicability to
numerous waste site restoration programs and groundwater management projects
that are implemented at an enormous cost by Federal agencies, states, counties,
petroleum facilities and chemical industries.