* 0128604
* SBIR Phase I: Comprehensive Database Resource on Protein Localization
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2002
* David Rubin, Cognia Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2002
* USD 106,444.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will enable the
development of the first knowledge management system dedicated specifically to
protein localization (ProLoc). Data generated from high-throughput genomic and
proteomic experimentation and information published across the entire spectrum
of cellular and molecular biology is proliferating at exponential rates.
Moreover, current database systems remain incapable of handling the intricate
network of relationships between proteins. ProLoc, a database system that
integrates expert-curated information from published literature with primary
data from a range of experimental methodologies, will begin to attack this
problem by focusing on one discrete area of cell biology (protein localization).
Researchers will be able to mine pathways and mechanisms, leading to disease
elucidation and new therapies. Phase I will be used to create the framework for
a functioning relational database, with representative entries for initial beta
testing. This will provide an essential foundation for Phase II, when
comprehensive content and ancillary tools will be added, creating a highly
structured, sophisticated, and interactive relational database system. Once the
daunting challenge of reflecting biological pathways into standard database
formats has been met through the ProLoc database, the ProLoc structure can be
extended to many other cell regulation pathways and processes.

ProLoc will stand out as an extremely high quality specialized resource in the
field of protein localization that will be a necessary part of any set of
molecular biology benchtop databases and tools.

