* 0128105
* SBIR Phase I: A Compressible Gas-Liquid Framework For Simulating Cavitating Pumps
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2002
* Ashvin Hosangadi, Combustion Research and Flow Technology, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 06/30/2002
* USD 99,955.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will study an innovative
formulation for simulating unsteady cavitation phenomena in pumps. The
formulation is based on a compressible gas-liquid framework that accurately
models the acoustics in multi-phase mixtures, and may be extended to account for
generalized thermodynamic effects. An innovative cavitation model based on
tracking the surface area associated with dense, bubbly vapor clouds is
presented: this permits the implementation of detailed bubble dynamics within a
continuum framework. The multi-phase formulation will be available within a
commercial CFD code CRUNCH, which has a multi-element unstructured framework and
is ideally suited for complex turbomachine geometries. The Phase I effort will
focus on validating the procedure for unsteady cavitation in unit problems that
will be extended to three-dimensional pump geometries in the Phase II program.
This technology will be applicable to a wide variety of&lt;br/&gt;pump systems
that have to operate over a range of low, off-design flow rates and Net Positive
Suction Head (NPSH)conditions, where the coupling of unsteady hydrodynamics and
cavitation has the potential for causing excessive vibration and damage. The
limited reliability of current design tools in this flow regime makes this
innovation a&lt;br/&gt;useful tool for high-energy pump
designers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Commercial Potential&lt;br/&gt;Manufacturers of
high-energy pumps have to certify their systems for operation at off-design
conditions. However, unsteady flow behavior coupled with fluctuating vapor
volumes at low NPSH levels can result in&lt;br/&gt;significant damage in this
flow regime. Hence, considerable resources are currently being expended by the
pump industry to better understand the formation of cavitation instabilities.
The development of innovative designs that eliminate or mitigate the formation
of cloud cavitation will result in a significant competitive advantage for both
marketing of new products as well as aftermarket upgrade opportunities. However,
current design tools, such as empirical correlations and one-dimensional
analyses, have limited reliability in this flow regime. Furthermore,
experimental testing over the entire flow regime is impractical. The proposed
effort here will address these needs by providing a tool for refining
preliminary designs, as well as correcting problems with existing designs. In
addition, The innovative technology proposed here would resolve the deficiencies
of currently available commercial CFD codes: such codes typically do not resolve
the acoustics within the gas/liquid mixture, which can have very low sound
speeds and directly impact hydrodynamic time scales. Indeed for accurately
modeling this unsteady multi-phase problem, the generalized compressible
framework proposed is essential for simulating the coupling between hydrodynamic
pressure fluctuations and the cavitation rate process. Potential customers for
this product are anticipated to be U.S. manufacturers of a broad range of high-
energy industrial pump systems.&lt;br/&gt;