* 0128178
* U.S. Mexico Cooperative Research: Methane Fluxes and Cycling in Mangroves Ecosystems
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/2002,10/31/2007
* Laurence Miller, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 10/31/2007
* USD 77,090.00

0128178&lt;br/&gt;Paytan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This U.S.-Mexico award will
support Dr. Adina Paytan of Stanford University in a research collaboration with
Dr. Jorge A. Herrera-Silveira of Cinvestav-Merida in Yucatan, Mexico. The
researchers intend to work on a multiple-year study to gain a better
understanding of the mechanisms underlying methane production and oxidation in
mangrove ecosystems. They aim to obtain reliable estimates of methane flux from
mangrove ecosystems to the atmosphere, and predict fluctuations in this flux
that may result from climatic and anthropogenic change. The Office of
International Science and Engineering and the Division of Environmental Biology
of NSF will contribute funds for the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study
will take place in several lagoons dominated by mangrove vegetation located on
the Yucatan Peninsula in Mexico. These lagoons have similar vegetation and
climate patterns yet very different levels of freshwater and nutrient inputs and
anthropogenic impact, allowing for comparison of various parameters in the
study. Project results will allow better estimates to be made of the
contribution of worldwide mangrove ecosystems to the global methane budget and
predict potential changes in this flux. The collaborators will bring
complementary skills to the project with Dr. Herrera-Silveira emphasizing
biological aspects and Dr. Paytan focusing on biogeochemical interactions in the
ecosystem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;