* 0128429
* STTR Phase I:  Real Time In Situ Sensor Development for Thermal Spray Coating Properties
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2002
* Rob Greenlaw, Integrated Coating Solutions, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 12/31/2002
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project proposes to
develop a real time coating property sensor to measure intrinsic material
properties of thermal spray coatings. The project proposes to develop this
technology into a production capable tool for thermal spray process development
and control with the following attributes: measures useful coating properties in
situ; usable by real world spray shop operators at both small and large shops;
relatively inexpensive (<$25K); able to operate in harsh environment; and uses
minimal assumptions and complexities associated with property interpretation.
The project will demonstrate feasibility of producing such a tool under Phase I.
Under Phase II, a production tool will be developed and important relationships
between the tool output and the functional properties of the coatings will be
generated. Despite this need, there are no simple procedures currently available
to rapidly determine the mechanical properties of coatings both in laboratory
and industrial settings. As thermal spray coatings evolve from a role of life
extension of components to performing a prime reliant function, there exists a
critical need to develop procedures to obtain design relevant properties.

The impact of this project will provide commercial thermal spray customers with
engineering support directed at improving quality and repeatability of coatings
application. This should result in significant capital expenditure savings for
companies over many disciplines that are involved in manufacturing.