* 0128631
* SBIR Phase I:  Group Coding for Reliable High Performance Network-Centric Storage
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2002
* Qutaibah Malluhi, Data Reliability Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jean C. Bonney
* 06/30/2002
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will study the
feasibility of building a reliable, high-performance network-centric storage
system technology (NetSTOR). NetSTOR's architecture is based on a new very fast
group data coding (GC) scheme that will achieve efficient and dependable data
delivery across the network. Recently, the need for network storage has
burgeoned, without truly universal solutions being available. Phase I will
evaluate the performance improvement achieved by NetSTOR's unique architecture
and validate the effectiveness and efficiency of the GC technique. Efficient
decoding algorithms will be employed to achieve reliability against server
failure and faulty network connections. Multi-threaded parallel data transfer
will ensure high performance data delivery. Automatic system reconfigurability
will provide high data availability. The system will be application-aware
addressing application specific issues such as cache management, data layout,
and prefetching will be employed for performance optimization.

Potential commercial applications of the proposed storage system include
distributed web hosting, multi media network-based services, high performance
computing, modeling and simulation, distributed information retrieval, and
terrain visualization. Applications of group coding in areas other than data
storage include mobile communication, reliable multicasting, audio/video
streaming, and digital fountain systems will be considered.