* 0128213
* SBIR Phase I: Exploring Complex Biological Concepts in an Interactive 3-D Learning Environment over the Internet
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2002
* Douglas Seifert, Syandus, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2002
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will catalyze the
creation of interactive worlds accessible over the Internet where students,
professionals, and consumers can experientially learn scientific concepts not
readily accessible to human physical interaction. The specific focus is the
construction of a cellular world where University students can explore complex
cellular mechanisms, and through customized versions, corporations can educate
physicians, researchers and patients on the cellular basis of their products. As
a proof of concept, Voyager Interactive has created a demonstration of 3D
content delivered over the Internet using narrowband connectivity. This
demostration allows students to become" a virus particle and if successful,
infect a cell. The student moves within a 3D cellular world, activates viral
functions, interacts with objects, and triggers events in the world. A Cellbot
companion interacts by voice and by uploading text and figures to assist the
student. The content and functionality requirements described in the proposal
will be translated into a comprehensive software development plan, which will
serve as the blueprint for success in the phase of the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BioMachine Cellular World proffers a
significant contribution to science education and an excellent launch point for
custom commercial collaborations. It has prospects for science publishers
interested in immersive 3D cellular educational software for use by electronic
texts as well as indirect benefits associated with the identification of
functional requirements for promoting student active learning in these highly
interactive environments.