* 0128452
* SBIR Phase I: Information Theoretic Learning and Application to Fetal ECG
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2002
* Neil Euliano, Convergent Engineering, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2002
* USD 96,874.00

&lt;br/&gt; This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)Phase I project
focuses on the development and evaluation of a new class of algorithms for blind
source separation (BSS) and independent component analysis (ICA) based on a
recently proposed information theoretic learning (ITL) criterion. The algorithms
yield several practical criteria to adapt universal mappers, either under
unsupervised or supervised paradigms. The ITL criterion can dramatically improve
upon systems trained with mean square error. NeuroDimension will develop new
algorithms to choose the segments for separation, address BSS of noisy mixtures,
and extend the ITL criterion to convolutive mixtures. The firm further proposes
to validate these methods via the fetal heart rate monitoring problem, which
requires the separation of the maternal and fetal ECGs, a blind source
separation problem. The ITL criterion of minimum cross entropy can exploit the
fact that the ECGs are statistically independent. The expectation is that the
new information theoretic learning will extract a much cleaner ECG because it is
exploiting all the information about the signal statistics, not only the second
order statistics (as MSE does). Finally the ITL criterion will be compared with
the conventional interference cancellation algorithms in real data obtained from
the University of Florida College of Medicine.&lt;br/&gt; The project has the
potential to develop a new piece of clinical instrumentation, a fetal heart
monitor, for which there is a demonstrated market. The firm utilizes a new
approach to information signal process that may be able to identify the elusive
fetal heart signal in a practical, real-time manner. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;