* 0128089
* Studies of High-Resolution Turbulence, Stratification, and Instabilities in the Nighttime Boundary Layer
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Ben Balsley, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Johannes Verlinde
* 12/31/2004
* USD 360,766.00

As part of the CASES-99 program (Cooperative Atmosphere-Surface Exchange
Study-1999), the PI measured the temperature, pressure, humidity, and wind
velocity with high resolution in time and altitude using instruments suspended
from a tethered kite or, in calm conditions, a tethered blimp. Preliminary
analysis of the data has revealed sharp temperature inversions, intermittent
bursts of turbulence, and apparent wave phenomena, all with unprecedented
resolution. This grant supports the continuing analysis of CASES-99 data. The
analysis is focused on the following objectives:&lt;br/&gt;(1) statistical
characterization of the turbulence in selected homogeneous layers;&lt;br/&gt;(2)
investigation of turbulence in the vicinity of horizontal interfaces separating
layers with different turbulence characteristics;&lt;br/&gt;(3) study of
turbulence intermittence, including calculation of spectra of the energy
dissipation rate e and the temperature structure parameter Ct2;&lt;br/&gt;(4)
examination of the structure of Kelvin-Helmholtz instabilities and other wave
phenomena in collaboration with large-eddy simulation modelers;&lt;br/&gt;(5)
entering other collaborations with CASES-99 researchers in the analysis of
different data sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research advances the fundamental
understanding of atmospheric turbulence and enables improved parameterization of
the diffusion and vertical transport of heat, momentum, and material in the
nocturnal atmospheric boundary layer.