* 0128698
* SBIR Phase I:  Using Variable Polarization Ultrasonic Shear Waves to Isolate and Quantify the Competing Effects of Microstructure and Stress on the Acoustic Properties of Steel
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2002
* Steven Turner, Analogic Engineering, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 06/30/2002
* USD 99,958.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop
prototype equipment to achieve control of acoustic shearwaves in ferromagnetic
materials, and introduce innovative technology to enable scientists and
engineers to utilize variable shear wave polarization as a new tool for
measuring and characterizing material properties. This will greatly enhance non-
destructive testing of metals.To establish the feasibility of the proposed
technique, a specially configured Electromagnetic Acoustic Transducer (EMAT)
will be used to demonstrate electronic steering of shear wave polarization.
Acoustoelastic relationships, relative to polarization angle, will then be
analyzed for several steel samples of varying microstructure with the objective
of establishing a measurement method capable of accurately determining
longitudinal stress, independent of sample microstructure.&lt;br/&gt; Commercial
applications exist for both rapid, in-situ, nondestructive assessment of
microstructure, and for longitudinal stress measurement in steel members.
Specific examples include monitoring and process control at critical stages of
steel manufacture and thermomechanical processing; improving railroad safety
through early detection and preemptive correction of extreme rail stress that
can contribute to train derailments; and verification of correct load
distribution in older or compromised steel structures such as bridges, stadiums,
factories and multi-story steelframe buildings.&lt;br/&gt;