* 0128392
* SBIR Phase I:  Characterization of Three Dimensional Discontinuity Properties from Digital Images of Rock Masses
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2002
* Jeffrey Handy, SPLIT ENGINEERING LLC
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2002
* USD 90,770.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will investigate
the usefulness of image processing technologies for characterizing
discontinuities in rock masses. Discontinuities in rock masses include joints,
faults, bedding planes, etc., and characterizing these features is one of the
most important inputs to engineering design in rock masses. Split Engineering
LLC has developed image processing and mathematical algorithms for I)
delineating fracture traces in images of rock fractures, and 2) extracting
three-dimensional properties (including strike and dip) from the delineated
fracture traces. The first objective of the Phase I work is to test and further
refine the image processing and mathematical algorithms that have been
developed. The second objective is to investigate the synergies between this
technology and the laser scanning technologies, which also have great commercial
potential in the field of fracture characterization. The third objective is to
conduct a number of field case studies to validate the trace analysis approach
and to determine under what circumstances it is beneficial to incorporate laser-
scanning technologies into the approach.

Knowledge of geologic discontinuities is important for a number of industries.
Current technologies have resulted in either millions of dollars in damage due
to a missed fracture or costly reinforcement where it was not needed because of
a misinterpreted discontinuity. Important end-users of the technology proffered
by Split Engineering LLC, referred to as the trace analysis technology, are the
mining and geotechnical industries. The capability fits in especially well with
the need to automate certain rock characterization tasks and incorporate the
resulting information into the mining process. If the project is successful in
developing improvements in fracture system characterization, benefits for the
petroleum and environmental industry are also plausible.