* 0128850
* The Digital Opportunity Partnership: Linking the IT Industry with Minority-Serving Institutions
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Marjorie Bynum, Information Technology Assoc. of America
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 08/31/2003
* USD 249,509.00

The Information Technology Association of America (ITAA), the nation's leading
IT association representing more than 500 corporate members from the information
technology industry, proposes a pilot initiative to establish a framework for
substantial engagement of its member companies with a core group of minority-
serving institutions representing the more than 105 Hispanic Serving
Institutions, 203 Historically Black Colleges and Universities, and 32 Tribal
Colleges and Universities across the U.S. This effort will be directly
responsive to the recommendations of the bipartisan Commission on the
Advancement of Women and Minorities in Science, Engineering and Technology
(CAWMSET) with respect to improving access to and the quality of higher
education for groups underrepresented in science, engineering, and technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad goal is to link the resources and expertise of
ITAA and its members with those minority-serving institutions demonstrating the
commitment and capacity to improve the technological and pedagogical
infrastructure devoted to student learning, faculty and student research, and
administrative processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this initiative, ITAA
will pursue two major activities:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Assist in developing
and implementing customized campus technology plans for specific schools
through:&lt;br/&gt;a) Identification, assessment, and refinement of user
needs;&lt;br/&gt;b) Recommendation and technical assistance in procurement of
baseline systems and technology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Provide knowledge
enhancement activities through:&lt;br/&gt;a) Student and faculty internships in
ITAA member firms&lt;br/&gt;b) Recommendation of specific curricular and
research activity enhancements&lt;br/&gt;c) E-mentoring of students, faculty,
and administrators&lt;br/&gt;d) ITAA practitioners-on-loan as potential academic
and administrative consultants&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ITAA project will
complement other NSF grants, including EDUCAUSE (Award # 9980537) and the
Council on Competitiveness (Award# 0110028). This project will also build upon
the quality assurance provided by merit review of proposals submitted to the
HBCU-UP and TCUP programs at NSF.&lt;br/&gt;