* 0128925
* Phylogenetic Relationships of Cyphelloid and Aquatic Homobasidiomycetes
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* David Hibbett, Clark University
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 07/31/2005
* USD 300,000.00

0128925 Hibbett and Binder The proposed research by Drs. David Hibbett and
Manfred Binder at Clark University concerns the evolutionary relationships of
homobasidiomycetes, which include the mushroom-forming fungi. There are about
13,500 described species of these fungi. Homobasidiomycetes play important
ecological roles as decayers, pathogens, and beneficial symbionts of plants and
animals. Traditionally, classifications and evolutionary hypotheses in this
diverse group have been based on the morphology of the fruiting bodies, which
include forms with a cap and stalk, club and candelabra-shaped forms, puffballs,
bracket fungi, etc. Recently, however, DNA sequences have been used to infer
evolutionary relationships of homobasidiomycetes. The proposed research will use
DNA sequences to study relationships of two groups of homobasidiomycetes:
"cyphelloid" fungi (roughly 300 species), which are minute cup-shaped forms, and
aquatic homobasidiomycetes (20 species, usually quite rare). Both cyphelloid and
aquatic homobasidiomycetes have been taxonomically obscure. Recent molecular
evidence suggests that these groups may be closely related, which had not been
predicted previously. The proposed research will follow up on the leads
generated in recent molecular studies, and will include fieldwork to expand
knowledge of the diversity in both groups. The proposed work will increase
understanding of the pathways of morphological evolution in homobasidiomycetes.
In addition, it will elucidate the ecological transitions from terrestrial to
aquatic habitats in fungi. The proposed research will benefit science and
society in two major ways: 1) The proposed research will enhance understanding
of biodiversity. In particular, it will highlight an unusual group of organisms
that even most biologists are not aware of, but that play important ecological
roles. 2) The proposed research will include a significant training and outreach
component. A post-doctoral fellow and a Ph.D. student will receive training. In
addition, a series of summer workshops in the Worcester, MA, area for local high
school students and high school teachers is planned (one student and one teacher
will be supported per year). The summer workshops will provide exposure to
modern techniques of molecular biology and evolutionary biology. Teachers who
participate in the workshops will receive professional development points, which
are necessary for annual recertification in Massachusetts, and which Clark
University is authorized to award. Teachers and students will be recruited from
the Worcester public school system.