* 0128657
* SBIR Phase I:  Applications of Fluid Models to Semiconductor Fab Operations
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2002
* Ronald Billings, Fluid Analysis for Balancing Queues
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 06/30/2002
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will evaluate the
use of innovative multiclass fluid models for analyzing factory capacity and
finding optimal scheduling policies for semiconductor fabs. Historically,
queuing theory models and other analytical tools have not modeled wafer fabs
well because of their massive size and highly reentrant flows. Recently,
researchers in modern queuing theory have made considerable progress in
developing a new type of model known as a multiclass fluid network, which
addresses many of the shortfalls of earlier analytic methods. The objective of
this project is improved analytic and computational techniques and tools for
design, optimization, and simulation of fab operation systems using queuing
theory and stochastic processes (as models of complex, dynamic fab systems and
processes) for production planning and control in scheduling wafer processing
and integrated material logistics (including automated material handling and
human delivery to and operation of equipment). The project will show the
feasibility of several algorithms for solving fluid models when applied to
realistic fab data in a robust, usable, portable, and scalable computing
environment. Anticipated results include the development of new software tools
to improve the performance of manufacturing production systems.

The commercial benefits will be to semiconductor manufacturing companies and
other firms that operate large factories with reentrant flows (such as flat
panel and disk drive producers). The worldwide semiconductor revenue was over
$203 billion in 2000 (with 914 fabs in current operation), and is projected to
be nearly $283 billion by 2004 (with an additional 38 fabs on line).