* 0128511
* SBIR Phase I:  Electrochemical Disinfectant Generator for Multiple In-Situ Applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2002
* Charles Tennakoon, Lynntech, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 06/30/2002
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I Project will focus on the
development of an electrochemically operated organic peroxy acid generator.
Peroxyacids are popular disinfectants that can eliminate even resistant
microorganisms (i.e. spores, viruses). Peracids produce biodegradable end
products, are effective at dilute concentrations (ppm levels), are safe for use
even in food preparation applications, and are thus applicable to many point-of-
use applications in homes, restaurants and hospitals. These include the use of
peroxylactic or peroxyacetic acids for diverse uses, including: i) preventing
the&lt;br/&gt;build up of heterotrophic bacteria in water treatment appliances,
ii) destroying pathogens in water and on food surfaces, iii) sterilizing medical
devices, and iv) sanitizing food processing equipment by incorporating a clean-
in-place capability. The conventional method of manufacturing peroxy acids
involves mixing concentrated hydrogen peroxide, organic acid, and inorganic acid
catalyst (concentrated sulfuric acid) with numerous stabilizers and additives.
In the proposed method, peracids can be generated and used on demand using
oxygen or air, thus eliminating the need for hydrogen peroxide and sulfuric
acid. In Phase I, optimization of the electrocatalyst (to improve current and
energy efficiencies), preliminary cell design and catalyst configuration, and
biocidal properties of the peracid product will be
conducted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a considerable need for miniature and
scalable clean-in-place devices in point-of-use applications in homes, hotels,
food service establishments and hospitals. Many equipment manufacturers are
trying to incorporate a self cleaning capability into their existing product
lines due to concerns of microbial contamination, especially one that requires
minimal user interaction, is cost effective, and environmentally friendly. In
water treatment applications alone, the market for these decives is estimated to
be over $1billion annually in the U.S. and $3 billion worldwide.