* 0128420
* SBIR Phase I:  Residual Stress and Part Distortion Prediction in Machined Workpiece Surfaces
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2001,05/31/2002
* Troy Marusich, THIRD WAVE SYSTEMS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 05/31/2002
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project will develop and
validate a three-dimensional finite element modeling capability to predict
machining induced residual stresses. This project will significantly extend the
current state-of-the-art that is limited to 2D residual stress analysis and
recently, 3D oblique cutting models of single cutting edge geometries. Residual
stress has become increasingly important because of its effects upon surface
quality, fatigue, and workpiece distortion. Residual stress has high economic
impact to industry since the cost of manufacture is incurred prior to any
measurement or detection. Testing methods are very expensive, difficult, and not
developed for production purposes. Industry and government testing has
determined that machining induced residual stresses can be significant enough in
magnitude to induce part distortion and out-of tolerance conditions on completed
workpieces. This project will demonstrate an integrated approach to predicting
residual stress effects upon completely manufactured parts. Workpiece residual
stress due to machining parameters will be modeled, verified, and then
integrated into a complete part analysis to determine the final state of stress
and distortion for a complete workpiece part prior to any manufacture.

The commercial applications include large, thin walled aerospace parts (such as
wing spars), structural components, and parts susceptible to high rates of
fatigue (rotor wing hubs and load carrying parts, spindles, structural, and
powertrain components). The economic impact to predict and control part
distortion induced by machining processes is very high. The cost of rejection of
one part due to out-of-tolerance conditions can easily exceed $100,000 and
routinely create weeks in production delay and scrap. The automotive sector,
primarily within engine block manufacture, piston liners, bearings, spindles,
and hard turning applications (generally) could also benefit from this
technology.