* 0128883
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Particle Acceleration and Photon Emission in Supernova Remnants
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2005
* Donald Ellison, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 02/28/2005
* USD 18,000.00

0128883 Ellison

This three-year award supports US-France collaboration in astronomy between
Donald C. Ellison of North Carolina State University and Anne Decourchelle of
the Astrophysics Department of the Center for Nuclear Studies in Saclay, France.
They propose to study the self-consistent theory of nonlinear particle
acceleration and photon emission in supernova remants. The objective is to
provide an accurate and efficient means of interpreting X-ray and GeV gamma ray
emissions in supernova remnants and TeV gamma rays. The research utilizes data
collected during various space missions, including the US Chandra and European
mission XMM-Newton, and data obtained from current and future spacecraft
missions and ground-based telescopes.

The US investigator brings to this collaboration on expertise in shock
acceleration and cosmic ray origins. This is complemented by French expertise in
X-rays from shock heated plasma emissions in supernova remnants and experience
with data gathered through spacecraft missions. The collaboration will lead to a
new state-of the art code that will advance understanding of the shock
acceleration of cosmic rays and impact other astrophysics topics, such as, the
origin of cosmic rays and the evolution of supernova remnants and their
influence on interstellar medium.

This award represents the US side of parallel proposals to the NSF and the
French National Center for Scientific Research (CNRS). NSF will cover travel
funds and living expenses for the US investigator. The CNRS will support visits
by French researcher to the United States.