* 0128609
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) Simulator for Use in Education
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2002
* Gary Casuccio, RJ LEE GROUP, INC
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2002
* USD 99,796.00

This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase I project will determine
the feasibility of designing the scanning electron microscope (SEM) component of
an instrument simulator. Cost prohibits that incorporation of a variety of
image/composition-based instruments used in research and industry into relevant
modern science/math/ engineering/technology curricula. Some of these instruments
are becoming available over the Internet, but they provide limited access to
students and, in general, they are not fully functional. The research objectives
in Phase I to will primarily relate to the method(s) of manipulating a very
large image (the equivalent of over 1000 SEM images) in a manner that faithfully
simulates the operation of a real WEB-based SEM. The key research area will be
to develop an image-management and input/output engine. The anticipated
deliverable of Phase I is the SEM image simulator, and the outline of several
educational modules on CD/DVD media.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Instrument simulation
proffered by the RJ Lee Group has the potential to distribute the benefits of
the resource of a variety of image/composition-based instruments (via CD or DVD)
to all students in a class throughout a school year. A simplified viewer mode
would be developed for the informal education and home markets, and an advanced
mode incorporating specific science content interactive discovery-based modules
would be developed for the K-college formal education market.