* 0128277
* Collaborative Research:  Effects of Environmental Variation on Plant Disease in the Tallgrass Prairie
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/2002,08/31/2004
* Alison Power, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 08/31/2004
* USD 31,679.00

ABSTRACT Karen Ann Garett, Allison Power, Helen Alexander (DEB-0130692,
0128277,0128810)

Little is known about the role of plant disease in natural ecosystems, but
several current environmental concerns motivate a greater understanding. When
considering the potential effects of climate change, invasions of new pathogen
species, or movement of disease resistance genes from genetically modified crop
species to wild plant populations, understanding the role of plant disease in
natural ecosystems is key. We propose a study of plant disease in the tallgrass
prairie to provide information relevant to these concerns as well as to a
general theoretical understanding of pathogen ecology and the role pathogens may
play in determining the success of particular plant species. Plants in the
tallgrass prairie of North America are of particular interest because so little
area remains of this ecosystem and attempts to restore tallgrass prairie are an
important focus of conservation efforts in the Great Plains. In this study we
will provide information about the abundance of pathogen species and the
patterns of their co-occurrence on a set of representative tallgrass prairie
plant species found at the Konza Prairie Biological Station (KPBS), an NSF LTER
site in the Flint Hills tallgrass prairie region in northeastern Kansas. We will
also estimate the effects of predicted climate change scenarios, landscape
patterns of microclimate variation, and burning cycle patterns, and work to
refine sampling methods for characterizing pathogen populations within natural
plant populations. This study will supply an essential baseline data set for
plant diseases at KPBS to complement the LTER database on plant species
composition and productivity.

