* 0128811
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Nuclear Magnetic Properties of Superfluid 3He in Bulk and Confined Geometries
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2007
* David Lee, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 01/31/2007
* USD 19,800.00

0128811&lt;br/&gt;Lee&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year award for U.S.-France
collaboration in condensed matter physics involves research groups at Cornell
University and the Center for Low Temperature Physics Research in Grenoble,
France. David M. Lee, Jeevak M. Parpia and John Reppy lead the US effort; Yuriy
Bunkov and Henri Godrin lead the French group. The focus of the research is
superfluid 3He (helium) - a unique coherent quantum system whose order parameter
shows the complex breaking of gauge and rotation symmetries. The main areas to
be studied are the relaxation domains in bulk superfluid 3HeB and the nature of
the superfluidity of liquid 3He in aerogel. The project involves nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) studies of 3He at high magnetic fields and at ultra low
temperatures. The Cornell group's experiments include exploration of magnetic
field dependence of the temperature of catastrophic relation and sound
propagation and heat transport in aerogel as a function of magnetic field. This
is complemented by French NMR studies of superfluid 3He in aerogel at the limit
of ultra low temperatures and theoretical investigations and numerical
simulations of catastrophic relaxation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
represents the US side of joint proposals to the NSF and the French National
Center for Scientific Research (CNRS). NSF will cover travel funds and living
expenses of the US investigators and postdoctoral researchers. The CNRS will
support visits to US of the French participants. The collaboration will advance
understanding of 3He systems and applications in cosmology and high-energy
physics. &lt;br/&gt;