* 0128805
* US-India Workshop:   BHUJ Earthquake:  Seismological, Geodynamic and Engineering Implications of the M=7.6, 26 January BHUJ Earthquake, India
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2002
* Roger Bilham, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 07/31/2002
* USD 20,000.00

0128805&lt;br/&gt;Bilham &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award supports
a US-India workshop on Seismological, Geodynamic and Engineering Implications of
the M=7.6, 26 January, Bhuj Earthquake that will be held October 3-5, 2001 in
New Delhi. Professor Roger Bilham, University of Colorado Boulder will convene a
three-day international meeting for scientists and engineers to discuss the
scientific findings and implications of this earthquake. With fatalities
exceeding 20,000, this was the most disastrous event in India's recorded
history. The first day of the workshop will be devoted to seismological,
geologic and geodetic investigations, the second to acceleration and engineering
effects, and to the characterization of seismic risk in India, the third to
general discussions on the seismotectonic implications of recent earthquakes in
India and to their association with plate boundary processes and underlying
plate dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The Bhuj event had a number of
features that resemble the mid-continent 19th century earthquakes of North
America. The expectation is that discussions will provide insights into the
causes of the Bhuj earthquake and of mid-cratonic events in general. This will
be a forum for Indian and foreign scientists that have undertaken relevant post-
seismic and theoretical investigations to compare their findings. The Indian
Department of Science and Technology is cofunding this workshop; it is jointly
funded by NSF's Division of International Programs and Division of Earth
Sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;