* 0128455
* Collaborative Research/RUI:  The Role of Frequency Dependent Selection in the Evolution of Color Pattern Polymorphism in Guppies
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Anne Houde, Lake Forest College
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 04/30/2006
* USD 148,643.00

Naturally occurring populations of guppies (Poecilia reticulata) exhibit
striking genetically based variability in the color patterns of males. Each male
has a unique color pattern or one that is shared with one or very few other fish
in the population. How this polymorphism is maintained remains a mystery despite
decades of study on this model organism. Laboratory studies have suggested that
the mating success of males may depend on how rare or common their color pattern
is, and theory suggests that such frequency dependent selection could maintain
genetic variation. This study will examine the role of frequency dependent
selection in maintaining color pattern variation in naturally occurring guppy
populations. It will use new techniques for molecular paternity analysis and
permanent marking of fish to examine patterns of survival and mating success of
individual fish in streams.

Understanding how genetic variation can persist in natural populations has long
been a goal of research in evolutionary biology and more empirical study is
needed. Dwindling populations of organisms often suffer from loss of genetic
variation. Thus, this is an increasingly important topic for investigation and
application to conservation strategies. This research involves an international
collaboration between research and undergraduate institutions, and research
participation by undergraduates and a high school teacher.