* 0128377
* SBIR Phase I:  Low Cost Synthesis of Polymer Composites with Functional Nanoparticles via Combustion Chemical Vapor Deposition (CCVD)
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2002
* Stein Lee, NGIMAT CO.
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 06/30/2002
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop an
economical platform technology for producing well-dispersed polymer
nanocomposite films. Emphasis has been placed on the mechanical property
advantages of mixing nano-sized clay flakes into conventional polymers.
Processing techniques include sol-gel, various vacuum-based deposition methods,
physical mixing, gas phase synthesis, chemical synthesis, liquid dispersions,
and mixed solvent casting. To overcome potential production problems, a low-cost
alternative technology, the modified Combustion Chemical Vapor Deposition (CCVD)
process can be utilized. The modified CCVD process allows for the incorporation
of nanoparticles of various sizes, distributions, and types in the polymer
matrix. As a test bed for this platform technology, nanocomposite films for
light emitting diode (LED) with voltage dependent wavelength output will be
synthesized for display applications.

The commercial application of this project will be in the polymer based LED
segment of the flat panel display market. A low-cost, voltage variable LED
system that is less expensive to manufacture, more reliable and with a longer
life-span could have a significant impact in capturing more of this market.