* 0128453
* SBIR Phase I:  Visualizing Arbitrary Basis Functions for Advanced Engineering Analysis and Simulation
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2002
* William Schroeder, KITWARE INC
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2002
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses the
lack of visualization technology for advanced engineering simulation tools. Such
tools routinely depend on interpolation and approximation (basis) functions for
a variety of purposes, including modeling geometry via CAD/CAM tools, or for
computational techniques such as the finite element method. What distinguishes
advanced tools from earlier, less sophisticated tools is their dependence on
higher-order basis functions, as compared to the linear functions typical of
early tools. While modern simulation tools have moved to more sophisticated
basis functions, visualization technology has lagged behind. Visualization
technology, which plays a vital role in understanding, communicating and
steering computational design, has not moved beyond supporting linear basis
functions, with a few special exceptions (e.g., quadratic). This situation poses
a significant problem for engineering computation, since advanced techniques of
high accuracy are coupled with lower-accuracy display of results. Such an
approach is error prone, and introduces significant penalties in terms of time
and computer resources required.&lt;br/&gt; Kitware, Inc. proffers software
technology that will enable analysts to use higher-order basis functions for
visualization. This technology will be available for licensing in the combined
CAD/CAM and finite element market. In addition, Kitware, Inc. will build
visualization applications for commercial sale.