* 0128872
* Molecular and Morphological Phylogeny of Acalypha (Euphorbiaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2007
* Victor Steinmann, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 04/30/2007
* USD 225,000.00

0128872 Levin The genus Acalypha, commonly known as copperleaf, is the fourth
largest genus in its family (Euphorbiaceae) with about 450 species. It is
widespread geographically, with species native to the Americas (about two-thirds
of the known species), Africa, Asia, Australia, and the Pacific Islands. It is
most abundant and diverse in subtropical and tropical regions. Some species are
problematic weeds in native and agricultural systems, whereas others are rare;
two are common ornamentals, and there is growing evidence that some species
contain potential pharmaceuticals. Unfortunately, the taxonomy of Acalypha has
not been revised in more than 75 years and is suspected to reflect true
relationships poorly. Ecological, conservation, pest management, and medical
research on the genus are being hindered by the poor classification. Drs. Levin
and Steinmann at the University of Illinois and the Institute of Ecology in
Mexico intend to address this issue and provide better understanding of the
evolution of the genus by using DNA sequence data and morphology to reconstruct
the phylogeny, or evolutionary history, of a large sample of the genus.
Combining field work and existing collections, they will examine about two-
thirds of the species. Morphological data and sequence data from two genes
(nuclear ITS and plastid ndhF) will be analyzed separately and in combination to
reconstruct relationships within the genus. The results will then be used to
revise the classification and assess various aspects of copperleaf evolution,
particularly changes in growth form and reproductive organization. The
investigators will develop a web site to distribute the results of this project
and of future studies of Acalypha. This project is significant because it
develops human resources, strengthens research on a poorly known group,
stimulates further research, and facilitates conservation and pest management.
Very few systematists work on Euphorbiaceae, especially given that the family is
the seventh largest family of flowering plants with over 7,000 species. This
project helps address this issue by providing training to a graduate student and
a young researcher (Dr. Victor Steinmann). Further scientific work will be
stimulated by providing the framework for other studies on a diverse group.
Because of its simple flowers but varied ways of organizing them on the plant,
Acalypha could become a model group for applying newly developed genomic
techniques to understanding the evolution of floral development, but only if a
well-supported phylogeny is available to provide the evolutionary context. In
addition, Levin's and Steinmann's work will have broader societal benefits. A
modern, well-supported classification will facilitate conservation of rare
species, management of agricultural weeds and invasive species, and the search
for pharmaceuticals.

