* 0128860
* Workshop on Nano and Related Technologies for Improving Human Performance to be held at the National Science Foundation, December 3-4, 2001
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2002
* Robert Shelton, World Technology Evaluation Center, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Cyrus K. Aidun
* 07/31/2002
* USD 72,785.00

Abstract CTS-0128860 R. D. Shelton, WTEC, Inc.

Partial support for the organization and travel of invited speakers
participating at the Workshop on Nano- and Related Technologies for Improving
Human Performance, December 3-4, 2001, at NSF, will be provided. The objective
of the meeting is to evaluate the current research results and discuss future
research directions in the emerging interdisciplinary field dealing with
synergistic implications of nanotechnology, biotechnology, information
technology and cognition on improving human performance. Nanotechnology is
opening an array of technological developments that may significantly improve
human perception, sensing, adaptation, learning, human-machine interface,
communication, group creativity, and other aspects of human activities. The
workshop will provide input from about thirty leading experts in various areas
from science, engineering, cognitive sciences, medicine and other disciplines.
Specialists from academe and industry will attempt to identify common principles
and approaches and develop collaborations. The workshop will be organized with
plenary presentations and 4-5 breakout sessions. There will be about sixty
participants, including observers from various agencies, academic and private
organizations. The main goals of the workshop are to evaluate the potential role
of nano related technologies on improving human performance, identify research
opportunities, and develop a strategic plan for the future. Ample time will be
allowed for questions and discussions. The workshop is expected to facilitate
the establishment of interdisciplinary cooperation among researchers in academe,
industry and government in the in the area technology implication on human
improvement. A website will be established for timely communication and
dissemination of the results. A report will be prepared at the end of the
meeting.