* 0128861
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Optically Pure Ortho-Quinone Methide Complexes- Synthesis and Stereoselective C-C Bond Formation
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/2002,09/30/2006
* Douglas Grotjahn, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 09/30/2006
* USD 18,000.00

0128861&lt;br/&gt;Grotjahn&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year award for US-
France collaboration in organometallic chemistry involves researchers and
students at the San Diego State University and University Pierre and Marie Curie
(Paris VI). Douglas B. Grotjahn in the US and Hani Amouri in France lead further
investigations of stable metal complexes - simple ortho quinone methides (o-QMs)
- discovered recently by the Amouri team. In the absence of metal, o-QMs are
capable of forming complex organic molecules or damaging DNA. The Amouri-
Grotjahn collaboration will use metals to stabilize the o-QM by binding tightly
to it. Preliminary studies show reactivity of o-QM complexes with the metal
iridium. Complexes of other metals are expected to show different reactivity.
The investigators will use coordinated o-QM ligands to create new carbon-carbon
bonds and rings. Optically pure samples of o-QM complexes will be used to make
single enantiomers (mirror images) of the products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The US
investigator brings to this collaboration expertise in optically active organic
molecules and synthetic application of organic cycloadditions using advanced
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) techniques. This is complemented by French
expertise in the chemistry of quinone methide complexes and their application.
The collaboration advances understanding of o-QM complexes and their synthetic
applications in products.&lt;br/&gt;Students from a predominantly undergraduate
research institution will gain international experience and benefit from
training in new synthetic techniques used in the French
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award represents the US side of parallel
proposals to the NSF and the CNRS. NSF will cover travel funds and living
expenses for the US investigator and students. The CNRS will support visits by
French researchers and students to the United States. &lt;br/&gt;