* 0128783
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Implicit Solvent Models for Biomolecular Simulations
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2006
* David Case, The Scripps Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 01/31/2006
* USD 21,000.00

0128783 Case

This three-year award for U.S.-France collaboration in computational biophysics
involves researchers at the Scripps Research Institute and the Institute for
Molecular and Cellular Biology and Genetics in Strasbourg, France. David A.
Case, Charles L. Brooks III in the US and Thomas Simonson in France lead the
collaborative program. The joint effort is aimed at the development and
distribution of computer codes for molecular dynamics simulations of proteins
and nucleic acids. The specific aims include performance of critical tests for
parameterizations and implementation of the generalized Born solvent model and
new applications for NMR (Nuclear Magnetic Resonance) structure refinement and
for behavior of biomolecules. The investigators have complementary expertise in
biomolecular simulation and in widely used computer programs: CNS/XPLOR
(Simonson), CHARMM (Brooks) and AMBER (Case). The new distributed computer codes
will allow new types of biomolecular simulations. The enhanced generalized Born
model will be used for structure prediction, prediction of protein-ligand
interactions, protein folding, structure-function analyses. This award
represents the US side of parallel proposals to the NSF and the French National
Center for Scientific Research (CNRS). NSF will cover travel funds and living
expenses of the US investigators and graduate students. The CNRS will support
visits to the US by the French participants. The project adds an international
dimension to research training of graduate students and enhances opportunities
for future collaborative partnerships.