* 0128857
* Patterns and Processes of Genetic Diversification in Solitary and Social Subterranean Rodents
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Eileen Lacey, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 02/28/2006
* USD 287,991.00

Lacey 0128857

The PI will examine relationships among social behavior, demography, and genetic
variation in two species of tuco-tucos (Rodentia: Ctenomyidae) from southwestern
Argentina. The presence of both the group-living colonial tuco-tuco (Ctenomys
sociabilis) and the solitary Patagonian tuco-tuco (C. haigi) in Argentina's
Limay Valley provides an unusual opportunity to explore the effects of sociality
on genetic variation in closely related species that occur in similar habitats.
Using DNA extracted from tissue samples collected from 10 populations per
species, variation at both microsatellite and Major Histocompatibility Complex
(MHC) loci will be quantified. These data will be used to determine how genetic
variation is apportioned within and among populations of each species.
Specifically, the PI will test the hypothesis that group living is associated
with enhanced selection for diversity at MHC genes, which are the genes
associated with the vertebrate immune response. To determine if selection on MHC
genes is influenced by presumably greater pathogen exposure among members of
group-living species, the prevalence of fleas and flea-borne bacteria of the
genus Bartonella will be assessed for all populations of C. sociabilis and C.
haigi sampled by the PI.

The proposed research is important in that it is one of the first studies of
natural populations of non-human vertebrates to (1) link behavioral and
demographic variables to patterns of MHC variation and (2) explore the role of
behaviorally-mediated differences in pathogen exposure in generating selection
on MHC genes. Both aspects of the project will significantly improve our
understanding of the processes underlying observed patterns of genetic variation
in vertebrates. The project will also contribute significantly to our
understanding of the biology of the endangered colonial tuco-tuco, which is
endemic to the western Limay Valley and surrounding hills. Specifically, by
engaging Argentine university students to assist with the project, the PI will
facilitate involvement of local biologists in the study and management of this
little-known species.