* 0128846
* SBIR Phase I: Protecting Multimedia Authenticity with Vaccination Of Electronic Bacteria Watermarks
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2002
* Joseph Landa, BriarTek Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jean C. Bonney
* 06/30/2002
* USD 99,960.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase 1 project develops a novel
method to protect the authenticity of multimedia. The Internet allows cost-free
distribution of multimedia products of all sorts, from simple documents to
music, video, or virtual reality. Free product samples become the gravity for
snowballing success. Yet the same medium is plagued with theft and piracy of
copyrighted media. The resolution of this dilemma is critical for inventors and
copyright holders, and indeed for the growth of e-commerce as a
whole.&lt;br/&gt;Media duplication is critical for exposure as long as the
author, artist or company is cited. This novel research embeds three markings in
multimedia by an independent component analysis (ICA) blind mixing algorithm: a
visible logo or advertisement, an invisible watermark, and an invisible
electronic bacteria code. The logo serves as a "vaccination" against a dormant
digital "electronic bacteria" code. Once the logo is removed the bacteria code
awakens and degrades only the multimedia. The invisible watermark enables
retrieval by hardware media players and tracking.&lt;br/&gt;The product of this
research is twofold: intellectual property and software tools. Revenue
originates from the sale of advertisement space, IP licensing, and sale of
software to the content producers.&lt;br/&gt;