* 0128043
* Embryonic Transitions in Vertebrate Cardiovascular Physiology - II
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2006
* Warren Burggren, University of North Texas
* Continuing grant
* Dona Boggs
* 01/31/2006
* USD 622,833.00

This award will extend our current highly limited understanding of the
development of cardiovascular regulation, and its potential plasticity in
vertebrate embryos. The four-year project will focus on three areas of study,
using conventional developmental models (the fry of zebrafish Brachydanio rerio,
embryos of chickens Gallus gallus), as well as embryos of other fishes and
birds. The first area extends the PI's investigation of the development of the
circulation and its regulation in early vertebrate embryos, making quantitative
measurements of blood pressure, blood flow, and heart rate as a function of
development, and during pharmacological and environmental manipulation. In
particular, these studies will focus on two aims: 1) Determination of changes in
cardiovascular regulation during embryonic development. Recent findings show
that there are non-linear rates of both appearance and maturation in the
development of reflexes controlling the circulation. Major species-specific
differences are emerging between chicken, emu and zebrafish embryos. Thus
experiments to determine whether the venerable chick embryo model is indeed
representative of vertebrate physiological development are warranted. 2)
Quantification of the specific properties of the blood vessels of the avian
chorioallantoic membrane (CAM), which remains largely a physiological black box.
Because the CAM and embryonic vessels are located in series, intrinsic responses
of the vascular beds of the embryo could be muted or completely masked by
qualitatively different vessel diameter responses occurring simultaneously in
the CAM per se, especially when blood pressure and other measurements are made
at only one point in the circulation. The second area focuses on the breathing
transition in late incubation of the avian embryo as it internally pips (pushes
its beak into the internal air cell) and relinquishes respiration using the CAM
for respiration using the lungs. This award will fund experiments to
characterize the physiological changes that occur from day 19-21 in chick
embryos, and from Day 50-53 in emu embryos. The PI's experiments to date suggest
that this 2-3 day period holds intense and complex change for cardiovascular
regulation, and its relatively slow time course relative to mammalian birth
should provide critical new insights in cardio-pulmonary transitions. The third
area will be an investigation of how environment (e.g. hypoxia) influences
normal developmental trajectories for the cardiovascular system. In particular,
planned experiments will explore the extent to which embryonic cardiovascular
systems exhibit "self-repair" as development progresses. Exciting new results
suggest that embryos with modifications of metabolism in early development
produced by low environmental oxygen can develop along unexpected trajectories
and still arrive at a normal metabolic state. The proposed research program will
make important and timely contributions to scientific advancement and human
resource development. The proposed measurements will provide mechanistically-
based information on how cardiovascular systems develop, how they respond
acutely to common environmental stress, and to what extent their long-term
function during subsequent development may be altered by environment. The
experiments will yield a basic understanding of embryonic physiology in
vertebrates which will be important in developing corrective procedures for
human defects through a combination of gene therapy and embryonic corrective
surgery (envisaged by some as the next surgical frontier). This project will
train a new cohort of undergraduate and graduate students in the use of
contemporary physiological techniques to address critical questions in
developmental physiology. The project will increase international collaboration,
and the broadening of professional vistas for trainees through the PI's informal
Environmental Genetic and Growth Science (EGGS) network of collaborating
scientists from six countries. And finally, a greater love of science in high
school and middle school teachers and their students will be fostered. Selected
secondary school teachers from Denton will participate in original scientific
research at UNT, through the PI's collaborative program with the local school
district.