* 0128780
* Gender-Specific Fitness and Intersexual Developmental Conflict in a Fruit Fly (Drosophila) Model System
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/2002,07/31/2008
* William Rice, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 07/31/2008
* USD 605,000.00

This research investigates a process by which natural selection can lead to
gender-specific dysfunction. Males and females need to accomplish different
biological functions, yet nearly 90% of the genome is expressed in both sexes.
In a recent pilot experiment the entire genome of the common fruit fly
(Drosophila melanogaster) was cloned and then identical copies of the same
genomes were expressed in both males and females. Genomes that produced the
highest Darwinian fitness in females produced low fitness in males, and visa
versa. This intersexual reversal suggests that genes that are favored in one sex
and disfavored in the other sex are common in the genome of the fruit fly.
Because all animals express many of the same genes, the observed intersexual
genetic conflict may be widespread. In the proposed research cytogenetic cloning
will be used to measure: i) the functional significance of sexually antagonistic
genetic variation, ii) its distribution among chromosomes, iii) its transmission
dynamics between generations, and iv) the traits that mediate intersexual
genetic conflict. The experiments are relevant to hereditary factors that
mediate gender-specific impairment (e.g., sterility). In the past it has been
assumed that harmful genetic variation was maintained solely by recurrent
mutation or genetic drift. This research evaluates a new source for the genetic
polymorphisms that are responsible for gender-specific dysfunction.