* 0128510
* LTREB: A long-term Study of Host-parasite Interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2008
* Jukka Jokela, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 01/31/2008
* USD 300,000.00

Lively&lt;br/&gt;0128510&lt;br/&gt;Explaining the widespread distribution and
maintenance of genetic recombination is widely regarded as one of the most
interesting challenges facing evolutionary biologists, and a large number of
ecological and genetical hypotheses have been suggested to explain why clonal
reproduction has not generally replaced genetically recombining individuals in
populations. Contrasting these alternatives has proven difficult, but the effort
is greatly aided by studies of populations in which clonal and recombinant
individuals coexist. Such mixed populations are common in the freshwater New
Zealand snail, Potamopyrgus antipodarum, which has been used as a model system
for evaluating different hypotheses. In past studies, no support for the lottery
hypothesis, the reproductive assurance hypothesis, or the tangled bank
hypothesis has been found. In contrast, past work has shown that the frequency
of recombinant individuals is spatially coupled with the prevalence of infection
by larval trematodes. This result is consistent with the idea that time-lagged,
frequency-dependent selection by parasites prevents the elimination of
recombinant hosts by clonal hosts - the Red Queen hypothesis. But, direct tests
of this hypothesis are still needed. This LTREB research will allow measurement
in mixed populations of the frequency of recombinant and clonal individuals over
time. Long-term data will provide a test of the hypothesis that time-lagged
selection by parasites prevents the replacement of recombinant individuals by
clonal individuals in natural populations. &lt;br/&gt;