* 0128902
* LTREB:  Climatic and Density-dependent Effects on the Ecology of Sockeye Salmon and their Freshwater Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2005
* Daniel Schindler, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jess K. Zimmerman
* 08/31/2005
* USD 130,779.00

0128902&lt;br/&gt;Quinn&lt;br/&gt;Despite the general appreciation for climatic
effects on ecological dynamics, most biological&lt;br/&gt;studies are too brief
to test for interactions between climatic and biological processes.
Alternatively,&lt;br/&gt;many long-term studies do not span enough levels of
biological organization to provide meaningful&lt;br/&gt;insights into the
complexity of ecological responses to environmental change. In the last
century,&lt;br/&gt;population dynamics of anadromous Pacific salmon have been
influenced by interactions among large-scale shifts in regional climate,
inherent density-dependent regulation, and fisheries activities. We propose to
take advantage of unique, highly detailed biological and physical time series
that extend for 40-50 years to test for interactions between climatic and
biological processes in the freshwater ecosystems used as nursery habitats by
sockeye salmon in southwestern Alaska. Sockeye are not only an important fishery
resource to commercial and subsistence communities in this region, but are also
keystone species, driving many components of freshwater and riparian
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;We have established a series of working hypotheses to
investigate interactions among climatic&lt;br/&gt;variables (e.g., hydrology,
ice-out date) and biological variables (e.g., bear predation,
juvenile&lt;br/&gt;competition) that interact to control life history evolution
and the ecology of sockeye in freshwater&lt;br/&gt;ecosystems. Our main research
themes are to explore: 1) interactions among habitat features, climate-driven
variation in hydrology, bear predation and salmon density controlling the life
history patterns and productivity of adult sockeye, 2) sockeye population
dynamics and climate as controllers of limnological conditions in lakes used as
nursery habitats, and 3) biological and climatic factors controlling growth
rates and age at seaward migration in juvenile sockeye salmon. Sockeye are an
ideal species for such studies because they occupy stream, lake and open ocean
habitats at discrete life history stages, exert top-down control on zooplankton
communities, provide important marine-derived nutrients to freshwater ecosystems
when they die and decompose, and occur in large, well-studied
populations.&lt;br/&gt;This LTREB research will: 1) maintain sampling programs
to build on existing data sets established over four&lt;br/&gt;decades ago in
two lake systems of Bristol Bay, Southwest Alaska, 2) continue to develop a
state-of-the-art data archive system to ensure long-term data security, and 3)
initiate new and retrospective studies to test several hypotheses central to
understanding the interactions between climate and the ecology of sockeye and
their ecosystems. A major objective is to develop a living database available to
investigators from all avenues of freshwater ecology and fisheries biology.
These data sets include the abundance, size- and age-structure of adult sockeye
salmon, regional climate, limnological conditions in nursery lakes, and
abundance and growth of juvenile sockeye salmon and other lacustrine fishes.
More specifically, we will evaluate the consequences of climate change for life
history evolution and population dynamics of a fish species that plays an
exceptionally important role in the structure and function of its ecosystems,
and the local economy and culture of people in the region.