* 0128157
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Behavioral Ecology of Chimpanzees Living in a Dry Area, Ugalla, Tanzania
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2003
* Craig Stanford, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 01/31/2003
* USD 6,440.00

This project focuses on the ecology and behavior of chimpanzees living in the
Ugalla area of The Tongwe East Forest Reserve in Tanzania. Ugalla is one of the
driest environments in which chimpanzees are known to exist and it shares
similarities with many of the paleoenvironments reconstructed for early
hominids. It has long been proposed that chimpanzees living in dry areas are an
important source of data for modeling the behavior and ecology of early
hominids, but very little research has been conducted on such
populations.&lt;br/&gt; This study attempts to discern the factors that
influence where the chimpanzees nest and how they use their habitat. Since the
chimpanzees at Ugalla are not habituated to human observers and are not provided
with food, the study methods require no direct observation of these apes. Maps
of chimpanzee nests as well as other signs of their presence (feeding remains,
feces) will be constructed, and the distribution of the resources they use
(food, water, available trees for nesting) will be studied. Data on the amount
and seasonal distribution of the fruit available to the chimpanzees will be
obtained by monitoring individual trees of species known to be eaten or possibly
eaten by the chimpanzees. In addition, data on the chimpanzees' diet will be
obtained by analyzing feces and the contents of carbon and nitrogen present in
hair collected from nests.&lt;br/&gt; The data obtained from this study will be
compared with that for other chimpanzee populations as well as for other great
apes. It will also be important to compare these results against the
archaeological evidence for early hominid habitat use.&lt;br/&gt;