* 0128794
* Comparative Anatomy, Phylogeny and Biogeography of Fossil and Living Gonorynchid Fishes (Teleostei: Ostariophysi)
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Terry Grande, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 12/31/2006
* USD 127,403.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Comparative Anatomy, Phylogeny and Biogeography of Fossil
and Living Gonorynchid Fishes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The family Gonorynchidae is
an extant family of primitive ostariophysan fishes with a long, and well-
preserved fossil record dating over 65 million years. Ostariophysi (e.g. carps,
minnows, catfishes) in turn, is one of the largest groups of fishes on earth
(75% of all freshwater fishes). An understanding of this basal fish group,
(i.e., Gonorynchidae) will provide vital information necessary to better
understand the complicated history of the Ostariophysi as a whole. This study
contains three clearly defined objectives. First, The comparative osteology and
development of extant species will be examined. It is necessary to understand
Recent forms first before including fossil taxa. Fossil taxa are often
incompletely preserved and developmental stages are often not available. Second,
based on the data generated from objective 1, a phylogenetic or evolutionary
analysis of all gonorynchid species will be conducted. Third, data generated
from the phylogenetic analysis will be used in a study of Historical
Biogeography. If one assumes that the earth and its biota evolved together, than
an understanding of the evolutionary patterns of the biota should lead to a
better understanding of the history of the earth. This project thus has broader
application to those interested in earth history and global change.&lt;br/&gt;
The significance of this project is multifaceted. This study will cross
disciplinary lines and combine paleontology and neontology into one project. It
will provide the first phylogeny for Gonorynchidae that is based on a thorough
comparative examination of all fossil and living species. Results from this
study will ultimately result in a better understanding of one of the most
important teleost fish groups known, the Ostariophysi. Because of the well-
bounded nature of this study, it will be used as a training tool for
undergraduate and Masters students at Loyola University and the Field Museum.
Students will have hands-on experience to all aspects of this project from the
preparation of both fossil and extant taxa to data collection and computer
analyses. Funds from this grant, along with matching funds from Loyola
University, will expose students to both the complexities and the intellectual
rewards of doing comprehensive anatomical phylogenetic work, and contribute to
the long-term health of comparative morphological studies in general. This
project thus extends beyond the limits of ostariophysan systematics and will be
of interested to developmental biologists, biogeographers and systematists in
general. The goal of this project is not only to provide vital information to
colleagues, but also to help assume the responsibility of educating and training
students to a field of biology fundamental to other disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;