* 0128689
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: The Arctic Sea Cover: Scaling Properties Associated with Deformation of Geophysical Materials
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2007
* Harry Stern, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 04/30/2007
* USD 21,755.00

0128689&lt;br/&gt;Stern&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year award for US-France
collaboration on studies of the Arctic Sea ice cover involves researchers and
students at the University of Washington and at the Glaciology and Environmental
Geophysics Laboratory in Grenoble, France. The principal investigators, Harry L.
Stern in the US, and Jerome Weiss in France, lead a team&lt;br/&gt;of
researchers with expertise in the fracture of geophysical materials and motion
and deformation of Arctic Sea ice. The objectives of this collaboration are to
characterize the variability of sea ice deformation, understand its connection
to stresses and coastal conditions, test the fracture mechanisms independent of
spatial scale, and improve sea ice models. Heterogeneity and scaling laws
associated with the process of deformation will be modeled in order to study the
dynamics of the Earth's lithosphere. A major source of data for the studies is
from the RADARSAT Geophysical Processor System. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The US
team brings to this collaboration expertise in remote sensing of deformation and
dynamics of sea ice cover and applications to oceanography and climate. This is
complemented by French expertise in fracture of geophysical material of the
Earth's interior and their development of multifractal and wavelets analyses.
The collaboration advances understanding of the dynamics of the Arctic Sea ice
cover and will improve existing models. Arctic sea ice dynamics are important to
monitor because of potential consequences for global climate, marine life and
commerce. The collaboration contributes as well to research and education
infrastructure. Students will benefit through advanced training and
participation in an international team effort.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award
represents the US side of parallel proposals to the NSF and the CNRS. NSF will
cover travel funds and living expenses for the US investigator and his students.
The CNRS will support visits by French researchers and students to the United
States. &lt;br/&gt;