* 0128390
* ITR/SY Collaborative Research: A Unified Relational Approach to Grid Information Services
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Beth Plale, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2005
* USD 234,702.00

An application running in a distributed computing environment such as the
Computational Grid must adapt to the available hardware and software resources.
This requires information about the properties of Grid resources such as hosts,
network switches, links and paths, software libraries and systems, user and
organization rights, software services, event channels and dictionaries, and
more. The information needed for an application to run, the values of the
information (how fast the information changes) and the freshness of the
information (how fast updates must be pushed to the application) can vary
dramatically. These attributes place significant demands on the resource
information service, demands that are arising with increasing prevalence in the
general area of directory services as well. The Grid Forum, an international
standards body for world-wide Grid computing, is developing standards for
representing and querying this information. There is much that is excellent
about these evolving standards, but there are many forms of highly desirable
queries that will be difficult or expensive to perform in these systems. In
particular, dynamic information will require very high update rates not
supported by LDAP-based implementations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
address these concerns through a proposed (and tentatively named) Grid Resource
Information Service (GRIS), a unified relational approach to grid information
services. The research will start with the full ACID
(Atomicity/Consistency/Isolation/Durability) functionality of a relational
database system and "build down" to a practical resource information system that
still provides most of the benefits of the RDBMS. Such a system will provide a
single highly flexible query model and language for all types of Grid resource
information, no matter how dynamic. The research will culminate in an extensible
implementation based on commodity database systems and the SQL language,
including "canned queries" for non-SQL users. The project will evaluate the new
system and techniques using logged updates and queries from an existing Grid
information service, and comparing results with a hierarchical system such as
Globus MDS2. To facilitate comparisons, the project will produce a set of
benchmark queries from discussions with users, tool developers, and Grid Forum
members, and will quantify the limits of these queries.&lt;br/&gt;