* 0128833
* Phylogenetic Systematics of Moraceae: Inflorescence Evolution and the Origin of a Pollination Mutualism
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2002,08/31/2005
* George Weiblen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 08/31/2005
* USD 291,676.00

Weiblen&lt;br/&gt;0128833&lt;br/&gt;Work by Dr. George Weiblen at the University
of Minnesota examines the evolutionary history of the mulberry family (Moraceae)
using the DNA sequences from the living members of this ancient lineage of
flowering plants. There are more than 1000 species of Moraceae worldwide,
including such economically important fruits as figs, mulberries, jackfruit and
breadfruit. Among the Moraceae, the figs (species of the genus Ficus) have been
a major focus of research in ecology and evolution because of their complex
interactions with fig wasps. Specialized wasps that feed on fig seeds are the
exclusive pollinators of over 700 species of figs. The mutually beneficial
relationship between figs and their wasps has stimulated much research on
coevolution, the process by which two species undergo genetic change in response
to each other. Ecological studies of fig pollination have advanced our
understanding of coevolution, and yet the origins and evolutionary stages
leading to fig pollination have remained virtually unknown. This project uses
new tools of DNA sequencing and phylogenetic analysis to probe the early history
of the mulberry family and to identify the closest relatives of the figs. Field
work in the Old World tropics will focus on pollination biology of several
Moraceae. Reconstructing patterns of diversification in this way makes it
possible to test theories on the origin of the unique fig pollination syndrome,
and to improve our understanding of general trends in floral
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;The project will significantly expand our taxonomic and
phylogenetic knowledge of an important branch of the tree of life. Economically
significant members of the Moraceae include ornamental and edible figs (Ficus),
breadfruit and jackfruit (Artocarpus), paperbark mulberry (Broussonetia), a
source of fiber, and breadnut (Brosimum), a major tropical timber. Mulberry
(Morus) also plays a key role in the production of silk as the main food source
for silk moths. Understanding how these plants are related genetically is
important for their sustainable use and conservation. In addition, the research
provides an opportunity for advanced graduate training in state-of-the-art
molecular techniques combined with museum collections-based approaches to the
study of biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;