* 0128141
* SBIR Phase I: A Parallax Barrier Technique for Autostereoscopic Displays
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2002
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2002
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I Project will be used to
investigate an optical system to be used with LCDs or plasma displays to produce
2D/3D switch-able autostereoscopic displays which produce images possessing the
full resolution of display. Various companies have begun to market
autostereoscopic displays. Such displays are encountering a market barrier in
some applications because they achieve their 3D effect by sacrificing
resolution. They divide the pixels on the display between a right and left eye
image, thus leaving each image with half the resolution of the flat panel
itself. The proposed technology will produce autostereoscopic images without
sacrificing resolution. The objective of the project is to establish the
feasibility of the autostereoscopic imaging concept, to identify the best
configuration for the optics, and to determine the feasibility of using the
concept on LCD and plasma displays. To accomplish this objective, small test
optics will be created and evaluated, measurements of relevant properties of
representative plasma and LCD panels will be made, and a development path for
the next phase of the project will be identified.&lt;br/&gt; The project has the
potential to produce a practical high resolution flat panel autostereoscopic
displays suitable for high resolution 3D imaging applications. The direct
commercial potential of the projects lies in autostereoscopic products that will
be manufactured using this technology. Such display products will find
widespread use in scientific and medical visualizations applications, industrial
inspection, telerobotic and other remote vision applications. Consumer based
applications may include electronic commerce and computer gaming.&lt;br/&gt;l