* 0128618
* SBIR Phase I:  Hybrid Lattice Boltzmann Technique for Heat Transfer Prediction
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2002
* Ilya Staroselsky, Exa Corporation
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 06/30/2002
* USD 99,774.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will produce a
unique computational tool for heat transport prediction. The novel approach to
be used here will hybridize the Digital Physics technology based on Lattice
Boltzmann Methods (LBM) for hydrodynamics with efficient partial differential
equation (PDE) solution methods for heat transfer using grids of up to a hundred
million computational cells thus allowing for quantitative prediction of heat
transfer phenomena of interest in materials processing and manufacturing. With
this platform, the highest standards of numerical accuracy, efficiency
(including nearly perfect parallel scalability) and geometrical flexibility
(including full integration with commercial CAD tools), as well as a user
friendly interface, shall be naturally inherited. Upon algorithm optimization
and benchmarking against test flow data, a complex heat transfer problem of
industrial level complexity shall be simulated.

The hybrid thermal transport prediction tool will open major new commercial
markets for the PowerFLOW product, especially at the engineering design level.
This new technology shall enable prediction of internal flow and heat transfer
within the automotive industry. The ability of the proposed LBM-PDE methods to
address microscale thermal transport problems in which Knudsen number effects
are important should open important new markets for novel technologies in MEMS
and related industries as well as broad new markets for computer aided
engineering (CAE), especially in manufacturing industries.