* 0128821
* Musa Genomics Workshop to be held in Arlington, Virginia, Summer 2001
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2002
* Andrew Paterson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* TEST user
* 07/31/2002
* USD 20,500.00

Musa Genomics Workshop, Arlington VA. July 17-19 2001&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
Musa Genomic Consortium has been formed within the framework of the Global
Program for Musa Improvement. Deciphering the banana genome is an enormous task
that will require participation and collaboration of scientists around the
world. The Consortium will bring together and enhance the combined expertise of
the different participating laboratories. This meeting has been organised to
develop the strategy for the Consortium and to plan its implementation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Musa genome offers exciting new perspectives in
studying genomic biodiversity of monocots. It has a small genome (500 to 600 Mb
- only 25% larger than rice) that is highly tractable to complete functional and
sequence analysis. Cultivated varieties of Musa are sterile clones that have
been propagated vegetatively for thousands of years, while fertile wild diploid
equivalents have been actively evolving for the same period in the same
environment, ranking Musa as a unique model to study plant evolution. Sterile
and fertile forms have also co-evolved with most of the Musa pathogens, creating
an excellent system in which to study plant/pathogen evolution. Musa was the
first species where a pararetrovirus was shown to be integrated into a plant
genome, with the capacity to give rise to episomal banana streak badnavirus.
Understanding the mechanism behind this phenomenon may lead to important
applications, such as gene targeting. Musa is among few plant species with bi-
parental cytoplasmic inheritance: paternal inheritance of mitochondria and
maternal inheritance of chloroplasts. Variability in ploidy levels in Musa
offers a new opportunity to gain insight to the greater-than-additive gains in
crop productivity that often accompany polyploidy. Polyploids such as cotton and
sugarcane contain only one type of polyploidy within the taxon, whereas Musa
includes several types of autopolyploids (AAA, AAAA, AAAAAA), and allopolyploids
(AAB, ABB, AABB, AAAB) in addition to diploid M. acuminata (AA) and M.
balbisiana (BB) and AB hybrids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;