* 0128623
* SBIR Phase I:  Ultrasonic Cavitation Probe for Monitoring and Testing Engineered Surfaces
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2002
* Timothy Gens, L-Tech Corporation
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 06/30/2002
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Busuness Innovation Research (SBIR) project will develop an initial
prototype design for a cavitation probe that uses the property of a collapsing
cavitation bubble to produce visible photons (sonoluminescence) has been
designed and constructed. These light emissions can be easily detected within a
small, finite volume and thus this probe provides a direct means of measuring
the cavitation density (activity/per unit volume) within a cavitating fluid and
the delivery of ultrasonic energy at an engineered surface. As a result,
ultrasonic methods treating a surface can be directly monitored and controlled
in real-time, leading to the ability to improve and predict the performance of
the resulting structure. For example, since cavitation is thought to be the
principal mechanism that leads to particle removal from silicon wafers during an
ultrasonic/megasonic cleaning operation, it is likely that a strong correlation
exists between cavitation probe output and cleaning effectiveness. Thus, this
probe provides the potential for constructing a real-time monitor of
ultrasonic/megasonic cleaner efficiency and effectiveness. In addition, because
the entire three-dimensional cavitation field can be measured with this probe,
it can also serve as a useful tool in ultrasonic/megasonic cleaner design.

A real-time cavitation-density measuring device would have great utility in the
semiconductor cleaning industry and thus this probe provides considerable
promise for commercial development.