* 0128922
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Out-of-Equilibrium Dynamics of Quantum Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2006
* Claudio Chamon, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 01/31/2006
* USD 15,342.00

0128922&lt;br/&gt;Chamon&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year award for
U.S.-France collaboration in condensed matter physics theory involves students
and faculty researchers at Boston University, Ecole Normale Superieure, Ecole
Superieure de Physique et Chimie, and Commission de l'Energie Atomique in Paris,
France. Claudio Chamon and Leticia Cugliandolo from Boston and Paris
respectively will lead the collaborative program. The theoretical work involves
studies of quantum non-equilibrium dynamics in both driven and non-driven
systems. The research focuses on aging dynamics, infinite dimensional quantum
spin glass systems, aging and memory effects in electronic glasses, and noise,
quantum fluctuations, charge, spin in quantum wires, quantum dots, and carbon
nanotubes . The collaboration takes advantage of complementary French expertise
in quantum systems, spin glass models, and dynamics in electronic
glasses.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award represents the US side of joint
proposals to the NSF and the French National Center for Scientific Research
(CNRS). NSF will cover travel funds and living expenses of the US investigators
and graduate students. The CNRS will support visits to US of the French
participants. The collaboration will advance understanding of quantum systems
and computational and theoretical methods. The theoretical results will be
applied to experimental data and lead to new interdisciplinary research
directions in statistical mechanics and quantum condensed matter physics.
&lt;br/&gt;