* 0128924
* Deforestation, Cloud Formation, and Hydrological Coupling of Lowland and Montane Systems in the Tropics
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Qingyuan Han, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 08/31/2005
* USD 170,006.00

The project will develop understanding of the linkage of tropical deforestation
with cumulus cloud formation and orographically generated cloud-banks in
environmentally complex terrain. Advancing hydrologic predictions in regions
undergoing land-use and land cover change from the use of remotely sensed cloud
observations will be an important project objective. The research is motivated
by the need to understand and model land-surface interactions and cloud
connections in regional hydrologic cycling in terrain regions such as the
tropical montane cloud forest ecosystems of northern Costa Rica. The research
will involve regional atmospheric modeling, remote sensing of land-surface
characteristics and cloud distribution, and on-site monitoring of soil moisture
and cloud-base heights. Drs. Welch, Han, and Lawton (University of Alabama,
Huntsville) expect project activities to shed insight into causes of lowland
deforestation, watershed management, ecosystem functioning, and biodiversity
conservation in mountainous parts of the tropics. The project is supported by
NSF's Water and Energy: Atmospheric, Vegetative, and Earth (WEAVE) interactions
program, which seeks to improve understanding of the Earth's hydrologic and
energy cycles to support better assessments of the potential impact of human
activities on those cycles and on the climate system, in particular.