* 0128992
* US-Japan Joint Seminar on New Aspects of Quark Nuclear Physics with Polarized Photons
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2003
* Kenneth Hicks, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 08/31/2003
* USD 15,000.00

0128992 Hicks

This award supports the participation of American scientists in a U.S.-Japan
seminar on new aspects of quark nuclear physics with polarized photons to be
held in Honolulu, Hawaii from February 25-28, 2003. The co-organizers are
Professor Kenneth Hicks at Ohio University and Professor Hajime Shimizu of
Yamagata University in Japan. The workshop will provide a forum for
presentations and discussions of the structure of subatomic particles using new
results from experiments with polarized photons incident on polarized hydrogen
and deuterium. Both theoretical and experimental techniques will be discussed,
with the objective to gain a better interpretation of the data.

Plans for new cooperative activities resulting from the workshop will most
likely be in the form of new proposals for experiments at the new facilities.
These collaborations would be a natural result of sharing experimental
techniques for polarized targets and beams. In addition, theoretical input from
experts across the globe will be highly desirable to provide an overview of the
role of non-perturbative QCD in the interpretation of precise polarization
observables to be presented at the workshop. The project advances international
human resources through the participation of many junior faculty, postdocs and
graduate students. Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project
will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international understanding
and cooperation. The researchers plan to publish proceedings of the workshop
through either the World Scientific Publishing Company or through the Jefferson
Laboratory.