* 0128936
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Investigation of Polyploid Genome Evolution
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/2002,06/30/2007
* Jonathan Wendel, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 06/30/2007
* USD 20,250.00

0128936&lt;br/&gt;Wendel&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year award for
U.S.-France collaboration in plant genome research involves students and faculty
researchers at Iowa State University and University of Rennes 1, Rennes, France.
Jonathan F. Wendel and Malika Ainouche will lead the collaborative program in
the US and France respectively. They will study polyploid formation and
evolution of novel expression patterns in two complementary model systems, one
from the cotton genus Gossypium and the other from the grass genus Spartina.
Using a diversity of materials and natural populations from both genera, gene
expression will be studied in newly synthesized and older, natural polyploids.
Changes that occur immediately after polyploid formation as well as those that
arise on an evolutionary time-scale will be evaluated. The researchers will also
determine the extent and dynamics of gene silencing using a cDNA-AFLP screen to
identify, sequence and verify. Tissue specific partitioning of expression and
novel expression in polyploids, compared to their diploid parents, will be
examined for duplicated genes where initial screens suggest silencing or novel
expression. The Iowa State group brings to this collaboration expertise in
natural and synthetic polyploid members of the cotton genus Gossypium. French
studies and investigations of the polyploid system from the grass genus Spartina
complement this.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award represents the US side of
joint proposals to the NSF and the French National Center for Scientific
Research (CNRS). NSF will cover travel funds and living expenses of the US
investigators and graduate students. The CNRS will support visits to US of the
French participants. The collaboration will advance understanding of the
evolution novel gene expression in higher plants and improvements in cotton
agriculture. &lt;br/&gt;