* 0128656
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Passivity Based Control of Networked Control Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2006
* Mark Spong, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 01/31/2006
* USD 18,000.00

0128656&lt;br/&gt;Spong&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year award supports US-
France collaboration in control systems between Mark W. Spong of the University
of Illinois and Romeo Ortega of the Signal and Systems Laboratory at SUPELEC, a
French center for research in electrical engineering. The objectives are to
investigate passive nonlinear control of networked control systems, in
particular, systems involving bilateral remote operation (teleoperation) over
unreliable communication networks. The problem is motivated by interest in
wireless communication in embedded real time control systems and the use of the
Internet as a communication medium in teleoperated and networked control
systems. The research will advanced understanding of how to design and utilize
mobile, intelligent robotic systems with local intelligence for communication
over unreliable networks with other robots and human operators. The researchers
plan to answer: How sensory, command and control information are shared over
such networks and how much local intelligence is needed to guarantee performance
and stability when network communications are degraded. The US investigator
brings to this collaboration expertise in passivity-based networked control
systems. This is complemented by French theoretical expertise in nonlinear
control and robotics. Potential applications of their results include work in
hazardous and remote environments, surveillance, search, and rescue robots,
autonomous vehicles and autonomous locomotion systems, haptic devices, remote
construction, and remote surgery.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award represents
the US side of parallel proposals to the NSF and the CNRS. NSF will cover travel
funds and living expenses for the US investigator. The CNRS will support visits
by French researchers and graduate students to the United States. &lt;br/&gt;