* 0128964
* Phylogeny of Physid Snails (Basommatophora: Physidae) and Evolution of Reproductive Isolation
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2006
* Charles Lydeard, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Dianna K. Padilla
* 01/31/2006
* USD 358,876.00

The Physidae (Gastropoda: Basommatophora) is a group of freshwater snails with
a native distribution in North, Middle, and South America, and Eurasia, but
reach their greatest diversity in North America. The family constitutes a major
component of the freshwater molluscan fauna in many lake, pond, and stream
habitats. Despite the prominence of physids in behavioral, physiological and
ecological studies, little is know of the phylogenetic relationships among the
taxa. Furthermore, many questions remain as to whether many of the currently
recognized species, subspecies, and "morphs" constitute valid evolutionary
entities. Despite nearly 200 years of taxonomic and systematics studies, no
rigorous study has been done employing modern methods and analyses. The purpose
of the NSF-sponsored research is to collect physid snail specimens representing
recognized species, subspecies, and "morphs" to estimate an evolutionary "tree"
using on mitochondrial and nuclear gene DNA sequences and shell and anatomical
data. In addition, the principal investigators will examine whether the family
Physidae constitutes a natural assemblage of snails, being more closely related
to each other than to any other group of snails. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although
estimating a phylogeny for the ecologically important Physidae is important for
its own sake, the resultant evolutionary "tree" will be used in conjunction with
a modern, analytically based view of species to test whether currently
recognized groups constitute valid species. At a time when species inventories
are being made to discover hotspots and prioritize areas for various protection
measures, it is imperative that recognized species correspond with phylogenetic
species. Furthermore, the researchers will examine the evolution of reproductive
isolation among selected physid species by conducting a series of controlled
experiments in the laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide a
robust evolutionary "tree" and modern classification of the snail family
Physidae. In addition, an empirical examination of species issues in physids
will provide important data for estimating how many species actually exist
within the family. These data will be of considerable use to conservation and
evolutionary biologists as well to federal and state wildlife agency personnel.
&lt;br/&gt;