* 0128531
* SBIR Phase I: Optimal Replisnishment Algorithms for Service Parts Logistics Systems
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2002
* Vipul Agrawal, MCA SOLUTIONS INC
* Standard Grant
* Jean C. Bonney
* 06/30/2002
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
new methodology to manage the inventory of service parts used to provide after-
sales support of mission-critical products. In particular this research will
develop computationally efficient and optimal algorithms for replenishment and
allocation of inventory in service parts logistics networks. Subsequently, the
algorithms will be incorporated into a commercial software product platform for
service supply chain optimization. Service part optimization requires
specialized models, since demand (due to machine failures and unscheduled
maintenance) is infrequent and difficult to predict. Movement of parts must be
coordinated across many inter-connected stocking locations in order to
facilitate on- time delivery, often within hours or even minutes. In addition,
there are multiple sources of supply for these parts such as internal
manufacturing, external suppliers, repair vendors, and de-manufacturing.

Current commercial service supply chain optimization systems do not incorporate
these complexities of the service supply chains. As a consequence, they perform
poorly in after-sales service environments resulting in extensive in service
parts inventory that turns only 1 to 2 times per year. This research can lead to
commercial technology that can reduce this expense substantially.

