* 0128168
* SBIR Phase I:  A Platform for Designing and Evaluating Electric Power System Generation Sources
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2002
* Mark Laufenberg, POWERWORLD CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2002
* USD 100,000.00

0128168&lt;br/&gt;Laufenberg&lt;br/&gt; This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project proposes a new software platform for designing and
simulating electric power generation and delivery networks. The demand for
reliable electric power, both in this country and in developing nations seeking
to forge a sustainable industrialized economy, is growing dramatically. At the
same time, fears over the environmental repercussions of burning carbon-rich
matter, particularly in regards to the emission of greenhouse gases and acid
rain, are intensifying. While using cleaner energy sources and technologies
could help mitigate the environmental impact of increased power production, the
larger initial investment required by such alternatives has made their adoption
a tough sell. The software will enable system architects to design a system
graphically and to assess and compare its merits using an integrated approach
that considers reliability, financial cost, and environmental impact. Users will
be able to distribute generation resources throughout a system, change generator
fuel and technology types, and experiment with various transmission topologies
with unprecedented ease. The package will assess system reliability using an
integrated contingency analysis tool. It will evaluate the financial
implications of a design by accounting for start-up and construction costs
associated with various generating and transmission equipment and calculating
projected operating costs using economic dispatch. Finally, it will assess the
environmental impact of a design by calculating the amount of pollutants emitted
by its power sources based on empirical formulas for emissions defined by the
user.&lt;br/&gt; The market niche that PowerWorld Corporation is attempting to
exploit is the development of high-quality, yet extremely user-friendly power
system visualization software to help answer the question: how can increased
demand for electric power be met reliably, cleanly, and economically? By
integrating reliability, economic, and environmental analyses into a single
package, the tool will enable developers, engineers, economists, and policy
makers to develop efficient and clean power system
designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;