* 0128062
* Supporting Teachers and Encouraging Lifelong Learning: A Web-Based Integrated Science Environment (WISE)
* EHR,DRL
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Marcia Linn, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 12/31/2005
* USD 1,197,453.00

The Web-based Integrated Science Environment (WISE)was founded in 1997 with a
3-year grant from the National Science Foundation.This invited proposal for an
Accomplishment Based Renewal (ABR)describes planned WISE activities for 3
additional years at the current rate of funding.Our document conforms to the
four-page ABR proposal limit;much more can be learned about WISE activities at
http://wise.berkeley.edu. WISE capitalizes on the synergies between Internet
connectivity and integrated science to advance our understanding of inquiry
science instruction.In the first 3 years,WISE has created the following elements
of inquiry: o The WISE learning environment that incorporates recent cognitive
and social research and gives new authoring partnerships a headstart on
effective inquiry designs. o Over 30 WISE projects that meet our design criteria
and can be used by teachers everywhere. o The WISE mentored professional
development model that guides teachers to implement inquiry practices. o WISE
server technology that collects and stores both student work and teacher
activities such as lesson plans, contributions to discussion, and reflection
notes. o WISE Knowledge Integration Assessments that measure progress in inquiry
and can be used to detect transfer from the topic where inquiry was taught to
new topics. o WISE science, technology, and language literacy measures, and
connections to standards-based measures of inquiry from NAEP,TIMSS,and state
testing programs to establish broader impacts. The proposed ABR will research
how these elements of inquiry instruction jointly contribute to sustained
improvement of science learning.We prepare to address four research
themes:(a)What is the longitudinal impact on students of one or more WISE
projects?(b)What are typical trajectories of teachers from diverse schools
(urban, rural,and suburban)who adopt inquiry practices such as WISE?(c)What
value do new technologies for visualization and modeling, including our new
grant of Palm technologies, bring to inquiry instruction with WISE? And (d)How
do Curriculum Design Partnerships progress in response to the design review and
classroom trials of their curriculum projects? Establishing and sustaining
technology-enhanced inquiry science instruction requires a powerful learning
environment that takes advantage of cognitive and social research as well as
effective professional development,rigorous design of urriculum and
assessments,and continuous monitoring of student progress. Our research will
characterize trajectories of teachers as they adopt WISE inquiry projects and
identify ways to make professional development more effective.

We will refine our design principles and test their effectiveness in guiding
partnerships that design new WISE curriculum.We will incorporate emerging
technologies into the WISE learning environment,adjust professional development
practices,and test the effectiveness of these improvements on student learning.
We will research the impact of WISE projects on students,both immediately and
longitudinally,as a function of the expertise of the teacher and the extent of
exposure to WISE projects. We will look specifically at the needs of diverse
learners and identify ways to ensure that all students succeed in WISE. Proposed
studies will inform the design of curricula,professional development,and science
assessment. Our work will inform the setting of policy for equity and
assessment.

To communicate our findings,we plan a book-length monograph,research
publications,and conference presentations, as well as workshops for teachers,
netcourses, and extensive on-line materials. We have already attracted over 3000
teachers to join our web-based community. As participating teachers provide
information about their customizations and insights into inquiry teaching,we
expect this community to grow. We will connect teachers to mentors according to
our WISE mentoring model for professional development. We appreciate the
contributions of our advisory board over the past 3 years and have identified
some continuing and some new advisors for the ABR. The longitudinal impact theme
will be advised by Paul Holland,ETS,and will continue to draw on the
methodological expertise of Mark Wilson, University of California, Berkeley;
David Rogosa, Stanford University; Robert Linn, University of Colorado, and
Lorrie Shepard, University of Colorado.

The teacher trajectory theme will be advised by Jane Bowyer, Mills College;and
Louis Gomez, Northwestern University who both have experience with urban
systemic reforms. The value of new technologies theme will benefit form
collaborations with CILT Post Docs Eric Baumgartner,Michelle Spitulnik,and Yael
Kali;in addition,we will be advised by computer scientists Michael Clancy,UC
Berkeley,and Elliot Soloway,University of Michigan;and by Nancy
Songer,University of Michigan. The Curriculum Design Partnership theme will be
advised by Philip Bell,University of Washington; Louis Gomez, Northwestern
University; Roy Pea, Stanford University; and Nancy Songer, University of
Michigan,all of whom bring experience in forming and sustaining partnerships.