* 0128492
* SBIR Phase I:  The Use of Gestural Interface and Robotics Technology to Facilitate Language Development
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2002
* Corinna Lathan, ANTHROTRONIX, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2002
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project examines the
feasibility of using gestural interface technology and interactive robotics to
facilitate receptive and expressive language development of children with severe
and/or multiple disabilities. Developed by AnthroTronix, Inc., the technology
uses a child friendly robot controlled by various interfaces adapted to
individual needs, regardless of physical limitations. The robot imitates
movements and tells the child's written or spoken stories, providing
reinforcements and motivation for learning. Speech and language impairments,
affecting 10% of school children, including most children with severe
disabilities, significantly impact abilities to read, write and communicate.
Objectives are to examine the technology's (a) applicability across a range of
disabilities, ages, and interventions in the promotion of speech, language,
reading, and writing skills, and (b) ease of use by therapists and teachers.
Methods will include qualitative data and pre-post tests with 3-5 children
representing a range of disabilities, cultural backgrounds, and ages who attend
a K-5 public school. Results will enable Beta Prototype design specifying a
range of applications for children with disabilities and will determine specific
interventions to be tested in the next phase of the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Completion of the project will enable the
refinement of the hardware and software to target specified interventions that
promote language literacy across a range of children with disabilities. The
technology will be marketed in a package that includes a CD-ROM and
instructional manual to teachers and therapists working with children with
disabilities.