* 0128104
* Host Specialization and Fungal Speciation in Ceratocystis
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2005
* Thomas Harrington, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 01/31/2005
* USD 320,001.00

0128104&lt;br/&gt;Harrington&lt;br/&gt; Studies of fungal species, their
reproductive strategies, how they evolve, and how humans influence their
evolution and distribution are needed. This need is particularly acute for plant
pathogenic fungi because humans unwittingly move cryptic species of fungi around
the world on their crops (mostly on plant propagative materials such as seeds
and cuttings) and plant products (such as logs, wood chips, packing materials,
etc.), often with devastating consequences. Introductions of invasive fungal
species and changes in fungal populations frequently frustrate disease control
strategies, reduce food and fiber productivity, and threaten forest ecosystems.
Ceratocystis species, which are primarily found in the Americas, have been
particularly damaging when introduced into new ecosystems or when introduced
plant hosts come into contact with indigenous pathogen populations. The research
of Dr. Thomas Harrington at Iowa State University focuses on how new species
arise in the Ceratocystis fimbriata complex, which contains some of the most
aggressive pathogens in the genus Ceratocystis. Although currently considered
one species, it is actually a complex of many species that share morphological
similarities but infect different hosts in different parts of the world. Dr.
Harrington will use a variety of modern molecular and traditional tools to
delimit species within the complex and infer their evolutionary history.
Particular emphasis will be given to the host range (which hosts the pathogen
can infect) of each of the delimited species. DNA fingerprinting markers will be
used to study the diversity of populations and trace the suspected spread of
host-specialized species by human activity. Recently derived populations should
have low levels of genetic diversity and have limited geographic ranges, except
where the geographic range has been extended by humans. Older lineages are
hypothesized to have more genetic diversity and broader geographic ranges. Also,
the hypothesis that older lineages are more restricted in their host ranges will
be tested. &lt;br/&gt; These studies will build a foundation for a taxonomic
treatment of this ecologically and economically important genus. Where and how
populations of C. fimbriata were introduced by humans will also be determined,
and this information will be particularly important because of the increasing
movement of plant pathogens on logs, wood chips and crating material. The
studies will allow for a better understanding of how ecological niche affects
speciation and will lead to a more practical definition of species in the fungi.
The definition of a species continues to be among the most controversial issues
in basic biology, but the practical implications for plant pathology,
particularly for quarantine concerns, are immediate. Concerns over invasive
species, including plant pathogens, have been heightened by the globalization of
our economies, and the simple concept of a species continues to be of pivotal
importance to the prevention of introductions and management of introduced
pests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;