* 0128929
* Comparative Osteology and Phylogenetic Relationships of Fossil and Living Sturgeons (Actinopterygii, Acipenseriformes)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* William Bemis, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 07/31/2005
* USD 143,107.00

ABSTRACT

Sturgeons, paddlefishes and their fossil relatives form a small group of fishes
from the Northern hemisphere called Acipenseriformes that is believed to have
split off from other ray-finned fishes (the actinopterygians) some 150 million
years ago. The morphology of living sturgeons (25 species) has remained largely
unchanged since they first evolved. Although there have been many studies of
sturgeon morphology, there never has been a study that is detailed or
comprehensive enough to allow modern studies of their evolution. The new study
of the skeleton of fossil and living sturgeons by Hilton, Grande and Bemis has
two main goals. The first objective is to describe in detail the skeleton of the
shortnose sturgeon (Acipenser brevirostrum), a small species of sturgeon found
in coastal rivers of eastern North America. This study will be based on several
types of specimens, including dry skeletons, hand cleaned skeletons that are
stored in alcohol, and cleared and stained skeletons (in which the soft tissue
is made clear, cartilage is stained blue and bone is stained red). Specimens
representing all life history stages will be studied, from the earliest embryos
to the oldest specimens available. Such an approach allows observations of
changes of morphology due to growth and development of the skeleton. The results
of this study will be published in a large format monograph, illustrated with
photographs for documentation and line drawings for interpretation, accompanied
by clear text descriptions. The intention is that this monograph will serve as a
lasting contribution to the knowledge of the anatomy of sturgeons and a standard
reference for anatomical studies of primitive ray-finned fishes. The second part
of this study concerns tracing evolutionary relationships among living and
fossil sturgeons. Most fossils that are identified as sturgeons are very
fragmentary, and only after a detailed study of the living members of a group
can such specimens be properly interpreted. Additionally, new comparative data
generated during the first part of the study will be used to formulate new
hypotheses of relationships. All previous morphological studies of the
relationships of sturgeons are inadequate for various reasons. For instance,
many studies have looked only at relationships of sturgeons from a particular
geographic region or country. Evolution has not occurred within political
boundaries, and Hilton, Grande and Bemis' study will be the first to incorporate
morphological data for all sturgeons on a worldwide scale. All species of
sturgeons are afforded some form of protection, with many listed as endangered.
The precarious conservation status of many sturgeons make studies of their
evolutionary history even more critical.