* 0128515
* SBIR Phase I: Development of MAC-to-PHY Convergence Tools for Broadband Fixed Wireless Access
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2002
* Donald Arnstein, Saraband Wireless, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jean C. Bonney
* 06/30/2002
* USD 99,608.00

This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase I project will address one
of the major obstacles to commercial development of broadband fixed wireless
access under 5 GHz, namely overcoming a "convergence bottleneck" arising from
distance-sensitive propagation conditions. It is well known that as distance
ranges from line of sight to well beyond line of sight, transmission parameters
can degrade dramatically. However, current state-of-the-art treats this
condition in a highly unsatisfactory way, through statistical models, through
"handshake" schemes, modulation fallback, use of preambles and embedded pilot
tones, to name just a few. An innovative concept will be demonstrated for rapid,
two-way, unobtrusive and easily scaled RF measurements that permit
characterizing thousands of hub-to-subscriber paths precisely without guesswork.
Regional operations centers, hub base station and consumer terminals will
operate more efficiently due to the network's ability to converge rapidly on
near-optimum transmission characteristics.

This innovation will make broadband more readily available to populations that
live and work where DSL, fiber, and cable modem service is not offered. This
includes: people who work in outdoor locations, in hard-to-get-to schools,
libraries, college campuses, transportation systems, factories, waterways, and
small businesses.

