* 0128460
* SBIR Phase I:  Surface Passivation to Prevent Coking in Pyrolisis Environments
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2002
* David Wickham, TDA Research, Inc
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 06/30/2002
* USD 96,153.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will eliminate
coking in ethylene furnaces and dusting in steam reformers. Ethylene and
hydrogen, two very important feedstocks, are produced by processing hydrocarbon
feed streams at high temperatures. Unfortunately, when hydrocarbons come into
contact with iron and nickel (major components of steel) at high temperature,
reactions can occur which cause coking in ethylene production and formation of
metal oxide particulate (dusting) in hydrogen production by steam reforming. The
lost time required to decoke ethylene crackers and the removal of metal oxide
particulate from steam reformers are costly. Although pyrolysis and steam
reforming are carried out under different conditions, the initial steps in
coking and dusting are identical, the formation of iron and nickel carbides. In
this project, additives will be developed that bind strongly to iron and nickel
on the steel surface, eliminating the formation of these metal
carbides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additives that reduce coke in ethylene crackers
and eliminate dusting in steam reforming would find immediate application in
both ethylene and hydrogen production industries. These problems are significant
sources of cost to each of the industries and their elimination would result in
measurable reductions in price for both ethylene and hydrogen.