* 0128903
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Functional Characterization of Phage-Type RNA Polymerases in Higher Plants
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2007
* David Stern, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 03/31/2007
* USD 17,425.00

0128903&lt;br/&gt;Stern&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year award supports
U.S.-France collaboration between David B. Stern of the Boyce Thompson Institute
at Cornell University and Silva Lerbs-Mache of the University Joseph Fourier in
Grenoble, France. They lead a collaborative program involving reciprocal visits
of postdoctoral researchers, graduate and undergraduate students, and faculty
researchers. The project utilizes a multi-faceted approach to the study of
transcription in organelles, specifically, mitochondria and plastids. The
objectives are: (1) to use reverse genetic approaches in maize cell cultures and
in Arabidopsis plants to reveal the functions of proteins in organelle
transcription and plant development; (2) to reconstitute the active polymerase
through overexpression of putative components; and (3) to use proteomics
approach to discover any unknown subunits. The US researchers bring to this
collaboration expertise in reverse genetics in maize to discern organelle
protein function. This is complemented by French laboratory strengths in
Arabidopsis and RNA polymerases biochemistry. Reciprocal visits of junior
faculty and students are emphasized to add an international dimension to their
activities and to develop international connections early in their
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award represents the US side of joint
proposals to the NSF and the French National Center for Scientific Research
(CNRS). NSF will cover travel funds and living expenses of the US investigators,
postdoctoral researchers, graduate and undergraduate students. The CNRS will
support visits to US of the French participants. The collaboration will advance
understanding of organelle biogenesis and plant development. &lt;br/&gt;