* 0128636
* SBIR Phase I:  A Universal Technology Platform for Remote Sensing and Controlling
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2002
* Dennis Hromin, JDS Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2002
* USD 99,641.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims at the
development of a universal technology platform for remote sensing and
controlling. This technology development will be carried out with a focus on
affordability, ease of use, reliability, usage of and compatibility with
existing communication standards, computer platform independence,
modularity/reconfigurability, scalability and expandability. One commercial
application using this Internet-based technology will foster the enhancement of
education through remotely accessible experimental devices, the availability of
which will provide significant relief to the strain on the spatial, temporal and
fiscal resources that traditional laboratories impose on educational
institutions. The initial beneficiaries of the proposed technology will be
students at the undergraduate and graduate college levels. Subsequently, the
propagation of the technology into the K-12, corporate training, and scientific
experimentation arenas as well as into industrial and consumer applications
appears to be both feasible and plausible.

The enabling of remote access to various experimental devices proffered by JDS
Technologies will facilitate improved student learning of scientific and
technical principles. The proposed technology will promote independent and
asynchronous learning patterns. It will also permit experimental demonstrations
in lectures and allow experimentation to be included in distance learning
programs. It thus provides access to sophisticated and cost intensive
experimentation for a much larger student audience than would be possible in the
absence of the remote-access capabilities.