* 0128913
* SGER: Reproductive Biology of Female King Penguins
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2002
* F. Stephen Dobson, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 08/31/2002
* USD 17,997.00

&lt;br/&gt;Considerable evidence has accumulated that female birds may exert
control over the sex ratio of their offspring. Under optimal conditions, more
female chicks are produced; and under poor environmental conditions, more of the
young are males. There are several plausible explanations for this. In some
cases, young males disperse and so under stressful conditions do not compete
with parents or siblings. In other instances where habitat conditions are
favorable, mothers with new chicks are assisted by older female offspring,
increasing reproductive success. In species that lay clutches with multiple
eggs, there can be chicks of both sexes and self-assessment of parent condition
may not be as crucial. However, in other species such as penguins, only one or
two eggs are laid during each breeding season. In this situation, the
application of the strategy of sex ratio allocation requires that females must
be very capable of assessing their condition and that of their mates. This Small
Grant for Exploratory Research will investigate the sex ratio of king penguin
chicks relative to the condition of the parents to determine if females are
controlling the gender of chicks. Sex determination will be accomplished by DNA
analyses of blood samples, a new method to be tested on king penguins in this
project. Quantifying parental condition will be done by several standard
methods, including measures of body size, parasite load, and immunocompetence.
This study will also explore the possibility that plumage coloration is an
indicator of condition in penguins as it is in other bird and fish species.
Plumage color is from diet-derived carotenoids and may be a useful proxy for
evaluating health and fitness. Penguins are dominant predators in their
environment and shifts in a population parameter as fundamental as offspring sex
ratio might reflect changes in climate or in distribution and abundance of food
resources. The results of this work, which will be conducted in collaboration
with scientists from the French Antarctic Program, will provide a better
understanding of penguin population dynamics and the complex mechanisms of
environmental biofeedback.&lt;br/&gt;