* 0128133
* SBIR Phase I:  Surface Engineered Powders by Fluidized Bed Combustion Chemical Vapor Deposition
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2002
* Miodrag Oljaca, NGIMAT CO.
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 06/30/2002
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop the
Combustion Chemical Vapor Deposition (CCVD) process to modify surface properties
of particulate matter in a fluidized bed. The proposed Fluidized Bed CCVD
(FBCCVD) technique will enable production of next generation surface engineered
powders for applications such as decorative and specialty chemicals. In the CCVD
process, low-cost, environmentally friendly, metal-bearing reagents are
dissolved in solvents that serve as a combustible fuel. Using MicroCoating
Technologies (MCT) innovative atomizer, the Nanomiser TM , this solution is
atomized to form submicron droplets that are then combusted in a flame to
produce the desired material. This flame-based method will be integrated with an
externally recirculating fluidized bed and used to encapsulate particulate
matter suspended in the fluidized bed with dense and well-adhered thin films.
The effect of the FBCCVD process variables on the encapsulated powder
properties, deposition efficiency, and production rate will be investigated.

Inexpensive powders with functionalized surfaces are in high demand for
decorative, optical, specialty chemicals, and electronics applications. The
powder market is estimated to be over a billion dollar market annually and
represents a growing segment. Success of the proposed research will result in a
new FBCCVD process that could facilitate inexpensive production of encapsulated
powders.