* 0128140
* Cell Interactions and Cell Fate Specification
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Charles Ettensohn, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 12/31/2004
* USD 390,000.00

0128140&lt;br/&gt;Ettensohn&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The accumulation of the protein
beta-catenin in the nuclei of specific&lt;br/&gt;cells is a critical, early step
in the development of multicellular&lt;br/&gt;animals. In all deuterostomes that
have been studied, nuclear&lt;br/&gt;accumulation ("nuclearization") of beta-
catenin is polarized along one&lt;br/&gt;axis of the early embryo.
Nuclearization of beta-catenin is required&lt;br/&gt;for mesoderm and/or
endoderm formation and the establishment of early&lt;br/&gt;signaling centers.
Despite its fundamental importance in patterning&lt;br/&gt;deuterostome embryos,
the mechanisms that regulate the differential&lt;br/&gt;nuclearization of beta-
catenin are unknown. The early sea urchin embryo&lt;br/&gt;is an ideal
experimental system for the analysis of this problem. The&lt;br/&gt;embryo is
highly transparent, which facilitates analysis of the dynamics&lt;br/&gt;of
protein turnover and targeting in vivo using light optical
methods.&lt;br/&gt;The sea urchin system is also unique in that specific cell
types can be&lt;br/&gt;isolated from early embryos in large quantities. This
critical&lt;br/&gt;characteristic means that it is possible to isolate large
quantities of&lt;br/&gt;early blastomeres that have, or do not have, beta-
catenin in their&lt;br/&gt;nuclei, and study biochemical differences in the two
kinds of cells.&lt;br/&gt;Many of the central molecular components of the beta-
catenin pathway&lt;br/&gt;have been cloned from sea urchin, including several
key players that&lt;br/&gt;have been cloned recently in our laboratory. This
powerful combination&lt;br/&gt;of characteristics makes the sea urchin embryo a
unique experimental&lt;br/&gt;system for the analysis of beta-catenin
nuclearization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal tests several specific
hypotheses concerning mechanisms&lt;br/&gt;that regulate the nuclear
accumulation of beta-catenin during early&lt;br/&gt;development. To test these
hypotheses, a combination of time-lapse, 3-D&lt;br/&gt;confocal microscopy,
manipulation of embryos by microsurgical and&lt;br/&gt;molecular biological
methods, and biochemical approaches will be&lt;br/&gt;employed. The major
questions to be addressed are the following:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;a) Do
interactions between blastomeres play any role in regulating
the&lt;br/&gt;pattern of beta-catenin nuclearization during early
development?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;b) What is the stability (half-life) of beta-
catenin in different cell&lt;br/&gt;lineages at different developmental stages?
Does the stability of&lt;br/&gt;beta-catenin increase or decrease at specific
times and in specific&lt;br/&gt;cells?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;c) Is the loss of
beta-catenin on the animal side of the embryo mediated&lt;br/&gt;through GSK3?
If so, are there measurable differences in GSK3 activity,&lt;br/&gt;stability,
or abundance along the A-V axis?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;d) What is the spatial
distribution of axin, a regulator of beta-catenin&lt;br/&gt;stability, along the
A-V axis? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;e) Is the state of the degradation complex
different in animal and&lt;br/&gt;vegetal blastomeres?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project will advance scientific knowledge by elucidating&lt;br/&gt;the
mechanisms of a fundamental process in animal development. It
will&lt;br/&gt;also contribute to the development of human resources through
the&lt;br/&gt;training of undergraduate researchers, graduate students,
and&lt;br/&gt;postdoctoral fellows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;