* 0128326
* SBIR Phase I: Innovative And Cost-Effective Process for Net-Shape Microfabrication of Ceramic Components
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2002
* Balakrishnan Nair, CERAMATEC, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 06/30/2002
* USD 99,885.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop and
characterize a novel ceramic material and microcomponent fabrication technique
for two different industrial sectors: the fiber-optic communications industry
and the chemical industry. Current processes for microcomponent fabrication,
primarily based on silicon processing technology are expensive, and often do not
meet the production rates required for optical component (fiber-connectors, beam
splitters) fabrication or possess the desired high-temperature performance for
chemical industry applications (micro-channel devices for gas
separation/reforming). The objective of this project is to develop a cost-
effective technique for microfabrication of components with properties and/or
production efficiency comparable to or superior than silicon technology. The
process will use a low-temperature, net-shape fabrication technique that is
expected to be efficient, cost-effective, scalable and environmentally friendly
(no-byproducts).

The commercial benefits will be an alternative to silicon processing technology.
The high production capacity and tight dimensional tolerances for components
fabricated using this material/technique makes it an attractive option for optic
fiber component manufacturers. The high achievable surface areas and the
inherent thermochemical stability of ceramics make this material very attractive
for fabrication of microchannel devices for gas separation/reformation.

