* 0128343
* Shifting Costs and Benefits of Systemic Endophyte Interactions With Native Grass Hosts
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2002,08/31/2007
* Thomas Day, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2007
* USD 418,950.00

Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Endophytes are fungi that live internally
in plants but do not cause disease. Instead, endophytes are thought to benefit
the plant by increasing resistance to drought, herbivores, and seed predators,
pathogens and root feeders and increasing germination rates, nutrient uptake,
and competitive abilities. Endophytes are found in all plants, including
agronomic crops and turf grasses. They are used in turf grasses to increase
performance of grasses, but may also cause harm livestock because of their toxic
effects. However, little is known about the role of endophytes in native
grasses. The benefits of endophytes are often not the same as in agronomic
grasses. Our research seeks to determine the costs and benefits of asexual, seed
borne endophytes in the genus Neotyphodium in two widespread SW native grasses,
Arizona fescue and sleepy grass. Our goals are to experimentally test the cost
and benefits of Neotyphodium infection depending on plant and endophyte genotype
and environment. We will implement two major field experiments that control
plant genotype and endophyte infection, soil moisture levels and herbivory by
invertebrates and vertebrates. Our results will provide insights into basic
interactions between endophytes and their host grasses, and may have important
applied aspects related to forage grasses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;