* 0128508
* SBIR Phase I:  Xtractica: A System for Extracting Coherent Data from Documents
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2002
* Hasan Davulcu, XSB, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Jean C. Bonney
* 06/30/2002
* USD 99,804.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will investigate
the feasibility of designing and building a software system: Xtractica. This
software system will allow domain experts to specify programs that transform
unstructured or partially structured data from a variety of document sources,
such as World Wide Web sites, PDF files and text into structured, coherent and
readily usable information. Xtractica will consist of a set of tightly
integrated powerful syntactic and semantics-driven data extraction technologies
that are managed from a graphical user interface to retrieve information that
was created for human understandability, and extract and reason about it to
create knowledge that can support automated decision making and transactions. An
important feature of Xtractica is that users can rapidly create extractors by
simply supplying examples of the data to be extracted. Thus it will empower
users who are knowledgeable about their application domains but are not
necessarily trained as computing technologists, to structure data into
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Phase I project will develop the operational
specifications of Xtractica and determine its feasibility by prototyping its
critical components. Phase 2 will then produce a fully functional Xtractica
system based on results from Phase I. Finally Phase 3 will make Xtractica
commercially available to clients with diverse business interests including
content aggregation, e-procurement, ERP and supply chain management vendors.