* 0128090
* SBIR Phase I:  Concrete-Filled Fiber Reinforced Polymer (FRP) Modular Framing System
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2002
* Mohsen Shahawy, SDR Engineering Consultants Inc
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 06/30/2002
* USD 99,750.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop:
connections between concrete-filled fiber reinforced polymer (FRP) tubes
(splicing and joints) and with other traditional construction materials; a cost-
effective structural framing system; and design aids and specifications for
these structural framing systems. The advantages of concrete-filled FRP tubes
(CFFT) over concrete-filled steel tubes (CFST) include high strength-to-weight
ratio, durability, and the possibility of optimizing and engineering the fiber
orientation for best result. Experiments have shown that CFFTs can significantly
increase strength and ductility of normal strength concrete (3-5 thousand pounds
per square inch (ksi) and 0.003-0.004 ultimate strain) to the level of high-
performance concrete (15-20 ksi and 0.02-0.04 ultimate strain). Phase I will
develop both analytical and experimental components, conduct modeling,
calibration, and parametric studies, and perform limited proof-of-concept
testing. Phase II would concentrate on manufacturing these new system
components.

The new framing system utilizing CFFTs and other structural forms are expected
to be used in civil construction such as buildings and bridges. It will offer
superior seismic performance and higher resistance to explosion damage, such as
in terrorist attacks, in comparison with traditional systems. In addition, long
durability and corrosion resistance are expected to extend the designed life
span of many civil structures with low maintenance costs.

