* 0128832
* Mathematical Modeling of Advanced Liquid Crystal Systems: Ferroelectricity and Chirality
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Maria-Carme Calderer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2005
* USD 164,957.00

DMS Award Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Award #: 0128832&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Calderer,
Maria-Carme&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Minnesota, Twin Cities
&lt;br/&gt;Program: Applied Mathematics&lt;br/&gt;Program Manager: Catherine
Mavriplis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Mathematical Modeling of Advanced Liquid
Crystal Systems: Ferroelectricity and Chirality&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Liquid
crystal phases are intermediate between solid and liquid and present a wealth of
rheological and electro-optical properties. Novel technological applications
involve highly ordered phases such as the ferroelectric smectic~C*.
Ferroelectricity in liquid crystals is a consequence of the chirality of the
phase (i.e., molecules are arranged in helical patterns). Chirality also turns
out to be a central attribute of all living organisms. This fact brings a
biological scope to liquid crystals research. This proposal deals with
mathematical and modeling issues of advanced liquid crystal materials, in the
context of applications to optics and rheology. Ferroelectricity and chirality
are at the core of the proposed models. One of the issues of the project is the
modeling of ferroelectric display. The switching time of such a display is much
less than that of other liquid crystal technologies (e.g., shutters are capable
of a 70 microseconds transition time); it also allows for sequential coloring.
The project also addresses related current trends of thin film research for
liquid crystals, with a view towards biological applications. One such trend
relates to the need of miniaturization of devices, such as the manufacturing of
very thin ferroelectric displays (from 10 to 100 nano-meters thickness). These
are particularly needed in interactive video applications, where some of the
display components are intended to be wearable. One related aspect of the
proposed research is the study of interfaces and contact surfaces between liquid
crystals and isotropic fluids, and the role of smectic liquid crystal phases as
surfactants. Such questions are also relevant in studies of biological membranes
and processes, such as the transport of drugs through cell walls, and the
attachment of proteins to strains of DNA. The analysis of flow problems will
encompass uniaxial and biaxial nematic, chiral and smectic liquid crystals and
polymers. The PI will also carry out research related to applications of liquid
crystals to optical switching and telecommunications, and will search for
industrial partnership in such topics. The work will incorporate modern theories
of partial differential equations and calculus of variations. Numerical
simulations will also be carried out for some of the problems. The PI will
continue the very active program of connecting research activities with
undergraduate education through the following: the summer REU program,
organization of industrial seminars, participation and organization of open
houses for undergraduate students as well as for high school students, first
year seminars, and bringing state of the art computer software and technology to
undergraduate mathematics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since their discovery at the
end of the nineteen century, liquid crystals have been at the core of the most
exciting scientific events, and have brought one of the truly remarkable
technological advances of the twentieth century. They are found in the most
basic household items, such as watches and calculators, to computer screens and
instrument display panels (LCD). Following the commercialization of the first
display device towards the mid 20th century, the physical and mathematical
modeling of liquid crystals has played a major role in their technological
development, during the last quarter of the 20th century. Moreover, the
mathematical challenges posed by the liquid crystal models of continuum
mechanics brought a wealth of activity in analysis and partial differential
equations. These achievements, in turn, prompted further technological
developments. The future of the liquid crystal research promises new levels of
scientific and technological advances, but it is also filled with challenges.
The goal of the proposed research is to actively participate in this endeavor
and work on the forefront of the modern liquid crystal research. This proposal
deals with mathematical and modeling issues of advanced liquid crystal
materials, in the context of applications to optics and rheology. The work will
incorporate modern theories of partial differential equations and calculus of
variations. Numerical simulations will also be carried out for some of the
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Date: June 25, 2001&lt;br/&gt;