* 0128350
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Computing the Real Hazard to the Earth from Comets and Asteroids
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2007
* William Bottke, Southwest Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 03/31/2007
* USD 22,068.00

0128350 Bottke

This three-year award supports U.S.-France collaboration in astronomy between
William F. Bottke of the Southwest Research Institute and Alessandro Morbidelli
of the Observatory of Nice. The project addresses the origin and evolution of
near earth objects or NEOs, a population of asteroids and comets crossing or
nearly crossing the Earth's orbit. Present knowledge of orbital and size
distributions of the NEO population is limited, because the NEOs known to the
Earth are biased by complicated observational selection effects and because only
a modest fraction of the entire NEO population has been discovered. US and
French researchers addressed the first problem through development of
quantitative models of debiased orbital and absolute magnitude distribution of
NEOs. This collaboration is extended to new problems: design of NEO surveys to
determine how and where to find the most hazardous or hard to find NEOs;
computation of frequency of impacts on Earth and other terrestrial bodies as a
function of the impact energy; computation of the relative collision rate on the
moon and terrestrial planets; and computation of the upper limits on long-period
and Halley-type comet population. The French investigators bring to this
collaboration expertise in asteroid and cometary dynamics and the physics of
collision fragmentation. This is complemented by US expertise in fast
integration codes; large scale numerical simulations and statistics on orbital
evolution.