* 0128098
* RUI: The Herbivory Uncertainty Principle - How Experimenter Visitation and Measurement Affect Herbivory and Plant Growth
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Richard Niesenbaum, Muhlenberg College
* Standard Grant
* James T. Morris
* 08/31/2004
* USD 87,000.00

The Herbivory Uncertainty Principle - How Experimenter Visitation and
Measurement Affect Herbivory and Plant Growth&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Richard
A. Niesenbaum, Muhlenberg College&lt;br/&gt;CO-PI: James F Cahill, University of
Alberta&lt;br/&gt;CO-PI: Christine M. Ingersoll, Muhlenberg
College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 1927,Werner Heisenberg proposed that
there are fundamental limitations to the study of subatomic particles, as the
act of measuring them can affect their behavior. Our prior work confirms that
such uncertainty also occurs in ecological studies, where visiting plants to
measure rates of herbivory actually changes those rates and significantly
impacts the plant-insect interactions being studied. The implications of such
"visitation effects" are enormous, and the proposed work will permit us to more
substantially test whether visitation and measurement of plants alters rates of
herbivory and plant growth, and will increase our understanding of the
mechanisms responsible for these effects. We will examine how the presence of
neighboring plants and local light environment influence the occurrence of
"visitation effects", and how visitation and touch influence plant chemistry and
insect foraging in the plant, Apocynum cannabinum. Results from the proposed
research will challenge the long-standing assumption that field researchers are
"benign observers", as the essential act of visiting plants during an experiment
could alter the performance of those plants. A significant visitation effect may
motivate us to re-think the way that we measure and test hypotheses about
herbivory, plant growth and productivity, and other plant-animal interactions.
This work is essential to understanding possible strategies to mitigate any
potential observer effect in future studies, and will provide information about
the basic ecology of plant-animal interactions in natural plant communities. An
additional major goal is to advance undergraduate education by giving students
primary roles in a significant ecological research project. &lt;br/&gt;