* 0128583
* SBIR Phase I:  Segmented Proton Exchange Membranes with Edge Seals for Compact Fuel Cell Electrode Structures
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2002
* Robert McDonald, GINER ELECTROCHEMICAL SYSTEMS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 06/30/2002
* USD 99,996.00

This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase I project will demonstrate
a design approach for a high energy density hydrogen/air Proton Exchange
Membrane (PEM) fuel cell. The proposed research will demonstrate a means of
creating sections of membrane, integral with the parent material, which are
thermoplastic in nature and which are impermeable to hydrogen, oxygen and water
for sealing edges. The same membrane modification will be used to create narrow,
inerted sections of membrane to serve as borders of inactive membrane between
segmented, series-connected, coplanar fuel cells. The material innovations will
be demonstrated in actual 50 cm 2 PEM fuel cells, both single and segmented.
Ionic conductivity and water and gas permeability will be determined to show the
extent of inactivation in treated regions. Tensile strength tests will be
conducted to demonstrate the integrity of the structures and the strength of
thermally bonded edge seals.

PEM segmented or coplanar have potential fuel cells applications where
exceptionally long total service lives (>30,000 Hrs) of operating times are
required. Long service life is required for residential applications, battery
replacement and standby power supplies for critical computer and control
facilities.