* 0128308
* SBIR PHASE I:  ECR (Electron Cyclotron Resonance) Plasma Treatment of Polymer Tubing Such As Catheters
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2002
* Ward Halverson, Spire Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 06/30/2002
* USD 100,000.00

This Phase I Small Business Innovation Research project will develop plasma
processes to treat both internal and external surfaces of medical polymer tubing
such as catheters. The treatments will facilitate attachment of bioactive
coatings, will clean, sterilize, and reduce friction; similar processes can also
deposit organic or inorganic coatings. Plasmas driven by electron cyclotron
resonance (ECR) will treat the lumen and external surfaces more uniformly, and
over a greater range of process parameters, than conventional glow discharge or
corona plasmas. Phase I will demonstrate that all treated surfaces of polymer
tubing samples have been significantly and uniformly activated by the ECR plasma
treatment without causing damage or discoloration of the material. A final Phase
I test will evaluate the uniformity of a heparin-containing bioactive coating
applied to the lumen wall of actual hemodialysis catheters. Phase II will refine
plasma processing parameters for attachment of antithrombotic and antibiotic
coatings, sterilization, pore sealing, and removal of contaminants on the lumen
wall and exterior surfaces of medical catheters. Phase II would also begin
applying research results to an ECR plasma activation system for Phase III
production and commercialization. The ECR plasma process should be expandable to
large-scale, low-cost commercial production of polymer tubing for catheters. A
surface treatment to facilitate attachment of bioactive coatings and for
cleaning, sterilization, and friction reduction would add both therapeutic and
economic value to dialysis and other catheter types. The same plasma treatments
can be applied to tubing for other medical and non-medical applications, such as
prevention of biofilm formation in dental water lines