* 0128981
* SGER-ISE-PUR: Internet-based Informal Science Education to Increase Public Understanding of Research -- A Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER)
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2002
* Robert Semper, Exploratorium
* Standard Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 08/31/2002
* USD 99,998.00

The Exploratorium is testing new methods of using Internet-based programming to
increase the public understanding of current scientific research. Exploratorium
staff, working with a group of advisors, will assess the current status of
projects that focus on conveying information about research. They then will
develop and test a prototype website. The exploratory research will examine such
questions as:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What information about research is important
and critical to convey to the public?&lt;br/&gt;How do you build a Web presence
that can rapidly accommodate new findings?&lt;br/&gt;What is an appropriate
oversight process to assure inclusion of appropriate research?&lt;br/&gt;What
are sufficient update intervals?&lt;br/&gt;How does such a Web site build an
audience?&lt;br/&gt;How can the Web effort be coordinated with other PUR
projects?&lt;br/&gt;How can the Web site provide opportunities for public input
and discussion?&lt;br/&gt;How do you develop buy-in and participation from
researchers?&lt;br/&gt;Is the additional interpretation/annotation sufficient to
give the public a deeper level of understanding?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These
planning and prototyping efforts will be coordinated with other simultaneous
Public Understanding of Research planning
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;