* 0128513
* SBIR Phase I: Surface Modification of Textiles for Protective Clothing
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2002
* Don Elrod, Lynntech, Inc
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 06/30/2002
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project concerns the surface
modification of textiles in order to impart properties to the fabric necessary
for their use as protective clothing. The increase in disease transmission, the
widespread use of pesticides in agriculture, and the increased proliferation of
chemical and biological weapons worldwide have increased the need for the
development of effective fabric treatments for protective clothing. During the
Phase I research, agents will be covalently attached to the surface of fabric in
order to give them the desired properties. The modified fabric will then be
tested for antimicrobial activity against a broad spectrum of pathogenic
microorganisms, for detoxification of chemical pesticides and appropriate
surrogates for chemical and biological weapons, as well as for skin
cytotoxicity. The Phase I research will show that the modified textiles are able
to effectively eradicate a broad range of pathogenic microbes, detoxify chemical
pesticides and surrogates for chemical and biological weapons while retaining
their original physical properties and possessing no skin cytotoxicity.
Potential applications for this technology include protective clothing and
materials for medical and dental institutions, agricultural workers, and
military soldiers as well as for cloth products for household disinfection and
various consumer products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Commercial applications for
fabric that is active against pathogenic microorganisms as well as chemical
agents are wide and diverse. Protective clothing for agricultural workers and
military servicemen could be produced from these modified fabrics. A multitude
of applications could be found in the medical and dental area. Clothing for
medical and dental personnel and patients including lab coats, scrubs, caps,
shoe covers, masks, privacy drapes, surgical drapes, bed sheets, etc. could be
rendered antimicrobial utilizing this technology. Consumer products such as
diapers, athletic socks, water filters, and disinfectant wipes could also be
prepared from these materials.&lt;br/&gt;