* 0128952
* Collaborative Research: A Multi-Gene Approach to Chlorophytan Phylogeny and Diversity
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2002,08/31/2007
* Marvin Fawley, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 08/31/2007
* USD 107,575.00

0128952&lt;br/&gt;Fawley&lt;br/&gt;Three research teams (Buchheim at University
of Tulsa, Fawley at North Dakota State University, and Zechman at California
State University at Fresno) have begun a collaboration that will address
questions about the hierarchical (i.e., phylogenetic) relationships among green
algal groups that are collectively known as the Chlorophyta. The Chlorophyta,
which has phylum status in the Linnean nomenclatural system, represents one of
two branches of the green plant lineage-the other branch being the land plant
alliance. The Chlorophyta comprise organisms that range from the microscopic to
the macroscopic, exhibit a variety of reproductive strategies (e.g., sexual vs.
asexual), and live in a broad spectrum of habitats (e.g., freshwater, saltwater
and terrestrial). Some aspects of the current classification scheme for the
Chlorophyta, based largely on comparative morphology, have been challenged by
new evidence from comparative molecular data. A comprehensive interpretation of
the new evidence, however, has not been forthcoming because (1) these new
molecular data have not been applied to all groups within the Chlorophyta and
(2) in most cases only a single gene has been used to evaluate diversity among
select groups of Chlorophyta (unlike the land plants where diversity in some
groups has been studied using three or more different genes). The goal of this
project is to develop a comprehensive assessment of diversity in the Chlorophyta
using a comparative study of DNA sequence data in three different genes, the
nuclear 18S ribosomal RNA and 26S ribosomal RNA genes, and the chloroplast rbcL
gene. The two rRNA genes code for portions of all ribosomes found in living
cells. The rbcL gene is part of the chloroplast genome and codes for a portion
of the enzyme responsible for carbon fixation in plants. The Zechman lab at CSU-
Fresno will be responsible for gathering data from the chlorophyte group known
as the Ulvophyceae. The Fawley lab group at North Dakota State University will
be responsible for gathering data from the chlorophyte group known as the
Prasinophyceae. The Buchheim lab group at the University of Tulsa will gather
data from the two chlorophyte groups, Trebouxiophyceae and Chlorophyceae. The
project will culminate in (1) a phylogenetic synthesis of all molecular data for
the Chlorophyta, (2) a fundamental re-assessment of chlorophyte classification,
integrating morphological and photosynthetic pigment data, and (3) an
integration of the chlorophyte molecular phylogenetic data with (published)
parallel data from the land plant lineage. &lt;br/&gt;Studies using chlorophyte
green algae as model organisms (for example, the genus Chlamydomonas, easily
cultured in the laboratory) have significantly advanced our understanding of
fundamental processes such as photosynthesis and flagellar function. As
biologists continue to dissect the molecular and biochemical basis for
biological phenomena, new chlorophyte models will be explored in order to
understand the spectrum of variation associated with these phenomena. A more
comprehensive understanding of the relationships among all chlorophyte groups
will be vital to interpreting the results (for example, assessing the broader
applicability) from studies of chlorophytes used as model organisms. Moreover,
the results from a comprehensive assessment of chlorophyte diversity will inform
future studies of biological processes that rely on green algae to model the
mechanisms. Lastly, studies of diversity within the Chlorophyta are critical to
advancing our understanding of the origins and evolution of the green plant
lineage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;