* 0128291
* SBIR Phase I:  Analytic Simulation Method for Oil/Gas Field Management and Optimization
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2002
* Randy Hazlett, POTENTIAL RESEARCH SOLUTIONS
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2002
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project assesses the
feasibility of new oil and gas reservoir management tools for optimization of
hydrocarbon recovery. It proposes extension of state-of-the-art analytic
solution methods for potential flow in porous media from 2-D to 3-D. It will
incorporate 3-D analytic fluid flow simulation technology into large-scale
optimization routines where reservoir recovery performance is required. Unlike
previous analytic solution methods, complex heterogeneous reservoir architecture
can be entertained. Well conditions are modeled directly, making possible design
of complex wells. Phase I will also address the possible extension of the method
to alternate subregion shapes to allow even faster and more flexible
implementations. This project will provide a new class of reservoir management
tools capable of rapidly and accurately screening what-if scenarios for field
development. The objectives of the research as to 1) generalize analytic
solution boundary element methodology to three dimensions; 2) build a prototype,
3-D, analytic simulation tool; 3) propose and test algorithms or well and field
optimization using an analytic solution performance evaluation; and 4) extend
algorithms to include additional geometric shapes for enhanced flexibility. The
next phase of the research involves algorithm refinement, generalization,
optimization shell implementation, and testing. Subsequently, concentration will
be on commercial software development and a user interface.

There is a recognized need for speed, accuracy, and simplicity in reservoir
engineering management tools. There is also a demand for such tools without the
high-end computational horsepower expected of most numerical reservoir
simulators. Potential Research Solutions envisions a PC software product as a
deliverable from this research and development, allowing improved management of
existing hydrocarbon resources, especially in mature reservoirs. The proffered
software product would benefit in-fill drilling programs, allocation of
production rates to balance well load and drainage volumes, and screening of a
large portfolio of reservoir management options--all with accurate reservoir
performance predictions in complex reservoir architecture--and, it will be of
particular interest to independent oil and gas producers with limited access to
high-end computers.