* 0129599
* How the Superoxide Dismutase Protein Specifies the Reactivity of Bound Fe
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Anne-Frances Miller, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 06/30/2006
* USD 386,016.00

Mn-superoxide dismutase and Fe-superoxide dismutase (MnSOD and FeSOD) catalize
alternating one-electron oxidation and reduction of the superoxide anion (O2 -),
to molecular oxygen and hydrogen peroxide (O2 and H2O2). These enzymes extend
our healthy life, and are closely related to enzymes that mediate degradation of
toxic wastes, and synthesis of antibiotics. This research seeks to understand
the determinants of SOD's catalytic activity. Previous work has shown that the
SOD proteins can tune the reduction midpoint potential, Em , of the bound
Fe2+/3+ or Mn2+/3+ ion over more than half a volt, thus providing potential
access to a wide range of chemistry. The protein has been proposed to achieve
this via hydrogen bonding between a conserved active site glutamine and a
coordinated solvent molecule. The spectroscopic, structural and thermodynamic
studies, on native enzymes and a few mutants, will elucidate the mechanism and
magnitude of this hydrogen bonding's effect on the Em. In addition, the first
characterizations of Mn-substituted FeSOD, whose Em is higher than 900 mV, will
be carried out. This research will test a rational, chemical mechanism for redox
tuning in metalloproteins. Many metalloenzymes besides SOD include a solvent
molecule among the metal ion ligands, and as a rule this solvent also hydrogen
bonds with protein residues. Thus, understanding gained as to the magnitude of
redox tuning this can afford, and the extent to which it can be manipulated,
will have general applicability.