* 0129775
* Elementary, Secondary, and Informal Education Conference:  'Museums, Media, and the Public Understanding of Research,' Science Museum of Minnesota, St. Paul, MN, September, 2002
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* David Chittenden, Science Museum of Minnesota
* Standard Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 08/31/2005
* USD 285,327.00

The Science Museum of Minnesota is requesting $279,577, of a total budget of
$339,074, to plan and conduct a four-day international conference exploring
issues, current practices and future directions related to furthering public
understanding of current research in science and technology. The conference will
bring together leading museum professionals, scientific researchers, science
journalists, television producers, web developers and others who are already
engaged in preliminary work for such an effort and who stand to learn from each
other's experiences. The conference will center on the role of museums in
informing the public about research, but will include representatives from other
media and institutions crucial to its success. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific goals of the conference are to:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Explore challenges
and barriers that hinder the development of public understanding of research
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Identify "best practices" and promising models,
tools and technologies for presenting current research to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Develop partnership strategies for creating public
understanding of research program collaborations across the museum, media and
research communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Identify strategies for selecting
significant research stories that are relevant to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Develop funding strategies and operational
approaches that help sustain a consistent public understanding of research
effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be under the direction of David
Chittenden, Vice President for Education at the Science Museum of Minnesota.
Advisors to the project include: Carol Lynn Alpert, Museum of Science, Boston;
John Beatty, Distinguished Teaching Professor, University of Minnesota; Graham
Farmelo, Head of Science Communications, Science Museum of London; Richard
Hudson, Twin Cities Public Television, St. Paul; Ken Keller, Hubert H. Humphrey
Institute of Public Affairs, University of Minnesota; Rob Semper, The
Exploratorium; David Ucko, Koshland Science Center and Science Outreach,
National Academy of Sciences; and Bonnie VanDorn, Executive Director,
Association of Science-Technology Centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;