* 0129571
* Nonlinear Feedback Control of Hybrid Process Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2005
* Panagiotis Christofides, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 03/31/2005
* USD 242,275.00

The objective of this research program is to develop a comprehensive framework
for nonlinear model-based feedback control of multivariable hybrid nonlinear
processes (i.e., processes with combined continuous dynamics and discrete
events). Both lumped and spatially-distributed hybrid systems will be studies.
Lyapunov theory will be employed to produce novel analytical nonlinear
controller designs that deal explicitly with control actuator constraints and
model uncertainty and enforce the desired stability, performance and robustness
specifications in the closed-loop system. The motivation for the research is
provided by: a) the common coupling of continuous process dynamics with discrete
events, b) the abundance of nonlinearities and uncertainties in chemical process
models coupled with the common occurrence of hard constraints on the capacity of
control actuators, c) the lack of practical nonlinear control methods for hybrid
chemical processes that can deal explicitly and simultaneously with
nonlinearities, uncertainty and constraints and d) the increasing need to
improve chemical process operation to reduce product variability and off-spec
production, improve energy efficiency and reduce environmental impact. To
realize the desired objective, the research will focus on the following
projects: a) nonlinear and robust control of multivariable hybrid nonlinear
processes with input constraints, b) output feedback implementation of the
nonlinear and robust controllers using nonlinear state estimators, c) nonlinear
and robust control of spatially-distributed hybrid processes, d) application of
the nonlinear control algorithms to simulated lumped and spatially-distributed
hybrid processes with uncertainty and actuator saturation, and e) development
and experimental application of a real-time integrated measurement/hybrid
feedback control system to a plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD)
reactor. The research will provide fundamental insights into the limitations
imposed by the presence of nonlinearities, uncertainty, constraints and discrete
events on our ability to modify the dynamics of a chemical process, provide
concrete control algorithms that can be readily implemented in practice,
illustrate the application of the control methods and derive tuning guidelines
for the implementation of the controllers, and produce a research monograph on
"nonlinear process control" based on previous and current research of the PI in
this area. The new control algorithms are expected to lead to significant
improvement in the operation and performance of chemical process systems with
combined continuous/discrete dynamics, nonlinearities, uncertainty and
constraints. The development of integrated measurement/control systems for PECVD
processes is expected to reduce spatial non-uniformity of the deposition,
especially as wafer dimensions continue to increase and broaden the use of these
processes in semiconductor manufacturing.