* 0129995
* Sex Chromosome Evolution with Haploid Sex Determination
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2005
* Michael Hood, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 01/31/2005
* USD 258,208.00

An analogy is often drawn between sex (or mating-type) chromosomes in haploid-
mating organisms, such as fungi, and the sex chromosomes in the majority of
plants and animals. However, the mechanisms of divergence, and thus the content
of sex chromosomes, are likely to be very different when mating compatibility is
determined during the haploid stage. In particular, sheltered degeneration of
the Y-chromosome in "higher" diploids is thought to be possible because only the
Y is permanently heterozygous. However, no such asymmetrical sheltering occurs
in haploid-mating organisms, yet they also have sex chromosomes dimorphic for
size. In fungi, this was first observed in the basidiomycete Microbotryum
violaceum. Variation in the size of sex chromosomes of Microbotryum may be
caused by translocations or by incremental insertions of repetitive elements
(for example, transposon accumulation). In this project, sex chromosome-specific
libraries will be screened, using electrophoretically isolated autosomes, for
hybridization patterns that identify translocations. Whether accumulation of
repetitive DNA is a cause of the dimorphism will be determined by sequencing a
large sample of DNA fragments from each sex chromosome. These sequences will be
tested for homology to known genes and for similarity among them. Several
retrotransposon-related sequences on the sex chromosomes of Microbotryum have
already been identified using this approach. The directions and rates of sex
chromosome change will be investigated by reconstructing intra-specific
phylogenies using DNA sequence data from regions completely linked to the mating
type locus. Sex specificity of the chromosome dimorphism will be investigated by
characterizing sex chromosomes from widely divergent samples from Europe and
North America.&lt;br/&gt; Although there have been enormous theoretical and
empirical advances in our understanding of sex chromosomes in plants and
animals, their occurrence has been a long-standing enigma in organisms that mate
as haploids, such as most fungi and mosses. This research, using the fungus
Microbotryum, will test specific genetic hypotheses regarding the composition,
origin, and evolutionary directions of haploid sex chromosomes. This research
will also contribute to understanding variation among members of the same
species for how genetic information is organized within the nucleus. Great
effort is currently being devoted to the construction of complete genome
sequences, and an understanding of genetic variation within species is essential
to interpreting such data, especially when it is associated with particular
chromosomes. In addition, because structural changes in chromosomes are often
implicated as barriers to compatible mating, the study of forces that promote
such variation will increase our understanding of the origins of new species by
reproductive isolation. &lt;br/&gt;