* 0129605
* Raman Lidar Applications in Mesoscale Studies
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2006
* Belay Demoz, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 03/31/2006
* USD 270,076.00

While much progress has been made over the last decade in understanding the
structural characteristics of severe weather systems, many questions remain
unanswered on the critical factors that trigger deep convection. Recent work has
shown that the dryline, a sharp horizontal gradient in moisture and often found
over the south central United States in spring and early summer, creates a
favorable environment for initiation of convection. This mesoscale phenomenon is
significant because it is often linked to the occurrence of severe weather,
which tends to develop along and to the east of the dryline. This is
particularly true during a cold frontal approach, which furnishes a mechanism
for the lifting of the moist air. To date however, there have been very few
detailed studies of the moisture structure and evolution of the
dryline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigators will perform a three
year study to quantify the detailed vertical and horizontal moisture
stratification of the pre-thunderstorm environment and drylines as well as the
potential role of humidity in the development and initiation of convective
storms using the capability of Raman lidar systems. They will use the Raman
lidar to verify theoretical as well as numerical predictions of dryline
characteristics dryline-front interactions and associated convection. This
project relies on acquiring and utilizing Raman lidar observations of water
vapor mixing ratio and aerosol profile data observed between 1994 and 2000
during several field missions at different parts of the U.S.A. Data from the
International H20 Project (IHOP), planned for May-June 2002 in the southern
Great Plains of the United states, and the Water Vapor Intensive Operations
(WVIOP) conducted by the Department of Energy (DOE) Atmospheric Radiation
Measurement (ARM) program, also will be utilized. A combination of analyses of
existing data from Raman lidars, rawinsonde, radars, microwave radiometers, wind
profilers and other conventional data sets and a numerical model will be used to
achieve the objectives of this research. Dynamic, thermodynamic and moisture
structure of convergence zones, frontal surfaces, and drylines as well as the
temporal development of the boundary layer will be analyzed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Areas of focus include the effects of small-scale
variations in the vertical structure of moisture during drylines and cold fronts
on storm initiation and convection and the role of the structure of the mid-
tropospheric layer in storm dynamics and initiation and/or inhibition. The
calculation of convective available potential energy and convective inhibition
as well as simple model simulations of selected case studies to better
understand the role of wind shear in the initiation of convection are
included.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the research should provide a
better understanding of the diurnal characteristics of the dryline, complement
the theoretical predictions of convective initiation by proving or disproving
the predicted quantities and eventually contribute towards improvements in the
forecasting skills of severe weather conditions.