* 0129179
* Molecular Phylogenetics of Neotropical Amaryllidaceae
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Alan Meerow, USDA, Agricultural Research Service, South Atlantic Area
* Interagency Agreement
* James E. Rodman
* 12/31/2005
* USD 70,200.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Meerow of USDA Agricultural Research Service in
Miami, Florida to complete studies on the evolutionary relationships of the
large flowering plant family Amaryllidaceae using DNA sequences and
morphological characters. The family, consisting almost entirely of showy-
flowered plants that grow from bulbs, is highly valued in horticulture. Meerow
is noted internationally as a leading specialist in the family. Previous work by
him and co-workers using both chloroplast and nuclear DNA sequences has
contributed to understanding the relationships of this family to other closely
related groups such as the onion family (Alliaceae). That the family is a
natural unit was confirmed, and geographically based groups of common ancestry
were resolved. The earliest branch in the amaryllis family tree is found in
Africa where the family likely originated. However, three chloroplast DNA
sequence data sets failed to resolve the relationships between two remaining
African groups (or "tribes" in botanical lexicon), a small tribe restricted to
Australasia, and the Eurasian and American genera of the family, the latter two
groups sharing common ancestry. Using a nuclear DNA sequence, Meerow and co-
workers were able to present a highly resolved estimate of the relationships
among the American genera which have resulted in a much more natural
classification. The current work to be funded by NSF has two objectives: 1)
complete a family-wide data matrix of nucleotide sequences of the ndhF
chloroplast gene for all genera of the Amaryllidaceae, with the express purpose
of resolving the relationships of the major lineages, and 2) use sequences of
the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) of 18S-26S nuclear ribosomal DNA to
resolve the Eurasian group of the family, as proved to be so successful for the
American group. The Eurasian group includes the economically important genus
Narcissus, one of the five most popular spring-flowering bulbs in the world. For
the family-wide analysis, gene sequences will be combined with morphological
data. Genomic DNA will be extracted from fresh or silica gel-dried leaf tissue
of approximately 59 species of Amaryllidaceae representing all genera
(chloroplast ndhF), and 20-25 species of the Eurasian group (nuclear ITS), using
standard procedures. Target sequences will be amplified using the polymerase
chain reaction PCR). Both strands of the target DNA sequences will be run on
automated sequencers. DNA sequences will be aligned, and subjected to
phylogenetic analysis and confidence testing using various computer programs. At
the same time, analyses of the Amaryllidaceae using morphological and
cytological characters will be completed. Comparative and combined analyses
should elucidate a robust phylogeny upon which a final, accurate classification
of the Amaryllidaceae can be based. Phylogenetic and taxonomic analyses of the
Amaryllidaceae will improve documentation of biodiversity patterns in the
tropics, facilitate study of biogeographic migrations and regions of endemism,
guide selection of stocks for horticultural improvement, and identify clusters
of related species and genera that may share biosynthetic capabilities, in a
family well-known for producing novel alkaloids, some poisonous to humans, but
others potentially of pharmaceutical interest. As the family is highly valued in
horticulture, especially genera of the Eurasian group, there is more than
passing interest among non-scientists in understanding the evolutionary
relationships of the genera. In the course of conducting this research,
undergraduate students recruited from local area universities will have the
opportunity to become acquainted with techniques of molecular taxonomic analysis
in Meerow's laboratory.

