* 0129793
* Acquisition of a CO2-Laser Fluorination System and a Mass Spectrometer System for Multiple Stable Isotope Analyses
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2005
* Huiming Bao, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 02/28/2005
* USD 235,919.00

EAR-0129793&lt;br/&gt;Bao&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides partial
support (55%) for the acquisition of a CO2-laser fluorination system and an
isotope-ratio mass spectrometer (IRMS) system for multiple stable isotope
analyses (e.g., O, S &amp; N) for geological and environmental samples. These
facilities will be installed and operated in the Department of Geology and
Geophysics at the Louisiana State University (LSU). This acquisition will
greatly improve LSU's existing research infrastructure and enhance current and
planned research capabilities of the LSU geochemistry group. In addition, the
facilities provide excellent science education and training platform for
undergraduate students. The Principal Investigator (PI), Dr. Huiming Bao,
recently joined the Department as an Assistant Professor. The instruments will
be the primary tool for Bao's research programs in multiple isotope
geochemistries of oxygen (all three isotopes: 16O, 17O, &amp; 18O), sulfur (all
4 isotopes: 32S, 33S, 34S, &amp; 36S), and nitrogen (14N &amp; 15N). The
capabilities of these new instruments will be used in research and educational
activities aimed at a better understanding of elemental cycles in the atmosphere
and in surface environments. Immediate research plans include studies of long-
term atmospheric deposition of sulfate and nitrate and their post-depositional
mobility in Antarctic Dry Valley soil systems (in collaborating with Dr.
Marchant at Boston University), oxygen and sulfur isotopic compositions of
Archean sulfide and sulfate deposits in South Africa, and sulfate leached from
recent and ancient volcanic ashes, all of which will benefit from the
availability of a CO2-laser fluorination system and an IRMS that can offer
efficient off-line/on-line gas extractions and high-precision multiple isotopic
analyses with minimal sample size. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;