* 0129088
* Collaborative Research:  ITR/AP - An Integrated Algorithm for Heat Conduction from Nano- too Macroscale
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Gang Chen, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Alfonso Ortega
* 08/31/2004
* USD 206,956.00

The goal of our project is to develop a novel integrated engineering simulation
tool for heat conduction in microelectronic and microphotonic components -
microscale systems with nanoscale features. The global impact of this work will
be to quantify, tabulate and disseminate phonon properties, which are as
important for heat conduction in these devices as properties such as emissivity
and extinction coefficient for thermal radiation in the classical regime. Novel
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations will be used to quantify and parameterize
phonon relaxation times and phonon-interface phenomena. Given the phonon data
obtained through MD simulations, a new ballistic-diffusive formulation of the
Boltzmann equation will enable the solution of realistically complex thermal
problems from nano- to macroscales. A modular design of our implementation will
facilitate an eventual integration into design software.

The results from the projects will be applied for the development of Information
technology systems. These are constructed from devices and components with
characteristic length scales ranging from nanometers to micrometers, such as
semiconductor lasers and heterojunction bipolar transistors used in
telecommunication systems. Currently, the thermal design of such micro- and
nanoscale components is major challenge because Fourier's law fails at these
scales due to the long mean free path of phonons (the dominant heat carriers in
most semiconductor devices) and there exists no practical alternative.

Revised Title: ITR: Collaborative Research on the Development of an Integrated
Algorithm for Heat Conduction form Nano- to Macroscale