* 0129190
* A General Method for the Design of Nanostructured Metal Oxides and Hybrid Composites
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Gustavo Larsen, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Glenn L. Schrader
* 02/29/2004
* USD 67,400.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: A General Method for
the Design of Nanostructured Metal Oxides and Hybrid
Composites&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: CTS-0129190&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Gustavo Larsen&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Nebraska&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this proposal is to develop electrohydrodynamic and chemical
methods for fabricating nanoscale spheroidal particles and filaments from
transition metals and oxides. Sol-gel chemistry in conjunction with electrically
driven liquid jets and droplets will be used to make uniform metal and hybrid
organic-inorganic particles and fibrous deposits. Metal alkoxides of Ti, V, Si,
and Al will be used in the presence of solvent mixtures to effect fiber and
particle formation at electrically driven jets. The fabrication of nanoscale
glassy fibers sheathed with an organic resin will be attempted. The design of
more complex structures using a novel concentric-tube feed is planned. Basic
characterization will be performed using electron microscopy, diffuse
reflectance Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, and temperature-programmed
decomposition. An international collaboration with scientists from Spain will be
established. The Spanish group has expertise in electrospray formation and will
assist in the design and modeling of this process. An industrial partner will
provide student support and equipment. The materials produced by these methods
possess high surface-to-volume ratios and have potential for use as catalysis
and sorbents. &lt;br/&gt;