* 0129018
* ABR: Response to Crowding and Vegetation Shade in Impatiens capensis: Genetic Basis and Fitness Consequences
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2006
* Johanna Schmitt, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 01/31/2006
* USD 335,625.00

Many plant species exhibit characteristic morphological and physiological
responses to crowding and vegetation shade. This "shade avoidance" response is
cued by a reduction in the ratio of red to far-red wavelengths (R:FR) in light
transmitted through or reflected from green vegetation. This R:FR signal is
perceived by light-sensing molecules known as phytochromes. Prior research from
this project has demonstrated that phytochrome-mediated stem elongation
increases lifetime reproduction of the native annual Impatiens capensis
(jewelweed or touch-me-not) in dense stands, but plants induced to display the
shade avoidance response at low density suffer reduced fitness relative to non-
elongated plants. The present study will examine genetic variation among inbred
lines in expression of shade avoidance traits across a range of densities, and
assess the contribution of phytochrome-mediated developmental pathways to this
variation. In addition, natural selection on shade avoidance traits will be
measured in the field across a range of densities, in order to predict how shade
avoidance responses will evolve in variable density environments. The results of
this project will provide important information about the genetics and evolution
of phytochrome-mediated shade avoidance responses in natural plant populations,
and will provide an ecological and evolutionary context for current research on
the molecular, genetic, developmental, and physiological mechanisms underlying
plant responses to light. It will also help to inform selection strategies for
crop improvement and provide an ecological context for recent proposals to
increase yield by genetically engineering crops in which shade avoidance
responses are blocked.