* 0129874
* Theoretical and Empirical Studies of Seed and Pollen Dispersal in Tropical Trees
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2005
* Stephen Hubbell, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 01/31/2005
* USD 312,000.00

There is a considerable void of data on the frequency, patterns, and mechanisms
of seed and pollen dispersal within and among natural plant populations. The
goal of the research is to integrate empirical and theoretical approaches to the
measurement dispersal over large distances. The project uses molecular genetic
markers, a large mapped tropical forest plot in Panama, and several long-term
environmental data sets to address fundamental questions about the patterns,
processes, and mechanisms of seed and pollen dispersal in five tropical tree
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As humans continue to alter and fragment tropical
forest landscapes, knowledge of those processes that regulate populations and
maintain diverse communities is critical for predicting how these populations
will respond in the future. Chief among the population processes that will
determine the ecological and genetic response over time and space is dispersal.
To our knowledge, this study is among the first and most comprehensive attempts
to obtain direct measurements of both seed and pollen dispersal distances using
genetic techniques. This study will directly inform conservationists and land
managers as to the appropriate size of habitat required to maintain populations
of tropical trees in light of the spatial extent of seed and pollen
movement.&lt;br/&gt;