* 0129731
* Bio-QuBIC:  Optimized Bacteriorhodopsin Proteins for Photonic and Holographic Memory Storage
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2001,11/30/2004
* Robert Birge, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 11/30/2004
* USD 400,000.00

EIA-0129731&lt;br/&gt;Robert R. Birge&lt;br/&gt;Syracuse
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Optimized Bacteriorhodopsin Proteins for
Photonic and HolographicMemory Storage&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The protein
bacteriorhodopsin is being optimized for bioelectronic and photonic applications
through site directed mutagenesis, random mutagenesis and directed evolution.
The native protein has many characteristics that make it a nearly optimal
photonic material, but further optimization is necessary to achieve competitive
performance in computer applications. The goal is to generate protein variants
that are optimized for holographic associative memories and large scale
volumetric memories. The former memory system is based on Fourier-transform
holography, and the protein will be optimized for thermal stability, quantum
efficiency and holographic efficiency. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The large scale
volumetric memory is based on a branching reaction out of the main photocycle.
The protein is being optimized for this application by increasing thermal
stability, branching efficiency and long-term stability of the branched
photoproduct. Genetic engineering is the best method for achieving all three
goals simultaneously, and directed evolution is being studied as one possible
method of rapidly achieving these goals simultaneously. This is a collaborative
project involving researchers at the W. M. Keck Center for Molecular Electronics
at Syracuse University and molecular biologists at the University of
Connecticut.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;