* 0129464
* Improved Estimates Of Turbulence From Mesosphere-Stratosphere-Troposphere (MST) Radars
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Gregory Nastrom, St. Cloud State University
* Continuing grant
* Andrew G. Detwiler
* 12/31/2006
* USD 147,700.00

Doppler spectra measured by MST (mesosphere-stratosphere-troposphere) radars are
broadened by turbulent velocity fluctuations of the scattering elements in the
beam. Measuring the spectral spread is therefore one of the ways of using MST
radar to estimate the intensity of turbulence. Because the beams of such radars
are fairly broad (typically several degrees) there are additional contributions
to the Doppler spread caused by the cross-beam wind (so-called beam broadening)
and by shear of the radial wind component in the direction of the beam axis.
Recent studies indicate that the methods currently used to correct for these
effects are inaccurate. Such methods are usually based on the assumption that
the contributing volume is uniformly filled with turbulence. In fact, the
turbulence is often confined to one or more horizontal layers that are thinner
than the vertical extent of the contributing volume. Corrections based on the
assumption of a filled beam are then generally too large.

The present award supports development of a new experimental technique that will
enable improved radar estimates of turbulence. Called the dual-beamwidth
technique, it has the advantage of obtaining the turbulence intensity directly,
without the need for the usual corrections to the Doppler spectral width. The
assumption underlying the method is that the (generally unknown) contribution of
beam broadening to the Doppler spread is proportional to the beamwidth.
Simultaneous measurements at the same range with two beamwidths, which is
possible with advanced MST radars such as those in Japan and India, then make it
possible to measure the contribution of beam-broadening to the total Doppler
spread and to compensate for it in estimating the remaining spread due to
turbulence. The turbulence intensities determined this way will be compared with
those estimated from a single beam employing the concept of an "effective
beamwidth," which is less than the geometric beamwidth to allow for the limited
vertical extent of the turbulent layers. If the method employing a single
effective beamwidth is proven accurate, it will then be applied to recompute
turbulence intensities for radar data from Japan and White Sands, New Mexico,
that have already been reported in the literature.