* 0129792
* RCN: Resource Discovery Initiative for Field Stations
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2007
* William Michener, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Francoise J. Lamblin
* 06/30/2007
* USD 528,397.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Michener at University of New Mexico to develop
the informatics framework that can facilitate storage, discovery, and access to
the strategic environmental information resources that are collectively held at
North American biological field stations. Project objectives will be
accomplished through two integrated networking activities: (1) a research focus
that encompasses five inter-related resource discovery components and (2) an
intensive training component that provides field station personnel with a solid
foundation in the computational and informatics skills that are critical for
developing, archiving, managing, and communicating data and information
resources. In so doing, communication, discovery and exchange of data and
information will be facilitated among scientists and students, integration and
synthesis in field biology will be enabled, and the incipient value of the
enormous data resources at biological field stations can begin to be realized.

Research activities include the development of five databases that will support
discovery of biological data and information resources at field stations. In
particular, the research team will: (1) establish a North American Field Station
Data Registry and Repository; (2) initiate a Thesaurus for Field Biology; (3)
develop a Site Characteristics Database for North American Field Stations; (4)
create a Bibliography of North American Field Station Publications; and (5)
develop a WWW-accessible Database of Field Station QA/QC and Standard Methods.
The team of investigators will coordinate development of the databases in
conjunction with representatives of the Organization of Biological Field
Stations, who comprise the project steering committee. In addition, the
investigative team will coordinate the development of educational activities for
field station personnel. These field station personnel will also contribute to
database development activities. Education will principally focus on annual
intensive (2-week) training workshops in ecological informatics that are
developed around a series of course modules. Where appropriate, training modules
will be made available on a web site to broaden the potential audience
throughout the community of potential users.

Biological field stations represent the premier facilities in North America
where the most pressing environmental challenges facing science and society can
be directly confronted and understood through research and education. These
challenges include maintenance of biodiversity, ecological sustainability,
environmental forecasting, restoration and rehabilitation of damaged ecosystems,
the outbreak and spread of diseases and control of invasive species. Research
Coordination Network activities supported in this project will enable discovery
of the critical information resources that are held at biological field
stations. These resources will facilitate synthesis in ecology-leading to a
better understanding of our natural environment, sound natural resources
management, and a more sustainable quality of life. The project management plan
and the composition of the core research team and steering committee are
designed to benefit the largest possible number of biological field stations in
North America and their associated field biologists and students, to amplify
research results to the international community, to promote an interdisciplinary
perspective in field biology, and to enhance workforce diversity.