* 0129446
* Collaborative Research:  Generic Relationships within Subfamily Bromelioideae (Bromeliaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2006
* Gregory Brown, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Juan Carlos Morales
* 01/31/2006
* USD 281,524.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Brown at the University of Wyoming and Dr. Evans
at Hope College to examine evolutionary relationships among members of the
tropical plant family Bromeliaceae subfamily Bromelioideae. The Bromelioideae,
with 30 genera and about 750 species, is the most poorly understood subfamily in
Bromeliaceae. Almost a third of the species in subfamily Bromelioideae are
represented by the genus Aechmea, an extremely variable, and almost certainly
artificial genus. Several genera in Bromelioideae differ from Aechmea by only
one or two characters, and the morphological boundaries among genera are very
poorly defined. Aechmea forms the core of a complex of as many as 20
Bromelioideae genera for which evolutionary relationships and systematics are in
complete disarray. The primary goal of this project is to utilize morphological
and molecular (DNA sequence) data to examine relationships within Bromelioideae,
with an emphasis on Aechmea and closely related genera. Morphological
information from individual plants will be collected during intensive field
studies. Because floral characteristics are poorly preserved in this family
during the normal pressing and drying process, observation of live and/or liquid
preserved material is critical for successful phylogenetic analysis.
Phylogenetic analyses using maximum-parsimony methods will be conducted on the
taxon by character data matrices produced in this intensive reanalysis of
morphology. DNA sequence data from three non-coding regions (two chloroplast
intergenic spacers, psbA-trnH and trnL-trnF, and nuclear ribosomal internal
transcribed spacer regions) will be collected from the same individuals used for
morphological studies. Phylogenetic analyses of the molecular data will provide
an independent assessment of the morphological phylogenies as well as a tool to
examine the evolution of specific morphological characters. Integration of
multiple data sets is currently an area of much discussion and debate in
systematics, and several methods for comparing and integrating the molecular and
morphological data will be explored. The proposed research will contribute
significanly to several broader sceintific and educational goals, as follows: 1)
It represents the first attempt to develop hypotheses of phylogenetic
relationships within Bromeliaceae subfamily Bromelioideae from within an
explicit phylogenetic paradigm. 2) It will make a significant contribution to
biodiversity documentation for an ecologically important taxon (Bromelioideae)
in one of the most endangered, yet biotically diverse biomes on Earth, the
Atlantic Forest Biome of Brazil. 3) Ecologically, tank-forming bromeliads, which
include most members of Bromelioideae, are keystone species in biodiversity
maintenance. They are an important resource for free-water in the canopy, and
provide feeding sites, breeding sites, and habitat for many diverse organisms
that represent all Kingdoms of life. The resulting phylogenetic hypotheses will
be important to biologists studying diversification, biogeography, and possible
co-evolutionary patterns of any of the organisms that utilize bromeliad tanks.
4) Both U.S. and Brazilian students will be trained in modern systematic
practice and theory. 5) The project will improve professional botanical
systematics research and teaching infrastructure at an important Brazilian
university. 6) DNA samples and sequences collected will be made available to
other researchers. 7) The project will help to stimulate future collaborative
U.S. - Brazil systematic and biodiversity-related research and education.