* 0129374
* Fine-scale Description of Shallow Atmospheric Boundaries during International Water Vapor Project (IHOP)
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Bart Geerts, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 12/31/2005
* USD 350,462.00

The International Water Vapor (H2O) Project (IHOP) is a large multi-agency,
multi-investigator project that focuses on the measurement of water vapor and
water vapor variability. The goal of the project is to improve understanding of
convective initiation and to increase short-term precipitation forecast skills.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher will employ the Wyoming Cloud Radar system
(WCR), in situ data from the University of Wyoming King Air research aircraft
(UWYKA), and ancillary IHOP data to describe in unprecedented detail, the
vertical structure and evolution of radar "fine-lines", such as outflow
boundaries and drylines, and to interpret their ability to trigger deep
convection. The UWYKA is equipped with an array of atmospheric sensors to
measure temperature, humidity, winds, and their fluxes, as well as cloud and
radiation probes. The combination of UWYKA and WCR data along stepped traverses
will allow (a) a description of the kinematic and thermodynamic vertical
structure of shallow convergence zones; and (b) an estimation of the variation
of the boundary layer precipitable water, convection parameters, and moisture
convergence across fine-lines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key hypotheses to be
tested are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. The WCR data are sufficiently sensitive and
detailed to describe various details of boundary layer
structures&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. The WCR data allow a detailed and accurate
description of the airflow in vertical sections across radar-detected fine-
lines&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Analysis of combined WCR, UWYKA, and ancillary
IHOP data, in particular DIAL water vapor profiles will show that the
variability of precipitable water in a 'well-mixed' convective boundary layer is
significant. &lt;br/&gt;