* 0129555
* SGER:  New Scales of Measuring Organic Carbon Diagenesis in Marine Sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2001,03/31/2003
* William Berelson, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Simone Metz
* 03/31/2003
* USD 59,056.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0129555&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A principal
investigator from the University of Southern California will take advantage of
two cutting-edge technologies for an investigation of benthic organic carbon
cycling. Initially, the PI will create oxygen profiles utilizing genetically
engineered bacteria (Shewanella sp.) which can be modified to perform carbon
oxidation using either oxygen, or manganese oxide, or any combination of
electron acceptors. Using these bacteria will allow the PI to construct oxygen
profiles with control over organic substrate type/distribution, oxidant
availability/distribution and bacterial community abundance/distribution. The
goal of this research is to provide a direct relationship between solute
profiles observed in sediments and the type and abundance of bacteria needed to
carry out the redox reactions to yield a given profile. In addition, the PI also
will use a profiling X-ray fluorescence scanner in collaboration with a
scientist from Germany, to determine Fe, Ca, Mn and Ti in laminated sediments
from low-oxygen-sites off Southern California and Mexico at 2-3 mm intervals or
3-6 years of resolution. The objective of this study is to obtain high
resolution images of changes in solid phase Fe, Mn and Ti and carbonate as a
function of time to identify diagenetic fronts and interpret changes in ocean
productivity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;