* 0129376
* Phylogenetic Relationships in Dioscorea, The True Yams
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2006
* Geeta Bharathan, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Juan Carlos Morales
* 01/31/2006
* USD 212,994.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to Geeta Bharathan at
SUNY at Stony Brook to study the evolutionary relationships of Dioscorea (the
true yams). Dioscorea is a large, economically important monocot genus that
contains about 600 species of, mostly tropical, vines that grow in a range of
habitats. Despite its traditional value as a tuber and medicinal crop (and,
recently, in the pharmaceutical industry) the taxonomy of Dioscorea is in a
mess. While a statement, over a 100 years ago, by the famous taxonomist, Hooker,
that "...the species of Dioscorea are in a state of indescribable confusion" is
slowly being remedied through heroic efforts by a great many alpha-taxonomists,
the question of higher level relationships is a thorny one that traditional
morphological approaches alone may not be able to resolve. &lt;br/&gt;In this
project species of Dioscorea across the world will be sampled to study variation
in molecules (DNA sequences of three genes) and morphology (observations on
field and herbarium collections). Molecular sequences will be analyzed to
formulate hypotheses of evolutionary relationships and to construct a systematic
framework for the group. This will help to achieve several goals: 1) Evaluation
of previous classifications to facilitate taxonomic revisions; 2) Evaluation of
the evolutionary basis for particular subgroups (e.g., the one that includes the
three North American species) to help understand the historical origins and
biogeographical spread of this large genus; 3) Evaluation of morphological
traits to improve their use in classification of the genus; 4) Compilation of a
morphological data set for phylogenetic analysis, to be done in collaboration
with Dioscorea scientists across the world.&lt;br/&gt;The wider significance of
the achievement of the above objective has both scientific and societal aspects.
The project would generate a rigorous systematic framework that then can be used
to study various aspects of this important tropical crop: evolution of
vegetative form and development (including leaf form and tuber-formation),
biogeographical patterns of diversification, and history of domestication. All
these would contribute to future uses and improvement of the crop. The project
would enable training of students (graduate and undergraduate) in field and
laboratory methods including morphology, while at the same time exposing them to
important international issues involved in the collection and utilization of
germplasm from other nations. The project has the explicit involvement of a
Mexican collaborator for plant collection and mapping using GIS, and a course on
phylogenetics to be taught in Mexico by the PI. All these activities will
contribute to building 1) a scientific base of knowledge on an important, but
understudied, tropical crop, 2) scientific skills and infrastructure at the
national and international levels, and 3) international collaboration and
scientific exchange.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;