* 0129383
* LTREB:  Five Decades of Biogeochemical Change in Soils and Ecosystems of an Old-Field Forest
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Daniel Richter, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 12/31/2006
* USD 235,578.00

Richter&lt;br/&gt;0129383&lt;br/&gt;Research at the Calhoun Experimental Forest
has investigated rates and processes of soil biogeochemical change over four
decades of forest-ecosystem development. From this work it is clear that soils
are dynamic components of ecosystems remarkably responsive to ecosystem change.
Continuation of this study by LTREB will allow continued testing of hypotheses
and objectives that together will result in critical continuity for research
development at this site. The three hypotheses concern: (1) the depletability
and resupply of soil micronutrients over four decades of forest development, (2)
soil SO4 and whether SO4 is decreasing in the last two decades in a pattern
indicative of reduced air-pollution inputs, and (3) recent changes in soil and
whole-ecosystem sequestration of C 14C, and N. Making this particularly
compelling is the recent disturbance by bark beetles, ice and wind damage which
together have decreased leaf area by as much as 50%, increasing litterfall
inputs to the forest floor, and greatly accelerating growth of understory
hardwoods. Because the Calhoun archive has nearly all soil samples collected
since 1962, investigators have the ability to conduct retrospective analyses on
soil and ecosystem biochemical change. The project also includes a program of
educational outreach with undergraduate and high school science students, and
data management improvements to expand the use of the Calhoun data for current
and future researchers. &lt;br/&gt;