* 0129682
* Pervasive Information Community Organization (PICO): A Framework for Internet Services of the Future
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Sajal Das, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Jie Wu
* 05/31/2006
* USD 438,861.00

Pervasive Information Communities Organization (PICO) is a framework
to&lt;br/&gt;create mission-oriented dynamic communities of software agents that
perform tasks&lt;br/&gt;on behalf of users and devices. PICO provides automated
continual services to&lt;br/&gt;improve quality of life, and to utilize
resources efficiently by enhancing&lt;br/&gt;existing Internet services. PICO
enabled Internet will be used effectively&lt;br/&gt;in many dynamically changing
time-critical applications that demand&lt;br/&gt;proactive real-time
collaborations among physical devices, software agents,&lt;br/&gt;and personnel
in heterogeneous environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main components of PICO
are software entities, called delegents&lt;br/&gt;(intelligent delegates) and
hardware entities, called camileuns (connected,&lt;br/&gt;adaptive, mobile,
intelligent, learned, efficient, ubiquitous nodes).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
novel features of PICO include: i) creation of mission-oriented
dynamic&lt;br/&gt;communities of software agents, ii) QoS management for just-
in-time&lt;br/&gt;communication and proactive collaboration among communities,
and iii)&lt;br/&gt;adaptability to dynamic environments through context-
and&lt;br/&gt;location-awareness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a pervasive computing
paradigm, PICO has applications in many domains&lt;br/&gt;such as telemedicine,
the military, crisis management, and many day-to-day&lt;br/&gt;activities. In
this project the researchers focus on the design and development of
PICO,&lt;br/&gt;and investigate its applicability as a platform for
distributed&lt;br/&gt;collaborations. Through telemedicine applications, the
researchers demonstrate the full&lt;br/&gt;potential of PICO as an Internet
enhancement framework that is not only&lt;br/&gt;unique, simple, and versatile,
but can also work with current and future&lt;br/&gt;hardware/software tools.
Specifically, the proposed tasks include: formal&lt;br/&gt;specifications,
design, and development of PICO architecture; requirements&lt;br/&gt;analysis
for telemedicine scenario; QoS and resource management; PICO&lt;br/&gt;prototype
development; and validation, performance evaluation and&lt;br/&gt;benchmarking.
PICO-enabled pervasive environments will revolutionize the way&lt;br/&gt;the
Internet is being used, enhance quality of life and promote user-
centric&lt;br/&gt;applications. The PICO project will result in the training of
students in&lt;br/&gt;pervasive computing, high quality masters and doctoral
theses, and transfer&lt;br/&gt;of technology to health care providers,
professionals and other researchers.&lt;br/&gt;