* 0129286
* U.S.-France Dissertation Enhancement: Variations in Dissociation Energies and Rates for Multiple NO2
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Mark Thiemens, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 02/29/2004
* USD 15,000.00

0129286&lt;br/&gt;Thiemens&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This two-year award for a
dissertation enhancement program in atmospheric chemistry is part of a US-France
collaboration between the University of California, San Diego, and research
group at the University Joseph Fourier in Grenoble, France. Greg Michalski, a
graduate student of Mark H. Thiemens, will carry out spectroscopic studies under
the supervision of Remy Jost at the Physical Spectrometry Laboratory in
Grenoble. The objectives of the collaboration are investigations of mass
independent fractionation (MIF) mechanisms using spectroscopic analysis of NO2
isotopomers. The collaboration requires the synthesis of symmetric and
asymmetric isotopomers of NO2. Mr. Michalski will carry out the spectroscopy on
the isotopomers substituting the central nitrogen atom with isotopes with
integer and half-nuclear spins. Probing states below the dissociation threshold
will be done using Cavity Ringdown Spectroscopy. Mr. Michalski will also be
trained to operate the French laser systems and the expansion jet using standard
NO2. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The US team brings to this collaboration expertise in
isotopomer synthesis. This is complemented by French expertise in spectroscopic
measurements. The resulting data will provide a basis for a complete and
quantitative theory to explain MIF in planetary atmospheres, the geologic record
and in meteorites. The collaboration contributes as well to research and
education infrastructure. The graduate student will benefit through advanced
training on specialized equipment in France and participation in an
international team effort.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award represents the US
side of parallel proposals to the NSF and the CNRS. NSF will cover travel funds
and living expenses for the US graduate student. The CNRS will support visits by
French researchers and students to the United States. &lt;br/&gt;