* 0129944
* Folate Synthesis, Catabolism, and Engineering in Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2005
* Andrew Hanson, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 01/31/2005
* USD 382,382.00

Folates are essential cofactors for one-carbon transfer reactions in all
organisms. Unlike plants and microorganisms, humans cannot synthesize folates
and so require them in the diet. A lack of folates is the world's most common
nutrient deficiency and has grave consequences that include neural tube defects
in infants and vascular disease in adults. Since plant foods are the single
largest source of folates in human diets, enhancing plant folate content by
metabolic engineering is an appealing way to improve human nutrition worldwide.
At present too little is known about folate synthesis, catabolism, and
regulation in plants to undertake the rational engineering of folate levels.
This research addresses the missing basic biochemical knowledge and will take
the first steps towards engineering itself. &lt;br/&gt;Of the nine enzymes
specific to folate synthesis, only three have been cloned from plants. It is
therefore planned to clone the other six enzymes by combining genomic approaches
and functional complementation, and to biochemically characterize the
recombinant proteins. Genomic sequence data indicate that some of these enzymes
differ so strikingly in structure from their counterparts in other organisms
that they are likely to have novel properties. &lt;br/&gt;The engineering work
will explore the extent to which flux in the whole folate pathway is regulated
via the committing enzymes of its pterin and p-aminobenzoate branches. These
enzymes will be overexpressed singly and together, relying primarily upon non-
plant enzymes that are expected to be insensitive to end-product inhibition. A
second engineering approach will seek to divert folates towards overaccumulation
in a stable form (5-formyltetrahydrofolate) by using antisense RNA to block
recycling of this compound. Folates and pathway intermediates in engineered
plants will be quantified by HPLC, and pathway flux will be measured using
radiolabeled precursors. Folate catabolism will also be investigated using
radiolabeled substrates to establish the degradative reactions that occur and
the rate at which the folate pool turns over.&lt;br/&gt;Tomato will be used for
both the cloning and the engineering work, because: (a) Fruits have lower folate
contents than leaves, showing that enhancement is in principle possible. (b)
Folates are subject to huge losses during cooking, making fruits and fruit
juices an efficient vehicle to deliver folates because they are consumed fresh.
(c) Tomato is readily transformable and is a major world crop. It is also
possible that the tomato fruit will tolerate unphysiologically high folate
levels because it is an organ programmed to die.&lt;br/&gt;