* 0129712
* Development of an Undergraduate Minor Concentration in Nuclear Fission Power Engineering (EEC-Small Grants for Exploratory Research)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* William Martin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 08/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

A planning grant (SGER) is sought to develop a national curriculum in nuclear
fission power engineering that would serve as a certificate-based, minor
concentration for undergraduate students majoring in traditional engineering
degree programs. With the renewed interest in nuclear power as a key component
of the nations energy portfolio, there is growing concern about the availability
of engineers trained in nuclear technology in view of the very significant
erosion in university nuclear engineering programs and facilities over the past
two decades. Even with a rapid infusion of new resources, the time required to
rebuild the&lt;br/&gt;necessary faculties and facilities and stimulate student
interest makes it highly unlikely that conventional nuclear engineering programs
can provide a flow of graduates adequate to meet the near-term needs of industry
and the federal government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose to form a team of
faculty members drawn from the leading nuclear engineering programs in the
nation to develop a minor concentration in nuclear fission power engineering
that colleges and universities could offer to students enrolled in conventional
undergraduate engineering degree programs (e.g., mechanical engineering,
electrical engineering, chemical engineering, industrial engineering, materials
science and engineering, and computer engineering). This effort would augment
nuclear engineering graduates in the near-term and supplement the growth of
nuclear engineering majors in the long-term. This&lt;br/&gt;multiple-course
nuclear power curriculum would include a summer practicum involving extensive
laboratory experience (perhaps at a regional university reactor facility or
national laboratory) taken between the junior and senior years of the
undergraduate major. This proposed nuclear-power minor curriculum would be
supported by extensive computer and network resources,&lt;br/&gt;including
nuclear code simulation packages, web portals, and technology enhanced learning
for on-campus and off-campus distance education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We believe
that such a program has the potential for rapidly expanding the production of
engineers and scientists capable of contributing to our nations nuclear energy
programs since it would draw from the large cadre of engineering and science
majors rather than the small enrollments of nuclear engineering degree programs.
In fact, industry has long expressed interest in hiring nuclear engineers more
broadly trained in general engineering majors such as mechanical engineering,
electrical engineering, and computer engineering. Furthermore, this approach is
particularly attractive to universities since it would allow them to respond to
growing national needs in nuclear energy without the necessity of major
expansion of existing&lt;br/&gt;nuclear engineering faculty or facilities
(unlikely in the current budget climate in any event). The program would be
designed to be highly transportable, and since both the content and support of
the proposed program would be provided by a team of faculty members drawn from
leading nuclear engineering programs across the nation, individual institutions
would not have to commit additional resources to build new capabilities. In
particular, this effort would intends to produce teaching tools such as course
resources, web-based lectures, and software simulations that could be used at
institutions that do not have access to nuclear engineering
faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Moreover, this effort could serve as a useful
model in engineering education for addressing the need for engineers trained in
other highly specialized areas such as integrated manufacturing, nanotechnology,
quantum engineering, and biotechnology. An undergraduate minor concentration
would allow students to prepare for careers in these fields without sacrificing
the broader educational experience (and market opportunities) provided by a more
conventional degree program. Furthermore, by developing a curriculum and
supporting materials for a minor concentration using a team of national leaders
in the given specialty, colleges and universities could offer such specialized
curricula without significant additional investments in&lt;br/&gt;new faculty
and facilities. In fact, the model we propose may well represent the future of
engineering education as technical knowledge continues to fragment into
subdisciplinary specialties and universities face growing constraints on
resources for&lt;br/&gt;faculty and
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;