* 0129527
* Quanta : A Quality of Service and Adaptive Networking Toolkit for Supporting Advanced Collaborative Environments over Optical Networks
* CSE,OAC
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2006
* Jason Leigh, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Gatchell
* 01/31/2006
* USD 567,000.00

QUANTA is a toolkit for supporting TeraNode applications over
optical&lt;br/&gt;networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Getting terascale collaborative
applications to work optimally on a high&lt;br/&gt;speed optical network is not
as simple as connecting ones computer to the&lt;br/&gt;Internet. Today's
protocol stacks and scientific applications cannot and do&lt;br/&gt;not know how
to utilize this extreme level of bandwidth even when it is&lt;br/&gt;available.
We intend to address this problem with Quanta, a cross-
platform&lt;br/&gt;adaptive networking toolkit for supporting the extraordinary
networking&lt;br/&gt;requirements of terascale collaborative applications.
Quanta will consist of&lt;br/&gt;a collection of novel networking protocols that
are designed for handling a&lt;br/&gt;wide variety of extremely high bandwidth
application traffic flows; and a&lt;br/&gt;Quality of Service (QoS) architecture
to flexibly control these protocols&lt;br/&gt;and support electronic and optical
QoS mechanisms such as Generalized Multi&lt;br/&gt;Protocol Label/Lambda
Switching (GMPLS). The goal is to provide an easy to&lt;br/&gt;use system that
will allow programmers to specify the data transfer&lt;br/&gt;characteristics of
their application at a high level, and let Quanta&lt;br/&gt;transparently
translate these requirements into the appropriate
transmission&lt;br/&gt;protocol and network QoS services.&lt;br/&gt;