* 0129242
* Collaborative Research: Phylogeny and Montane Species Richness in Plethodontid Salamanders
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2006
* Paul Chippindale, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 01/31/2006
* USD 150,000.00

The investigators will reconstruct the phylogeny of plethodontid salamanders
using morphological and molecular data and then use the phylogeny to explore how
species diversity changes with elevation, and the evolutionary reasons for
patterns of species richness. Plethodontidae is the largest family of
salamanders, containing about two-thirds of all 460+ species of salamanders.
Plethodontids are possibly the most abundant vertebrates in eastern North
America and are the focus of research by dozens of scientists in many diverse
fields of biology (e.g., ecology, behavior, morphology, evolution, development).
Many (if not most) of these studies depend critically on having a robust
phylogenetic framework. However, higher-level relationships among plethodontids
have never been the subject of a comprehensive study using modern methods. In a
three-year collaborative study, the PIs will reconstruct the phylogeny of 112
species of plethodontid salamanders (plus outgroups representing five other
families) using morphological characters and DNA sequences from two
mitochondrial genes and one nuclear gene. The phylogeny will be used to explore
how and why species diversity changes with elevation, using the unusually rich
salamander fauna of the Appalachian Mountains as a model system. Many groups of
organisms exhibit increased species diversity in montane areas relative to
lowland areas, a widespread pattern that remains poorly explained. It is
suggested herein that this pattern results from increased speciation in montane
regions caused by the disjunctive nature of montane habitats and the elevational
habitat specificity of highland species. Three key predictions of this model
will be tested using phylogenetic methods. &lt;br/&gt; The study will provide
the first phylogeny of plethodontid salamanders based on a rigorous analysis of
morphological and molecular data. The phylogeny will be critical to dozens of
researchers who use plethodontids as a model system in studies of ecology,
behavior, evolution, development, and other areas of biology. The study will
also be the first to address elevational patterns of species richness from a
phylogenetic perspective. These analyses of montane species richness should have
important implications for the fields of ecology, evolution, biogeography, and
conservation biology. For example, the analyses of elevational specificity (how
narrowly adapted a species is to a given elevational range and its associated
climate) may be important for predicting the persistence or extinction of
montane species in relation to global warming or other changes in climate. The
study will provide training for undergraduate and graduate students and a
postdoctoral fellow in molecular techniques and in integrated analyses of
phylogeny, ecology, and evolution. &lt;br/&gt;