* 0129656
* Elementary, Secondary and Informal Education:  Science InSight -- A Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER)
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2002
* Beth Hoppe, Educational Broadcasting Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 08/31/2002
* USD 100,000.00

The Educational Broadcasting Corporation (WNET) is researching and testing an
experimental, short format television broadcast and Web project entitled,
"Science InSight." The goal of this experimental research is to determine if
short-format television segments can successfully increase Americans'
understanding of and interest in new research in science and technology and, if
they can, which of several possible formats is likely to be most successful.
During this research and development phase, WNET will test the viability of the
project model and develop and refine the model for use in a selected group of
media venues such as the forthcoming PBS weekly public affairs program, "Public
Square." The specific activities to be undertaken in the research phase
include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;assembling an expert board of up to six advisors
with expertise in science, science journalism and
media;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;producing three experimental, short-format, "program
concept" video segments of varying lengths for use as science information pieces
in other media programs;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;conducting formal and informal
testing and evaluation of these test formats for appeal, credibility, clarity,
and comprehensibility of style and content; and
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;identifying additional key potential distribution partners
from television media, print, Web and science centers
outlets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;