* 0129922
* An Investigation into the Natural History of the Perimenopause in a Sample of American Women
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Wenda Trevathan, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 08/31/2003
* USD 8,515.00

Anthropologists have long been interested in the life histories of women as they
are embedded in culture and in understanding the social and biological processes
underlying lifespan transitions such as puberty, birth, and menopause. The goal
of this project is to better understand the natural history and daily
experiences of the menopause transition in contemporary American women. Between
1992 and 1998, 59 women, aged 45 to 50 at entry into the study, kept records of
biological, psychological, and social events and experiences for one to five
years. Unlike most previous studies of the perimenopause, which were cross-
sectional or relied upon infrequent contact and relatively few measurements, the
present study used daily checklists of events (e.g., stressors, exercise, sexual
experiences, physical symptoms) and mood ratings, along with standardized
psychosocial questionnaires and personal narratives, to obtain a full
description of the experience and meaning of the menopause transition. This
fine-grained information will allow the exploration of changes, processes, and
interrelationships among factors that vary on a daily or weekly time scale, as
well as the examination of processes that take place over time periods up to
several years in length. In previous studies, the authors have demonstrated that
a rich view into the lives of individual women can be obtained through the use
of daily recording of selected variables. This is the next best thing to
becoming participant observers in the classic anthropological sense by immersion
in the experiences of each of the women whose lives are being followed.
Information collected as part of this study includes over five million data
points from the daily checklists in addition to extensive narrative descriptions
of significant life events. Funding will allow analysis of these data using
appropriate quantitative and qualitative techniques.