* 0129256
* A Planning Grant for a Culturally Relevant Math and Science Summer Evaluation Training Institute for Mid-Level Experienced Evaluators
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2003
* Vinetta Jones, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 08/31/2003
* USD 95,432.00

This proposal is submitted with the acknowledgement that project and program
evaluations are indispensable to those agencies and organizations that emphasize
mathematics, science, technology and staff and funders with valuable information
to make informed decisions about the implementation, progress and success of a
project or program. Therefore, it is imperative that the evaluators responsible
for planning, collecting and analyzing evaluation data are trained to be both
technically competent in their work efforts and sensitive to the cultural
context in which the project or program takes place. This planning grant would
provide the structure for the development of a summer training institute for
participants to broaden thier knowledge of evaluation models, methods, and
standards, as well as raise both their awareness and understanding of a very
important aspect of evaluation - its cultural context. That is, a fundamental
aspect integrated throughout all the institute's training activities will attend
to the reality that evaluations do not occur in a vacuum but instead are
contextual because of the variety of racial, cultural, socio-economic, and other
settings in which the project or program is operating. As such, there is a
pressing need to develop a framework for identifying the many "hidden" variables
(e.g., stereotypes, attitudes, ecpectations) that frame the cultural contex of
evaluation. A major focus of this planning grant would be to develop a
culturally relevant evaluation training model and plan for its utilization at a
summer training institute so that mid-level evaluators will appreciate and
understand the need for a cultural context of educational evaluation of math and
science and other projects. Upon completion of the Institute, the participants
will be able to effectively transfer theoretical knowledge learned to procedural
knowledge, and then to actual evaluation practice within a responsive and
relevant context.