* 0129138
* LTREB: Exotic Pests, Nitrogen Saturation, and Nutrient Cycling in a Northeastern Forest
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Clive Jones, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 12/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

Lovett&lt;br/&gt;0129138&lt;br/&gt;This LTREB project will support sustained
research on the direct and indirect effects of two exotic pests that threaten
the forests of the eastern US, the gypsy moth and the hemlock wooly adelgid. The
gypsy moth is the most important defoliator of eastern forests. It
preferentially attacks oak-dominated forests and causes widespread defoliation
during periodic outbreaks. The hemlock woolly adelgid is a more recently
introduced pest that is devastating hemlock trees in the mid-Atlantic states and
New England. It is an aphid-like insect that feeds exclusively on hemlocks, and
generally results in 100% mortality of trees within several years after
infestation. The research questions here involve the effect of these pests on
the nitrogen cycle of forests. Both of these pests are occurring against the
backdrop of elevated levels of nitrogen deposition due to nitrogen oxide
emissions from fossil fuel combustion and ammonia emission from agricultural
activities. These is a strong probability of a complex interaction between
nitrogen deposition and the effects of these pests on the nitrogen cycles of the
forest ecosystems under study. This LTREB project will continue measurements of
forest productivity and nutrient cycling in long-term study plots in Millbrook,
NY. The plots include both oak plots in the zone likely to be affected by the
gypsy moth, and hemlock plots in an area soon to be infested with hemlock woolly
adelgid. In addition, a long-term N-addition experiment in an oak forest will be
maintained, as well. This work has direct relevance to management of eastern
forests, in that gypsy moth and hemlock woolly adelgid are two of the most
devastating pests in the region. The phenomenon of nitrogen saturation and its
effects on forest health and the quality of surface waters, is an emerging
management and policy issue in the eastern US. Thus, the study of the
interaction of these two stresses is of both scientific and practical
importance.&lt;br/&gt;