* 0129483
* WORKSHOP: The 4th International Workshop on Future Information Processing Technologies in Gubbio, Italy, September 3-6, 2001.
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2001,01/31/2002
* Ralph Cavin, Semiconductor Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 01/31/2002
* USD 8,000.00

The purpose of this workshop is to gather for the fourth time, a diverse group
of leading researchers in solid state technology, devices, circuits, and system
architectures to:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Assess the change in the knowledge base
since 1999&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interact in an open discussion and free exchange
of ideas across the broad spectrum of communication/information processing
technology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Identify areas on the research frontiers that
extend communication/information processing progress into&lt;br/&gt;the 21 st
Century and beyond shrink limitation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Establish a
communication link between researchers from around the world from different
disciplines&lt;br/&gt;and backgrounds for a fruitful exchange of experiences and
ideas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the cost and performance factors of
microelectronic devices improve through advances in technology,&lt;br/&gt;novel
and/or improved information/communication systems are enabled. Conversely, new
concepts for&lt;br/&gt;information/communications applications often create a
demand for more advanced microelectronics&lt;br/&gt;technologies that offer
unique capabilities. As an example, the need for mobility has driven the
creation of&lt;br/&gt;high performance, low power, microelectronic devices used
in portable electronic assistants with&lt;br/&gt;communication
capabilities&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the 4th IWFIPT is to examine
the push and pull between microelectronics technology and&lt;br/&gt;emerging
application areas to obtain a sense of future technology trends and
capabilities. Leading&lt;br/&gt;contributors will describe their views on
hardware performance and functionalities needed in the&lt;br/&gt;information
society of the future. These projections will be juxtaposed with anticipated
trends in&lt;br/&gt;microelectronics and with potential ioradical technologiesli
arising from advances in carbon-based materials,&lt;br/&gt;quantum physics,
molecular nanotechnology and other areas. A synthesis of views is planned to
identify&lt;br/&gt;trend feeding, trend fighting and trend setting
microelectronic technologies that are likely to emerge over&lt;br/&gt;the next
few decades.