* 0129247
* An Empirical Analysis of the Interaction between Inbreeding, Linkage and Selection in Wild Barley
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2002,11/30/2004
* Michael Clegg, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 11/30/2004
* USD 411,000.00

The goal of this project is to assess the role of high levels of self-
fertilization in enhancing the conditions for linkage disequilibrium within
plant species. Linkage disequilibrium refers to a correlation in allelic state
between two different genetic loci at the population or species level. The
statistic used to measure this correlation provides an index of the non-random
distribution of alleles at different loci or of different nucleotide sties
within a locus. All other things being equal, sexually reproducing organisms are
expected to reach a state of linkage equilibrium because recombination
ultimately randomizes the genome at all scales of resolution (the correlation in
allelic state approaches zero independent of genetic distance). However, the
rate of approach to equilibrium may be slow because it depends on the breeding
system and the extent of linkage between genes. A nonrandom distribution is
important because selection on a gene will perturb the frequencies of all other
genes in linkage disequilibrium with the selected gene. Such perturbations can
reduce the efficiency of selection because selection at one locus may be
contravened by selection at a second locus in linkage disequilibrium with the
first. This situation is known as linkage drag. Self-fertilization and linkage
interact to restrict recombination, because self-fertilization reduces
heterozygosity and thereby reduces the effective rate of recombination between
genes or between nucleotide sites within a gene. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
obviously important to characterize the extent of linkage disequilibrium in
inbreeding species to better understand how restricted recombination may affect
adaptive potential. This project will investigate the extent of linkage
disequilibrium within wild barley (Hordeum vulgare ssp. spontaneum), a species
with a rate of self-fertilization greater than 98%. The project will sample
nucleotide sequences from a number of loci and the accessions sequenced will be
chosen to span the geographic range of wild barley. The genetic scale of the
samples will permit a measure of linkage disequilibrium at different physical
and genetic distances ranging from (a) physical distances up to approximately
5,000 base pairs; (b) moderately linked genes (recombination fraction &lt;
0.01); and (c) loosely linked genes (recombination fraction &gt; 0.1). This
investigation will permit a direct empirical assessment of how the interaction
between selection, linkage and recombination restricts adaptive potential in
inbreeding species.&lt;br/&gt;