* 0129867
* Investigating Synaptic Growth Through Live Imaging and Genetics.
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Graeme Davis, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 08/31/2005
* USD 368,957.00

Dr. Davis will combine live imaging techniques with Drosophila genetics to
visualize synapse remodeling in vivo and analyze the underlying molecular
mechanisms that control synapse remodeling in real time. Synaptic connections
are the sites of communication between neurons. The precise modification of
synapses is essential to the correct wiring of neuronal circuitry during
development and to the modification of neural circuits during adult plasticity.
Despite the identification of myriad synaptic proteins, the mechanisms that
control synaptic bouton formation, stabilization and retraction are still poorly
understood. Dr. Davis will characterize, with fine temporal resolution, the
sequence of events by which new synapses are assembled, stabilized and
disassembled. Combined with a genetic analysis, these studies aim to identify
important molecular mechanisms underlying the events of synapse remodeling. In
previously published studies, Dr. Davis has demonstrated that mutations in the
cell adhesion molecule Fasciclin II and the microtubule associated protein
Futsch impair synaptic growth. Dr. Davis will now examine how these and other
molecules affect synapse growth in real time. Preliminary data from Dr. Davis
demonstrate that new presynaptic varicosities can be added to the nerve terminal
as rapidly as 2 to 5 minutes and can be eliminated during normal development.
These data challenge previous hypotheses regarding synaptic growth at this
synapse, the Drosophila NMJ, that suggest that synaptic boutons are added slowly
over the course of hours and, once added, are not eliminated. Dr. Davis now
hypothesizes that presynaptic varicosities can form very rapidly, but only a
subset of the newly formed varicosities become stabilized to form functional
boutons. Dr. Davis further hypothesizes that, once stabilized, synaptic boutons
are rarely eliminated. Thus, an essential growth regulatory event may be the
determination of whether a new presynaptic varicosity is stabilized. The live
imaging experiments proposed in this study will address this possibility in
detail. Dr. Davis will also investigate the molecular mechanisms that determine
whether newly formed synaptic boutons are stabilized or retracted. Preliminary
data implicate the dynactin protein complex as an important regulator of synapse
stabilization. Inhibition the dynactin complex causes the elimination of
synaptic terminals at the NMJ. Live imaging combined with genetic analysis will
precisely define how synapse elimination occurs in the dynactin mutations.
Finally, Dr. Davis will use well characterized mutations that alter nerve and
muscle activity to determine the roles of pre- and postsynaptic activity in the
process of synaptic growth and elimination using live, in vivo imaging.

