* 0129160
* Collaborative Research: Ecology of Viruses in an Alkaline, Hypersaline Lake, Mono Lake, California
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2004
* Robert Jellison, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 12/31/2004
* USD 37,914.00

Non-Technical Summary

PI names: Jiang, Sunny (collaborating with Jellison, R.S. & Steward, G.F)
Institution: University of California - Irvine (collaborating with University of
California - Santa Barbara & University of Hawaii - Manoa) Proposal Number:
DEB-0130528 (collaborating with DEB-0129160 & DEB-0129174) Proposal Title:
Collaborative Research: Ecology of Viruses in an Alkaline, Hypersaline Lake,
Mono Lake, California Viruses infecting bacteria and algae are generally the
most abundant microorganisms in aquatic environments, and are known to influence
microbial community structure, function, and biogeochemical cycling. Although
the importance of viruses in typical marine and freshwater environments is
recognized, almost nothing is known about their roles in alkaline hypersaline
environments. Preliminary observations from Mono Lake, where pH is ~10 and salt
content nearly three times that of seawater, indicate that viruses are near the
highest concentrations ever observed in nature. Mono Lake supports a relatively
simple food web with high phytoplankton production, brine shrimp acting as the
sole macrozooplankton grazer, and permanent stratification shaping the structure
of the microbial community. Three basic questions are addressed in this
research. How does viral abundance, dynamics, and diversity differ in this
unusual environment from those in marine and freshwater environments? What is
the contribution of viruses to host mortality? How are the viruses in this
seeting different from other viruses in terms of genetic and physiological
properties? Viral density and diversity will be ascertained using viral isolates
as well as direct molecular approaches. This research complements ongoing
activities at the Lake Mono Microbial Observatory, and facilitates an integrated
study of the viral community in a broad biotic and abiotic context. Results will
provide new insights into the occurrence, diversity and function of
microbiological life forms extreme environments. The project also provides
opportunities to educate graduate and undergraduate students in environmental
and microbiological sciences.