* 0129762
* Dissertation Research:  Defending the Homeland: The Cultural Construction of U.S. Defense in Everyday Practice
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2002
* Robert Rubinstein, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 12/31/2002
* USD 12,000.00

Since the late 1990s, people in agencies at multiple levels of government have
sought to prepare for terrorist attacks. Attempts to form a functional response
structure have been hampered by communication and coordination problems among
practitioners unaccustomed to their new roles in national defense. This
dissertation research project by a student of cultural anthropology is a multi-
sited, ethnographic study of homeland defense in the United States. The research
will be conducted in a policy-based community comprising those individuals
working in local, state, and federal level organizations operating in the
Boston, Massachusetts area. Based on network and domain analyses in conjunction
with ethnographic interviews, the study will examine (1) how practitioners from
varied backgrounds (police, medical personnel, FBI agents, firefighters)
construct their models of homeland defense, (2) how those models affect
interactions, and (3) how local experiences intersect with and potentially
transform policies. It examines homeland defense as an area of daily practice
and discourse through which traditional ideas of defense are challenged and
either maintained or transformed. The project advances anthropological knowledge
of defense as a culturally constructed institution, expands the application of
practice theory, and addresses the methodological challenges of studying multi-
sited organizations as parts of daily social life. Of particular relevance, the
research has the potential to offer practical insights into communication
barriers that hamper coordination of homeland defense efforts.