* 0129069
* Phylogenetic Study of the Dogwood Genus Cornus L. (Cornaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2006
* JennyQiuyun Xiang, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Carlos Morales
* 01/31/2006
* USD 100,001.00

Xiang 0129069 The discontinuous distribution of many closely related plant
species in eastern Asia and eastern North America is one of the most fascinating
biogeographic patterns in the Northern Hemisphere. This striking phenomenon has
attracted the attention of botanists for centuries, providing a focal point for
systematic and biogeographic investigation. Although evidence available so far
has suggested a complex history, the floristic exchange between the two
continents and relative importance of proposed migration routes have largely
remained unclear. Additional studies of plant groups with a good fossil record
is necessary for a better understanding of the biogeographic pattern. The
dogwood genus Cornus L., which contains several ornamentally and medicinally
important plants including the widely planted "flowering dogwood", is an ideal
model for the study. With an excellent fossil record and three subgroups showing
intercontinentally discontinuous distributions, the genus permits a detailed
quantitative, phylogeny-based biogeographic study of disjunct distribution
patterns. The primary goals of the proposed study by Dr. Jenny Xiang at North
Carolina State University are: 1) to build a robust genealogical foundation for
the dogwood genus using morphological characters and DNA sequence data from
multiple genes; 2) to test evolutionary and biogeographic hypotheses that were
based upon assessments of the morphological diversity in the genus; and 3) to
evaluate the timing (in a geological sense) of major speciation events in the
genus using the genealogical framework. Extensive fieldwork will be conducted in
the Americas and China to collect plant materials that are currently not
available for some species. Historical information will be made available to the
public via an on-line web page, which will serve as a starting point for the
future development of a web-accessible, taxonomic monograph of this highly
cultivated and biogeographically important plant genus. The study focuses on the
genus Cornus to advance our current understanding of the historical nature of
eastern Asian-eastern North American floristic exchange through integration of
phylogenetic and biogeographic data, and DNA-based dating approaches using
calibration points provided by the fossil record. Despite well known taxa in
Europe and North America, tropical and Asiatic dogwoods are poorly known, and
understudied. The multiple molecular data sets generated in the study will also
facilitate comparisons of mode and tempo of evolution of different genes to
enhance the understanding of molecular evolution in the two isolated continents.
The on-line web page will maximize the utility of the phylogenetic and
biogeographic information obtained from the study, which will be valuable for
evaluating conservation priorities (help in guiding research on the dogwood
anthracnose disease, and developing strategies for sustainable uses of natural
sources of dogwoods), and future ecological, pharmacological, and horticultural
research. One graduate student will be trained through this study. The
opportunity for student participation is important for it has profound impact on
the future of systematics, the science of biodiversity.

