* 0129768
* Collaborative Research: The Causes and Consequences of Pathogen Resistance on Fitness and Community Structure
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2005
* Michael Travisano, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 03/31/2005
* USD 205,000.00

Organisms have developed numerous mechanisms for resisting predators and
pathogens. These mechanisms are generally thought to incur a "cost" to the
organism, such that predator resistant organisms are inferior competitors
(relative to sensitive organisms) in the absence of predators. However, the
causes and consequences of this tradeoff have proven difficult to examine in
most experimental systems. Escherichia coli and its viral predators
(bacteriophage) are ideal model organisms with which to study this tradeoff,
because they are easy to propagate, they grow rapidly and because there is an
abundance of background literature on their biology. Experiments will be
performed that directly examine the genetic and physiological causes of the
tradeoff between competitive ability and bacteriophage resistance in E.coli, and
the effects of this tradeoff on populations and communities over short
(ecological) and long (evolutionary) time scales under specific environmental
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The premise that there is a tradeoff between
resistance and competitive ability forms the basis for numerous hypotheses on
the origin of biodiversity and the interaction of predators or pathogens and
their prey. Understanding this tradeoff will have widespread value in both pure
and applied sciences, including increasing the accuracy of predictions of
climate change effects on biodiversity, the impact of foreign species
introduction, and the evolution of virulence in human
pathogens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;