* 0129747
* Genome-Wide Hunt For Metal Hyperaccumulation Genes
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* David Salt, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Gavin Thompson
* 08/31/2005
* USD 450,000.00

01297747 David E. Salt

The overall objective of this project is to identify genes involved in metal
hyperaccumulation in metal-hyperaccumulating plants. These unique plant species
are able to accumulate between 0.1 and 3% of their shoot dry biomass as Cd, Ni,
Se or Zn depending on the species. Such characteristics could be invaluable in
current efforts to use plants to clean metal-contaminated sites
(phytoremediation). The known metal hyperaccumulators are not well suited for
phytoremediation because of their small size and slow growth. However, they are
a unique source of genes for metal hyperaccumulation. Over 25% of the known
hyperaccumulator species are members of the Brassicaceae family, and as such
they are related to Arabidopsis thaliana. By investigating the molecular
genetics of metal hyperaccumulation in species related to A. thaliana, the
investigators will utilize the technical and genetic resources developed during
the Arabidopsis genome project, harnessing powerful functional genomics
technologies to dissect metal hyperaccumulation at the genetic level.

Metal hyperaccumulators in the Brassicaceae will be collected from around the
world, and genes important in hyperaccumulation will be identified using three
complementary approaches. Seed from approximately 40 accessions of over 20
different species of hyperaccumulators in the Brassicaceae family will be
collected from North America, France, Germany, Austria, Italy, Greece and
Turkey. Accessions of metal hyperaccumulators found to be amenable to T-DNA
insertional mutagenesis will be identified and over 100,000 genetic lines will
be generated. In a forward genetic approach, these lines will be screened for
mutants exhibiting metal-sensitivity and loss of metal-hyperaccumulation. T-DNA
tagged genes from these mutants will be isolated, and their role in metal
hyperaccumulation determined. In a reverse genetic approach, genomic DNA pools
will be generated from these lines and screened by PCR to identify lines
containing T-DNA insertions in genes already known or suspected to be involved
in metal hyperaccumulation. The A. thaliana genome sequence will provide a rich
source of candidate genes for this reverse genetic approach. In a third
approach, cDNA expression libraries will be created in E. coli and yeast from
hyperaccumulating species and screened for genes conferring heavy-metal
resistance and sensitivity. Taken together these approaches will provide a
comprehensive framework for the identification of genes involved in metal
hyperaccumulation in plants. The set of genes identified in this project will
provide a valuable resource for the future development of plants ideally suited
for the phytoremediation of metal polluted sites.

This project was funded through the Joint Program on Phytoremediation, co-
sponsored by the Environmental Protection Agency, the National Science
Foundation, the Office of Naval Research, and the Strategic Environmental
Research and Development Program.