* 0129812
* Vertebrate Taphonomy and Paleoecology of Lake-Margin Wetlands during Oldowan Times at Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2003
* Robert Blumenschine, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2003
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Robert Blumenschine, Mr. Jackson Njau will collect
data for his doctoral dissertation. The goal of his research is to understand
how early humans behaved and utilized the environment ca. 1.7 million years ago.
For many years a multidisciplinary team jointly headed by Dr. Blumenschine has
examined a single stratum representing a ca. 50,000 year interval at Olduvai
Gorge in Tanzania. The deposit contains early hominid stone tools as well as
hominid and other faunal remains. It also offers a wealth of paleo-environmental
data in the form of preserved animal tracks, fossil plant remains and geological
and geochemical information. On this basis the team is working to reconstruct a
detailed and accurate picture of the landscape and then to superimpose hominid-
related remains on it. In this way one can gain insight into early human
behavioral adaptations. Based on multiple lines of evidence the group knows that
a significant portion of the region consisted of river and lake margin as well
as other types of wetlands. However it lacks the ability to distinguish
accurately among these. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mr. Njau will conduct a
multipronged investigation to provide the necessary refinement. He will study a
number of modern analog environments which range from alkaline lakeshore to
spring fed marshes and in particular note the kinds of faunal assemblages
associated with each. Since hippopotomi and crocodiles both modify such
landscapes and predate on a wide range of species, they can leave a major mark.
Mr. Njau will focus on both species and will conduct feeding experiments in
which farm raised crocodile are provided with prey remains;their imprint on
discarded bones noted. Mr. Njau will also examine prior excavated faunal
assemblages from Olduvai to search for matches between experimental and observed
patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is important for several reasons.
It will provide a framework for an improved understanding of hominid behavior at
one of the most important prehistoric sites in Africa. It will also yield modern
analog data which are directly relevant to a wide range of paleoecological and
archaeological questions. The award also provides a promising young
scientist.&lt;br/&gt;