* 0129617
* Cryptographic Mechanisms for Internet Security
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Mihir Bellare, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 02/28/2006
* USD 218,585.00

The Internet has opened the door to new possibilities, but also brought with it
new risks.&lt;br/&gt;Internet security is a widely recognized problem crossing
the boundaries between mathematics,&lt;br/&gt;systems and sociology, and
panaceas are unlikely. The goal of this proposal is to isolate
and&lt;br/&gt;target a few components of the security problem that have real
impact on Internet security in&lt;br/&gt;practice and are well-defined enough
that clear, documented, and identifiable progress can be made&lt;br/&gt;within
the time-frame and resources of the project. The chosen problems relate to
cryptographic&lt;br/&gt;components of current and future Internet security
protocols and standards, in technical areas such&lt;br/&gt;as authentication,
access control, privacy, key distribution and key compromise, and to
bridging&lt;br/&gt;the gap between cryptography and systems security.&lt;br/&gt;
Providing high-quality, cost-efective cryptographic mechanisms, and tying them
together se-&lt;br/&gt;curely,is a challenge. Cryptographic schemes are easy to
specify but hard to validate, and notorious&lt;br/&gt;for containing bugs that
take a long time to be discovered. This proposal will employ the
practice-&lt;br/&gt;oriented provable-security approach toimprove security
guarantees of cryptographic mechansisms.&lt;br/&gt;Developed by Bellare and
Rogaway, this approach already has a track record in delivering
prac-&lt;br/&gt;tical cryptography backed by theoretical guarantees. Past
successes of this method include the&lt;br/&gt;HMAC andOAEP algorithms which
have been adopted by numerous standards bodies and
widely&lt;br/&gt;implemented.&lt;br/&gt; The first two problems that we propose
to address are related to the security of protocols&lt;br/&gt;such as SSL. The
researchers propose to investigate the security ofa mechanism that is common
practice but&lt;br/&gt;not analyzed in theory, namely to use the same key for
both asymmetric encryption and digital&lt;br/&gt;signatures. The researchers
will seek to determine under what circumstances this is secure, with
particular&lt;br/&gt;focus on existing standards. The researchers will then
propose to investigate the security of the session key exchange protocols at the
heart of security protocols like SSL, TLS or that of 3GPP, building on
past&lt;br/&gt;work in provable security for session key exchange.&lt;br/&gt;
The greatest threat to the security the researcher may hope to obtain from some
cryptographic mechanism&lt;br/&gt;may simply be key exposure: an intruder breaks
into the system and compromises the underlying&lt;br/&gt;key. This problem
crosses the boundary between security and cryptography, and the next
two&lt;br/&gt;problems proposed by the researcheris to consider two
cryptographic approaches to it. The first is forward-security, whose goal is not
to prevent key exposure, but to mitigate the damage it causes by making sure
that past uses of a key are not compromised by its exposure. The researchers
propose two specific pieces of research related to forward security, one in the
domain of signatures and the other in the domain&lt;br/&gt;of pseudorandom
number generation. The second problem relates to human-memorizable keys,
or&lt;br/&gt;passwords. These have the advantage of not being subject to key
exposure via breakin, but have&lt;br/&gt;other disadvantages, most notably being
subject to dictionary attack. Several corporations have&lt;br/&gt;proposed some
form of server-aided, password-based authentication. The researcher looks into
the security of some of the potential mechanisms to this end.&lt;br/&gt;