* 0129833
* QEIB: A Theoretical Framework for Density-Dependent Life-History Evolution in Variable Environments
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Peter Chesson, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 03/31/2006
* USD 210,551.00

The parameters defining the life history of an organism, for example, survival
rates at different stages in life, birth rates, germination rates and dispersal
rates, vary with the physical environment, such as weather, and also with the
biological environment defined by the densities of organisms of different sorts.
A general mathematical theory of life-history evolution will be developed that
takes into account the interacting effects of a varying environment and organism
densities. Mathematical models will be developed and investigated using
probability theory, dynamical systems theory, and computer simulation.
Particular emphasis will be placed on annual plant germination, growth, survival
and reproductive relations in perennial organisms, and seasonal variation in
growth of perennial plants.

The life history of an organism is fundamental to the way it relates to its
environment, and therefore the life history is fundamental to predicting what
will happen to the organism as conditions change either through human
intervention or natural causes. The complexity of the subject means that
effective study requires a theoretical framework to generate hypotheses, which
can then be tested empirically. Although separate theories for the effects of a
varying physical environment and organism densities have been developed
previously, there has been very limited attention to their interaction. The
results of the study should have wide applicability to wild organisms (flora and
fauna, pests, weeds and fisheries), with some applications also to crops and
domestic animals.

