* 0129031
* Collaborative Research:  Mesozoic Therians from Central Asia:  The Basal Radiation of Tribosphenic Mammals and Their Impact on the Higher-Level Relationships of Therian Mammals
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Michael Novacek, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Charles Lydeard
* 07/31/2005
* USD 97,454.00

Collaborative Research - Mesozoic therians from Central Asia: the basal
radiation of tribosphenic mammals and their impact on the higher-level
relationships of therian mammals

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Novacek at the American Museum of Natural
History, Dr. Rougier at the University of Louisville, and Dr. Wible at the
Carnegie Museum of Natural History for a comprehensive study of the Cretaceous
(145 to 65 million-years-ago) radiation of therian mammals. Therians include
living marsupials and placentals plus their extinct relatives. Therians are
represented today by more than 4600 species accounting for nearly all the
diversity of living mammals, the exception being the three species of egg-laying
monotremes. The study of the evolutionary relationships among therians has been
addressed with data from molecular biology (the structure of DNA) and
comparative anatomy (the structure of living and extinct forms). The family
trees (phylogenies) that result from these two approaches are not entirely
congruent nor do they suggest the same time of origin of the major lineages of
living therians. However, both molecular and anatomical workers agree that
insectivore-like forms are at the base of the therian radiation. Available to
Drs. Novacek, Rougier, and Wible as the core study group for their project are
exquisitely preserved, 80 million-year-old insectivore-like fossils, some
related to placentals and others to marsupials, collected from the famed
dinosaur and fossil mammal beds of Mongolia's Gobi Desert by recent joint
expeditions from the American Museum and the Mongolian Academy of Sciences.
Unlike the vast majority of Cretaceous therian fossils, which are merely
isolated jaws and teeth, these are nearly complete skeletons. They will provide
the most comprehensive anatomical data base to date for studying the
evolutionary relationships among Cretaceous therians and their living
descendants, and evaluating the controversial difference between DNA and
anatomical results. Most of the Cretaceous therians to be studied are shrew-
sized and, therefore, cannot effectively be investigated with the naked eye
alone. Two tools are needed for the anatomical study of these small forms:
standard stereoscopic microscopy and high-resolution computer tomographic
imaging (CT-scanning). Both are available, the latter at a National Science
Foundation supported facility at Pennsylvania State University. Drs. Novacek,
Rougier, and Wible will use their expertise in the anatomy of living and extinct
mammals, and the collections at the American Museum, Carnegie Museum, and other
institutions to build an anatomical data base of comparative information. Family
trees will be generated from this data base by various available computer
programs and compared with those previously published based on other
information. These exquisite Mongolian fossils are a unique resource that
ultimately will be returned to their country of origin. Careful study and
extensive documentation of these fossils now is critical in order to make them
widely accessible for scientific advancement. A by-product of this study will be
a standardized anatomical terminology for the therian skeleton; currently,
researchers studying particular therian lineages employ different terms that are
often incongruent. This study also affords the opportunity for educating and
training of new scientists at both the pre- and postdoctoral level. Finally, the
valuable scientific knowledge contained in these fossils will be translated for
the public through the exhibits and educational programs of the American Museum
and Carnegie Museum.