* 0129535
* SGER:  The Fabrication of Biological Time Resolved Arrays of Chemical Energy Readers
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2001,02/28/2002
* James Kolodzey, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Filbert J. Bartoli
* 02/28/2002
* USD 30,000.00

0129535&lt;br/&gt;Kolodzey&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes to evaluate the
performance of a novel bio-chemical sensor based on
the&lt;br/&gt;electrochemical field effect in MOS-type transistor structures. He
has fabricated&lt;br/&gt;prototypes of this MOS sensor, and have found that they
produced non-linear&lt;br/&gt;current-voltage responses to DNA molecules in an
aqueous solution. Calculations indicate&lt;br/&gt;that the device should be
highly sensitive to the electrochemical potential of bio&lt;br/&gt;molecules
such as DNA and proteins. It should be capable of nanosecond response times
for&lt;br/&gt;time-resolved measurements. These preliminary results will be
described briefly here and&lt;br/&gt;in more detail in the Motivation Section of
this proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The operation of the sensor is based on the
semiconductor surface field effect in MOS&lt;br/&gt;devices in which the
electrochemical potentials (Fermi levels) of bio-compounds
influence&lt;br/&gt;the electrical current flowing in a transistor-like device.
The detected biomolecules are&lt;br/&gt;located within a Debye screening length
of the gate insulator electrode. Calculations&lt;br/&gt;indicate that the
proposed field effect device may be sensitive to less than 110
molecules&lt;br/&gt;per square micron of active sensor area. By reducing the
active area to 100 nm square,&lt;br/&gt;which is within lithographic
capabilities, the sensor may be able to detect the charge on&lt;br/&gt;one DNA
molecule.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The reason for the exploratory and high-risk
status is that the PI has not yet performed a comparison of sensor responses
with different types of DNA and other biomolecules. He has not yet measured the
time resolved response. The sensitivity is unknown, and it is uncertain if the
sensor can distinguish different concentrations and different types of DNA. For
this SGER proposal, the PI wants to measure the sensor response with different
types of DNA to determine its sensitivity and selectivity. The measurements will
be calibrated with an optical fluorescence microscope. If it turns out that this
bio-chemical sensor is a valuable instrument that can yield useful information
on biomolecules, he plans to submit a full proposal for a comprehensive research
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A comprehensive proposal based on this sensor was
submitted in November 2000 to the&lt;br/&gt;Nanoscience NIRT program, but was
unsuccessful. The reviewers stated that a weakness was the lack of sufficient
chemical and biological data on sensor operation. In this SGER proposal, the PI
requests the funds to support a student and travel to obtain measurements of the
sensor for different DNA molecules and reference solutions. These results would
be used to justify further research and large funding programs.&lt;br/&gt;