* 0129038
* LTREB: Rising Global Temperatures and Long-term Performance of Tropical Rain Forest Trees
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2007
* Deborah Clark, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 01/31/2007
* USD 299,670.00

0129038&lt;br/&gt;Clark&lt;br/&gt;LTREB&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will continue
the TREES Project, an 18-year study designed to examine the ecological bases of
life history diversity and population ecology in tropical forest trees. The core
activity is an annual census of 2300 individuals of ten canopy and emergent tree
species in a 250 ha area of old-growth tropical wet forest. Growth, mortality,
physical damage, and microsite conditions of all trees have been measured
annually since 1983. All trees are mapped and incorporated into the La Selva
Geographic Information System, and their distribution and performance have been
studies in relation to both soil nutrients and topography over a meso-scale
landscape. Two compelling scientific issues will be addressed during the next
five years. One question with major environmental, political and economic
implications is whether tropical rain forests are experiencing a decline in
forest productivity with global warming. The second issue is the original core
driver of the project, to elucidate the diverse life history modes represented
among tropical rain forest canopy trees. The core TREES data set is the largest
and longest record available of concurrent annually-measured growth and
microsite conditions for tropical rain forest trees. This project clearly links
population ecology with global climate change, and has important implications
for conservation and maintenance of biodiversity in tropical
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;