* 0129263
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Dependence of Optical and Nonradiative Relaxation Properties of Copper Nanoparticles on Shape and Self-Assembly
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Mostafa El-Sayed, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 02/28/2006
* USD 17,800.00

0129263&lt;br/&gt;El-Sayed&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This two-year award for US-
France collaboration in nanoparticle research involves researchers and students
at Georgia Institute of Technology and the University Pierre and Marie Curie
(Paris VI). The principal investigators, Mostafa El-Sayed in the US and Marie-
Paule Pileni in France, lead the collaboration. The combined teams will examine
radiative and nonradiative properties of individual and assembled copper
nanoparticles of different sizes and shapes. Copper particles represent a new
and interesting nanoparticle system. Their properties such as surface plasmon
absorption, acoustic breathing, oscillations, electron-phonon and phonon-phonon
relaxation processes will be studied. Changes in spherical and rod-shaped
nanoparticles as a result of self-assembly and intraparticle interactions will
be investigated. Experiments involve femtosecond transient laser spectroscopic
methods and monodispersed size and shape distributions of nanoparticles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaboration merges different experimental methods
and expertise. The US group is expert in ultrafast laser methods and
spectroscopic experiments. This is complemented by French expertise in the
synthesis of monodispersed nanoparticles, including copper nanodots and
nanorods, and nanoparticle self-assembly. This collaboration advances
understanding of the optical and mechanical properties of nanomaterials.
Nanoparticle materials are important for new electronic devices, optical
devices, and biological materials. Graduate students also benefit. They will
receive training in advanced synthetic and self-assembly techniques.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This award represents the US side of parallel proposals to the NSF
and the CNRS. NSF will cover travel funds and living expenses for the US
investigator, postdoctoral researcher and students. The CNRS will support visits
by French researchers and students to the United States. &lt;br/&gt;