* 0129846
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Preservation through Privatization: Maya Heritage Workers and Transnational Institutions in Yucatan, Mexico
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2003
* George Marcus, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 02/28/2003
* USD 8,678.00

This dissertation research is a comparative study of how those Maya communities
associated with the archaeological zones, Chunchucmil and Chichen Itza,
negotiate and experience their roles, meanings, and claims over archaeological
patrimony in the context of the implementation of cultural heritage policy by
national institutions, foreign archaeological projects, and international
government organizations. Through ethnographic description of Maya conceptions
of space, property, and ownership, the juridical establishment and regulation of
archaeological zones, and the recent efforts to establish local cultural
foundations with international ties, the research considers how current
endeavors on the part of archaeologists and local communities to develop and
preserve cultural heritage promote "alternative privatizations" of
archaeological zones. This study engages the fields of Maya studies and cultural
heritage studies, providing baseline criteria by which to comparatively study
how Maya communities integrate with the modernizing influences of institutional,
scientific, and commercial agencies of regional, national, and international
scale. In addition to training a doctoral student in cultural anthropology, the
findings of this research will contribute to understanding those factors that
enhance or impede efforts to nationalize and/or privatize cultural heritage.