* 0129834
* Elementary, Secondary and Informal Education:  Dragon Skies: Astronomical Instruments of Imperial China -- A Planning Grant for a Traveling Exhibit
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2001,10/31/2002
* Michael Reynolds, Chabot Space and Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 10/31/2002
* USD 49,967.00

Chabot Space and Science Center is developing and organizing a major traveling
exhibit called "Dragon Skies: Astronomical Instruments of Imperial China." The
exhibit will consist of nine Chinese astronomical instruments, dating between
1439 and 1744, as well as 25 smaller artifacts. In addition, a variety of
interpretive materials and activities will be developed to enhance the
exhibit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI, Michael Reynolds, has visited the Ancient
Beijing Observatory and begun initial conversations with the staff there,
resulting in tentative collaboration agreements. Subsequent to that visit, the
Ancient Beijing Observatory has already determined which original instruments
will be able to travel, has replicated several exhibits, and has compiled a
collection of additional artifacts that will enhance the exhibit. The planning
phase will be carried out by staff from Chabot, the Beijing Ancient Observatory,
the Chinese Astronomical Society, and a team of advisors. Planning activities
will include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Decide which aspects of exhibit development
will be taken on by each partner.&lt;br/&gt;Determine what ancillary materials
will need to be developed.&lt;br/&gt;Establish what interactive activities, such
as hands-on activities or computer kiosks, will enhance the
project.&lt;br/&gt;Determine what multimedia programs, such as an audio tour or
planetarium shows, will increase the impact of the exhibit.&lt;br/&gt;Determine
the translation needs for the exhibit and for the supplemental materials and
programs.&lt;br/&gt;Arrange the logistics for the traveling
exhibit.&lt;br/&gt;Establish criteria for venues that might display the exhibit
and identify potential sites.&lt;br/&gt;