* 0129898
* SCIENCE AND MATHEMATICS EDUCATION IN RURAL AMERICA: Evaluative Study of NSF's Rural Systemic Initiatives
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2003
* Jason Kim, Systemic Research, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Bernice Anderson
* 09/30/2003
* USD 574,022.00

Systemic Research, Inc. proposes to conduct a 24-month evaluative study (from
October 2001 to&lt;br/&gt;September 2003). During the initial phase,
comprehensive secondary data collection will be conducted from various sources,
including past Core Data Elements (CDE) reports, Annual Reports submitted
to&lt;br/&gt;NSF, other key indicators obtainable from the RSIs' own web sites
and relevant rural project reports.&lt;br/&gt;Systemic Research will develop a
Rural Key Indicator Database (RKID) to organize both quantitative
and&lt;br/&gt;qualitative longitudinal achievement databases over the project
period of individual RSI sites. The study&lt;br/&gt;team will conduct two site
visits each year to confirm reform implementation and to write relevant
case&lt;br/&gt;stories based on observation. Based on completed RKID, both
quantitative and qualitative data analysis will be performed to explore an
inferential causal model. Study results will be disseminated in
three&lt;br/&gt;publications: a two volume Rural Key Indicators of Science and
Mathematics Education (Volume I for&lt;br/&gt;individual RSI progress report and
Volume II for overall RSI progress reports); a rural education report
in&lt;br/&gt;booklet format; and a RSI Evaluative Study Report including case
stories of the four sites that were&lt;br/&gt;visited. All publications will be
available in three different formats-- printed copy, CD-ROM, and web-
based&lt;br/&gt;publication.