* 0129024
* Assembly of Wetland Plant Communities along Gradients: An Experimental Study
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2008
* Paul Keddy, Southeastern Louisiana University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 01/31/2008
* USD 363,846.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
DEB-0129024&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Assembly of Wetland Plant Communities
Along Gradients: An Experimental Study&lt;br/&gt;PI Name: Paul
Keddy&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Southeastern Louisiana
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most basic questions in ecology
relates to the rules or mechanisms that determine the assembly of species into
local communities. Although some hold that physiological limitations of species
along environmental gradients determine community composition, others argue that
interspecific competition plays a pivotal role in determining the identity of
coexisting species. This research addresses such questions through a suite of
manipulative experiments. Twelve species of wetland plant, many used in
restoration projects, will be combined in controlled experiments along a
gradient of water depth. By comparing aspects of growth in the presence or
absence of competitors, this research will address two broad topics. First, how
much does competition suppress the ecological range of species, and to what
extent is it variable and species-specific? Second, is competitive displacement
one-sided, and if so what are the quantitative characteristics of this
asymmetry? Because this work will take place in a new outdoor classroom that is
accessible by K-12 students, it will provide a concrete platform for
illustrating the importance and role of research in understanding the ecology
and conservation of wetlands.&lt;br/&gt;