* 0129270
* A multi-Consumer Perspective of Consumer-Resource Dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Priyanga Amarasekare, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 12/31/2005
* USD 396,763.00

Proposal Number: DEB-01-29270&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: A multi-species
perspective of consumer-resource dynamics&lt;br/&gt;PI Name: Priyanga
Amarasekare&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Chicago&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
This research investigates how multiple predator and parasite species influence
the dynamics (change in abundance) of their common prey or host species. The
ecological system that is the focus of research is the harlequin bug and two
parasitoid species (parasitic insects that grow on and kill other insects) that
attack the bug's eggs in southern California. The system presents a puzzle:
multiple parasitoid species can coexist on the same host stage as well as reduce
fluctuations in host abundance. Solving the puzzle requires understanding the
mechanism(s) by which both parasitoid species coexist on a single host species,
and how these mechanism(s) in turn influence the parasitoids' effect on the
host. The first goal is to distinguish between two hypotheses that address
mechanisms of parasitoid coexistence are intraguild predation (IGP) and temporal
niche partitioning (TNP). Intraguild predation predicts that species will
coexist because one species is superior at attacking unparasitized hosts while
the other species is superior at attacking hosts already parasitized by the
first (multiparasitism). Temporal niche partitioning predicts that species will
coexist because each is superior at attacking hosts at different times of the
year. Predictions for the two hypotheses will be tested via manipulative field
experiments. Understanding how coexisting parasitoid species influence host
population dynamics will be the domain of mathematical models that explore the
impact of parasitoids on host abundance and variability under different
mechanisms of coexistence (IGP vs. TNP). &lt;br/&gt;This research is novel
because it investigates how multiple consumer species influence the dynamics of
a shared resource, a poorly understood issue that is critical to the maintenance
of species diversity. It also has applied significance. The decision to release
single or multiple natural enemies to control a pest, an issue at the heart of
biological pest control, depends crucially on the mechanisms by which natural
enemies coexist on a given pest species. Linking mechanisms of resource use with
population dynamics allows us to predict which combinations of natural enemies
provide the most effective control of a pest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;