* 0129724
* The Study of Gene Exchange During Recent Speciation Events among Cichlids of Lake Malawi
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Emanuel Hey, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 03/31/2006
* USD 404,000.00

&lt;br/&gt; There are over one thousand species of fish in the family Cichlidae
(Cichlids) throughout the world, but surprisingly most of this diversity occurs
in the great African lakes, Malawi (Nyasa), Tanganyika, and Victoria. These
lakes are not of great age, in evolutionary terms, and biologists are puzzled
over how the hundreds of unique Cichlid species, that exist in each of these
lakes, could have arisen quickly. The traditional model of species formation
assumes that separate species first begin as isolated populations that do not
exchange genes. However, an important alternative model that could apply where
there are not sharp barriers to migration, is that species arise without
population separation. This model includes gene exchange between newly forming
species, as well as natural selection acting to cause divergence. It is an
interesting model, but difficult to test. In this project, researchers will test
the model by applying a newly developed genetic procedure for detecting recent
gene exchange between several Cichlid species from Lake Malawi. &lt;br/&gt; The
Cichlids of Lake Malawi have become a model system for many researchers studying
speciation. Yet the critical question here, as in other cases of recently formed
species, is whether natural selection has caused the divergence directly, or
whether species arise as completely separate populations that diverge
separately. This question is fundamental to the understanding of how biological
diversity arises. &lt;br/&gt;