* 0129167
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Advancing Liquid Sodium Experiment
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2006
* Daniel Lathrop, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 02/28/2006
* USD 15,000.00

0129167&lt;br/&gt;Lathrop&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year award for
U.S.-France collaboration in earth sciences involves researchers and graduate
students at the University of Maryland and Ecole Normale Superieure de Lyon and
the French Atomic Energy Commission in Saclay. Daniel P. Lathrop and Jean-
Francois Pinton will lead in the US and France respectively in experiments in
magnetic field generation in liquid metals flow. This research is relevant to
understanding nonlinear dynamics associated with turbulent flow conducting
fluids. Such conditions are thought to occur in the Earth, planetary bodies, and
stars. The experiments take advantage of access to a new experimental sodium
facility constructed and funded by the French Ministry of Research. This
facility has a larger capacity than similar experimental facilities at the
University of Maryland. The US and French groups have complementary skills in
fluid turbulence, nonlinear dynamics, and in fluid experiments. Reciprocal
visits of students are emphasized to advance their research training and
encourage future international partnerships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
represents the US side of joint proposals to the NSF and the French National
Center for Scientific Research (CNRS). NSF will cover travel funds and living
expenses for the US investigator and graduate students. CNRS will support the
visits of the French researchers and graduate students to the United States. The
collaboration will advance fundamental understanding of the Earth's magnetic
field and the magnetic fields of other planetary and astrophysical bodies.
&lt;br/&gt;