* 0129266
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Higher Order Elliptic Equations in Geometry
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2002,10/31/2002
* Matthew Gursky, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 10/31/2002
* USD 16,054.00

0129266&lt;br/&gt;Gursky&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year award for
U.S.-France collaboration in geometry involves Matthew L. Gursky at Indiana
University, Paul C. Yang and Sung-Yung Chang at Princeton University, Frank
Merle and Emmanuel Hebey at the University of Cergy-Pontoise. The collaboration
addresses higher order elliptic, in particular fourth order, and parabolic
equations in geometry and mathematical physics. These geometry problems arise in
conformal geometry, Einstein manifolds, and canonical metrics. The US
mathematicians bring to this collaboration expertise in higher order equations.
This is complemented by French expertise in analytical
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award represents the US side of joint
proposals to the NSF and the French National Center for Scientific Research
(CNRS). NSF will cover travel funds and living expenses for individual visits of
US investigators and students and group travel to a workshop. The CNRS will
support the visits of the French researchers. The collaboration will advance
fundamental understanding of higher order equations as applied to problems in
physics, geometry, and analysis. The project adds an international dimension to
training of students and provides opportunities to develop international
partnerships.&lt;br/&gt;