* 0129227
* Spring Topology and Dynamics Conference 2002, at the University of Texas at Austin on March 21-23, 2002
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2004
* Cameron Gordon, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 01/31/2004
* USD 31,500.00

DMS-0129227&lt;br/&gt;Cameron M. Gordon&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Department of
Mathematics at the University of Texas &lt;br/&gt;at Austin will host the 2002
Spring Topology and Dynamics &lt;br/&gt;Conference. Now in its 36th year, this
is the largest annual &lt;br/&gt;topology conference in the US. It has a broad
scope that &lt;br/&gt;encompasses set-theoretic and general topology,
continuum&lt;br/&gt;theory and dynamical systems, geometric group theory and
&lt;br/&gt;geometric topology. It thus provides a unique forum for
&lt;br/&gt;researchers in a wide range of disciplines within topology.
&lt;br/&gt;There will be eight invited plenary one-hour lectures of a semi-
expository nature, given by leading researchers in the &lt;br/&gt;areas covered.
There will also be twenty invited half-hour &lt;br/&gt;lectures, together with
15-minute contributed talks, held in&lt;br/&gt;four parallel sessions. The
invited speakers have been &lt;br/&gt;selected with the help of an advisory
committee of experts &lt;br/&gt;in the various
subfields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Topology is one of the major subdisciplines of
mathematics, &lt;br/&gt;and, at just over a hundred years old, the youngest. It
&lt;br/&gt;originated with Henri Poincare around 1900, who introduced
&lt;br/&gt;it as a means of describing the qualitative behavior of
&lt;br/&gt;certain physical systems (for example, our solar
system),&lt;br/&gt;whose complexity renders a precise quantitative analysis
&lt;br/&gt;too difficult. The wide range covered by the subject today
&lt;br/&gt;is well represented by the Conference. General topology deals
&lt;br/&gt;with the abstract properties of topological spaces; set-
theoretic&lt;br/&gt;topology impinges upon the logical foundations of
mathematics. &lt;br/&gt;The study of dynamical systems is close to Poincare's
original motivation, and deals with the behavior of various iterative
&lt;br/&gt;processes. These often give rise to complex objects,
continua,&lt;br/&gt;which are studied in their own right. Geometric topology
&lt;br/&gt;deals with manifolds, objects which are locally like
&lt;br/&gt;n-dimensional Euclidean space, but whose global structure
&lt;br/&gt;might be quite complicated. For instance, there is a lot
&lt;br/&gt;of current activity in 3-dimensional topology, whose goal
is&lt;br/&gt;essentially to describe all theoretically possible
&lt;br/&gt;3-dimensional universes. Rich connections have recently
&lt;br/&gt;been discovered between this subject and quantum physics,
&lt;br/&gt;while on the other hand topological techniques from the
&lt;br/&gt;theory of knots in 3-dimensional space have recently &lt;br/&gt;been
applied to the study of DNA. Finally, geometric &lt;br/&gt;group theory, a
relatively new subject, studies groups, &lt;br/&gt;which are algebraic objects,
from a topological point of view; &lt;br/&gt;this is leading to deep connections
between topology and &lt;br/&gt;algebra. The interaction at the Conference
between workers &lt;br/&gt;in all these different branches of topology is
expected to &lt;br/&gt;be very fruitful.&lt;br/&gt;