* 0129804
* Cells and Boundaries All Around Us
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2007
* Randall Kamien, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 01/31/2007
* USD 210,000.00

This award supports theoretical research and education in the area of soft-
condensed matter physics. Research will focus on two problems: (1) The key
element in the theory of the self-assembly of macromolecular-and nano-crystals
is a connection between purely repulsive potentials and area-minimizing, space-
filling structures or honeycombs. This interaction is juxtaposed with entropic
arguments that show that close-packed lattices are favored. While in two
dimensions both close packing and perimeter minimization result in the same
triangular lattice, in three dimensions there is a fundamental frustration
between packing entropy and the area-minimizing lattices. The PI plans to
further develop these ideas, to extend them to non-cubic lattices, and to make a
closer connection between molecular details and this analogy. Molecular dynamics
and Monte Carlo simulations provide tests of these ideas. (2) The PI plans to
explore the nonlinear elasticity of layered systems. The energetics of defects
is dramatically altered when one adds those nonlinearities required by
rotational invariance -changing from exponentially decaying interactions to
power laws. The PI will further explore this effect and employ novel linear
decompositions of minimal surfaces as a starting point for variational
calculations. This activity also contributes to postgraduate education in the
theory of soft-condensed matter. %%% This award supports theoretical research
and education in the area of soft-condensed matter physics on two projects. The
first involves the study of the wide variety of crystal structures exhibited by
molecular assemblies, such as diblock copolymers, dendritic polymers, and
hyperstar polymers. The PI seeks to extend his previous work to understand these
structures as a consequence of an additional 'interfacial interaction'
contribution to the free energy that arises from the interactions between the
brush-like coats of these molecular assemblies. A firmer connection will be
developed between this interaction and microscopic properties of polymers. This
work has potential impact on fundamental science as well as on developing
concepts to aid in designing structures in technologically important self-
assembling materials. The second project is concerned with studying the role of
defects in elastic layered systems when the elasticity of the layer is
nonlinear. ***

















