* 0129892
* Optimal Utilization and Impact of Water Vapor and Other High Resolution Observations in Storm-Scale Quantitative Precipitation Forecasts (QPF)
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Jidong Gao, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 06/30/2006
* USD 825,133.00

In an effort to better characterize the four-dimensional distribution of water
in the atmosphere with a view toward improving understanding of its impact on
deep convection, the International H20 Project (IHOP-2002) field experiment will
take place over the Southern Great Plains during May and June of 2002. The four
focus areas of IHOP are: 1) quantitative precipitation forecasting (QPF); 2)
convective initiation; 3) atmospheric boundary layer processes; and 4)
instrumentation research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigators will
conduct storm-scale research with particular emphasis on moisture sensitivity
and data assimilation in the context of numerical quantitative precipitation
forecasting. Specifically, they will:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Develop new and
improved techniques, based particularly on variational approaches, for the
analysis and assimilation of water and related diabatic fields (e.g., latent and
sensible heating) at the scale of individual convective storms and their larger
mesoscale clusters.&lt;br/&gt;2. Study the impact of special and routinely
available, high-resolution observations of water vapor and hydrometeor content
on the forecasting of convective storm morphology and quantitative precipitation
at resolutions of one to a few kilometers. Both forward and adjoint models will
be used to assess sensitivity and data impact.&lt;br/&gt;3. Develop and evaluate
techniques for estimating error characteristics (i.e., error covariance
matrices) of numerical forecasts at the convective scale to improve the quality
of three-dimensional and four-dimensional variational data
assimilation.&lt;br/&gt;4. Apply newly developed single Doppler velocity and
thermodynamic retrieval algorithms to mobile radar data collected during IHOP
and assimilate the retrieved data into a forecast model. &lt;br/&gt;5. Provide
real-time, high resolution (2-3 km) analysis and forecasts for ranges between 6
and 12 hours, to assist the operational decision-making and targeting of mobile
observations during the field phase of the IHOP.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will provide much needed education and training for graduate students
and a post-doc in the increasingly important areas of variational data
assimilation, numerical weather prediction and ensemble forecasting. The
research findings will have a direct path to operations through the PI's
involvement as one of the lead scientists in the Weather Research and Forecast
(WRF) model system development project. Although much of the work to be
performed herein will use the Center for Analysis and Prediction of Storms'
(CAPS) Advanced Regional Prediction System (ARPS) owing to its maturity and
capability, the new WRF will be used whenever possible. Further, the results
obtained here, and the software developed, will be applied to further the
development of the WRF model as part of CAPS' involvement in the WRF project.