* 0129935
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Migration, Transitionalism and expressive culture  in Yoruba Churches
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2004
* Andrew Apter, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 03/31/2004
* USD 8,243.00

This dissertation research project by an anthropologist at the University of
Chicago examines how a dispersed Nigerian community maintains its Yoruba
cultural identity through ritual performances of religious music in African as
well as U.S. churches. The research focuses on the changes in cultural practices
and transnational identities of Nigerian migrants through the performance of
music, dance, and oratory in churches in Lagos and Chicago. The objectives of
this ethnographic research are to describe and analyze the formal
characteristics and aesthetic values of Yoruba church music, and to compare the
effects of migration on local identities and practices. The methods to be used
include participant observation, collection of demographic data, life histories,
and migration profiles through surveys and interviews, and detailed ethno-
musicological analysis of religious ceremonies. Through careful ethnographic
study of the local as well as transnational networks produced through musical
performance, this project will advance our understanding of the relationship
between cultural and economic processes of transnationalism and globalization.
Methodologically, the research will contribute to anthropological studies of
music and ritual by focusing on the ways in which music structures and is
structured by other ritual modes. Finally, the study will explicate the meanings
of the term "diaspora" as a social scientific concept as well as a lived
experience. In addition to contributing to the education of a young social
scientist, the research will advance our knowledge of this region of Africa, and
improve our understanding of how migrants preserve and modify their culture in
both originating and receiving societies