* 0129627
* Secure and Proactive DNS
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2006
* Giuseppe Ateniese, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 01/31/2006
* USD 366,253.00

The Domain Name System (DNS) is a hierarchically distributed database that
provides information fundamental to Internet operations, such as translating
between human readable host names and Internet Protocol (IP) addresses. Due to
the importance of the information served by DNS, there is a strong demand for
securing communication within the DNS system. The current (insecure) DNS does
not prevent attackers from modifying or injecting DNS messages. Users accessing
hosts on the Internet rely on the correct translation of host names to IP
addresses by the DNS. A typical attack, referred to as DNS spoofing, allows an
attacker to manipulate DNS answers on their way to the users. If an attacker
makes changes in the DNS tables of a single server, those changes will propagate
across the Internet as a viral infection. Increasingly, DNS is also being used
to perform load distribution among replicated servers. For instance, companies
such as Akamai have used DNS to provide Web content distribution. Moreover,
there is consensus that since DNS is a global and available database, it can be
employed as a Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) which would enable e-commerce
applications.

Securing DNS means providing data origin authentication and integrity
protection. Existing proposals for securing DNS are mainly based on public-key
cryptography. In this proposal, the researcher describes a new approach based on
standard symmetric (or secret-key) cryptographic techniques. The researcher
introduces the concept of DNS symmetric certificate that are used to create a
trusted path from the DNS root server to a server that is authoritative for a
portion of the DNS tree. This strategy is very similar to the one introduced by
Davis and Swick and symmetric certificates can be seen as a sort of tickets in
the Kerberos system which create a trusted path from the authentication server
to the destination server going through the ticket-granting server. DNS
symmetric certificate are as manageable as public-key certificates with the
exception that they cannot be shared, which is not generally required in the DNS
system. The project solution enables a wide range of secure services previously
believed impractical or too difficult to manage, such as mutual authentication
and key revocation. Moreover, the gain in terms of computational complexity,
network traffic, and storage requirements is impressive when compared with
public-key cryptography based approaches. The research has clear ideas on how to
define a secure DNS system based on symmetric-key cryptography. The researcher
proposes to build such a system and make public the prototype implementation.

The second part of the proposed research, would focus on a still unresolved
problem: A DNS server represents a single point of attack which could easily be
compromised. The researcher would like to investigate the possibility to
distribute the role of a single DNS server among several servers. The research
proposes a proactive DNS system that can survive component failures (whether
malicious or not) by combining standard techniques of decentralized storage and
dynamic self-maintenance. The researchers approach would allow DNS servers to
automatically recover from possible, undetected break-ins and then maintain
uninterrupted security. The researchers propose to use the proactive security
model, which provides a method for maintaining the overall security of a system
even when individual components are repeatedly broken into and controlled by an
attacker, as long as not too many servers are compromised at the same time. The
approach employed by the proactive security model is to first distribute the
cryptographic capabilities among several servers, next have the server
periodically engage in a refreshment protocol. Information gathered by an
attacker before a refreshment period becomes useless to attack the system in the
future. The researcher proposes to define, and build, an architecture that
combines decentralized storage system technologies, data redundancy and
encoding, and dynamic self-maintenance to create survivable DNS servers based on
the proactive security model.

