* 0129062
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Analysis, Computer Aided Design and Applications of Time Delay Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2003
* Keqin Gu, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 02/28/2003
* USD 10,000.00

0129062&lt;br/&gt;Gu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This one-year award in computer aided
design and applications involves researchers from nine US universities in the US
and seven laboratories of the French National Center for Scientific Research
(CNRS) and the French National Institute for Research in Informatics and Applied
Mathematics (INRIA). Keqin Gu of Southern Illinois University and Silviu-Iulian
Niculescu at the University of Science and Technology in Compiegne, France are
the principal organizers of this joint effort. US and French engineers,
mathematicians and computer scientists will meet in a workshop format to
collaborate on time-delay topics including: stability and performance issues,
input-output approaches, prediction and feedback control design, and
applications in energy distribution networks, computer networks, and load
balancing in parallel computation. The researchers will develop new software,
including a comprehensive toolbox for computer aided control systems design
applicable to time delay systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaboration takes
advantage of complementary US and French expertise in systems and control areas.
Time-delay systems are present in nature, from biology models to population
dynamics and from engineering to economics. The collaboration will advance
understanding of these systems and their applications to a wide variety of
scientific disciplines and problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award represents
the US side of parallel proposals to the NSF and the French National Center for
Scientific Research (CNRS). NSF will cover travel funds and living expenses for
the US investigators. The CNRS will support visits by French researchers to the
United States. &lt;br/&gt;