* 0129298
* LTREB: Collaborative Research:  Experimental Manipulation and Monitoring of the Chihuahuan Desert Ecosystem at Portal
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* James Brown, University of New Mexico
* Continuing grant
* Jess K. Zimmerman
* 06/30/2005
* USD 161,000.00

The PIs request LTREB support to continue experimental studies in the Chihuahuan
Desert near Portal, Arizona. The 20-ha study site contains 24 fenced plots, each
0.25 ha in area. They have maintained the removal of some or all species of
rodents and/or ants from 10 plots continuously since 1977 and from an additional
4 plots since 1988. Standardized censuses of rodents, ants, and plants provide
invaluable data on responses of individuals, populations, and communities both
to experimental perturbations and to background temporal and spatial variation
in the environment.

Results to date demonstrate: 1) complex interannual and seasonal dynamics of
rodent, ant, and plant populations; 2) direct effects of seed predation by
rodents, birds, and ants on winter annual plants; 3) direct effects of
competition by kangaroo rats on population densities and species diversity of
other seed-eating rodent species; 4) indirect effects of kangaroo rats on
vegetation, other rodents, birds, and lizards; 5) reorganization of the entire
ecosystem, including large increases in woody vegetation and extinctions,
colonizations, or shifts in abundance of many animal species, apparently caused
by a change in climate since the late 1970's; 6) regulation of emergent
properties, such as species diversity, biomass, and energy use of rodents and
plants, within narrow bounds despite large shifts in species composition in
response to environmental change.

The proposed research for the next five years includes: 1) continuation of
experimental manipulations and standardized censuses of rodents, ants, and
plants; 2) focus on spatial patterns and processes over a wide range of scales;
3) investigation of the experimental manipulations and functional groups of
organisms on ecosystem processes; 4) examination of the dynamics of the ant
community; and 5) assessment of the interacting influences of climate, livestock
grazing, and fire on the transition between desert shrubland and arid grassland.