* 0129895
* Biological Information Technology  Systems - BITS: Algorithms for Real-time Decoding and Modulation of Neural Spike Trains
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2007
* John Miller, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pinaki Mazumder
* 02/28/2007
* USD 1,400,347.00

EIA-0129895 -John P. Miller-Montana State University-Algorithms for real-time
decoding and modulation of neural spike trains-A grand challenge in neuroscience
is to understand the biological basis of information processing in nervous
systems. Three major goals facing sensory neuroscientists are a) to understand
how sensory information is encoded in the activity patterns of neural ensembles,
b) to understand how those activity patterns are decoded by cells at the
subsequent processing stages, and c) to understand how computations (e.g. visual
pattern recognition or oriented motor responses) are carried out on that decoded
information. Two major goals of the research proposed here are a) to develop a
formal, general approach toward achieving those goals, and b) to test and refine
that approach by characterizing the functional organization and neural encoding
scheme of a simple sensory system. These goals will be achieved through the
development of a data-driven model of the system. The model will be formulated
in terms of information processing units and information channels, rather than
in terms of individual neurons. That is, the functional units in the model will
be operators that carry out specific, independent computations (or information
transformation operations) at a specific processing stage in the test nervous
system, and the channels through which information is passed between these
functional units will correspond to information channels in the Shannon
sense.&lt;br/&gt;