* 0129082
* U.S.-France  Cooperative Research: Influence of Pressure, Aging and Molecular Architecture on Polymer Dynamics
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2007
* Alexei Sokolov, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 01/31/2007
* USD 19,945.00

0129082&lt;br/&gt;Sokolov&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year award for
U.S.-France collaboration in polymer sciences involves researchers and students
at the University of Akron and University of Paris Sud. Alexei Sokolov and
Christiane Alba-Simonesco lead the US and French efforts respectively. They will
perform experimental studies of polymer dynamics using light and neutron
scattering techniques, dielectric and calorimetric measurements. The
investigations focus on dependence of dynamics in polymeric systems, on
molecular architecture, pressure, and aging. The four experimental techniques
cover extremely broad frequency ranges and provide a bridge between fast
molecular motion and macroscopic properties, between dynamic and thermodynamic
quantities in polymeric systems. The Akron team will perform the light
scattering experiments. This is complemented by neutron scattering experiments
at the Institute Laue Langevin and dielectric and calorimetric measurements
performed at University of Paris Sud.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award represents
the US side of joint proposals to the NSF and the French National Center for
Scientific Research (CNRS). NSF will cover travel funds and living expenses of
the US investigators and students. The CNRS will support visits to the US of the
French participants. The program trains graduate students on different
techniques at large international facilities. The collaboration will advance
understanding of polymer dynamics in the high frequency range and development of
new plastics for high frequency applications in information, computer and
communication technologies. &lt;br/&gt;