* 0129883
* SOFTWARE: Building High Performance and Reliable System Infrastructure for Clustered Scientific Data Centers
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Xiaodong Zhang, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* David Du
* 08/31/2005
* USD 95,075.00

Internet Data Centers are built by clustered high performance servers,
workstations, and PCs, where the size of the cluster ranges from LAN (local area
networks) to WAN (wide area networks for metasystems and for grid computing).
The data centers not only provide data searching/storage services, but also
provide large scale computing services. Effective resource management presents
important and challenging research and development issues to be addressed in the
areas of scalability and reliability. Cluster-based data centers provide us with
tremendous opportunities for aggregating huge amounts of information and
computing resources in a cost-effective way, but it is harder to build
distributed data centers that are efficient. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
exploratory award will investigate several areas of research in resource
management in distributed systems based on the core technology of being able to
monitor and predict the usage of resources in a distributed system: (1)
development of a unified network and system information extraction tool for
performance prediction, and data center resource utilization; (2) modeling of
and profiling network behavior and activities; and (3) development of dynamic
scheduling schemes and their implementations for optimal utilizations and
management of global resources in Internet data centers including networks,
memory, and I/O systems. The result will be the identification of the most
promising line of research for future investigations.&lt;br/&gt;