* 0129573
* BE: A Multi-Method Analysis of the Social and Technical Conditions for Interdisciplinary Collaboration
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/2002,06/30/2003
* Julian Orr, The Hybrid Vigor Institute
* Standard Grant
* Thomas J. Baerwald
* 06/30/2003
* USD 253,490.00

Numerous factors have driven the desire to promote more interdisciplinary
research in the environmental sciences, including the desire to better
understand the complex interactions among the many different natural and human
systems that characterize the world and the need to better integrate the efforts
of those researchers seeking to answer fundamental questions about various
systems with those interesting advancing methods and techniques for the conduct
of scientific research. Despite the acclaim accorded interdisciplinary research,
relatively little scholarly attention has been given to dynamics that result in
effective work that spans disciplinary boundaries. This project will use a
multi-level, multi-method approach to study interdisciplinary collaboration as
it relates to scientific production and innovation. The investigators will
combine a socio-anthropological approach with an organizational perspective to
examine how interdisciplinary collaboration transpires as well as when and how
it leads to scientific production and innovation. This project will be a pilot
study designed to test the effectiveness and tractability of a range of
approaches on a sample of interdisciplinary centers that focus on environmental
research and education and that have received NSF research support. The pilot
will emphasize two strands if research. The first strand will focus on
interdisciplinary research network structure. It will use techniques of social
network analysis to explore structural relations among individuals in eight
sample centers. Data used in this part of the pilot will be drawn from a variety
of sources, including surveys of individual researchers, a census of ties among
individuals within centers, and bibliometric analyses of citations in curriculum
vitae. The second strand will focus on interdisciplinary research network
dynamics. This strand will focus on interaction and organizational analyses of
knowledge transfer, conversion, and integration. Special attention will be given
to the connectedness, centrality, and roles and positions of different
researchers and disciplines in the networks of two sample centers. Data will be
gathered through the conduct of interviews, the review of artifacts and
documents, and the observation of activities in the centers. The results of
these activities will be used to generate white papers, to make presentations as
major meetings of groups like the American Association for the Advancement of
Science and the American Sociological Association, and to submit papers to
scholarly journals like Social Studies of Science, Science Communication, Human
Communication Research, Social Epistemology, and Organization Science.

Through these analyses, the investigators expect to provide new insights into
the personal, organizational, psychological, and intellectual components of the
research environments and interactions within centers, and they expect to
distinguish between factors that characterize successful interdisciplinary
collaborations. This project will advance general knowledge of the factors that
lead to successful interdisciplinary research, thereby facilitating such work
among members of the myriad research communities who now are exploring
collaborative work with each other. The project also should assist NSF and other
funding agencies in assessing which proposed projects are most likely to
generate new insights that span traditional disciplinary boundaries. This
project is being supported with funds designated by NSF for the support of
projects in Biocomplexity in the Environment.