* 0129185
* Integrated Analysis of Fossil Lemur Sites
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2006
* David Burney, Fordham University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Kay
* 02/28/2006
* USD 191,498.00

A newly developed approach to excavation below the water table, tested
successfully last year under a High Risk Anthropological Research award, will be
applied to fossil lemur sites throughout Madagascar. The anticipated rich yield
of data will permit the examination of the nature and timing of the extinctions
of the larger native animals and the landscape changes that occurred on the
island in the last two thousand years. In the past, sites containing a fossil
record of the period during which the extinctions occurred have generally been
excavated without suitable stratigraphic control. By creating a temporary
depression in the water table in order to remove the sediments with full three-
dimensional stratigraphic control, high-pressure ultralight water pumps now make
it possible to re-excavate key sites, and open others previously uninvestigated
because of their flooded nature. Improvements in radiocarbon dating techniques
and a multidisciplinary approach to analysis now make it feasible to correlate
evidence from the bones of extinct giant lemurs and other extinct animals with
many other types of data, including small vertebrate and invertebrate remains,
pollen and plant macrofossils, charcoal particles, stable isotopes, ancient DNA,
and human artifacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrating these results at the
landscape level, through the choice of key sites from the various regions of the
island for detailed analysis and the compilation and evaluation of existing data
sets for comparison, will provide the most rigorous test yet devised for the
Blitzkrieg Hypothesis (rapid overkill by humans) and five competing hypotheses
for the extinctions in Madagascar. Determining the length of the period of
overlap between humans and the extinct megafauna and the sequence of biotic
changes will be particularly critical to the evaluation of competing
explanations for the extinctions. In addition, new insights will be gathered
concerning the diet and habits of extinct giant lemurs, range shifts of extant
lemur species, and the timing of human arrival and landscape transformation.
Applying these techniques will enrich our basic understanding of lemur evolution
and ecology and of the role of humans in transforming Madagascar.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Office of International Science and Engineering and
Environmental Social and Behavioral Sciences Activities are assisting in the
funding in order to enhance international cooperation and educational
opportunities for undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;