* 0129885
* A Symposium Associated with the Opening of the Play Copenhagen in Washington, DC
* MPS,PHY
* 03/15/2002,12/31/2003
* Brian Schwartz, Research Foundation of the City University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence S. Brown
* 12/31/2003
* USD 19,301.00

A symposium will be organized in conjunction with the opening of Michael Frayn's
play "Copenhagen" in its four-week run in Washington, currently scheduled for
February 26, 2002 through March 24, 2002. The play reenacts possible events
associated with an actual 1941 meeting between Werner Heisenberg and Niels Bohr
in Nazi-occupied Denmark. The symposium will seek to ensure and expand the
involvement of the general public and students in the science and drama of the
play. There is a need to engage and inform the general public in the
understanding and appreciation of science, scientists and the impact of science
on our daily lives. The play Copenhagen, perhaps more than any science-based
play, involves the audience in an understanding of the impact of the new
physics. The symposium will be held about a week before the play opening and
consists of three parts: 1- The Science and History Surrounding Copenhagen
focused on the science in Copenhagen, and its modern day impact. 2- An
Understanding of the Characters of the Play, with speakers who knew the three
characters in the play, (Bohr, his wife Margrethe and Heisenberg) and.
3-Deconstructing Copenhagen, with the playwright, theater critics, writers and
journalists examining the construction and dramatic elements of the play. The
audience for the symposium is the general public with a strong emphasis on
students. The impact of the symposium and the associate colloquia and seminars
will extend well beyond the attendees through wide interest by the local press
including, TV, radio and print. The extended colloquia and discussions will
encourage debates and interdisciplinary learning opportunities by including the
sciences (physics), the humanities (history), and the arts (theater).