* 0129037
* RUI:  Resource, Predation, and Disturbance Interactions in a Grassland Community
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2005
* Matthew Moran, Hendrix College
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 03/31/2005
* USD 140,644.00

Resource, Predation, and Disturbance Interactions in a Grassland
Community&lt;br/&gt;PI: Matthew D. Moran DEB- 0129037&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This
study is designed to investigate how carnivores, nutrients, and fire affect
grassland communities. Previous studies have shown that these three factors are
important for determining the population sizes of many different animals and the
growth of plants in grasslands. However, how these processes interact with each
other is not well understood. This study is also designed to compare small
isolated grassland communities in Arkansas to those larger, more well studied
tallgrass prairies in the Great Plains of North America. The grasslands of the
Great Plains have many similarities with my field sites, including similar plant
species and frequent disturbance by fire. However, my field sites lack (and
historically lacked) large mammal herbivores such as bison. This study will
therefore help determine if the results of studies on the tallgrass prairies
apply to other grassland systems.&lt;br/&gt; Proper management of grasslands is
important as these systems have been drastically altered by human activity and
often contain rare and declining species. This study will address what factors
affect the abundance and diversity of life in grasslands and will therefore
provide information as to the proper human management of these systems. Some of
the research will take place on state owned lands with public access and will
help with both management and education of the public. This project will also
provide support for numerous undergraduate research projects furthering the
educational goals of the National Science Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;