* 0129844
* The Molecular Basis for Heavy Metal Accumulation and Tolerance in the Hyperaccumulating Plant Species, Thlaspi Caerulescens
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2001,11/30/2005
* Leon Kochian, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Standard Grant
* Gavin Thompson
* 11/30/2005
* USD 416,927.00

0129844&lt;br/&gt;Leon V. Kochian&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Contamination of soils
with toxic heavy metals is a serious worldwide problem both for human health and
agriculture. Cleanup of hazardous wastes by the currently used engineering-based
technologies has been estimated to cost at least $400 billion in the U.S. alone.
Recently, there has been considerable interest in the use of terrestrial plants
as an alternative, "green technology" for the remediation of surface soils
contaminated with toxic heavy metals. The principal behind phytoremediation is
to grow plants on a contaminated site in much the same way crop plants are grown
on agricultural soils. If the plants have an affinity for the heavy metals in
the soil, they can extract the metals from the soils and accumulate them in the
above-ground shoot biomass. These heavy metal-containing shoot tissues are then
harvested and ashed to reduce their volume prior to storage in a waste
repository. This plant growth and harvesting process is repeated until the level
of contaminant in the soil is reduced to acceptable levels (usually a number of
years).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major factor behind the recent interest in
phytoremediation of metal polluted soils has been the growing awareness by the
scientific community of the existence of a number of plant species that not only
can tolerate high levels of toxic heavy metals in the soil, but actually can
accumulate these metals to very high levels in the easily harvested above-ground
shoot biomass. Over 200 terrestrial species have been reported that grow on high
metal soils and can tolerate and accumulate high levels of heavy metals such as
Zn, Cd, Cu, and Ni in their shoots. These plants have been coined
hyperaccumulators; the very existence of these interesting metal
hyperaccumulator species suggests that the genetic potential exists for
phytoremediation to be successful. Most of these hyperaccumulator species,
however, are small and slow growing, and because they produce limited shoot
biomass their potential for large-scale decontamination of polluted soils is
limited. Transferring the genes expressing the hyperaccumulating phenotype to
higher shoot biomass-producing plants has been suggested as an avenue for
enhancing the potential of phytoremediation as a viable commercial technology.
Progress towards this goal, however, has been hindered by a lack of
understanding of the basic molecular, biochemical and physiological mechanisms
involved in heavy metal hyperaccumulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the best
known metal hyperaccumulators is Thlaspi caerulescens, a member of the cabbage
family that can accumulate the heavy metals cadmium (Cd) and zinc (Zn) to
extremely high levels in the shoot. Additionally, certain ecotypes of T.
caerulescens have been reported to accumulate high levels of other heavy metals,
including Ni and Co. The unique physiology of heavy metal transport and
tolerance in Thlaspi caerulescens makes it a very interesting experimental
system for basic research aimed at elucidating plant mechanisms and the
associated genes controlling heavy metal
hyperaccumulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this research are to
identify the basic mechanisms of heavy metal hyperaccumulation in plants, and to
isolate and characterize the suite of genes that underly this hyperaccumulation
trait in Thlaspi caerulescens. Dr. Kochian's group will use recent advances in
plant molecular biology and genomics to identify both metal transporter genes
involved in metal accumulation and tolerance, as well as genes involved in the
production of low molecular weight organic compounds (e.g., peptides, organic
genes, amino acids, metallothioneins, phytochelatins) that can bind and detoxify
Zn and Cd in plant cells. Based on the recent sequencing and analysis of the
Arabidopsis genome, it is now known that higher plants employ the same families
of metal transporters recently identified and characterized in yeast, bacteria
and mammals for metal accumulation and homeostasis. Dr. Kochian's group has
cloned genes in T. caerulescens from these different metal transporter gene
families and will characterize these transporters to determine their role in
metal hyperaccumulation. This characterization will include determining in which
plant tissue and cell type different genes are expressed, the membrane
localization of transport proteins to help assign a potential role for each
transporter, and the elucidation of the physiological function of individual
metal transporters. They also are expressing T. caerulescens genes in yeast to
look for genes conferring metal tolerance through the production of metal
binding organic ligands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These approaches should allow the
investigators to identify the suite of genes that confer heavy metal
hyperaccumulation in T. caerulescens and to elucidate the molecular mechanism(s)
for this trait. The ultimate goal of this research is to use these
hyperaccumulation genes to develop transgenic plants that both are metal
hyperaccumulators and produce high shoot biomass , and thus will be well suited
for the phytoremediation of metal contaminated soils.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project was funded through the Joint Program on Phytoremediation, co-sponsored
by the Environmental Protection Agency, the National Science Foundation, the
Office of Naval Research, and the Strategic Environmental Research and
Development Program.&lt;br/&gt;