* 0129826
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Community characteristics and food-sharing among the Huaorani of Ecuador
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2003
* Monique Borgerhoff Mulder, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 01/31/2003
* USD 11,603.00

Based on the theoretical framework of human behavioral ecology, this research
will examine the importance of community-level variation in food sharing
patterns, and the relationship between intra-community sharing and extra-
community trading of meat resources. The importance of household-level factors
in food sharing patterns has been investigated previously, but little attention
has been given to differences among communities. Therefore, this research
focuses on the contextual variation across two different Huaorani communities
located within the same region of the Ecuadorian Amazon, and the role that this
community-level variation has in predicting food sharing patterns. The PI, a
graduate student in anthropology from the University of California at Davis,
will investigate the hypotheses that 1) contextual differences between the two
communities influence the extent of intra-community food sharing observed, and
2) the degree of intra-community sharing and the degree of extra-community
trading are inversely related. Contextual factors to be considered include
community layout, relatedness of households, and potential reproductive
opportunities. Data will be collected through direct observation and structured
interviews. In addition to providing doctoral training for a promising woman
scientist, the research will contribute to understanding the potential impact of
indigenous people's participation in market economies on local wildlife
conservation.