* 0129530
* Workshop for the Advancement and Retention of Underrepresented and Minority Engineering Educators
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2001,06/30/2003
* Mardi Hastings, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* George Chiu
* 06/30/2003
* USD 122,489.00

Proposal No.#0129530 PI: Hastings, Mardi

This project supports a workshop that is designed to encourage retention and
advancement of qualified women and underrepresented minority-engineering
educators in pursuit of scientific and engineering challenges. The workshop will
bring together a select group of 80 of the nation's outstanding engineering
educators who predominately have been in tenure track positions for less than
five years or are in jthelast year of their Ph.D. program and actively pursuing
tenure track academic positions. The participants will be employed in teaching
and/or research positions and actively developing their own unique research
programs.

Specific workshop goals are to: I) foster technical and intellectual exchange
among Ph.D. level, underrepresented and minority engineers who are or desire to
be engineering educators; II) instill in its participants the sense of a
technical community in which they can thrive and to which they can contribute;
and III) increase participant awareness of research and funding opportunities.
The workshop will consist of ten formal sessions spread over a three-day period
emphasize the integration of research and education presentations on funding
opportunities from agencies such as NSF, ARO, AFOSR, ONR, DARPA, and NASA. A
panel of university deans will discuss their perspectives on reasonable career
expectations and demands, include the discussion of issues related to tenure,
teaching, research, publications, funding, outreach and a rewarding personal
life along the career path of an engineering educator.

The workshop proceeding will summarize the recommendations from the working
session discussions, provide a workshop outcomes ass4esment and recommendations
statement, and include a two page abstract from each participant that describes
their research interest.

The envisioned significance and benefits of the workshop are the increased
retention of women and underrepresented minority engineers as active researchers
and educators and development of infrastructures of colleagues is the same field
that is a rich diversity.