* 0129226
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Anisotropy in Shrinkage during Sintering
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Antonios Zavaliangos, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 02/28/2006
* USD 18,335.00

0129226&lt;br/&gt;Zavaliangos&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year award
supports US-France collaboration in metal and ceramic powder manufacturing
between Antonios Zavaliangos of Drexel University and Didier Bouvard of the
National Polytechnic Institute, Grenoble, France. Their collaboration addresses
modeling and experimental aspects of anisotoropic shrinkage in sintering and
compaction powder processes. During these processes, powder mixtures are pressed
into different and sometimes complex forms. Characterization of microstructure
evolution during powder sintering and modeling of anisotropic aspects will be
studied. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaboration merges modeling and
experimental approaches. The US investigator brings to this collaboration,
expertise in thermomechanical modeling. This is complemented by participation in
experiments in France and French expertise in physiochemical and microstructural
characterization. Sintering of powder mixtures is a key step in a number of
processing techniques for a variety of industrial processes, such as
manufacturing of steel parts and hard magnets. This research will advance our
understanding of behavior of powder mixtures and enhance predictive modeling
capabilities. The collaboration includes an educational component. An
instructional module is planned for classroom use and undergraduate students
will participate in the experiments in France.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award
represents the US side of parallel proposals to the NSF and the CNRS. NSF will
cover travel funds and living expenses for the US investigator and students. The
CNRS will support visits by French researchers to the United States. &lt;br/&gt;