* 0129064
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: CFD Simulation of Chemical Reactors: Development and Experimental Validation of Micromixing Models for Product Selectivity
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Rodney Fox, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 02/28/2006
* USD 22,738.00

0129064&lt;br/&gt;Fox&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year award for U.S.-France
collaboration in chemical and thermal systems involves researchers and students
at Iowa State University and the University of Rouen in France. Rodney O Fox and
Pascale Domingo lead the US and French efforts respectively. Computational fluid
dynamics (CFD) macroscopic models for liquid-phase turbulent reacting flows will
be studied. Such models have potential for improving process design in the
chemical process industry. The research addresses the utility of CFD models for
reducing pollution and toxic byproducts caused by poor product selectivity. The
collaboration's focus is code development and validation, and detailed
simulations for experiments conducted on the Iowa State planar-jet reactor. The
US research group will obtain data for a well-defined reactor geometry using
particle-image velocimetry and planar laser-induced fluorescence. This will be
complemented by the French group's studies of direct numerical simulations and
large-eddy simulations of flow statistics that cannot easily be measured with
the techniques used by the Iowa State group.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award
represents the US side of joint proposals to the NSF and the French National
Center for Scientific Research (CNRS). NSF will cover travel funds and living
expenses of the US investigators and students. The CNRS will support visits to
the US of the French participants. The collaboration will produce a set of
detailed data for CFD model validation of liquid-phase chemical reactors.
&lt;br/&gt;