* 0129134
* Expectations for the Detection of Climate Change in Vertical Temperature Data
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Elizabeth Weatherhead, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 03/31/2006
* USD 192,000.00

This research involves using vertical temperature measurements from available
sonde stations and from the space-based Microwave Sounding Unit (MSU) to
determine the altitudes and geographic locations expected to be optimal for
detecting long-term changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both radiosonde profiles of
atmospheric temperature and MSU estimates of lower and upper tropospheric
temperatures will be used to characterize the variability and autocorrelation of
the profile data. This information will then be combined with general
circulation model projections to discern the altitudes and locations at which
significant climate changes might be detected earliest. The methods follow
statistical techniques previously applied to ozone and other geophysical
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to detect the atmospheric changes
expected to accompany increasing levels of greenhouse gases can assist the
climate community in accurately attributing the environmental effects and may
help quantify the extent to which these changes are due to anthropogenic
components. The results will help determine if the projected changes should be
detectable either currently, or in the near future. The techniques can also
quantify the advantage of improved data accuracy in reducing the time to detect
trends. The work is important in terms of developing realistic expectations for
the detection of climate change.