* 0129168
* Why are Chiles Hot? An Integrative Exploration of Secondary Metabolite Function in Ripe Fruit
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2002,06/30/2006
* Joshua Tewksbury, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 06/30/2006
* USD 328,415.00

Non-technical summary of "Why are chiles hot? An integrative exploration of
secondary metabolite function in ripe fruit"

Doug Levey and Joshua Tewksbury University of Florida

It is well known that the pungent compound in chile fruits, capsaicin, has many
physiological effects in humans. Although it is widely used in medicine and is
one of the most important spices in the world, the evolutionary basis for
capsaicin remains mysterious. Why and how did the compound evolve? Is its
function secondary (non-adaptive) or can its presence in chiles be explained by
selective pressures of frugivores? Because similar secondary compounds are
common in other fruits, our work will simultaneously address a long-standing
paradox: Why do many plants place compounds in ripe fruit that are apparently
toxic to fruit-eating animals? Six hypotheses for the role of secondary
metabolites in ripe fruit, using chiles and capsaicin as a model system will be
tested. The work will entail laboratory trials with captive frugivores and field
studies on two chile species that are widely separated geographically and
phylogenetically. One occurs in Arizona, the other in Boliva. In Boliva, a
variety is available that is non-pungent (i.e., it lacks capsaicin). By
comparing consumption of pungent and non-pungent chiles by a wide diversity of
frugivores, from microbes to vertebrates, we will be able to determine the
effect of capsaicin on frugivore behavior. Parallel studies will use artificial
fruits made with and without capsaicin. These experiments will lead to a better
understanding of capsaicin's evolutionary function and will pave the way for
potential applications of capsaicin in human health, pest management, food
storage, and chile cultivation.