* 0129020
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Cold Rydberg Atoms: At the Crossing of Atomic, Molecular, Solid State, and Plasma Physics
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Thomas Gallagher, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 02/28/2006
* USD 18,300.00

0129020&lt;br/&gt;Gallagher&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year award for
U.S.-France collaboration in atomic, molecular and optical physics involves
Thomas Gallager, Pierre Pillet and graduate students at the University of
Virginia and the Laboratoire Aime Cotton in Orsay, France respectively. The goal
is to use cold Rydberg gases as a controllable test system for several different
kinds of experiments. Cold Rydberg atoms mimic an amorphous solid, the
properties of which can be manipulated using small tuning electric fields or by
changing the Rydberg state. This cooperative research program will explore
collectively this phenomena in cold Rydberg atom samples, the Rydberg to plasma
evolution, and dipole-dipole interactions in frozen Rydberg gases. The main
questions addressed are: How does ultracold plasma containing cold atoms in a
well-defined Rydberg state come to equilibrium? What key role do dipole-dipole
interactions play in quantum logic gates? The French group brings to this
collaboration expertise in high-resolution laser spectroscopy and cold atom
manipulation. This is complemented by US expertise in manipulation of Rydberg
atoms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award represents the US side of joint
proposals to the NSF and the French National Center for Scientific Research
(CNRS). NSF will cover travel funds and living expenses for the US investigator
and graduate students. CNRS will support the visits of the French researchers
and graduate students to the United States. The collaboration will advance
fundamental understanding of the atomic-solid state connection in cold Rydberg
gases and this phenomena's applications in plasma and condensed matter physics.
&lt;br/&gt;