* 0129079
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Flow and Resuspension of a Suspension in a Pipe
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Jeffrey Morris, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 02/28/2006
* USD 20,238.00

0129079&lt;br/&gt;Morris&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year award for US-
France collaboration in chemical and transport systems involves researchers and
students at Georgia Institute of Technology, University of Florida, University
of Marseilles, and the Ecole Polytechnique. The US investigators, Jeffrey F.
Morris and Jason E. Butler, and the French investigators, Elisabeth Guazzelli
and Paul Manneville, will collaborate on theoretical and experimental studies of
fluid transport and suspension of solid particles in pipes (tubes). The
suspension mechanical perspective - in which particles impact the flow processes
- and the role of inertia will be studied. Particle fraction and velocity
distributions in pipes, flow structures and stability, bulk stresses in
particle-laden liquids are emphasized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaboration
merges experimental and theoretical expertise of the US and French research
teams. Both types of expertise reside in the US and French groups. Jeffrey
Morris is known for his quantitative theories. This is complemented by the
French investigator's experimental expertise. The collaboration provides access
to some unique French experimental facilities equipped with a functioning
experimental loop for pipe flow suspensions. This collaboration advances
understanding of engineering problems related to particulate transport. These
problems are important in numerous industrial and geotechnical areas and
processes, including fluvial and oceanic sediment transport and deposition.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award represents the US side of parallel proposals
to the NSF and the CNRS. NSF will cover travel funds and living expenses for the
US investigator and students. The CNRS will support visits by French researchers
and students to the United States. &lt;br/&gt;