* 0129613
* Exploratory/GOALI: Synthesis and Structure-Property Investigations of Branched Block Copolymer Brushes
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2002,09/30/2003
* Victor Thalacker, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 09/30/2003
* USD 119,964.00

Abstract CTS-0129613 Kilbey, S. Michael Clemson University

In this exploratory project the PI and Co-PI will focus on creating a series of
branched amphiphilic block copolymers and investigating how their assembly,
organization and structure are different than brushes formed form linear
polymers.

In order to maximize the productivity during this one-year exploratory project,
the synthesis efforts will focus three types of architectures. The PI and Co-PI
will synthesize comb-block, star-block copolymers and make proof-of-concept
syntheses of A2A'B and A3A'B copolymers. The A2A'B and A3A'B copolymers are
novel materials.

In terms of characterization, the PI and Co-PI will focus on two key techniques:
They will use the surface forces apparatus (SFA) to investigate the structure of
brushes made from the aforementioned materials; they will also investigate the
surface morphology and organization using atomic force microscopy (AFM). The
former technique will focus on the layers as they are assembled from a selective
solvent, and the latter technique will examine dried layers after the assembly
process. The focus here is to explore how the connectivity and size of the new,
branched polymers affects the organization and structure of the brush layer.

This is an Exploratory/GOALI grant in which the PI and Co-PI will collaborate
with Dr. Victor P. Thalacker, Senior Laboratory Manager at 3M Corporate Process
Technology Center in St. Paul, Minnesota.