* 0129805
* RUI: Functional Convergence in the Venom Delivery System of Snakes
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Bruce Young, Lafayette College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 06/30/2005
* USD 88,483.00

Snakes have one of the most specialized feeding mechanisms among vertebrate
animals. One of the key aspects of snake feeding is the presence of a venom
delivery system in roughly one-fifth of the living snakes. Molecular and
anatomical studies suggest that a venom delivery system has evolved
independently in at least four snake lineages. The Viperidae (including pit-
vipers and true vipers), the Elapidae (cobras and sea snakes), the Atractaspidae
(Stiletto snakes from Africa), and several taxa - such as the boomslang - within
the Colubridae have all evolved venom delivery systems. In recent years a suite
of techniques were developed to study the mechanics of venom injection in one
representative viper, the western diamondback rattlesnake (Crotalus atrox). The
purpose of this grant is to apply these same techniques to the mechanics of
venom delivery in representative elapids. This will be the first experimental
analysis of venom expulsion in an elapid, and a comparison with the earlier
studies will highlight the degree of functional convergence among snake venom
delivery systems. The venom delivery system will be examined through four
integrated projects on the kinematics, neuro-muscular control, functional
morphology, and behavioral ecology of venom injection. The kinematics of venom
expulsion will be studied using high-speed digital videography and computer-
based image analysis techniques to document the degree to which the monocled
cobra (Naja kaouthia) modulates its strike depending on such factors as the size
of the target and the behavioral context of the strike. The kinematics of venom
"spitting" by the red spitting cobra (N. pallida) will also be documented. In
snakes the venom is expulsed through skeletal muscle contraction; by regulating
the contractile state of the muscle the snake could control the amount of venom
injected. The extrinsic venom gland musculature will be studied in N. kaouthia
using anatomical techniques to document the gross and microscopic structure of
the muscle and its innervation. Subsequent experimental analyses will combine
muscle stimulation with measurements of venom flow and pressure to document any
spatial functional specialization within the muscle, and the motor units within
the muscle will be mapped using glycogen depletion. In cobras venom forced from
the venom gland by muscle contraction flows through the venom duct into a series
of soft tissue chambers which are surrounded by the fang sheath, a drape of
connective tissue and epithelium. The functional morphology of this region will
be studied in both N. kaouthia and N. pallida using gross and microscopic
anatomy, radiopaque tracers (used to document venom barriers), cannulation
experiments, and recordings of venom pressure. The behavioral ecology of venom
injection will be studied by chronically implanting transonic flow probes onto
the venom duct of N. kaouthia. Venom flow (measured with flow probes) will be
synchronized with high-speed digital videography while the cobra strikes a
variety of defensive and predatory targets. This will document the kinematics of
venom flow during the strike and reveal the extent to which cobras inject
differential volumes of venom depending on target size or behavioral context.