* 0129212
* A Five-Gene Region Phylogeny for Cordyceps and the Clavicipitaceae (Ascomycota)
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2005
* Joseph Spatafora, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 12/31/2005
* USD 260,000.00

0129212&lt;br/&gt;Spatafora&lt;br/&gt;Cordyceps is a genus of ascomycete fungi
that includes over 300 described species, most of which are pathogens of insects
and other fungi. It is a member of the family Clavicipitaceae, which also
includes numerous species of plant pathogens. The Clavicipitaceae are
fascinating in that all species must associate with other organisms in nature in
order to complete their life cycle. This association is usually antagonistic,
resulting in disease and death of the host organism. Many of these fungal
pathogens are only known from asexually reproducing states, which often inhibits
accurate identification and inferences about their evolutionary origins. Results
from prior NSF supported research by Dr. Spatafora are consistent with an
interpretation of host jumping through evolutionary time and multiple losses of
sexual reproduction. The data reject previous hypotheses pertaining to the
evolution of this group of fungi, which is reflected in an outdated
classification that does not reflect true relationships or possess predictive
value. Research funded by this grant will build upon previous data by collecting
and analyzing DNA sequences from five nuclear and mitochondrial genes. The
overall goal of this research is to develop robust and testable hypotheses for
the evolutionary relationships of Cordyceps and related fungi, which in turn
will provide a basic understanding of the evolution of host association,
pathogenicity, and mode of reproduction. To develop such hypotheses, the
diversity of Cordyceps species will be sampled with a special emphasis on East
Asia, the most species rich region of the world for the genus. In order to
sample this diversity, Dr. Spatafora will collaborate with researchers from
Japan, Korea, and Thailand. They will assist in collecting of species and he
will provide training opportunities in molecular evolution of fungi for a
limited number of graduate students from each of these countries. The students
will visit the laboratory at Oregon State University for a period of
approximately six months, after which they will return to their home
institutions with the goal of transferring this technology.&lt;br/&gt;Many
species of Cordyceps and related fungi of the Clavicipitaceae are important in
both agriculture and medicine. Numerous species of Cordyceps are pathogens of
insects and are promising candidates for biological control of insect pests.
Biological control is an active area of research that may lessen the dependence
on, and environmental impact of, pesticides. Central to development of efficient
biological control systems is an accurate understanding of both the
relationships of candidate species and the overall pattern of host association
and niche specialization. In addition, many species of Cordyceps and the
Clavicipitaceae produce biologically active compounds that function in
pathogenicity. Some of these compounds have been exploited for use in medicine
(e.g., Cyclosporin A from Cordyceps subsessilis), but others likely await
discovery. An understanding of the evolutionary relationships of these fungi
will provide a predictive framework in which more focused and directed research
in other fields of biology (e.g., biological control, drug discovery, etc.) can
proceed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;