* 0129155
* U.S.-France Collaborative Research: High-Resolution U-Channel Magnetic Study of Late Quaternary Sediment Cores From the East Antarctic Margin.
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/2001,12/31/2003
* Stefanie Brachfeld, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 12/31/2003
* USD 17,600.00

0129155 Brachfeld

This two-year award for U.S.-France cooperative research involves Stefanie
Brachfeld of Ohio State University and Catherine Kissel and Carlo Laj of the
Laboratory for Climate and Environmental Sciences at the French National Center
for Scientific Research (CNRS), Paris, France. The objective of the research is
the construction of a proven, millennial-scale correlation and dating tool for
Antarctic glacial-marine sediments beyond the range of radio-carbon dating.
Researchers will utilize an established geomagnetic method of dating sediment
cores in which paleointensity records from an undated core are correlated with
high-resolution paleointensity target curves in order to import absolute ages to
one's core site. The analyses will be conducted on nine late Pleistocene through
Holocene kasten cores and jumbo piston cores from sites in the East Antarctic
land margin.

The construction of the paleointensity records requires investigation of the
remanence vector recorded by the sediments (paleomagnetism) and investigation of
the magnetic mineral assemblage in the sediments (rock magnetism). The US
investigator is an expert in rock magnetic analyses. This is complemented by
French expertise in paleomagnetism and access to the French lab's high-
resolution pass-through magnetometer that will be used to measure u-channel
samples.

This award represents the US side of a joint proposal to the NSF and the French
National Center for Scientific Research (CNRS). NSF will cover travel funds and
living expenses for the US investigators and graduate students. The CNRS will
support the visits of French researchers to the United States.