* 0129144
* Elaboration of a Novel Theory for the Scaling of Plant Form, Function, and Diversity
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Brian Enquist, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* William E. Winner
* 08/31/2002
* USD 35,000.00

0129144&lt;br/&gt;Brian Enquist&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support
field research to obtain data for assessing assumptions and predictions of a new
theoretical model for scaling plant anatomical and physiological attributes from
within individuals to populations, and even ecosystems. The ultimate goal of
this research is to expand and elaborate a general theoretical and mechanistic
framework for scaling in biology. This framework is based on evolutionary and
physical first principles, integrating how specific attributes of organismal
form and function change with organismal size (allometry) and how such changes
influence ecological and evolutionary phenomena. Field and laboratory
assessments are necessary to (i) advance future efforts to scale anatomical and
physiological attributes of individuals and (ii) to link how attributes of
organisms at the level of the individual ramifies (scales) across plant
populations, communities, and ecosystems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
focuses on understanding plant vascular form and function. It will provide the
base-line allometric data for woody plant species necessary to assess numerous
predictions of theoretical models. Specifically, the research will focus on
intensive anatomical and physiological measurements of four tree species which
span a range of environmental gradients and are functionally diverse (including
the three major classes of vascular structure; ring-, diffuse-, and non-porous
vascular plants). Standardized measurements of anatomical and hydrodynamic
attributes of individuals will be used to evaluate the model. For example,
specific measurements will be made to determine how total leaf area, the number
of branches, length of branches, total water flux/photosynthetic rate, stem
conductivity, leaf specific conductivity, tracheid/vessel radius, the proportion
of conductive and non conductive tissue, and water content scale with changes in
plant mass and with branch diameter. Such information will be critical for (1)
future elaboration of new theoretical models; (2) understanding scaling of
physiological attributes of plants; and (3) investigating the evolutionary and
ecological implications of allometry in biology. These three research directions
will form the core of Dr. Enquist's research program as a new faculty member at
the University of Arizona, and this award will support the building of a
graduate program in biological scaling.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;