* 0129025
* U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research: Rate Effects in the Fracture Toughness of Ferroelectric Ceramics under Mechanical Loading
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2005
* Christopher Lynch, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 02/28/2005
* USD 6,000.00

0129025&lt;br/&gt;Lynch&lt;br/&gt;This award supports Christopher Lynch and
students from Georgia Tech in a collaboration with Juergen Roedel of the
Department of Material at the Technical University of Darmstadt, Germany. The
aim of the international project is to design ferroelectric ceramics that are
less brittle and more reliable than those used today. This will require detailed
knowledge of both the quasi-static and fatigue crack properties under both
electrical and mechanical loading. To improve the materials properties, the
mechanisms of their failure have to be fully understood. The US group has
developed a finite element computer code capable of determining stress and
electric field concentrations in ferroelectric materials. The German group has
developed experimental techniques and specialized fixtures for measuring the
crack propagation behavior of brittle materials under combined electrical and
mechanical loading. By bringing together the strengths of both groups, new
analytical techniques and new experimental techniques will make possible a full
understanding of the fracture process in lead zirconate titanate (PZT), which in
turn will elucidate the role of microstructure in the fracture process. The work
plan provides for extensive participation by graduate students in the
international travel and research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;