* 0130673
* CISE Research Resources: Acquisition of a Computing Cluster and Access Grid Node for Information Technology Research
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2001,12/31/2004
* Hong Zhang, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 12/31/2004
* USD 175,333.00

EIA-0130673 &lt;br/&gt;Xian-He Sun&lt;br/&gt;Illinois Institute of
Technology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CISE Research Resources: Acquisition of a
Computing Cluster and Access Grid Node for Information Technology
Research&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Department of Computer Science at the Illinois
Institute of Technology (IIT) will purchase an 82 node Linux cluster, an Access
Grid node, and several workstations, all of which will be connected via a high-
speed network. These computational resources will be dedicated to the support of
several on-going research projects in the area of information technology. Such
projects include the development of a process migration environment for
heterogeneous distributed computing, design and implementation of scalable
information systems, scalable distributed simulation in support of complex
systems management, and scalable parallel numerical algorithms and simulations.
These projects require significant computing power and high-performance
networks. Such resources are not currently available within the university. The
acquisition of these resources through the NSF CISE Instrumentation program is
critical to the success of these research projects, and to the development of a
strong computer science program at IIT. Additionally, the requested equipment
will offer an excellent platform upon which students can learn about and
experience state-of-the-art research via course work and term
projects.&lt;br/&gt;