* 0130459
* Compact-AGEP Partnership (CAP)
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2008
* Ansley Abraham, Southern Regional Education Board
* Continuing Grant
* Lenell Allen
* 07/31/2008
* USD 1,630,347.00

COMPACT-AGEP PARTNERSHIP&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks to expand a pilot project
begun two years ago between the Minority Graduate Education (MGE) program and
the Compact for Faculty Diversity's Institute on Teaching and Mentoring. The
proposed project would continue and expand Institute participation to all AGEP
programs, as well as provide the full array of program activities and services
that have contributed significantly to the Compact' s
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Compact is a nationwide program initiated in
1994 involving three regional organizations, the New England Board of Higher
Education (NEBHE), the Southern Regional Education Board (SREB), and the Western
Interstate Commission for Higher Education (WICHE). The goal of the program is
simple; to increase the number of minority graduate students who earn the
doctoral degree and seek careers as college and university
faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extending the experiences of the pilot group to
scholars in every AGEP program and expanding the services these scholars receive
is what this initiative will accomplish. Specifically, the proposed Compact/AGEP
partnership will achieve two broad goals: 1) provide AGEP scholars with
knowledge, skills, academic mentoring, and support that will increase the
likelihood of success in graduate school; and 2) enhance preparation for a
career as a college or university faculty member. The project has five key
objectives:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective 1: To provide an array of direct
support services to AGEP scholars that will increase the likelihood of
completion of the doctoral degree. These services include regular contact by
staff; review of student progress and grades; a newsletter; academic counseling
and advocacy; mentoring, and professional development
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;Objective 2: To provide training in skills and
techniques of succeeding in a Ph.D. program in SEM.&lt;br/&gt;Objective 3: To
prepare AGEP scholars for successful transition from graduate school to a
faculty position.&lt;br/&gt;Objective 4: To provide expanded networking and
academic community building support to AGEP scholars.&lt;br/&gt;Objective 5: To
provide training to the faculty mentors of AGEP scholars in effective mentoring
techniques and practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Compact's annual Institute on
Teaching and Mentoring is clearly the "centerpiecel" of Compact activity. This
three-day, fall meeting of more than 500 participants provide a forum for
students and faculty mentors to discuss issues critical to success at the
doctoral level. Attendees participate in workshops and seminars that range from
how to survive graduate school to what is expected of a junior faculty member,
with particular attention given to enhancing research, teaching, and mentoring
skills, career preparation, proposal writing, negotiating the first job, and
networking. With the majority of Compact scholars representing science,
engineering, and mathematics (SEM) disciplines, particular attention is paid to
the issues specific to scholars and faculty. &lt;br/&gt;