* 0130671
* U.S.-Czech Republic Research on Microarray-Based Analysis of Plant Genome Structure.
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* David Galbraith, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 03/31/2006
* USD 40,448.00

This U.S.-Czech research project between David Galbraith of the University of
Arizona and his counterpart, Jaroslav Dolezel from the Czech Academy of
Sciences' Institute of Experimental Botany in Olomouc, features use of
flowsorting to selectively enrich populations of individual barley chromosomes.
Their intent is to produce fluorescent genomic DNA targets for hybridization of
barley DNA microarrays and for fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) analyses
of metaphase chromosomes. The total effort benefits from the Arizona team's
extensive expertise with microarray technologies and the Czech's expertise in
both fluorescence-activated sorting of plant chromosomes and plant chromosome
cytology. Research experiences for undergraduate students are an integral part
of the research plan. If successful, this work my yield new techniques for
mapping single copy genes (i.e. ESTs) on specific plant chromosomes using barley
as a model. The researchers also anticipate using the sorted chromosomes for the
production of chromosome-specific DNA libraries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
international project in plant genome research fulfills the program objective of
advancing scientific knowledge by enabling experts in the Untied States and
Central Europe to combine complementary talents and share research resources in
areas of strong mutual interest and competence.