* 0130702
* Singularity Formation in Nonlinear Evolution Equations Conference, Iowa State University, June 8-9, 2002, Ames, Iowa
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2003
* Xiaoming Wang, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 04/30/2003
* USD 8,000.00

NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0130702&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical Sciences: Singularity
Formation in Nonlinear Evolution
Equations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0130702
Sacks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
participants in the conference on Singularity Formation in Nonlinear Evolution
Equations held at Iowa State University on June 8-9, 2002. The conference
emphasizes recent progress in the theory of singularity formation in nonlinear
partial differential equations. The focus is mainly on three topics: singular
solutions of systems of partial differential equations, critical exponent
phenomena in nonlinear parabolic and hyperbolic equations, and effects of
damping and convection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An issue of fundamental importance
in the mathematical theory of evolution equations is that of singularity
formation. Analysis of this phenomenon can be essential for understanding the
physical processes being modeled. One might very roughly divide the subject into
three categories: regularity theory (proofs that singularities do not occur),
propagation and interaction of singularities results (proofs that singularities
persist in some respect) and theory of singularity formation (proofs that
singularities must occur, and behavior of solutions near singular points). It is
this last topic which is the main theme of the proposed conference, which will
provide an excellent opportunity for communication and collaboration among
faculty and between senior and junior investigators. &lt;br/&gt;