* 0130722
* Conference: RNA Transport, Sorting and Localization to be held June 21-26, 2003 in Snowmass Village, Colorado
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2003
* Paul Macdonald, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 12/31/2003
* USD 4,000.00

This award is in partial support of a conference on Intracellular RNA Sorting,
Transport and Localization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of the meeting is
to stimulate further progress in understanding what is now recognized as an
essential form of post-transcriptional gene regulation in germ cells, embryos,
and somatic cells. This conference is one of the series of summer FASEB-
sponsored meetings, to be held in 2002 at the Big Mountain Resort in Whitefish,
Montana. The meeting has been held in alternate years since 1994. It provides a
unique opportunity to bring together researchers who have common interests in
RNA transport and localization but use a wide range of experimental systems to
study what are often quite different aspects of development or cellular
function. The meeting serves to inform researchers about the most recent
advances from all experimental systems in a setting that is extremely conducive
to interactions. The cross-fertilization of ideas from scientists who otherwise
attend different meetings and thus do not interact extensively has been
extremely beneficial. Approximately 120-150 participants are expected. Speakers
will be scientists with recent significant research contributions, and will be
assembled by both invitation and evaluation of submitted abstracts. The major
session topics will be: 1) Defining roles for mRNA localization in somatic
cells; 2) Comparing mechanistic strategies for mRNA transport and localization;
3) Tracing mRNA movements in vivo to define mechanisms of localization and
transport; 4) mRNA localization signals: structural organization and function;
5) Proteins that recognize mRNA localization signals ; 6) Role of the
cytoskeleton in mRNA localization; 7) Molecular motors and moving mRNAs; 8)
Coordination of mRNA localization with other post-transcriptional control
points; and 9) Local regulation of mRNA translation. There will also be two
poster sessions.&lt;br/&gt;