* 0130422
* CISE Research Resources: Infrastructure to Develop a Large Scale Experiment Testbed of Multi-modal Resources
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2004
* Amy Weinberg, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2004
* USD 132,006.00

EIA-0130422 &lt;br/&gt;Louiqa Raschid&lt;br/&gt;University of Maryland College
Park&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CISE Research Resources: Infrastructure to Develop a
Large Scale Experiment Testbed of Multi-model Resources&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
use of the widely distributed collections of structured and unstructured
information expressed in multiple languages or modalities provided by the
Internet, requires production of scalable, robust algorithms for the discovery
of replicated content, determination of delay or access latency of sources, and
the confrontation of the inherently dynamic nature of the
Internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's objective is to establish a
laboratory testbed providing a controlled environment that captures structural,
content, and latency characteristics of the (publicly accessible) Web. This will
stimulate collaboration between researchers whose interests range over natural
language applications, language independent processing of scanned documents,
analysis of video information sources, information retrieval, and wide area
applications and resource discovery across heterogeneous servers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The testbed will support the development and testing of:
(1) tools for broad-scale, cross-linguistic analysis and discovery of relevant
information across languages and modalities, (2) cost models and access cost
catalogs for wide area environments, reflecting the temporal variability in
access latency, (3) distributed content based indexing and association of media
clips for resource discovery, (4) transcoding and scheduling of multimedia
resources for delivery any time and anywhere to disparate clients; from mobile
wireless to high speed optical links. &lt;br/&gt;