* 0130843
* Biological Information Technology  Systems - BITS: Hybrid Testbed for Evaluation of Cell-Cell Communication Models in Prokaryotes
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Gary Sayler, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing grant
*  Elliott Francis
* 02/28/2006
* USD 1,040,886.00

EIA-0130843 Chris D. Cox University of Tennessee Hybrid Testbed for Evaluation
of Cell-Cell Communication Models in Prokaryotes Information processing
strategies utilized by biological cells are fundamentally different than those
used for silicon-based computing and thereby hold great promise for the
development of improved algorithms, software, and hardware. However, our
understanding of how genetic networks control information flow in biological
systems needs to be further developed. To this end, various research programs
are underway to develop models of genetic networks; however, the success of this
effort could falter unless tools to directly observe cell processes and validate
the models are developed and integrated into the model development process. The
proposed research program seeks to develop a hybrid testbed to calibrate and
validate models of genetic regulatory networks controlling quorum sensing
behavior in prokaryotic organisms. The benefits or [sic] this project to
biological information technology include: i) development of a system for
calibration and validation of genetic regulatory models leading to a better
understanding of intracellular information flow; ii) improved technologies for
silicon-to-cell and cell-to-cell silicon information transfer; and iii) a better
understanding of information transfer between cells through chemical signaling.
Project objectives, methods, and impacts are described below.