* 0130543
* Research Starter Grant:  Evolutionary History of Invasions by the Zebra Mussel, Dreissena polymorpha
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2001,03/31/2003
* Carol Lee, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 03/31/2003
* USD 40,800.00

0130543&lt;br/&gt;Lee&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on geographic
pathways and genetic mechanisms of invasions by the zebra mussel, Dreissena
polymorpha. Objectives of this study are to (1) reconstruct pathways of
invasions, from potential sources in the Caspian and Black Sea region to North
America, (2) clarify genetic (evolutionary) relationships among sibling species
and identify which subspecies are invasive, and (3) describe genetic traits of
the invasive subspecies. Using genetic markers, a genealogy (phylogeny) will be
constructed to determine pathways of invasions and genetic relationships among
physiological races of zebra mussels. For this purpose, sensitive genetic
markers (AFLPs) and powerful data analysis software (Dominant Marker Analysis
Package) are currently under development. This project will also involve
collaborative efforts with scientists at the Russian Academy of Sciences,
including a joint research cruise on the Caspian Sea to collect from sites where
the zebra mussel species complex has probably evolved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
zebra mussel ranks among the most hazardous exotic species that has entered
North American waters, with an economic impact in the billions of dollars.
Despite intense ecological interest and efforts toward mitigation, little effort
has been devoted toward understanding genetic and physiological mechanisms of
zebra mussel invasions. We do not know origins of North American populations,
their genetic traits, and why they are so successful as invaders. Information
from this project will enhance our predictive power on range expansion and
adaptive potential during invasions. In addition, as pathways of invasions tend
to be shared by multiple species, information from this project will yield
insight into general principles on mechanisms of invasions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;