* 0130317
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Self and the Moral Obligations of Husbands and Fathers in a West Sumatran City
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2004
* Steven Parish, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 01/31/2004
* USD 12,000.00

Indonesia currently faces a period of social instability marked by a struggling
economy and widespread political uncertainty. This dissertation research project
will ask how concepts of morality, masculinity, and selfhood shape the way
Minangkabau men in the West Sumatran city of Bukittinggi adapt to these
conditions. West Sumatra is a particularly compelling area in which to examine
issues of gender and morality in modern Indonesia due to its unusual mix of a
matrilineal social structure with a widespread commitment to Islam. The research
plan consists primarily of participant-observation of men's lives in
Bukittinggi, interviews concerning the cultural meanings of men's roles and
their moral significance, and extended, person-centered interviews conducted
with a small number of respondents. These methods are designed to elicit
information on the relationship between cultural conceptions of morality and
masculinity, the shape of social and economic life in Bukittinggi-and in
Indonesia more generally-and Minangkabau men's experiences of themselves as
masculine, moral actors. In addition to contributing to the training of a young
anthropologist, this study will further the development of anthropological
theories of self and subjectivity, and illuminate the dynamic engagement between
individuals and cultural worlds experiencing uncertainty and transformation.