* 0130806
* CISE Research Resources: A Low Cost Parallel and Distributed Systems Laboratory
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2001,02/28/2006
* Hanqi Zhuang, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 02/28/2006
* USD 52,719.00

EIA-0130806 &lt;br/&gt;Jie Wu&lt;br/&gt;Florida Atlantic
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CISE Research Resources: A Low Cost Parallel and
Distributed Systems Laboratory&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
includes three parallel applications on a Beowulf cluster. The chief advantage
of a Beowulf cluster is its superb price/performance ratio: the proposed cluster
will obtain performance in the 3-5 Gigaflop range, for less than one tenth the
cost of a comparably powered supercomputer. The low cost parallel and
distributed systems laboratory consists of a 16-node Beowulf cluster. Each node
is similar to an off-the-shelf PC without a monitor or keyboard. The nodes are
networked by 100 Mbit Fast Ethernet lines. Each node will run both Linux and
Windows/NT. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three parallel applications are proposed: (1)
A parallel system for ecological modeling, with its focus on minimizing the
simulation time of parallelized ecological models. A central component will be
porting NOAA's NNT-SMS rectilinear parallel modeling package to the Beowulf
architecture, (2) A Java runtime framework on Beowulf clusters for parallel
execution of multithreaded processes. A new lottery-based job stealing algorithm
will be studied for efficient scheduling of large-scale multithreaded
computation. (3) Optimal configuration selection for accuracy enhancement of
programmable machines. A genetic algorithm solution will be studied to enhance
the accuracy of programmable machines. The success of this project will
demonstrate the usefulness of Beowulf clusters as a cost-effective alternative
to the supercomputer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;