* 0130800
* CISE Research Resources: A State-of-the-Art Immersive Display for Research in Rendering, Animation and Simulation, and Cognitive Human-Computer Interface Design
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2003
* David Brogan, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2003
* USD 79,864.00

EIA-0130800 &lt;br/&gt;David Luebke&lt;br/&gt;University of
Virginia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will construct a state-of-art
immersive display at the University of Virginia. Specifically, the investigators
will build a wide field-of-view tiled display, using passive stereo projection,
6-DOF head tracking, and spatialized audio to create an extremely immersive 3-D
audio-visual display environment. This display will benefit and enable three
separate research projects in the Computer Science and Psychology departments:
gaze-directed rendering, perceptually driven physical simulation and animation,
and cognitive design of human-computer interfaces. Tiling multiple projectors
will create a display spanning a very wide field of view; two projectors per
tile will enable passive stereo display with lightweight polarizing glasses. An
audio system, a head tracker, and realistic scanned 3-D environments will enable
immersive and convincing virtual worlds. The wide field-of-view will provide an
ideal testbed for gaze-directed rendering, which accelerates interactive
rendering by exploiting reduced visual acuity (e.g., for peripheral or fast-
moving objects), and for perceptually driven physical simulation, which
selectively degrades simulation accuracy according to perceptual metrics. The
human-computer interface project investigates immersive ambient context to
improve human memory. The stereo head-tracked capabilities of the new display
will literally add a new dimension to the investigation, enabling full 3-D
environmental cues.&lt;br/&gt;