* 0130400
* Quantum -QuBIC:  Connecting the Quantum Dots: Theory of Quantum Computing in a Solid-state Implementation
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Mark Friesen, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 12/31/2005
* USD 499,939.00

EIA-0130400&lt;br/&gt;Robert Joynt&lt;br/&gt;University of Wisconsin-
Madison&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Connecting the Quantum Dots; Theory of
Quantum Computing in a Solid-state Implementation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A program
of theoretical research on quantum computation in quantum dot structures is
underway. In this type of quantum computer, the qubits are the spins of
electrons trapped in a silicon-germanium semiconductor heterostructure. The
error distributions and decoherence properties of these electrons are being
calculated, and it appears that correlated errors and mutual decoherence are
important in this dot implementation. The impact of these phenomena on quantum
algorithms and quantum error correction schemes is being investigated. This is
done by examining their effect in two paradigmatic quantum processes. The first
is the quantum random walk, a simple example of an algorithm that can be
implemented on a one- or two-dimensional array of quantum dot qubits. The second
is the computation of the majority function. A particularly attractive feature
of both problems is that it is interesting and feasible to do them in cases that
require relatively few qubits. More general questions are also being addressed.
Certain types of quantum algorithms will be more susceptible to certain types of
errors. This leads to the possibility of quantum error-resistant algorithms, and
the feasibility of this generalization of the similar classical concept is being
determined. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;