* 0130905
* RUI:  Infrared Spectroscopy as a Probe of Active Site Structure and Molecular Mechanism in the Hydrogenases
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Kimberly Bagley, SUNY College at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2006
* USD 210,011.00

In this project infrared difference spectroscopy will be used to study the
active site structure and molecular mechanism of hydrogen binding and activation
in the hydrogenases. Previous infrared spectroscopic studies have shown that
both the [NiFe] hydrogenases and the Fe-only hydrogenases display intense
infrared bands in the 2100-1800 cm-1 spectral region. The groups responsible for
these infrared bands have been identified as arising from intrinsic carbon
monoxide and cyanide molecules coordinated to Fe ions in the active site of
these enzymes. The primary objectives of this research are: 1) Utilization of
infrared spectroscopy for delineating the active site structure of the [NiFe]
hydrogenase from Desulfovibrio vulgaris. The enzyme from Desulfovibrio vulgaris
has been proposed to have a NiFe (CO)(CN)(SO) cluster at its active site rather
than the NiFe (CO)(CN)2 cluster shown to exist in other [NiFe] Hydrogenases. 2)
Utilization of infrared difference spectroscopy to explore the molecular changes
accompanying reductive activation in the [NiFe] hydrogenases. 3) Utilization of
the infrared spectral signatures, combined with isotopic labeling, for
determining the active site structure of Fe-only Hydrogenases I and II from
Clostridium pasteurianum. 4) Utilization of mid-infrared difference spectroscopy
to examine the role amino acids play in the activation of hydrogen. The research
will involve undergraduate students pursuing degrees in chemistry and chemistry-
related fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that this work will have
important consequences for understanding the mechanism underlying the
hydrogenases' ability to split molecular hydrogen into protons and electrons, or
conversely, to produce hydrogen from protons and electrons. Such knowledge has
consequences for the design of cheap catalysts for the production of hydrogen, a
clean burning fuel source. The proposed research will involve the participation
of undergraduate students, both during the academic year and during the summer.
Student participation in this project will afford undergraduate students a
unique opportunity to apply skills and knowledge they have learned in their
coursework, while contributing to an exciting project in modern physical
biochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;