* 0130885
* Effects of Developmental Changes on the Physiological Processes that Regulate Photosynthetic Responses to Climate Change
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* James Lewis, Fordham University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 05/31/2006
* USD 230,855.00

Increasing atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations and other atmospheric and
climate changes may substantially alter plant growth. Differences in growth
responses within and between plant species may have substantial impacts on
biodiversity, carbon sequestration and other ecosystem functions by altering
community composition and changing the movement of carbon, nutrients and water
through ecosystems. However, despite extensive research over the last several
decades, fundamental problems remain with predicting effects of climate change
on plants. For example, carbon dioxide uptake by plants, a standard measure of
climate change effects on carbon sequestration potential, has been found to vary
substantially from carbon accumulation in plants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; To
account for this variability, a source-sink feedback mechanism is frequently
invoked that links changes in carbon uptake (photosynthesis) with developmental
changes that affect carbon accumulation. This mechanism is driven by changes in
the balance between source activity (carbon uptake) and sink capacity (carbon
accumulation). However, few studies have actually manipulated plant development
to analyze the effects of normal developmental changes on physiological
processes that regulate photosynthetic responses to climate change. As a result,
the role of plant development in regulating photosynthetic responses to climate
change is poorly understood. The overall goal of the proposed research is to
develop a mechanistic understanding of the effects of developmental changes as
plants age on the physiological processes that regulate photosynthetic responses
to climate change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; To identify key developmental and
physiological processes that regulate photosynthesis, two key developmental
processes, plant ontogeny (the timing and duration of developmental events) and
morphological changes as plants age, will be independently manipulated. Planting
cohorts of plants on different dates and inducing all cohorts to flower
simultaneously will independently manipulate ontogeny and plant size. To avoid
the confounding effect of accelerated ontogeny induced by growth in elevated
carbon dioxide concentrations, a developmentally determinate, short-day species
(Xanthium strumarium L.) will be used. In addition, because temperature is a key
component of climate change and nitrogen supply is a critical factor regulating
interactions between developmental and physiological processes, these factors
will be manipulated to examine how they mediate the effects of developmental
changes on photosynthesis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this study will
increase our understanding of the effects of changes in plant ontogeny and
morphology on photosynthetic responses to climate change. More broadly, this
study will increase our understanding of the links between carbon uptake and
growth responses of plants to environmental change.&lt;br/&gt;