* 0130864
* CISE Research Resources: Instrumentation for a Virtual Environment Laboratory to Study Human Behavior
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* James Cremer, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2005
* USD 66,665.00

EIA-0130864 &lt;br/&gt;James Cremer&lt;br/&gt;University of
Iowa&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CISE Research Resources: Instrumentation for a Virtual
Environment Laboratory to Study Human Behavior&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
University of Iowa will purchase equipment supporting multidisciplinary research
on the use of virtual environments as a medium for the study of human behavior.
The primary components of the equipment include a PC-based, real-time image
generation system for use in the existing immersive display environment, and
hardware for instrumented bicycle and wheelchair interfaces to the virtual
environment. The equipment will replace outdated and unstable equipment
currently in use, and greatly improve the computational foundation of the
virtual environments laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The supported research has
two primary thrusts: (1) a computational component directed at advancing
scenario modeling techniques to meet the special needs of experiments for
replicable experiences that adapt to subject behavior and (2) an experimental
component investigating children's bicycle riding behavior in simulated traffic.
Experiments conducted in virtual environments will be compared with experiments
conducted in real environments to validate the use of simulators as laboratories
for the study of human behavior. The work integrates research on high-fidelity
simulation, control of complex behaviors of simulated agents, human factors, and
developmental psychology. This research will advance virtual environment
technology, experimental methods, and simulator validation, and increase the
understanding of a leading cause of childhood injuries.&lt;br/&gt;