* 0130538
* CISE Research Resources: Computer cluster to support computational biology and other nonlinear signal reconstruction and system design problems
* CSE,EIA
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2002
* Saul Gelfand, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Tse-yun Feng
* 08/31/2002
* USD 58,369.00

0130538 Peter Doerschuk Purdue University

CISE Research Resources: Computer Cluster to Support Computational Biology and
Other Nonlinear Signal Reconstruction and System Design Problems

The grant, an equipment grant, will purchase two computers, a compute server and
a 3-D visualization workstation, in support of the investigators' NSF CISE
funded work in computational mathematics and its application to the structural
biology of viruses and other nonlinear signal reconstruction and system design
problems. The compute server (Microway, Inc.) is a cluster computer containing
64 Intel Pentium III microprocessors and 16 GB of memory organized into 32 nodes
connected by 100 Mb Ethernet. The visualization workstation (Sun Microsystems)
is a workstation with one 900 MHz UltraSPARC-III microprocessor, 1 GB of memory,
and the intermediate level of Sun's three levels of 3-D graphics hardware
accelerators.

This equipment will support 3 projects which concern computational mathematics
including multi-dimensional quadratures, transforms, and numerical optimization.
The unifying theme is numerical optimization, especially global optimization.
The projects are divided according to application and include 3-D reconstruction
problems in structural biology and systems design problems for nonlinear
communication channels. The main application is structural biology, in
particular, the structural biology of viruses. The problems of particular
interest are 3-D signal reconstruction problems for computing the dynamical
behavior of viruses from a variety of biophysical measurements.