* 0130277
* Investigating Genetic Mechanisms of the Baboon Dentition
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2002,11/30/2004
* Leslea Hlusko, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 11/30/2004
* USD 198,916.00

The primate dentition has been studied for many reasons ranging from
phylogenetic reconstruction to dental development to functional morphology.
Because of their composition, teeth are the most frequently preserved parts of
fossil primates and the only ones known for some extinct taxa. Teeth are adapted
for many functions - e.g. mastication, food preparation, and social interactions
- but also contain a record of their growth, which all means that a great deal
can be learned from their fossilized forms. The dentition is also important from
the developmental and evolutionary perspective. Only wear, breakage and caries
alter the morphology of primate teeth once eruption has occurred, and the
effects of these processes are fairly easy to identify. Teeth are thus
relatively less affected by environment and behavior than are bones.
Consequently, teeth have a reduced nongenetic component to their variation and
are more tractable for determining underlying genetic mechanisms. Combining all
these characteristics of teeth, the dentition is a prime candidate for
investigating the genetic evolutionary history of a complex phenotype. This
project proposes research into the genetic evolutionary history of the primate
dentition using a baboon model. This project is a novel integration of the
usually disparate fields of quantitative genetics and paleontology in order to
investigate and identify the genetic mechanisms underlying evolutionarily
significant morphological variation. This project identifies dental traits from
the last five million years of baboon evolution in Africa that also vary in a
genotyped pedigreed colony of modern savanna baboons at the Southwest Foundation
for Biomedical Research in San Antonio, Texas. This variation will then be
studied using modern quantitative genetic analyses to identify the genetic
mechanisms that underlie this variation in modern baboons, and thereby, probably
represent the same mechanisms that determined this variation in past baboon
species. This project represents a unique opportunity to integrate the power of
modern genetics with the time depth of the fossil record to investigate the
genome and anatomy simultaneously, rather than as separate entities. Results
from this study have broad implications for evolutionary and developmental
biology, as well as for anthropology and primatology. This study will provide
insight into the genetic mechanisms that underlie tooth development and
patterning in baboons, mechanisms likely to be involved in the evolution of
teeth of other primates, including humans and their ancestors. Thus, the results
of this study will be immediately applicable to the study of human dental
evolution, as well as the evolution of many other primates.