* 0130151
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Work and Life in the New Economy: An Ethnography of High Tech Startup Companies
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2002
* Kathryn Dudley, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 12/31/2002
* USD 10,089.00

High-technology startup companies have been heralded as the future of work, but
scholars have yet to examine the extent to which startups' organizational
structures and corporate cultures differ from those of previous generations and
other industries. This doctoral dissertation research by a cultural
anthropologist in the American Studies program at Yale University tests the
hypothesis that high-tech startups represent a new corporate form with unique
implications for employees and the technologies they develop. This comparative
ethnography of U.S. high-tech startups investigates employees' experiences and
conceptions of work in a particular industry and organizational setting. Taking
into account the unique demographics of the startup workforce, this study
challenges received wisdom concerning the relationship between work and home
life and elucidates the characteristics of a new generation of white-collar
employees, salient topics considering recent economic and cultural shifts in the
high-technology industry. In light of skyrocketing unemployment in the high-tech
industry over the last half of 2001, interviews with unemployed high-tech
workers supplement data collected on corporate employees. Methods include long-
term participant observation, directed and open-ended interviews, video
ethnography, surveys, analysis of labor force statistics, and historical study
of management theory and the corporate form. This research advances our
understanding of the place of work in contemporary life and the evolution of the
corporate form, knowledge that will help employees, managers, and labor
advocates modify the organization of corporate work and the quality of workers'
experiences