* 0130391
* Bio-QuBIC:  Robust Engineering using Biologically-Inspired Models of Cell Differentiation and Morphogenesis
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Gerald Sussman, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2005
* USD 500,000.00

EIA-0130391 Gerald J. Sussman Massachusetts Institue of Technology

Title: Robust Engineering Using Biologically-inspired Models of Cell
Differentiation and Morphogenesis

This research focuses on morphogenesis and developmental biology as an
inspiration for algorithms and general principles for organizing complex
behavior from locally interacting agents. The goal is to design artificial
systems that replicate biological robustness, and to use insights from these
systems to understand the capabilities of biological systems. The general
principles are formalized as programming languages --- with explicit primitives,
means of combination, and means of abstraction --- thus providing a framework or
the design and analysis of self-assembling systems. Previous work demonstrated
this approach with a programming language that specifies a robust process for
shape formation on a sheet of identically-programmed ``cells'' using local
primitives from epithelial cell morphogenesis and Drosophila cell
differentiation, and rules from geometry. The specific aims are: 1) developing
new programming models for domains such as growth and apoptosis (cell death) and
2) investigating the connection of current programming models to biological
processes. This research will have significant impact on both the engineering
principles for robust design and on the understanding of biological
morphogenesis.

