* 0130344
* CISE Research Resources:  A Flexible Video Networking Infrastructure to Support Massively Scalable Information Flows
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Jonathan Walpole, Oregon Health & Science University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2005
* USD 139,980.00

EIA-0130344&lt;br/&gt;Wu-chi Feng&lt;br/&gt;Oregon Graduate
Institute&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CISE Research Resources: A Flexible Video
Networking Infrastructure to Support Massively Scalable Information
Flows&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project proposes the establishment of a
flexible video networking testbed in the Department of Computer Science and
Engineering at the Oregon Graduate Institute. The main purpose of this
architecture is to facilitate experimental research in systems that support
massively scalable information flows. Focus will be on four main tasks: (1)
Scalable Video Distillation Architectures - providing mechanisms to support the
aggregation of large numbers of video streams in a video sensor network; (2)
Scalable Video Multicast Distribution Protocols - providing scalable mechanisms
that support quality and rate adaptive video for multicast over overlay
networks; (3) An Integrated Approach to Resource Management for Internet
Applications - combining application-level knowledge with low-level networking
to provide scalable Internet application architectures, and (4) A Video Archive
- creating an extensive testset of video data for use within our experiments as
well as for distribution of statistical and frame size information to the rest
of the research community.&lt;br/&gt;