* 0130908
* RUI: Mutagenesis and Mechanistic Studies of Firefly Luciferase
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2005
* Bruce Branchini, Connecticut College
* Continuing grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 02/28/2005
* USD 326,000.00

Bioluminescence the emission of light by living organisms is a fascinating
phenomenon that has enchanted children and challenged those who have tried to
fully understand it. Fireflies are examples of bioluminescent beetles capable of
emitting light of various colors from green to red. The basic biochemistry of
the firefly light emission process has many practical applications including
drug development, clinical trials and food testing. This project will
investigate the key firefly protein called luciferase that is responsible for
the extraordinary biochemical light process. The research is designed to
identify important components of firefly luciferase and to determine how
specific amino acids work together to efficiently produce light of varying
color. Molecular biology techniques will be used to create and evaluate new
luciferase proteins. The results should contribute to a better understanding of
firefly bioluminescence and the fundamental process by which living organisms
convert chemical energy into light. The elucidation of the light-emitting
process of firefly luciferase is important to the continued development of
significant useful applications. Additionally, a better understanding of the
firefly luciferase structure-function properties is important to fundamental
biochemical processes with significant practical applications extending beyond
the realm of bioluminescence. This project will be carried out at Connecticut
College, a liberal arts college with a strong commitment to undergraduate
research experiences. Previous bioluminescence work directed by the principal
investigator for approximately 25 years has been highly appealing to
undergraduate students. Professional and students participants in this project
will be involved in modern mainstream biochemical and molecular biology
research. It is expected that student participants will become scientists well
prepared for entry into graduate programs and professional scientific careers.