* 0130473
* Contextual Determinants of Household Food Security in African-American and Hispanic Neighborhoods in the Southern US
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2002
* Margaret Bentley, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 12/31/2002
* USD 13,999.00

15 years ago, Fitchen (1997) posed the question, "Why do we continue to tolerate
hunger amidst the affluence of the United States?" She hypothesized that
Americans expect the poor to eat marginally-the rich shall eat steak and the
poor shall have cheese. Although the prevalence of food insecurity and hunger in
the general population has fallen, high rates continue among African-Americans
and Hispanics. What is the social and cultural context in which minority
households experience food insecurity in the US? In Durham County, NC, this
doctoral student will investigate the relationship between structural,
community, and household factors that contribute to food security. She proposes
to develop a theoretical model of food security based on the perspectives of
African-American and Hispanic families living in urban and rural neighborhoods.
Using food access indicators developed through GIS to identify 8 case study
neighborhoods, she will use qualitative and participatory research methods to
conduct key informant interviews and focus group interviews. Participants will
document their own sources of household food security, the role that food
assistance plays in their household food security, and the relationship of food
access to food assistance and household food security. The results from this
study will provide important insights into the determinants of household food
security beyond and within the household.