* 0130982
* RUI: m-Survivin Expression in Differentiating Lymphocytes
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2002,02/28/2007
* Judith Owen, Haverford College
* Continuing Grant
* John C. Rogers
* 02/28/2007
* USD 233,897.00

Apoptosis, or programmed cell death, is utilized extensively in the functioning
immune system. During development, cells which express potentially auto-immune
or functionally irrelevant receptors are excised before they reach maturity. In
addition, once a lymphocyte has participated in an antigen-specific response, it
may be eliminated either passively, following growth factor withdrawal, or
actively, after interaction with cells bearing death-inducing signals. In this
project, the role of the IAP (Inhibitors of APoptosis) family of anti-apoptotic
proteins will be explored in normal lymphocytes. IAPs share a unique, 70 amino
acid BIR (Baculovirus Inhibitor of apoptosis Repeat) domain and most function by
inhibiting some of the caspase enzymes which play a central role in apoptosis.
Mouse- (m)-survivin, the central focus of this work, is the smallest and
simplest of these interesting IAP proteins. The thesis to be investigated is
that different anti-apoptotic molecules may function at particular stages in the
lymphocyte life-cycle. In particular, it is posited that survivin acts to
preserve lymphocyte viability in cells which are undergoing rapid proliferation
and/or are subject to active selective pressure. The signals and conditions
which induce m-survivin expression in B and T lymphocytes, both in vivo and in
vitro will be investigated and the relative kinetics of IAP expression will be
compared with those of other anti-apoptotic proteins. The lymphocyte
subpopulations in which m-survivin is expressed will be defined, and the
experiments will also explore the effects of over-expression of survivin on the
capacity of lymphocytes to withstand induction of cell death. Finally, a novel
modification of mRNA differential display methodology, first developed by the
PI's laboratory will be employed to characterize the expression of multiple
members of the BIR-containing family in differentiating lymphocytes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be conducted at an undergraduate
institution. The primary participants will be senior year and summer research
undergraduates in the PI's laboratory at Haverford College. Significant
contributions to the work are expected from undergraduate students who are
members of under-represented groups. Students are involved at every stage of the
research, from selection of their individual projects to presentation of the
work, either at local or national meetings or in final written form. The control
of apoptosis is a burgeoning field of research with major implications for the
regulation of cellular proliferation across the eukaryotic kingdom. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;