* 0130633
* Using Physiological Structure to Model Individual Production:  Determinants of Female Reproductive Effort
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Steven Beaupre, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Dianna K. Padilla
* 03/31/2006
* USD 310,675.00

Current scenarios of predicted environmental change raise
fundamental&lt;br/&gt;questions about the expected responses of animal
populations to changes in&lt;br/&gt;local climate and food availability. Animal
responses to environment are&lt;br/&gt;mediated by physiological functions such
as metabolism, digestion, growth&lt;br/&gt;and reproduction. Using parallel
simulation modeling and experimental&lt;br/&gt;studies in the laboratory and in
nature, the PI will investigate the effect&lt;br/&gt;of food availability on
reproduction in the timber rattlesnake (Crotalus&lt;br/&gt;horridus) in
northwest Arkansas. Rattlesnakes are excellent subjects for&lt;br/&gt;these
studies because of their abundance and large size which allows the&lt;br/&gt;use
of radio-transmitters (for location and body temperature
information).&lt;br/&gt;The simulation model is based on information about
energy flow through&lt;br/&gt;timber rattlesnakes discovered under a previous
grant (IBN 9728470). New&lt;br/&gt;studies will build upon and complement
previous work. A laboratory&lt;br/&gt;population of snakes will be maintained
under three feeding regimes&lt;br/&gt;designed to produce variation in
reproduction. In nature, an experimental&lt;br/&gt;food manipulation will test
model predictions by comparing reproduction&lt;br/&gt;between supplementally fed
and control groups of radio-tagged female&lt;br/&gt;rattlesnakes. Information
gathered from these experiments will be used to&lt;br/&gt;test previous
predictions made by the simulation model, and then to refine&lt;br/&gt;and
improve the simulation. The results of this study will enhance
our&lt;br/&gt;ability to predict the responses of animal populations to
environmental&lt;br/&gt;change. The described studies will also provide multiple
opportunities to&lt;br/&gt;enhance science literacy and involve students (from
grade school to&lt;br/&gt;graduate school) in the process of science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;