* 0130828
* Biological Information Technology Systems - BITS: Information Processing in Designed Neuronal Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2006
* Bruce Wheeler, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 01/31/2006
* USD 1,155,999.00

EIA-0130828 -Bruce C. Wheeler-University of Illinois-BITS: Information
processing in Designed Neuronal Circuits

BITS: Information processing in Designed Neuronal Circuits

The aim of this project is to enhance our understanding of information
processing by small numbers of neurons arranged in designed circuits. This is an
ideal time for this initiative because: We can intentionally design neuronal
microcircuits due to progress in serum free media to support relatively pure
neuronal populations, in microlithgraphy as applied to the deposition of
proteins and other biomolecules to surfaces, and in understanding of the
conditions under which sparse pattern populations of neurons become functionally
active in culture.

We can study the information processing capabilities of these neuronal circuits
due to advances microelectrode array technology, permitting both stimulation and
recording of electrical activity, as well as the supporting real-time data
acquisition technology.

We can analyze the data utilizing theories of neural coding derived as
applications of rich theoretical foundations in signal processing and
communications theory.

We have three specific goals, creation of reliable, repeatable, robust neuronal
circuits of cultured hippocampal neurons. Stable circuit behavior is essential
to further investigation of information processing.

The first aim emphasizes geometric properties, including guiding axonal
extension, the second aim emphasizes functional properties, and the third aim is
neuronal information processing. Models to be evaluated include rate codes,
precise timing codes and phase synchronization codes.