* 0130967
* Mechanism of Flavobacterium johnsoniae Gliding Motility
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Mark McBride, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 05/31/2007
* USD 422,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Gliding motility (the active movement of cells over surfaces without
the aid of&lt;br/&gt;flagella) is a trait shared by diverse bacteria. Gliding
motility was first observed nearly&lt;br/&gt;200 years ago, yet the mechanisms
responsible for cell movement are still largely&lt;br/&gt;unknown.
Flavobacterium johnsoniae is a convenient model organism for studies
of&lt;br/&gt;bacterial gliding motility. Techniques to genetically manipulate F.
johnsoniae have&lt;br/&gt;recently been developed and used to characterize a
number of genes that are required&lt;br/&gt;for gliding (gld genes). The
proteins encoded by these genes appear to localize to the&lt;br/&gt;cell
envelope, where the motility apparatus is expected to reside. GldA, GldF,
and&lt;br/&gt;GldG are thought to interact to form an ATP-binding cassette (ABC)
transporter. Most&lt;br/&gt;of the other Gld proteins do not exhibit significant
similarity to proteins of known&lt;br/&gt;function. The role of the Gld ABC
transporter in gliding is not known and will be&lt;br/&gt;investigated. Wild-
type and mutant cells are being biochemically characterized to
identify&lt;br/&gt;the cargo of the transporter and determine the role of the
transporter in gliding.&lt;br/&gt;Additional genes required for gliding will
also be identified by cosmid complementation&lt;br/&gt;and transposon
mutagenesis. These genes will be cloned, sequenced, and analyzed
to&lt;br/&gt;determine possible functions for the individual components of the
gliding machinery.&lt;br/&gt;Mutations will be created in individual gld genes
and the effects on cell motility will be&lt;br/&gt;assessed. The genes will also
be cloned into expression vectors to allow&lt;br/&gt;overproduction of Gld
proteins. These proteins will be used to raise antibodies, which&lt;br/&gt;will
allow localization of the Gld proteins by cell fractionation and by immuno-
electron&lt;br/&gt;microscopy. This may allow visualization of the motility
machinery at high resolution for&lt;br/&gt;the first time, and will be an
important step toward determining the mechanism of&lt;br/&gt;gliding.
Bacteriophages that infect only motile cells will also be used as tools to aid
in&lt;br/&gt;identification of the outermost components of the motility
machinery. These studies&lt;br/&gt;will lead to a better understanding of the
mechanism of Flavobacterium gliding motility. In addition to expanding our
knowledge on this common but little understood means of bacterial locomotion,
these studies could have more practical value since gliding bacteria related to
F. johnsoniae are important as pathogens of plants, animals, and humans, as
agents of biodegradation, and as producers of enzymes, antibiotics and other
secondary metabolites.&lt;br/&gt;