* 0130275
* RCN: The North Atlantic Project: Historical Ecology of the Trans-Atlantic Biota
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2008
* Clifford Cunningham, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 01/31/2008
* USD 499,803.00

0130275&lt;br/&gt;Cunningham&lt;br/&gt; Although the North Atlantic is the best-
studied ocean in the world, there is no coordinated effort to study its ecology
and evolutionary history. This research coordination network will bring together
ecologists, paleontologists, oceanographers, and evolutionary biologists. In
particular, the group will focus on the many marine taxa that are hypothesized
to have invaded from the North Pacific following the opening of the Bering
Strait in the late Pliocene. This invasion placed closely related organisms on
both coasts of the North Atlantic in a grand natural experiment. Although there
is great potential to compare the ecology of taxa found on the very different
coasts of the NW and NE North Atlantic, this is rarely done. The major goals of
this network are to encourage trans-Atlantic ecological and evolutionary
research when closely related taxa are found in the NW and the NE Atlantic. This
research will be placed in a historical context by coordinating literally
hundreds of molecular phylogeographic and systematic studies of the North
Atlantic flora and fauna, with an emphasis on taxa found on both coasts. These
historical molecular studies will then be placed in the context of knowledge
about oceanography, paleoclimatology, and paleontology. Although a comprehensive
study of the North Atlantic requires cross-disciplinary and international
cooperation, currently there is no annual meeting devoted to basic research by
significant subsets of these fields and attended by scientists from both sides
of the Atlantic. Even within specific fields, scientists who study marine
animals and plants rarely interact. This network brings together 76 scientists
from 12 countries bordering the North Atlantic, and has already generated
considerable excitement at the opportunity to carry out trans-Atlantic, multi-
disciplinary collaborations.&lt;br/&gt; Because of its central location between
Europe and North America, the North Atlantic is strongly affected by human
activities. Overfishing and pollution have led to population crashes in
important species such as cod and lobster. Since both cod and lobster have close
relatives on both coasts of the North Atlantic, there is much to learn about
their ecology by comparing populations on both coasts. This can help to explain
why, for example, lobsters (genus Homarus) are so much more common in America
than in Europe. By placing this research in an evolutionary context, the
research coordination network will examine what organismal characteristics
allowed taxa to survive the last glaciations in the northern hemisphere. This
information will help explain why some species are more resistant to local
extinction than others, which will help in conservation
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;