* 0130487
* Riparian Plant Genotype by Environment Interactions:Eeffects on Leaf Litter Quality, in-Stream Decomposition, and Aquatic Biodiversity
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Thomas Whitham, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Martyn M. Caldwell
* 07/31/2006
* USD 365,000.00

Litterfall from riparian vegetation provides a critical energy source for many
stream food webs. The quality of those litter inputs strongly influences their
rate of decomposition in the stream and the diversity and productivity of
aquatic organisms they support. The extent to which genetic variation within a
single species or hybrid complex contributes to variation in litter quality is
not well understood, but could be critical, particularly in high-elevation
riparian ecosystems in the southwest, where two species of cottonwoods and their
hybrids constitute 80-95% of the riparian vegetation. Furthermore, the effects
of environmental stress such as insect herbivory and drought are known to depend
on cottonwood genotypes, but how such genotype by environment interactions
affect leaf litter quality and in- stream processing is not known for
cottonwoods, nor, to our knowledge, for any other riparian
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will determine whether aquatic
biodiversity and ecosystem processes are similarly linked to cottonwood hybrid
zones. Common gardens with pure and hybrid cottonwoods of known genotypes will
be used to determine how genetic variation within the cottonwood hybrid complex
affects litter quality, in- stream decomposition (including mass loss and
nutrient release), and colonization and diversity of microbial decomposers
(bacteria and fungi) and invertebrates. This experimental work will be
supplemented with natural surveys of litter entering streams to determine the
importance and distribution of litter from each of four cottonwood cross-types
(Fremont, narrowleaf, F1, and backcross) that are naturally ubiquitous in
watersheds from Colorado to Mexico. Finally, controlled experiments crossing
cottonwood cross-types and environmental stress (drought and herbivory) will be
used to determine how genetic by environment interactions alter litter quality
and litter processing and biodiversity in streams. This research will address
these critical unknowns in our understanding of aquatic community and ecosystem
processes and terrestrial-aquatic interactions.&lt;br/&gt;