* 0130893
* Evolution of Coloration and Mate Preferences Along Resource Availability Gradients
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Gregory Grether, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* John A. Byers
* 12/31/2006
* USD 453,051.00

Evolution of coloration and mate preferences along resource availability
gradients

Gregory Frank Grether (PI) Gita Raman Kolluru (co-P)

The only barriers to reproduction between some closely related species are
female mate preferences for male secondary sexual characters. Factors that cause
female mate preferences to evolve (i.e., change over generations) can lead to
the formation of new species. Scientists are just beginning to understand the
role of the environment in this process. In guppies, a small stream-dwelling
fish native to Trinidad, females prefer males with larger and "brighter" orange
spots. The orange spots contain two types of pigments, one which males can
synthesize (drosopterins) and another which they must ingest (carotenoids).
Guppies acquire carotenoids from algae, which grow on rocks in the streambed.
Algae availability for guppies is strongly influenced by forest canopy cover and
therefore by stream width (wider streams create larger gaps in the forest). The
proposed project will expand and strengthen efforts to understand how variation
among streams in forest canopy cover affects the evolution of male coloration
and female mate preferences. In addition, new experiments will be carried out to
determine (1) whether carotenoid consumption influences parasite resistance, (2)
whether transfer of carotenoids from mothers to offspring affects offspring
viability, and (3) whether males also express carotenoid-based mate preferences.
The methods will include field experiments, laboratory breeding experiments,
color measurements and biochemical analyses. The broader goal is to develop a
deeper understanding of how the environment affects the evolution of mate
preferences and the traits they favor. This study will contribute to our
knowledge of biological diversity.