* 0130421
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Investigating the Development of Agriculture in the Salta Puna, Northwestern Argentina
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2003
* Mark Aldenderfer, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2003
* USD 11,161.00

Under the direction of Dr. Mark Aldenderfer, Claudia U. Rumold will collect data
for her doctoral dissertation which will examine the adoption of agriculture in
the high Andes of northwestern Argentina. She will participate in the
archaeological investigation of two sites, Ramadas and Matansillas 2, located in
the San Antonio de los Cobres River Valley. The sites, dating from circa 5240 to
2040 BP, span the period in which agriculture developed in this region and
current evidence indicates that they will provide data regarding this process.
Both sites contain evidence for the cultivation, processing, or consumption of
plants (e.g., hoes, grinding stones, plant remains). Significantly, sites as
early as Ramadas are rare in the south-central Andes and may provide key
insights into the first stages of agricultural adoption.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within the last ten thousand years, agriculture appeared
independently among many societies inhabiting distinct environmental settings
around the world. The widespread adoption of an agrarian economy had and
continues to have a far-reaching impact - contributing to increasing
sociopolitical complexity, sedentarization, rapid population growth, urbanism,
and large-scale human transformation of the environment. In view of its pivotal
role, archaeologists wish to understand agriculture's origins and development -
how and why it diffused so successfully throughout the globe. Clarification of
the fundamental variables underlying the shift from hunting-gathering to farming
hinges on careful comparison of case studies. Northwestern Argentina possesses
many of the variables closely linked with the appearance of agriculture (e.g.,
the domestication of autochthonous plants and animals and the appearance of
pottery and settled village life). Rumold's research here will therefore provide
new data critical to the comparative process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four
analyses will be carried out with the aim of characterizing the emergence of
farming at the sites in question. Grinding stone and ceramic use-wear analysis
will elucidate the nature and intensity of plant processing techniques.
Examination of charred plant remains will illuminate the use of seed plants.
Roots and tubers (e.g., potato) - the most important economic plants
domesticated prehistorically in the Andes - do not often preserve in charred
form; therefore, starch grain analysis will be conducted in order to clarify
their economic role. As this technique is relatively new to archaeology,
Rumold's research will help to expand its empirical base in highland South
America. On a theoretical level, data regarding the use of roots and tubers will
be essential to correcting the present bias in theories of agricultural origins,
which primarily concern seed plants. &lt;br/&gt;