* 0130797
* Biological Information Technology Systems - BITS: Modeling and Analysis of Biological and Information Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2004
* Mark Goulian, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 01/31/2004
* USD 300,000.00

EIA-0130797 -Harvey Rubin-University of Pennsylvania-Modeling and Analysis of
Biological and Information Networks &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goals of
our research are to: 1) create enabling technologies and experimental systems
that are necessary to understand and predict the integrated functions of two
bacterial sensing and regulatory networks--porim osmo-regulation in E.coli and
oxygen sensing regulation of DNA synthesis in Mycobacterium tuberculosis; 2)
model and abstract principles of organization, design control and coordination
of biological systems. We believe that a better understanding of networked,
hybrid models in biology will provide deeper insights into networked, embedded
systems. No systematic approach to designing and developing such hybrid systems
exists today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our research on the porin osmo-regulatory
system in E. coli will investigate crosstalk between the porin osmo-regulatory
system and other signaling systems. We suggest that the ability of the sensing
element of the system, EnvZ, to act as both a kinase and phosphatase is crucial
for the control of information flow and to minimize crosstalk. We will extend
our models in a related series of experiments on the PhoQ/PhoP two component
systems, which responds to changes in the extracellular magnesium concentration.
Since the levels of the histidine kinase PhoQ and response regulator PhoP are
modulated by the concentration of phosphorylated PhoP, we will be able to
establish the effect of this feedback and its influence on robustness of the
overall system behavior.&lt;br/&gt;