* 0130868
* Jasmonate Signaling in Plants: Activation of Jasmonic Acid by the JAR1 Response Locus in Arabidopsis thaliana
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Paul Staswick, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 04/30/2006
* USD 357,937.00

Jasmonic acid (JA) and related octadecanoid-derivatives are key plant signals
that are involved in development, defense against pathogens and insects, and in
protecting plants from harmful environmental agents such as ozone. Despite the
importance of these signaling molecules, their mechanism of action at the
molecular genetic and biochemical level is largely unknown. Mutations in the
JAR1 gene in Arabidopsis thaliana impair many JA-signaled responses, suggesting
this gene is associated with JA function. The JAR1 protein was recently found to
be a member of the adenylate-forming firefly luciferase superfamily. These
enzymes adenylate substrate carboxyl groups, thereby activating them for further
biochemical modification. Importantly, JAR1 appears to adenylate JA. This
finding is unique among known plant hormone response pathways, because it
suggests that covalent modification of the signal (JA) by JAR1 positively
affects JA response. Arabidopsis also has 18 other genes that are closely
related to JAR1 and some of these act on other plant hormones. This project
intends to: 1. Determine how the adenylating activity of JAR1 affects JA
signaling in Arabidopsis. 2. Understand the role of JAR1 in controlling plant
gene expression. 3. Compare and contrast the expression pattern of JAR1 and
related genes. 4. Isolate and characterize suppressors of the jar1 phenotype. 5.
Determine the biochemical and physiological function of other Arabidopsis genes
that are related to JAR1. Methods to achieve these objectives will include the
in vitro assay of enzyme activity of JAR1-like genes using GST-fusion proteins
expressed in E. coli. Extracts from jar1 mutants and wild type plants will be
analyzed by GC/MS to determine if levels of JA, JA precursors or JA derivatives
are altered. JAR1-related gene function will be explored in knockout mutants and
by gene overexpression. The developmental and tissue-specific expression pattern
of JAR1 and the 18 related Arabidopsis genes also will be analyzed to determine
where and when each gene acts. Finally, suppressors of the jar1 phenotype will
be isolated and characterized. Together these approaches will yield a
comprehensive understanding of the role that covalent modification of hormones
by adenylation plays in controlling hormone function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
gene family that influences plant development and helps to protect plants from
disease and other environmental damage will be investigated. Some of these genes
encode enzymes that biochemically modify the plant hormones jasmonic acid and
indole acetic acid. This is important to study because the control of plant
hormone activity by chemical modification is poorly understood. The project will
increase our understanding of how hormones regulate growth and protect plants
from damage. The results from this study of the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana
will have a fundamental and broad impact because similar genes are found in many
if not all plant species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;