* 0130086
* RUI: Use of Transgenic Xenopus Embryos to Study Cell Specification in Eye Development
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Jean Hardwick, Ithaca College
* Standard Grant
* Aixa Alfonso
* 08/31/2007
* USD 299,361.00

Cell specification in eye development

Eyes in vertebrates develop from cells in two regions of the forebrain, and
these cells specialize (or differentiate) to generate many cell types. The cell
types include photoreceptor cells (which detect light), many types of neural
cells (which integrate signals from photoreceptor cells and send signals to the
brain), and several types of supporting cells. The mechanisms by which regions
of the brain become specified to form eyes, and cells in these region become
specified to form different cell types, are not well understood.

The proposed research will examine eye development in a model laboratory
organism, the frog Xenopus laevis. Cells within the developing eyes communicate
by releasing specific signaling proteins; these proteins bind to receptors on
other cells, influencing cell determination. One group of signaling proteins,
called FGFs, is used in several processes during eye development. FGFs can bind
to, and activate, any of four different FGF receptors (FGFRs), but it is not
clear whether activation of specific FGFRs affects cell differentiation in the
eye.

Experiments will be conducted to test the hypothesis that activation of
different FGFRs causes eye cells to differentiate in different ways. Inhibitory
FGFRs will be expressed in the developing eye; it will then be possible to
compare the effects of blocking signaling through, say, FGFR-1 with the effects
of blocking other FGFRs. This analysis will show whether different FGFRs play
distinct roles in eye development. The experiments will utilize recently
developed transgenic technology in frogs, which makes it possible to introduce
specific genes into frog embryos. The introduced genes will consist of DNA that
directs the gene to be expressed only in the eye, coupled to DNA encoding an
inhibitory FGFR. .

These studies will lead to a better understanding of the mechanisms by which
vertebrate eyes develop, and which processes may be disrupted when eyes develop
abnormally. Finally, comparison of eye development in different organisms will
contribute to a better understanding of how eyes have evolved.

Undergraduate students will be strongly involved in the proposed research. This
research will thus serve, in part, to train the next generation of scientists.