* 0130414
* Quantum-QuBIC:  Deterministic Cavity Quantum Electrodynamics for Quantum Information Studies
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2004
* Dan Stamper-Kurn, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 09/30/2004
* USD 399,928.00

EIA- 0130414 Dan M. Stamper-Kurn University of California-Berkeley

Title: Deterministic Cavity quantum Electrodynamics for Quantum Information
Studies

In the young field of quantum information science, theoretical investigations
have quickly identified potentialities which are so astounding in scope
(exponential speed-up of computation, the insecurity of current cryptographic
schemes) that a focused experimental activity must be undertaken. This project
is pursuing a fundamental experimental advance in one potential arena for the
implementation of these theoretical ideas is proposed: the synthesis of optical
and atomic quantum information resources through cavity quantum electrodynamics
(CQED). While theoretical developments indicate that CQED devices offer a
scalable and powerful architecture for quantum information processing, a key
missing element which stands in the way of further progress is the deterministic
loading of the atom-cavity system. To mend this gap, a powerful yet
straightforward integration of the experimental techniques of laser cooling,
magnetic trapping and Bose-Einstein condensation with cavity quantum
electrodynamics is underway. This synthesis is clearly beneficial to quantum
information processing, combining well controlled, stationary qubits comprised
of trapped atoms wherein quantum information is stored in long-lived internal
states, "flying qubits" in the form of photons emitted from the cavity, and a
means of strongly coupling the two. This ambitious effort will enable a broad
range of breakthroughs and innovations in the field of quantum information
science.

For this project, an evaporatively-cooled, and at times quantum degenerate,
atomic gas is produced outside the confines of a high-finesse optical cavity,
and then adiabatically placed inside the cavity to provide a reservoir of
ultracold atoms. Single atoms, or a countable number of atoms, are "activated"
from this "passive" reservoir by a transition between atomic hyperfine states,
and are then used for a wide range of basic applications with direct relevance
to quantum information and communication schemes. These applications include the
generation of single photons on demand, the generation of non-classical number
states of the optical field, the implementation of Raman CQED by which the atom-
cavity system can be programmatically switched on and off, and an exploration of
quantum and non-linear optical properties of quantum degenerate gases at the
single photon level.

