* 0130398
* Energetics of Protein Metabolism during Development of Antarctic Echinoderms
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2007
* Donal Manahan, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 03/31/2007
* USD 472,369.00

0130398&lt;br/&gt;Manahan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Larval forms are dominant in the
life history strategies of invertebrates in marine environments. In Antarctica,
energy budget calculations have shown that larval stages of echinoderms have the
capacity to survive without food for periods of several months to years. This
has led to the speculation that mechanisms of energy metabolism are more
efficient in these larval forms, and that this "enhanced efficiency" might be
unique to life in extreme cold. Recent studies on the biochemical bases of
developmental physiology in Antarctic marine invertebrates have revealed some
novel aspects of metabolism in the cold. Contrary to expectations of low
metabolism and low rates of macromolecular synthesis in the cold, embryos and
larvae of an Antarctic sea urchin have high rates of protein synthesis, while
maintaining low rates of metabolism. This apparent paradox was resolved with the
recent finding that the cost of protein synthesis in this Antarctic sea urchin
is one twenty-fifth of that reported for other animals. This is the highest
efficiency for protein synthesis reported for an animal and has important
implications for the physiology of growth and development in cold environments.
This unique biochemical efficiency of protein synthesis in the cold is the
subject of detailed investigation in the current project. The research team will
combine expertise in Antarctic larval physiology and biochemistry and molecular
biology of sea urchin development to address an experimental plan that is based
on three major objectives. (1) The generality of the recent finding of the low
cost of protein synthesis in Antarctic sea urchin larvae will be tested by
measuring metabolism and protein synthesis during development of other Antarctic
echinoderm species. (2) The prediction of a high rate of protein synthesis with
low metabolic cost is that growth efficiencies will be high in such organisms.
This will be tested by measuring the physiology of protein growth efficiencies
in larvae. (3) The unique high efficiency of protein synthesis in Antarctic sea
urchin embryos will be studied using specific molecular biology approaches. The
combination of these quantitative analyses will enable us to pinpoint those
aspects of protein metabolism that result in such extremely high energy-
efficiencies. Understanding metabolic efficiency in polar organisms is required
to help resolve long-standing questions regarding temperature compensation and
adaptations to food limitation in polar regions. The unique approach here is the
emphasis on the cellular and sub-cellular levels of biological analysis to
understand the relationship among development, growth, metabolic rate, and rates
and costs of protein synthesis in the Antarctic organisms we propose to study.
&lt;br/&gt;