* 0130347
* When Does Microenvironmental Variation Modulate Developmental Stability?
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2005
* Stephen Tonsor, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 03/31/2005
* USD 322,051.00

This project examines microenvironmental causes of developmental instability.
This project hypothesizes that developmental instability results in part from
the sensitivity of metabolism and development to (generally unmeasured) micro-
environmental variation This project tests the hypothesis that trait
sensitivities to small-scale changes in environmental conditions will explain a
significant fraction of developmental instability. Thirty five ecotypes of
Arabidopsis thaliana will be grown in controlled environmental conditions. Each
plant will experience one of four macro-scale environments: High Light (HL)/High
Nitrogen (HN); HL/LowNitrogen(LN); LowLight (LL)/HN; LL/LN. Within these
macroenvironments, each plant will receive a slight increase or decrease in
light or nitrogen relative to the macro-scale target levels. Using a
quantitative genetics approach, the comparison of 1) the sensitivity of trait
measurements to small changes in environmental conditions and 2) the extent of
developmental instability, will test the hypothesis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developmental instability is thought to play a number of
important roles in the processes by which organisms adapt to changing
environments. Perhaps most importantly, developmental instability obscures the
roles of genes in the variation between individuals. For crop breeding, this
means that the response to selection for economically important traits is
reduced. In natural populations, developmental instability reduces the abilty of
the organism to both maintain a stable phenotype, and to adapt to changing
environments. &lt;br/&gt;