* 0130395
* High Performance Algorithms for Electronic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Yousef Saad, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/28/2006
* USD 420,000.00

This grant is supported by the Divisions of Materials Research and Advanced
Computational Infrastructure and Research. The research is in the area of
computational materials research and involves a collaborative effort in both
materials research and computational science. The overall goal of the research
is to exploit high performance computers for solving large scale and complex
problems that arise in modeling real materials. The research will center on
electronic materials with extended and point defects, and non-ideal interfaces
and in the form of amorphous solids, atomic clusters, liquids, and
glasses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The continuing evolution of high performance
computers is creating new opportunities for the application of sophisticated
electronic structure techniques to the study of technologically important
materials. A few orders of magnitude improvement in speed are feasible in the
near future and will enable us to step beyond the current computational limits
in materials science and achieve an unprecedented understanding of the physical
and electronic properties of materials. Such achievements are not made by
progress in computer hardware alone, but depend more so on innovations in
algorithms. The development of new algorithms in multidisciplinary research
requires an understanding and appreciation of the different disciplines involved
by the collaborating members. Based on prior experience of this group, progress
can be best made by a close collaboration between computer scientists and
materials scientists. Thus, algorithms will be developed, implemented and
applied to a number of materials problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Applications
will include: localized systems, atomic clusters and quantum dots; liquids and
disordered semiconductors; dilute magnetic semiconductors. Algorithms to be
developed include: out-of-core methods; special methods for computing
eigenvectors and eigenvalues; avoiding eigenvectors and
eigenvalues.&lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;This grant is supported by the Divisions
of Materials Research and Advanced Computational Infrastructure and Research.
The research is in the area of computational materials research and involves a
collaborative effort in both materials research and computational science. The
overall goal of the research is to exploit high performance computers for
solving large scale and complex problems that arise in modeling real materials.
The research will center on electronic materials with extended and point
defects, and non-ideal interfaces and in the form of amorphous solids, atomic
clusters, liquids, and glasses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The continuing evolution of
high performance computers is creating new opportunities for the application of
sophisticated electronic structure techniques to the study of technologically
important materials. A few orders of magnitude improvement in speed are feasible
in the near future and will enable us to step beyond the current computational
limits in materials science and achieve an unprecedented understanding of the
physical and electronic properties of materials. Such achievements are not made
by progress in computer hardware alone, but depend more so on innovations in
algorithms. The development of new algorithms in multidisciplinary research
requires an understanding and appreciation of the different disciplines involved
by the collaborating members. Based on prior experience of this group, progress
can be best made by a close collaboration between computer scientists and
materials scientists. Thus, algorithms will be developed, implemented and
applied to a number of materials problems.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;