* 0130705
* Adaptive Neurally-Inspired Computing: Models, Algorithms, and Silicon-Based Architectures
* CSE,CCF
* 12/15/2001,11/30/2007
* Rajesh Rao, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Pinaki Mazumder
* 11/30/2007
* USD 591,035.00

EIA-0130705 -University of Washington-Guang R. Gao-Adaptive Neurally-Inspired
Computing: Models, Algorithms, and Silicon-Based
Architectures&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rapid advances in silicon technology over the
past few decades have allowed digital&lt;br/&gt;devices to achieve ultra-high
speeds in numerical computation. However, a majority of&lt;br/&gt;these devices
are prone to catastrophic failure when confronted with
circumstances&lt;br/&gt;unforeseen at programming time. Endowing such devices
with the ability to adapt and&lt;br/&gt;learn from experience is rapidly
becoming a problem of fundamental importance in&lt;br/&gt;information
technology. We propose a new approach to solving this problem:
building&lt;br/&gt;information technology systems based on neurobiological
computation and learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We intend to achieve this goal by
developing computational models of plasticity and information processing in
neurons and networks of neurons in selected sensory and motor areas of the
brain; testing these models and their corresponding algorithms in software-based
simulations, and designing real-time implementations of these algorithms in
silicon using synapse transistors and field-programmable learning arrays
(FPLAs).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We expect our research to provide a better
understanding of computation within neuronal&lt;br/&gt;networks, and to lead to
a new generation of adaptive neuromorphic devices that could be&lt;br/&gt;used
for a variety of information technology applications, ranging from signal
processing&lt;br/&gt;and pattern recognition to ubiquitous computing and robotic
control.&lt;br/&gt;