* 0130931
* Biodiversity and Ecosystem Informatics - BDEI - Towards an Operational Semantics of Biological Diversity: Integrating Structure and Function in a Web-accessible Knowledge Base
* CSE,EIA
* 09/01/2001,10/31/2002
* Marta Ceroni, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Brandt
* 10/31/2002
* USD 95,680.00

EIA-010931&lt;br/&gt;Villa, Ferdinando&lt;br/&gt;University of Maryland Center
for Environmental Sciences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BDEI: Towards an Operational
Semantics Diversity: Integrating
Structure&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the
dynamics of biological diversity requires new approaches
and&lt;br/&gt;integration between different disciplines. The development of a
unitary body of&lt;br/&gt;knowledge about biodiversity is made difficult by the
fragmentation and lack of&lt;br/&gt;interoperability between the diverse - and
often informal and simplistic - semantics&lt;br/&gt;adopted for data and models.
Different representational paradigms require conceptual, as&lt;br/&gt;well as
technical, integration to enable reorganizing the body of knowledge and
enable&lt;br/&gt;new ideas, theories, and higher-level paradigms to surface and
be tested.&lt;br/&gt;Building on software and conceptual frameworks being
developed at IEE/UMD, we&lt;br/&gt;propose to develop and deploy a web-
accessible database where temporally- and&lt;br/&gt;spatially- explicit
biodiversity data will coexist with dynamic modular
models,&lt;br/&gt;potentially integrating multiple modeling paradigms and
automatically enforcing their&lt;br/&gt;compatibility. The XML-based
infrastructure used by the underlying software engine will&lt;br/&gt;enable us
to store data and models (modules) adopting an extensible array
of&lt;br/&gt;representations, and to link them together transparently and
automatically. The&lt;br/&gt;integration will happen through explicit cross-
cutting abstractions called domains, which&lt;br/&gt;represent various aspects
of the world (such as time or space) as seen by each module,&lt;br/&gt;and are
processed by the simulation engine to resolve conflicts related to different
scales&lt;br/&gt;or representational paradigms.&lt;br/&gt;