* 0130437
* SOFTWARE: High-level Programming Methodologies for  Data Intensive Computations
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2006
* Joel Saltz, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 01/31/2006
* USD 350,981.00

Solving problems that have large computational and storage requirements is
becoming increasingly critical for advances in many domains of science and
engineering. Runtime and compiler technology can significantly accelerate
advances in such domains by enabling the programming of algorithms for these
problems at very high levels of abstraction. Our research focuses on an
important class of scientific and engineering problems: data intensive
computations. Such computations arise in many domains of scientific and
engineering research. We are targetting two high-level programming models for
this class of computations:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Object-Oriented (Java-
Based): Object-oriented features like encapsulation and polymorphism can ease
software development and allow better long-term management of large
computational projects. We are using a dialect of Java for expressing data
intensive computations. An initial prototype compiler for this dialect of Java
has been built. Our compiler uses static interprocedural slicing technique to
extracting required functions for utilizing an existing runtime system, Active
Data Repository (ADR). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; 2. Declarative (XQL-Based): The
very high-level nature of declarative languages can allow rapid prototyping of
new computational techniques. XML (Extensible Markup Language) is getting
accepted as the format for the logical layout of data which may be made
available over the web or exchanged between organizations. We will make
extensions to XML Schemas for expressing multidimensional collections of
elements. We also will also make extensions to XQL, which is a query language
for XML documents, for expressing processing of large datasets.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;We propose innovative research in five important
areas:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Execution Strategies for Disk Resident
Datasets.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;2. Advanced Symbolic Analysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Interprocedural Code Motion Techniques for Object-
Oriented Programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4. Combined Compiler and Runtime
Techniques for Locality Management. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;5. Advanced
Interprocedural Slicing Techniques for Object-Oriented
Languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;