* 0130599
* CISE Research Resources: Instrumentation for Communications Research in Wireless Ad-Hoc Networking
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2001,11/30/2005
* James Krogmeier, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 11/30/2005
* USD 198,977.00

EIA-0130599 James Krogmeier Purdue University

CISE Research Resources: Instrumentation for Communications Research in Wireless
Ad-Hoc Networking

The Schools of ECE and Civil Engineering at Purdue University will purchase
radio frequency test equipment (a network analyzer, an air-interface measurement
tool, and radio frequency channel emulators), workstations, Bluetooth
Developer's Kits, laptops, and supporting electronic and interface supplies to
enhance the capabilities of the Wireless Communications Research Laboratory and
the Harold L. Michael Traffic Operations Laboratory in the area of experimental
wireless communications research and intelligent transportation systems.

Four research projects will be directly enhanced by the availability of the
above resources: 1) Wireless ad-hoc networking for dedicated short range
communications applications in intelligent transportation systems, 2) Reduced
complexity receivers for continuous phase modulations, 3) Reduced-dimension
decision feedback equalizers for high-speed wireless communications, and 4)
Embedded signal processing for intelligent transportation systems.

The communications research involved in the projects above is focused on
synchronization, channel estimation and equalization, and low complexity
receivers for both linear and non-linear modulations. End-to-end network
performance is also considered, as is the design of simplified protocols for use
in ad-hoc networking. The signal processing research is largely experimental
involving the integration of different intelligent transportation subsystems
including communications and embedded signal processing for traffic signal
control and weigh-in-motion.