* 0130746
* Biological Information Technology Systems - BITS: Biological Computation in Olfactory Systems: Experiments, Theory and Analog Circuit Modeling
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2008
* Gilles Laurent, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 01/31/2008
* USD 1,145,004.00

EIA 0130746-Giles J. Laurent-California Institute of Technology - Biological
computation in olfactory systems: experiments, theory and analog circuit
modeling&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pattern recognition (e.g., face, voice
recognition) remains one of the most difficult problems for computer science.
Odors are complex physical objects (blends of molecules) and yet, are perceived
as singular objects (e.g., coffee, jasmine); because olfactory circuit designs
appear similar across animal species (from insects to mammals), olfaction
constitutes a potentially ideal system to identify key solutions to pattern
recognition. The investigators are an interdisciplinary team from Biology,
Physics, Computer Science and Electrical Engineering from Caltech and from the
University of California-San Diego. They are investigating the basic
computational principles of olfactory processing and recognition in animals,
with the long-term goal to build "intelligent" pattern storage and recognition
devices, designed using rules inspired by neurobiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We
plan to study how to build simple and later, scale up, both in number of
processors and in frequency, "electronic antennal lobes and mushroom bodies" so
that one might, in the future, adapt and exploit the design of biological
pattern recognizers and provide new computational paradigms for human
uses.&lt;br/&gt;