* 0130677
* RUI - Nitric Oxide Inhibition of Metamorphosis in a Marine Snail
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Esther Leise, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Continuing Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 04/30/2006
* USD 302,509.00

During development, the cells of the nervous system go through periods of growth
and proliferation and are often produced in excess. As cells become connected
into their adult circuits, excess cells and cells in temporary structures die
and are removed by a naturally occurring process called apoptosis. This process
is regulated, in part, by diffusible signaling molecules that also act as
neurotransmitters in adults. Neurotransmitters are small compounds that nerve
cells use to communicate with each other. One such molecule is the diffusible
gas, nitric oxide. Once inside a cell, the interaction of nitric oxide with its
target molecule sets off a cascade of biochemical events. While nitric oxide has
been implicated in regulating both cellular proliferation and apoptosis, little
information exists about its role in the regulation of nervous system
development. Previous work in Dr. Leise's laboratory has indicated that nitric
oxide acts as a natural inhibitor of metamorphosis in a species of marine snail.
During this process, one cluster of neurons in the brain, the so-called apical
ganglion, disappears. Drs. Leise and Hens hypothesize that the disappearance of
this ganglion is a result of apoptosis. They will use a histochemical test to
look in apical ganglion cells for the presence of DNA fragments which form
during apoptosis. They will also conduct related pharmacological and anatomical
investigations to determine if nitric oxide regulates this process. They will
investigate the relationship of nerve cell proliferation to metamorphosis and
will determine if nitric oxide also controls the birth of new neurons. Finally,
they will use molecular and immunocytochemical methods to identify regions of
the embryonic brain that produce the enzyme that generates nitric oxide and
determine when the production of the enzyme, and thus nitric oxide, cease during
development. Nitric oxide occurs naturally as a neurotransmitter in the brains
of adult humans, and its importance in the function of the adult brain is widely
accepted. However, little is known about the role of this important molecule in
embryonic development. These studies will further our understanding of nitric
oxide in the embryonic brain and its importance for the regulation of neural
development.