* 0130631
* Acquisition of a New Generation Thermal Ionization Mass Spectrometer
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2006
* Mukul Sharma, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 01/31/2006
* USD 267,997.00

EAR-0130631&lt;br/&gt;Sharma&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partial funding is awarded
towards the purchase of a new generation multi-collector Thermal Ionization Mass
Spectrometer (TIMS), which permits ultra-high precision measurements of
positively and negatively charged ion beams. The Dartmouth College will provide
a match consisting of 50% of the expected cost of the instrument. The TIMS
instrument will be the primary research tool in the new radiogenic isotope
geochemistry laboratory in the Department of Earth Sciences. Ultra-high
precision osmium and neodymium isotopic ratios will be determined using the new
TIMS with the aim of addressing issues related to the origin and evolution of
Earth and other planetary reservoirs. In addition, high sensitivity measurements
of rhenium, osmium, iridium, samarium, neodymium, uranium, thorium, lead,
rubidium, strontium, and iron isotopes will be performed. The new TIMS facility
will provide an exciting new dimension to research at Dartmouth, complementing
the extant strong research programs in the Department of Earth Sciences, which
include K-Ar geochronology, organic geochemistry and paleoceanography,
hydrogeochemistry of watersheds, climate change, landscape evolution,
stratigraphy and basin analysis, hydrology and geomechanics, and tectonics. Many
of these programs have a radiogenic isotope component and require access to a
state-of-the-art TIMS facility. Additionally, other researchers and students at
Dartmouth and in New England region will be able to use the new facility,
resulting in further growth of research and education in geochemistry and in
physical sciences. &lt;br/&gt;