* 0130600
* CAREER: The Evolution of Cooperative Breeding, Reproductive Suppression, and All-Male Groups in a Southern African Ground Squirrel
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2002,02/29/2008
* Jane Waterman, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Byers
* 02/29/2008
* USD 582,283.00

The evolution of cooperative breeding, reproductive suppression, and all-male
groups in a southern African ground squirrel. Jane M. Waterman&lt;br/&gt; In
highly social species, reproduction is often monopolized by a few individuals,
yet species with more breeding individuals offer an alternative approach to
understanding the costs and benefits of sociality. Although most cooperative
groups are composed of close relatives, examining sociality among unrelated
individuals enables other selective advantages for grouping to be evaluated. The
Cape ground squirrel (Xerus inauris) lives in the arid regions of southern
Africa in clusters of related females and associated bands of apparently
unrelated males. Females and their young are considered to be cooperative
breeders because of the delayed dispersal and reproductive suppression of young
that help care for offspring. Males live independently of females in amicable
all-male bands that persist throughout the year, and only interact with females
during breeding. Thus, two different social systems (male and female) coexist in
this species, resulting in a social organization unlike that described for any
other mammal and providing a unique model for testing hypotheses on the costs
and benefits of grouping. &lt;br/&gt; This project will test critical hypotheses
about the evolution of social behavior in Cape ground squirrels using a
combination of behavioral, molecular and hormonal techniques. To understand the
evolution of cooperative breeding in females, reproduction, survival, and
offspring care of breeders and non-breeders will be examined in groups that
differ in size and habitat quality. The reproductive suppression of subadult
females will be monitored using hormone assays and correlated with number and
behavior of breeders. Genetic relationships of males and the paternity of
offspring within the band's home range will be correlated with dominance status.
Predator mobbing experiments will examine mobbing as a form of helping behavior
in females and a form of paternal care in males (related to the number of
offspring in the area). Delayed dispersal by young males will be examined to
compare the reproductive payoff of this strategy to that of early
dispersers.&lt;br/&gt; The research and educational objectives of this project
will be highly integrated in a collaboration between the University of Central
Florida and the University of Pretoria in South Africa. Much of the research
will be conducted by graduate students from both schools who will develop thesis
projects based on this proposal. A field course on the ecology and behavior of
small mammals in South Africa will be developed for senior undergraduates and
beginning graduate students from both schools. This course will use web-based
distance learning and an intensive field component to expose students to the
theory, methods and analytical tools used in mammalogy, behavioral ecology, and
research in general. Thus, this project will lay the foundation for a long-term
study of African ground squirrels and collaboration with the University of
Pretoria in both research and education. &lt;br/&gt;