* 0130902
* SYMPOSIUM:  New Perspectives on the Origin of Metazoan Complexity, held at (SICB) meeting in Anaheim, California
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2002
* Mark Martindale, Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 11/30/2002
* USD 12,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;The symposium, New Perspectives on the Origin of Metazoan Complexity,
will be held at the annual meeting of the Society for Integrative and
Comparative Biology (SICB) meeting, January 3-6, 2002, in Anaheim, California.
Funding for the symposium will provide a stimulus for research on the early
diversification of metazoans. The vast majority of living organisms, bacteria,
algae, and "protozoans", consist of single cells or even when multicellular of
only a few different types of cells. What distinguishes metazoans from these
organisms is that they have not just many cells, but many different types of
cells. Their cells, moreover, are organized in complex patterns, forming tissues
and organs. Exactly how metazoan complexity evolved is a daunting problem in
evolutionary biology. The goal of this symposium is to examine how the
morphological and theoretical aspects of metazoan complexity relate to the
growing evidence that genomic complexity increased very early and rapidly and
may predate even the origin of the clade. Such a view challenges the idea that
metazoan ancestors were simple and that complexity has arisen incrementally. The
symposium will bring together a select group of biologists and paleontologists
to identify promising areas for research and promote greater cooperation between
their respective disciplines. The program includes promising young investigators
at the Masters, PhD, and postdoctoral levels as well as senior investigators
with established research programs. The symposium is also designed to encourage
gender diversity, with 7 women as presenting authors, and promote foreign
collaborations, with 12 of the participants coming from countries other than the
United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;