* 0130292
* Acquisition of a 40Ar/39Ar Dating Laboratory at Rutgers University
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Carl Swisher, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 12/31/2005
* USD 177,103.00

0130292&lt;br/&gt;Swisher &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF Instrumentation and
Facilities award provides funds for equipment required for the completion of a
"state of the art" 40Ar/39Ar dating facility at Rutgers University designed to
address a diverse array of geochronological issues in geology, paleontology and
anthropology. The Rutgers facility centers around a Mass Analyzer Products
215-50 mass spectrometer recently acquired with the closure of the Princeton
University Ar laboratory. The MAP 215-50 is well suited for 40Ar/39Ar research,
however, ancillary sample extraction, gas purification, and computer systems
were needed to make the Rutgers facility fully operational. NSF funds from this
award will provide necessary CO2 laser and resistance furnace sample heating
systems, and, an automated, low volume, ultra low background extraction system
for gas purification. Sample extraction and gas purification systems necessary
for the completion of the Rutgers 40Ar/39Ar dating system are not available, for
the most part, as single off the shelf items; rather individual components and
parts must be purchased, assembled, integrated calibrated and tested. Thus, in
addition to equipment, funding of additional technical support during build-out,
testing and calibration phases is also required. As part of cost sharing between
NSF and Rutgers University, Rutgers has committed two years salary and benefit
support for a permanent Ph.D. level, Research Associate faculty position for
development and technical assistance during the tenure of this proposal.
Thereafter, Rutgers will continue to support this position at the 50% level, the
remaining time to be allotted to research initiatives, collaborative projects
and university lectureships. Rutgers has also committed funds for the purchase
of the MAP 215-50 mass spectrometer, over $145,000 on upgrades and modernization
of research facilities and fixed equipment, and committed permanent academic
year salary and benefits for the P.I. to oversee and develop these facilities.
Ongoing and proposed research by the P.I., Research Associate and numerous
Rutger's faculty and students will benefit immediately from implementation of
the new instrumentation. The new Ar facility will serve as a catalyst, bringing
together two unique working groups of Rutger's scientists; a timescale group
consisting of faculty Swisher, Aubry, Berggren, Kent and Miller, and a
geological paleoanthropology group of Swisher, Anton, Ashley, Blumenschine,
Feibel, and Harris. Collaborative research with faculty and student
investigators in geology and anthropology at Rutgers and Princeton universities
is anticipated, as is continued collaborative research with other national and
international colleagues. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;