* 0130143
* CISE Research Resources:  From High Performance to Low Power:  Infrastructure for Ubiquitous Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2006
* Mary Irwin, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 02/28/2006
* USD 49,556.00

EIA-0130143&lt;br/&gt;Anand Sivasubramaniam&lt;br/&gt;Pennsylvania State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CISE Research Resources: From High performance
to Low Power: Infrastructure for Ubiquitous Computing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CISE Research Resources proposal asks to establish a computing infrastructure
laboratory in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering at
Pennsyvlvania State University. The resources will include a 16 node dual
Pentium/Linux cluster connected by Gigabit Ethernet, laptops and PDAs with
wireless LAN capabilities, and testing/measurement equipment for evaluating
energy-performance trade-offs on the mobile devices. This laboratory will
support the research activities of the following NSF-funded projects: 1)
Scheduling Support for High Performance Clusters; 2) Energy-Efficient
Architctures and Their Interaction with Software: A Java Perspective; 3) EOC: An
Energy-Aware Optimizing Compiler Framework; and 4) Optimization and integrated
Control of Low Power Wireless Multimedia Networks. These projects address
different components of this ubiquitous computing infrastructure. At the high
performance end, the principal investigators will examine architectural and
systems software issues in the design and deployment of clusters of workstations
for the emerging and demanding applications (such as web services, databases,
graphics and visualization applications, and multimedia) to provide high
performance and guaranteed service. At the resource-constrained end, they will
examine architectural, runtime and compilation optimizations, specifically
targeted for conserving battery energy and to make energy-performance trade-
offs. They also will examine the issue of wireless communication that is
intended to seamlessly integrate the mobile/handheld devices with the servers
(clusters) on the wired network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The equipment will serve
as a platform for the experimental activities and evaluation of prototypes in
these projects. The laboratory will also be used in many of the courses that we
teach at the graduate and undergraduate level to introduce students to this
important emerging topic.