* 0130525
* Monitoring the Human Impact and Environmental Variability on Adelie Penguins at Palmer Station, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* William Fraser, Polar Oceans Research Group
* Continuing Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 05/31/2006
* USD 633,595.00

0130525&lt;br/&gt;Fraser&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential consequence of human
impact on wildlife in Antarctica has been debated for many decades. Scientists,
support staff and visitors in Antarctica may have an effect on the behavior and
population dynamics of marine mammals and seabirds. Since the early 1970's,
shipboard tourism has expanded to the point where it is timely to address the
question, using a scientific research approach. The focus of this study is to
examine the potential effect of tourist activities on the Adelie Penguins
(Pygoscelis adeliae) in the Antarctic Peninsula. The topic has gathered the
interest and opinions of those in private industry, the scientific community,
government organizations and environmental groups. A key concern is that
increases in these activities may eventually overcome the ability of research to
address critical issues in a timely and biologically meaningful manner. The
approach to understanding how tourism might affect Adelie Penguins must involve
both a study of human activity and a study of natural variability in the
physical environment. The ongoing Palmer Long Term Ecological Research program
focuses on the ecosystem and its components and thus addresses the issues of
natural variability. This project focuses on the human dimension and continues a
tourist-monitoring program begun as a pilot project near Palmer Station. This
site is in a geographic location that mirrors current patterns in tourism and
tourist-wildlife interactions in the western Antarctic Peninsula. It also offers
a setting that provides unique opportunities for human impacts research. This
includes the presence of long-term databases that document environmental
variability over multiple time and space scales in both marine and terrestrial
habitats, and the ability to examine potential tourist impacts as part of
controlled experiments. The results of the study will have important
implications to understanding interactions between climate change and ecosystem
response, and for detecting, mitigating and managing the consequences of human
activities such as tourism.&lt;br/&gt;