* 0130500
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar:  Resonances in Small Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2003
* Ilya Fabrikant, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 05/31/2003
* USD 30,000.00

0130500&lt;br/&gt;Fabrikant&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the
participation of American scientists in a U.S.-Japan seminar on resonances in
small systems to be held in Saitama, Japan from July 22-24, 2002. The co-
organizers are Professor Ilya Fabrikant at the University of Nebraska, Lincoln
and Professor Mineo Kimura of Yamaguchi University in Japan. Collision processes
in different environments are often driven by intermediate resonance states.
They play an important role in a broad variety of scientific fields: atomic
physics, nuclear physics, surface and condensed matter physics, chemistry, and
biological sciences. Even in complex processes involving many particles it is
often possible to extract few-body resonance effects responsible for observed
phenomena. On the other hand, each field of science has its own method in
treating these effects. Therefore, it is important for specialists in each
particular field to get together and discuss their own findings and problems, to
exchange ideas and to learn about the methods used in other
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is expected that the seminar will provide a good
opportunity for closer interactions between electron scattering and positron
scattering groups, surface and atomic physics groups and interaction between
other branches of science. The project advances international human resources
through the participation of many junior faculty, postdocs, graduate students
and undergraduate students. Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this
project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international
understanding and cooperation. The researchers plan to publish proceedings of
the seminar in the Plenum Press. &lt;br/&gt;