* 0130417
* Effects of Foraging on the Lipid Biochemistry of Freely Diving Weddell Seals
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Michael Castellini, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 12/31/2006
* USD 668,638.00

The primary goal of this program is to quantify the dynamics of lipid uptake and
utilization in a naturally foraging mammalian carnivore by examining freely
diving Weddell seals in Antarctica. This species offers a unique opportunity to
follow the biochemistry and physiology of nutrient utilization in a large
carnivore that may not be possible in any other system. This is due to the
essentially impossible logistics of working with large predators such as free-
ranging felids (e.g, lions, tigers) or ursids (bears) and obtaining multiple
blood samples and measuring digestive chemistry while the animal is actively
foraging. While such studies can be conducted in laboratory or zoo settings,
they are necessarily limited to using captive animals where feeding times are
typically constrained by husbandry requirements and to human-determined diets.
However, a unique opportunity to perform digestive chemistry experiments in
actively foraging large carnivores in the wild exists in the Antarctic. For
several decades, the Weddell seal has been the focus of studies on natural
diving physiology because of the ability to work with the species using isolated
holes in the sea ice near McMurdo Station, Antarctica. In that system, the seal
has access to a single ice hole where it routinely returns to breathe, sleep,
digest, etc. With the use of blood-sampling catheters, serial samples of blood
can be collected whenever the seal returns to the surface between diving bouts.
Seals rely primarily on lipid metabolism for their daily energy demands and in
this new program, nutrient metabolism in predatory carnivores will be studied by
examining the kinetics of lipid uptake and utilization during active foraging
bouts. Labeled blood samples from freely diving animals will be used to quantify
lipid turnover rates and to characterize the various components of the lipid
pool. Adult seal lipid uptake and utilization will be compared to similar
processes in pups, which are biochemically adapted for massive and rapid lipid
utilization while nursing. This project will provide rare and perhaps
unparalleled data on the foraging biochemistry of freely living carnivores.
Results will also provide insight not only to Antarctic ecosystem studies, but
to the entire field of lipid metabolism in mammals and to the study of carnivore
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;