* 0130665
* Morph-Dependent Cyclic JH Titer in a Wing-Polymorphic Insect:  Adaptive Significance and Underlying Causes
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Anthony Zera, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Dianna K. Padilla
* 08/31/2006
* USD 321,626.00

Some insects, such as the cricket (Gryllus firmus), are wing polymorphic (i.e.,
they contain both flight capable and flightless morphs). Wing polymorphism has
been extensively used to investigate the hormonal control of dispersal and the
evolution of endocrine regulation in insects. However, all previous studies have
focused exclusively on the hormonal control of flight capability (e.g., growth
of wings and flight muscles) in the laboratory. No study has investigated the
endocrine regulation of flight itself, and no study has investigated the
hormonal regulation of wing polymorphism in the field. Recent studies indicate
that the endocrine regulation of morph-specific traits is more complex than
previously expected. The key regulator of wing polymorphism is juvenile hormone
(JH). In the cricket, Gryllus firmus, the mean concentration of JH is similar in
the flight capable and flightless morphs, but the morphs differ in how the level
of this hormone varies over time. The JH titer changes 10-50 fold during the day
in the flight capable morph, but it is relatively constant in the flightless
morph. This study focuses on the underlying causes and adaptive significance of
daily changes in the JH titer. Prolonged elevation of the JH titer is associated
with ovarian growth and with the breakdown of flight muscles--changes that are
detrimental with respect to flight. This study will test the hypothesis that
brief elevation of the JH titer is of sufficient duration to cause the
expression of flight behaviors but of insufficent duration to cause ovarian
growth or the breakdown of flight muscles. Studies will involve direct
comparisons of hormone titers between morphs throughout the day and evening. The
JH titer will be experimentally manipulated, and its effect on flight propensity
will be monitored. Finally, physiological processes (hormone biosynthesis and
degradation) that regulate morph-specific daily changes in the JH titer will be
investigated. Importantly, these studies will be undertaken in both the
laboratory and the field. This study will substantially enhance our
understanding of the endocrine regulation of dispersal and evolution of
dispersal in insects.