* 0130316
* Collaborative Research: Measurement and Analysis of the Preconvective Boundary Layer and Convection Initiation during International H2O Project (IHOP)
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2006
* Erik Rasmussen, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 12/31/2006
* USD 419,476.00

This collaborative project between the University of Oklahoma and the
Pennsylvania State University is part of the International H2O Project (IHOP).
The IHOP is a large multi-agency, multi-investigator project that focuses on the
measurement of water vapor and water vapor variability. The goal of this project
is to improve understanding of convective initiation, increase short-term
precipitation forecast skills and test the capabilities of various instruments
to measure the four dimensional characteristics of water vapor. The field phase
of the IHOP will be conducted during the Spring and Summer of 2002 and will
provide a wide range of mesoscale meteorological observations for studies to
gain a better understanding of the scales of, and processes influencing, water
vapor variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this hypothesis-driven
research is to improve understanding of the processes leading to the initiation
of deep, moist cumulus convection. Though several studies have examined certain
aspects of boundary layer structure little is known about what causes convective
initiation. IHOP will provide the comprehensive data sets needed to begin
evaluating and revising hypotheses concerning convection initiation processes
and the role of boundary layer water vapor. The Principal Investigators will
acquire and analyze three dimensional radar-derived boundary layer airflow and
in-situ measurements of winds and thermodynamic parameters from mobile
facilities. The combination of boundary layer airflow with in-situ measurements
of absolute humidity and virtual temperature provides the only means of
documenting the dynamical and transport processes acting in the boundary layer
to regulate precipitable water and force the development of secondary
circulations. Thus these observations are essential for evaluating hypotheses
concerning the impact of water vapor supply and airflow evolution on boundary
formation and convection initiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Detailed observations
will be analyzed in several different ways. Subjective analyses and
visualizations will be produced incorporating all available data on relevant
scales for convection initiation. Observation density will be enhanced utilizing
an advanced time-to-space conversion scheme by distributing nearly conservative
variables along Lagrangian trajectories based on multi-Doppler wind syntheses.
Finally, these enhanced observations will be assimilated into mesoscale models
to determine the dynamical forcing processes controlling the development of
localized boundary layer circulations that either promote or prevent convection
initiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort will result in the collection and
analysis of an unprecedented data set at scales previously not observed. Through
this work, a completely new understanding will emerge regarding the processes
occurring near low-level boundaries and how these processes regulate the
formation of thunderstorms. The knowledge will be useful for developing new
advances, both numerical and subjective, in quantitative precipitation
forecasting by improving the ability to forecast if, when, and where convection
will develop.