* 0130021
* Physiological Responses to Predators and Their Consequences for the Growth/Predation Risk trade-off
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2006
* Mark McPeek, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Dianna K. Padilla
* 03/31/2006
* USD 317,332.00

Many organisms respond to the threat of predators by altering their physiology,
behavior and morphology. These attempts to reduce their likelihood of being
killed by a predator, often come at the cost of reducing growth. Although
organisms from bacteria to plants and animals show such responses, the
underlying reasons for this trade-off are poorly understood. Reduced growth in
the presence of predators may result in part from behavioral responses to reduce
feeding, but physiological changes also may play a major role.

This research will explore the differences among species and genera of larval
damselflies (Hexapoda: Odonata) in physiological response to predators, the
consequences of these differences for metabolic resource allocation and
behavior, and the evolution of these traits. Five studies will be performed to
examine the physiological responses of species and the allocation of ingested
resources to various molecules in the body. The first study will survey 12
species to measure natural growth rates and the amount of glucose, glycogen,
triglycerides and protein in the organism's body. The second will experimentally
determine alterations in growth and allocation to these molecules under
treatments of predator presence and food availability in the lab. The third is a
field experiment to test whether the results obtained in the controlled
laboratory experiment are substantiated in real lakes. The fourth tests
hypotheses about the proximate differences between the genera that induce the
physiological response. Finally, the fifth examines the broader evolutionary
history of this physiological response to predators.

This work explores the physiological mechanisms underlying a fundamental
difference in ecological performance between two groups of insects. This is
critical to understanding how an individual's phenotype shapes its ability to
engage in interactions with its environment and with other species. Also,
examining how this physiology has evolved provides valuable insights into how
species adapt to various environments and to natural and anthropogenically-
induced environmental change (e.g., natural habitat shifts, climate change,
habitat degradation).