* 0130760
* Protein-Protein Interactions in DNA Precursor Biosynthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Christopher Mathews, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 09/30/2006
* USD 389,416.00

Enzymes catalyzing sequential reactions are increasingly found to be associated
within cells. Sometimes the association involves multifunctional proteins, such
as those in eukaryotic fatty acid synthetase complexes, sometimes tightly linked
enzyme complexes, such as the glycine cleavage system, and sometimes membrane-
associated complexes, such as mitochondrial respiratory complexes. Most enzymes,
however, are soluble proteins, readily isolated free of other proteins. At the
high protein concentrations found within cells, such enzymes can associate into
loosely bound complexes, which the late Paul Srere termed metabolons. A complex
that has favorable properties for structural and kinetic analysis of the
metabolon concept is the bacteriophage T4 dNTP synthetase complex. Previous
research from this laboratory has demonstrated a complex containing at least
eight phage-coded proteins and two of host cell origin. Individual activities
within the isolated complex are kinetically linked. Indirect evidence suggests
that the complex is associated with the DNA replication apparatus and that it
plays an important role in delivering deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates (dNTPs)
to replisomes fast enough to sustain DNA chain at rates of 500-800 nucleotides
per second. All of the enzymes known to be in the complex and all T4 DNA
replication proteins are available as purified recombinant proteins, allowing
numerous approaches to identifying specific protein-protein interactions and
analysis of kinetic coupling through studies on partially reconstituted forms of
the complex. This project includes the following specific aims: (1) To identify
direct and indirect interactions among proteins in the T4 dNTP synthetase
complex and interactions with T4 replication proteins shown to associate with
the complex. This involves analysis in an optical biosensor, as well as protein
affinity chromatography and nondenaturing gel electrophoresis; (2) To define
effects of substrates and allosteric effectors upon protein-protein
associations. Evidence suggests that small molecules have dramatic effects upon
protein associations in the dNTP synthetase complex; (3) To define effects of
protein-protein interactions upon kinetic behavior of individual enzymes and
linked multi-step reaction pathways. Kinetic analysis of partially reconstituted
complexes explores the nature of kinetic coupling. Steady-state analyses, and,
in collaboration with a colleague, pre-steady-state analyses using quench-flow
techniques are being used; (4) To ascertain whether the dNTP synthetase complex
is associated with the replication machinery in vivo. These experiments involve
immunolocalization of E. coli dNTP-synthesizing enzymes, specifically,
ribonucleotide reductase and thymidylate synthase, and are also being done in a
collaborative effort. Crystal structures of some of the enzymes in the complex
have been determined and other structure determinations are under way. As
structural information about proteins and docking sites emerges, these data will
be merged with the enzymological data from this study, in an attempt to develop
a unified picture of this particular metabolon.