* 0130910
* Cargo Recognition and Regulation of the Ncd Motor Protein
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2006
* Richard Walker, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 03/31/2006
* USD 203,661.00

Microtubule-dependent motor proteins of the kinesin and dynein superfamilies are
essential components of mitotic and meiotic spindles, the complicated cellular
machines that power chromosome segregation. For kinesins at least, there is now
a fairly good understanding of how these motors move along microtubules, but to
understand completely the role that a given motor plays in the cell and how the
protein performs its role, additional questions need to be answered for each
motor. These questions include: What is the motor's cargo and how is that cargo
recognized? Are non-motor subunits associated with the motor subunits and if so,
what is their role? How is the motor's location and function regulated? For most
kinesins, the answers are likely to be interdependent, but a major stumbling
block in answering these questions is that the identity of the cargo is unknown
for many kinesins. However, certain kinesins, including members of the
C-terminal, MKLP-1, and bimC subfamilies, recognize and transport a well-known
and well-characterized cargo: another MT. Study of these motors, which are
thought to drive MT sliding, should facilitate answering the above questions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this projectis to understand how
the Drosophila C-terminal Ncd motor functions during the meiotic divisions of
oogenesis and the early mitotic divisions of the embryo. Ncd is perhaps the
best-characterized C-terminal kinesin, yet much remains to be learned about how
this protein recognizes cargo, whether the motor slides or simply bundles
adjacent MTs, the composition of native Ncd, and how it is regulated to produce
appropriate forces at appropriate times during cell division.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are two specific objectives. The first will examine
the ATP- independent binding of the Ncd tail to cargo microtubules. Experiments
will determine if recombinant Ncd can slide MTs past each other, what specific
residues are involved in binding cargo microtubules, and how dimeric Ncd tail
domains interact with cargo microtubules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second
objective will examine the subunit composition of native Ncd and characterize
the activity of native Ncd. Ncd, like majority of kinesins, has never been
purified from native sources and working knowledge of the protein is based on
recombinant motor subunits expressed in bacteria. To determine if native Ncd
also contains non-motor subunits, a combination of ion exchange chromatography
and microtubule affinity techniques will be used to purify the native motor. In
addition, the motor properties of native Ncd will be determined to determine if
previous work with recombinant Ncd motor subunits is an accurate reflection of
native Ncd activity. To accomplish these objectives, Dr. Walker will use a
combination of biochemical, biophysical and molecular biology approaches.
Increased understanding of Ncd activity and function will shed light of the
mechanisms of C-terminal kinesins, and ultimately on the fundamental properties
of microtubule-dependent motors and the cellular processes dependent on these
proteins.&lt;br/&gt;