* 0130611
* Utilization of the UAH Mobile Integrated Profiling System to Characterize Boundaries and Adjacent Boundary Layer Properties Associated with Convective Initiation during IHOP 2002
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2005
* Kevin Knupp, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 03/31/2005
* USD 259,147.00

This project involves participation in the International H20 Project (IHOP)
field program. The IHOP is a large multi-agency, multi-investigator project that
focuses on the measurement of water vapor and water vapor variability. The goal
of this project is to improve understanding of convective initiation, increase
short-term precipitation forecast skills and test the capabilities of various
instruments to measure the four dimensional characteristics of water vapor.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigator will utilize an advanced
instrument known as the Mobile Integrated Profiling System (MIPS) as part of an
extensive ensemble of mobile ground-based instrumentation. The MIPS capabilities
include vertical profile measurements of wind, vertical motion, temperature,
virtual temperature, cloud properties, boundary layer characteristics, and water
vapor. The principal objectives of the Principal Investigator are to advance
understanding of convective initiation and its dependence on characteristics of
boundaries and the adjacent atmospheric boundary layer. In addition to
participating in experiments on convective initiation, the Principal
Investigator also will use the MIPS to collect data important to the success of
other IHOP researchers. Finally, the Principal Investigator will conduct
thorough comparisons of the MIPS 12-channel passive microwave profiling
radiometer with other remote sensing devices and in situ soundings.