* 0130758
* Large-Scale Phenomena in Anti-Predator Behavior: On the Consequences of Putting Predators Back Into Predator-Prey Interactions
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Steven Lima, Indiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Dianna K. Padilla
* 08/31/2006
* USD 112,203.00

Large-scale phenomena in anti-predator behavior: on the consequences of putting
predators back into predator-prey interactions

PI - Steven L. Lima

Most studies on the anti-predator behavior of animals focus on a small area in
which prey respond to an ambient level of predation risk imposed by predators.
The tendency has been to focus more the behavior of prey rather than predators,
and the latter have usually been treated merely as a source of risk to prey
rather than active participants in the behavioral interaction. This small-scale
perspective has revealed much about behavioral predator-prey interactions, but
it has missed an entire class of behavioral interactions that exist at larger
spatial scales. To appreciate these large-scale interactions, one must think on
the scale of an ecological landscape, or an area many km2 in extent-a scale much
larger than usually considered by behavioral ecologists. One must also put
predators back into the picture by allowing them to be an active participant in
the behavioral interaction. More specifically, the proposed work is motivated by
a simple question: what drives the movement of animals across a landscape? The
present (small-scale) consensus holds that movement by prey attracts predators,
hence movement by prey must reflect a need to find new sources of food, etc.
However, the results of a simulation model show that predator and prey may be
involved in a large-scale shell game, in which predators move frequently in
search of elusive prey, and prey move among feeding sites to remain elusive.
Furthermore, if prey in a given area are relatively difficult to locate, then
predators will focus their attention elsewhere on more predictable prey, with
the result that these predictable prey may initiate greater movement to avoid
predators. This indirect interaction among prey (through their effect on the
predator's behavior) represents a related large-scale phenomenon: the predator
pass-along effect. Under other circumstances, predators might avoid constantly
attacking prey at a particular location in an effort to render them more
catchable in the long-run. Such predatory behavior represents another large-
scale effect: prey management by predators. The further theoretical exploration
of these large-scale phenomena is an important feature of the proposed work.
Much of the proposed work covers an empirical exploration of these large-scale
behavioral interactions. This work focuses on the conceptually important
paradigm of the small bird in winter, in which small birds must survive both the
rigors of winter and the predatory onslaught of bird-eating Accipiter hawks.
This task requires much basic biological research, as very little is known about
the large-scale movements of small wintering birds or Accipiter hawks. The daily
movements of hawks and their avian prey will be followed (via radiotracking
techniques) over study areas many km2 in extent. Basic information will be
established on hawk and prey home range sizes and movements. Using food
manipulation sites established throughout a study area, the distribution and
spatial predictability of prey birds will be altered experimentally. These food
sites will be manipulated (established and withdrawn) in order to test
predictions concerning shell games, predator pass-along effects, and prey
management by predators. Conducting behavioral research at a large spatial scale
presents unique challenges, but such work represents an important step in the
study of predator-prey interactions, one that may ultimately shed much light on
ecological systems in general.