* 0130613
* Qubic:  Biological Information Technology Systems:  Self-Perfecting Genetic Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Frances Arnold, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 12/31/2005
* USD 625,021.00

EIA-0130613&lt;br/&gt;Arnold, Frances&lt;br/&gt;California Institute of
Technology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BITS: Biological Information Technology Systems
- BITS: Self-Perfecting Genetic Circuits&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose to
develop efficient, evolutionary design strategies for constructing functional de
novo genetic&lt;br/&gt;circuits. We will apply methods of molecular evolution,
which have proven highly successful for&lt;br/&gt;engineering proteins with
improved or altered properties, to complex genetic systems involving
multiple&lt;br/&gt;repressors, operators, and promoters. We believe that
evolution will prove to be generally applicable for&lt;br/&gt;optimizing
individual devices as well as complex genetic circuits, and our goal will be to
demonstrate&lt;br/&gt;how evolutionary searches are best performed in order to
build libraries of devices and assemble them&lt;br/&gt;into functional
circuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We anticipate that this research will establish a
general strategy for de novo genetic circuit design&lt;br/&gt;and provide new
insight into the natural algorithms of information processing in biological
systems and&lt;br/&gt;biological complexity. This research exploits, in powerful
combination, the strengths of classical&lt;br/&gt;approaches in electrical
circuit design (characterizing the device physics of gates, then
composing&lt;br/&gt;circuits from well understood components) with adaptation
mechanisms (mutation and selection)that are&lt;br/&gt;the hallmark of biological
systems.&lt;br/&gt;