* 0130410
* Workshop:  Urgent Opportunities for Transmission System Enhancement:  Western US and Brazilian Grids to be held  September 27-28, 2001 in Palo Alto, California.
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2001,09/30/2003
* Chen-Ching Liu, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* James Momoh
* 09/30/2003
* USD 48,000.00

0130410&lt;br/&gt;Liu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will bring together
decision makers from government and the power industry and technology experts
from US and Brazil to discuss the solutions to the current energy crises in both
countries. The workshop organization will be guided by NSF and EPRI. The PI will
also work closely with the Brazilian colleagues to identify the best team for a
successful discussion. The workshop is intended to identify the basic research
needs and fundamental solutions for the future both near-term and long term.
This is the first of a series of three NSF/EPRI workshops, whose ultimate goal
is to promote research leading to a quantum leap in the level, intelligence and
efficiency of global grid control, whether centralized or distributed. A
critical issue that this first workshop will address is rapid development of the
devices that allow an increased level&lt;br/&gt;of controllability in a wide
area grid. There is substantial opportunity for the U.S. to learn from the
successful experience of Brazil with such devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The US
is facing severe national challenges on the electricity infrastructure in the
years to come. These issues were discussed in President Bush's National Energy
Policy: Grand Challenge 1: Lack of Transmission Capability; Grand Challenge 2:
Operation in a Competitive Market Environment; Grand Challenge 3: Power
Infrastructure Vulnerability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These grand challenges
require basic research to develop fundamental solutions to the national
problems. Some questions that must be answered through basic research
are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;o What is the optimal strategy to expand the
transmission capabilities from an engineering point of view?&lt;br/&gt;o What is
the strategy to defend, protect and operate the stressed power grids in the
market environment?&lt;br/&gt;o What is the strategy to ensure that wide area
power grids are invulnerable facing the various sources of
disruption?&lt;br/&gt;o What new technologies are needed to meet the grand
challenges?&lt;br/&gt;