* 0130059
* Bio-QuBIC:  Causes of Robustness and Vulnerability in Real-world Networks: Lessons from Molecular Biology
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2004
* T. Dewey, Keck Graduate Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2004
* USD 501,105.00

EIA-0130059&lt;br/&gt;Animesh Ray&lt;br/&gt;Keck Graduate
Institute&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Causes of Robustness and Vulnerability in
Real-world Networks: Lessons from molecular
biology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vulnerability of natural networks (such as the
Internet, power supply grid, or molecular regulatory circuits of cells) to
perturbations is an important area of study. Prior work has traditionally
involved observations on static networks or on computer simulations, and has
revealed certain general fundamental properties. Specifically, the study of one
representative natural network by direct experimental manipulation should
illuminate general properties of most networks. The molecular machinery
regulating the synthesis of RNA molecules in the nucleus of budding yeast forms
a natural network that can be experimentally perturbed, and their effects
studied by transcriptional profiling on DNA microarrays. In this initial funding
period, study of the responses of a sub-section (comprised of approximately 300
nodes) of this natural network as a function of precise perturbations in the
form of gene knockout mutations. A queriable, static, database model of the
network is being made, which is queried by simple attack plans, and responses
are tested for consistency with experimental results. This interplay is allowing
a proof-of-principle demonstration of this empirical approach to studying
properties of complex networks. Insights obtained from these studies is forming
the basis of more sophisticated investigation of complex network
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;