* 0130761
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Social and Biological Determinants of Cardiovascular Risk among Urban and Rural Yakut: The Impact of Socioeconomic Upheaval
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2002,07/31/2003
* William Leonard, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 07/31/2003
* USD 10,027.00

The collapse of the Soviet Union was a watershed event that resulted in a
catastrophic decline in longevity and health status for indigenous Siberians.
The social and economic disintegration following the breakup of the Soviet Union
resulted in epidemic mortality from cardiovascular diseases. This study will
investigate the social, behavioral and physiological phenomena underlying this
higher mortality. This research uses an urban-rural design to investigate major
determinants of cardiovascular risk in the Yakut, an indigenous Siberian group.
The hypothesis will be tested that rapid social change has lead to dietary
changes, producing a gene-diet interaction leading to high cholesterol levels
among urban subjects and increased incidence of cardiovascular disease.
Approximately 500 adult subjects will be recruited from the city of Yakutsk, the
village of Tiungiuliu and surrounding settlements. Serum lipids and C-reactive
protein will be used as markers of cardiovascular risk and will be measured
using dried blood spots. Dietary intake of saturated fats and cholesterol will
be assessed using a food frequency questionnaire. Data on health behavior
(alcohol consumption, smoking) and sociodemographic dimensions will be collected
by questionnaire. This research will enhance international collaboration and the
exchange of scientific knowledge between U.S. and international scientists and
will provide essential training for future scientists in the United States. This
research is significant in that it explains the health consequences of failed
modernization, estimates the effect of gene-diet interactions, and increases our
knowledge of how rapid epidemiological change can occur within the context of
rural-urban social change.