* 0130588
* Zooarchaeology of Challuabamba, Azuay Province, Ecuador
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Peter Stahl, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2003
* USD 19,584.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Peter Stahl will identify and
analyze a collection of animal bone specimens that were recovered during
archaeological investigations at the site of Challuabamba in the southern Andean
highlands of Ecuador. The site is of great importance for our understanding of
early village agricultural life in this southern area of the northern Andes, as
it appears to have been settled in 2200 B.C. and subsequently occupied for as
much as 1000 years. Analysis of the animal bone collection from Challuabamba
provides insight into local resource utilization. Identification of the material
could also contribute to our understanding of the early introduction and
subsequent spread of South American animal domesticates like llamas, alpacas and
guinea pigs, into their northernmost pre-Columbian distribution. The
identification of native domesticates in the Challuabamba collection would be of
crucial importance for documenting their early appearance north of the present
Peruvian border and for understanding the mechanism involved in their original
introduction. In particular, their appearance at Challuabamba is critical for
assessing the viability of a southern terrestrial trade route as a potential
mechanism for introducing early animal domesticates into Ecuador. Coastal marine
shells may have entered the southern Ecuadorian highlands via a terrestrial
route through the nearby Cordillera de Mullupungu, where they were subsequently
consumed and/or processed for further overland trade to interior northern Peru,
and eventually to the coast. In exchange, southern-derived animal domesticates
may have entered Ecuador via this early trade mechanism. This would be
significant for our understanding of early domesticates in Ecuador, because
Challuabamba appears to predate important early cultural sequences on the coast.
The absence of native animal domesticates in the assemblage would support their
appearance at Pirincay around A.D. 100 as the earliest occurrence of
domesticates in the southern highlands of Ecuador, and potentially provide an
earliest date for possible terrestrial exchange of animals into the area.

Plants and animals were independently domesticated in several regions of both
the Old and New World and Peru constitutes one such "hearth" area. In all cases
domesicates eventually spread and were adopted by hunting and gathering peoples
thus significantly altering their way of life. Anthropologists wish to
understand the principles which underly this process of diffusion and culture
change and Challuabamba provides an excellent context in which to address this
question.