* 0130372
* Disadvantaged Second Generations:  The Socioeconomic Incorporation of Mexicans in the U.S. and Maghrebins in France
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2005
* Richard Alba, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 02/28/2005
* USD 123,599.00

The project, a collaboration between U.S. and French researchers, is an attempt
to conduct systematic comparative research on second-generation incorporation of
immigrants in the US and France. Examination of a wider range of contexts than
can be found in one society alone can help to clarify the circumstances under
which each of the competing theoretical models of incorporation--classical
assimilation, segmented assimilation, and ethnic pluralism-best applies and the
causal mechanisms involved. The intent is to study the socioeconomic
incorporation of the second generation of the largest immigrant groups in France
and the U.S.- Maghrebins, i.e., Muslim North Africans, in the former and
Mexicans in the latter. A number of similarities in the situations of these two
groups suggest that they may be on more or less parallel tracks of
incorporation. The societies they have entered both have strong histories of
assimilation as the principal mode of incorporating the descendants of
immigrants, but the groups in question come from countries that have endured
colonial or semi-colonial relationships to the host societies. Both
impressionistic and systematic evidence indicate that they suffer from prejudice
and discrimination and that their second generations (and, in the case of
Mexicans, their third) evidence a variety of disadvantages, from higher rates of
early departure from school to concentration in low-skill jobs. Thus, the
evidence to date leaves it unclear which of the models of classic and segmented
assimilation better applies and under what circumstances. If the socioeconomic
trajectories of Mexicans and Maghrebins turn out to be similar in a systematic
comparison, this could lead to a re-evaluation of the understanding of the
position of the groups in both societies-in the U.S., this could entail some
revision in the segmented-assimilation model, which is so far tied to features
specific to the U.S. (e.g., racial segregation); and in France, to a revision in
the understanding of the source of Maghrebin disadvantage, which is heavily
colored by religious distinctiveness. The research will be based on analysis
with multi-level models of a number of micro-level data sets in both countries-
in the U.S., we will use the National Longitudinal Study of 1979 and the
National Educational Longitudinal Study of 1988; in France, we will use four
different studies, including the FQP ("Fonnation-Qualification-Professionelle")
of 1993 and the "Generation 1992" of Cereq. All the studies offer a comparable
range of variables measuring family origins, school achievement, and early
labor-market experiences on major variables..