* 0130009
* The Earthquake Research Plan: Research Needs and Opportunities for Earthquake Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2003
* Susan Tubbesing, Earthquake Engineering Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Peter Chang
* 08/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This project provides for development of a long-term research plan that will
identify the needs and opportunities that exist to advance the state of the art
and the state of the practice in earthquake engineering and earthquake loss
reduction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Earthquake Engineering Research Institute
(EERI) will convene intensive panel activities to be comprehensive in nature and
to advance knowledge in the following areas: improve understanding of physical
models, improve the treatment of uncertainty in analysis and simulations,
contribute to the development of a protocol for systematic performance data,
improve understanding of societal impacts, and contribute to better integration
of research and education. The plan will incorporate opportunities presented by
high performance computing, information systems, simulation and visualization
and will work closely with other organizations and programs including the
Advanced National Seismic System (ANSS), the NSF-funded earthquake engineering
research centers (EERCs), and the agencies and organizations that make up the
National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EERI will
establish a panel of researchers and professionals from the earth sciences,
structural and geotechnical engineering, the social and policy sciences,
architecture and urban planning, and information technology. Over a nine-month
period, the panel members will commission a series of white papers that provide
a summary of expert assessment of research needs in each field. The panel will
engage in teleconferences to gain further input and will draw on the white
papers to prepare the comprehensive plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;