* 0130954
* Synaptic Organization of the Primate Pulvinar Nucleus
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Martha Bickford, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 02/28/2006
* USD 369,998.00

Lay summary In a world that continually supplies us with a multitude of sensory
information, the selection and enhancement of important signals is crucial.
There is general agreement that the pulvinar nucleus is uniquely involved in
this process. However the mechanisms by which the pulvinar carries out this
function are, as yet, unknown. Several models of directed attention have
proposed that the pulvinar nucleus acts as a hub in a network that integrates
inputs from widespread cortical areas to direct attention to salient visual
targets. Such models predict that neurons that project to and from different
cortical areas, are synaptically connected within the pulvinar nucleus to link
diverse signals related to visual spatial location, memory, and motivation. To
test this theory, the investigators propose to examine, at the ultrastructural
level, connections between the pulvinar nucleus the posterior cingulate gyrus,
and the inferior parietal lobule. In addition, they propose to examine the
synaptic targets of subcortical inputs from the pretectum, and the
pedunculopontine tegmentum. These areas, in which activity is correlated
respectively with eye movements and attentional state, are also predicted to
contribute to networks underlying visual attention. The results of these studies
will help to understand how cortical and subcortical inputs structurally
interact within the synaptic circuitry of the primate pulvinar nucleus. By
studying these neural circuits in experimental animals, we can begin to
understand the mechanisms underlying normal attentional processes, and how they
are affected by disease.





