* 0130306
* Dissertation: Health Care Seeking in Nicaragua: Researching the Interface Between Economics, Cultural Understanding, and Practical Logic
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Mark Nichter, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 06/30/2004
* USD 11,998.00

Health and disease are experienced within social contexts. For people living in
poverty, health care seeking decisions are made in conjunction with
considerations of how to allocate scarce resources to meet the needs of multiple
household members. Much of the international health literature has focused on
sociocultural factors that impact health care seeking. Yet little research has
been conducted on the ways that economic factors directly and indirectly
constrain or facilitate health care seeking strategies in poor households. The
proposed study will examine how sociocultural factors, economics, and social
relations articulate in health care and resource decision-making among poor and
lower middle income households in Nicaragua, a country with high rates of child
morbidity and mortality as well as high rates of maternal mortality. Utilizing
participant observation and semi-structured interviews, the researcher, an
anthropology graduate student at the University of Arizona, will prospectively
follow fifty rural households in a municipality of the department of Masaya over
the course of a year. Ethnographic research is needed in local contexts to
assess how multiple factors impacting on health seeking articulate during actual
illness episodes. In addition to providing doctoral training for a promising
woman scientist, the proposed study will help fill the gap in the paucity of
ethnographic research into contemporary health issues for Nicaraguans living in
poverty, and assess the cross-cultural applicability of theoretical and
methodological approaches to the study of health care seeking.