* 0130001
* Characterization of a Vertebrate Sperm Chemoattractant
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Robert McGaughey, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Chris T. Amemiya
* 05/31/2007
* USD 411,998.00

0130001&lt;br/&gt;Chandler&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Critical steps in sperm-egg
interaction during fertilization in animals include initiation of sperm
motility, sperm chemotaxis toward the egg, sperm penetration of the
extracellular matrix layers surrounding the egg, and binding and fusion of sperm
with the egg plasma membrane. This proposal focuses on the important step of
sperm chemotaxis, a process that has been widely studied in invertebrates such
as the sea urchin but which has received little attention in vertebrates
including mammals and humans.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Dr. Chandler and
Collaborators have now purified and sequenced allurin, a 21 kD protein obtained
from the egg jelly layers of Xenopus laevis that represents the first vertebrate
sperm chemoattractant to be isolated. Phylogenetic analysis of the allurin
sequence suggests that this protein is related to the cysteine-rich secretory
protein (CRISP) family of mammals, members of which are known to bind to sperm.
They propose to molecularly clone the cDNA coding for allurin, to express
recombinant allurin in bacteria, and to determine whether native and recombinant
allurin both have chemoattractant activity for Xenopus sperm. Chemoattractant
activity will be quantitated in vitro using a two chamber assay in which sperm
cross a porous polycarbonate membrane barrier, and sperm will be observed
microscopically by using a "choice" assay in which sperm swimming behaviors and
trajectories are monitored by video microscopy as they approach agar wells
filled with the chemoattractant protein. In addition, they plan to study the
mechanism by which allurin acts on sperm with goals of 1) identifying and
characterizing a sperm-surface receptor for allurin, and 2) determining what
types of intracellular signals are elicited in sperm by allurin. Finally, they
will determine the range of allurin expression in both reproductive and non-
reproductive tissues. Protein expression will be assessed by immunocytochemistry
and Western blotting while expression of mRNA coding for allurin will be
detected by Northern blots and in situ hybridization. They anticipate that
allurin-like proteins will be found in the reproductive tracts of both female
and male amphibians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;