* 0130880
* The Genetics of Parental Care Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Edmund Brodie, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Byers
* 08/31/2006
* USD 412,000.00

The Genetics of Parental Care Behavior&lt;br/&gt;Edmund D. Brodie
IIII&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The genetic control of behaviors involved in social
interactions is difficult to understand because traits of one individual can be
influenced by traits of individuals with which it interacts. Such influences
have traditionally been considered sources of environmental variation in
phenotypes, but this view ignores the possibility that the 'environmental'
influences can themselves be genetically determined. The result is a complex web
of genetic effects that reach from traits in one individual to traits in another
and allows environmental sources of variation to contribute to evolutionary
change. Indirect genetic effect (IGE) theory provides a framework for
understanding such complex inheritance in terms of the quantitative genetic
parameters and equations traditionally used to understand evolutionary
processes. The presence of IGEs can substantially alter evolutionary dynamics
and outcomes, but virtually no empirical studies of IGEs are available with
which to evaluate the general importance of IGEs in behavioral
evolution.&lt;br/&gt; Parental care behavior is one of the most common examples
of social interactions that can generate IGEs. The behavior of both parents and
offspring determines how much care parents provide, and parental care in turn
influences many traits in offspring. If parent and offspring components of
parental care are genetically variable, IGEs exist and can affect the evolution
of parental care. The proposed research will investigate the genetics of
maternal provisioning in the burrower bug, Sehirus cinctus. Parental care in
burrowers is limited to females, which provision their offspring with fruits
from mint plants as the sole source of nutrition. Previous research has shown
that burrowers are an ideal system for studying the genetics of parental care
because they can be readily cross-fostered, reared, and bred in
captivity.&lt;br/&gt; The proposed work is divided into two parts designed to
determine how genes in mothers and offspring interact to determine the
inheritance of parental care behavior. Project 1 is an experimental
investigation of how maternal care influences offspring traits that will reveal
how traits in one generation influence traits in the next. Project 2 combines a
quantitative genetic breeding design with manipulative cross-fostering
experiments to measure the relative importance of genes in parents and offspring
in determining provisioning. This project will also determine patterns of
genetic variation and covariation among parent and offspring components of
provisioning behavior. Genetic variation is a requisite for the evolution of any
trait. IGE theory recognizes that genetic (co)variation for interacting
phenotypes (e.g., parental care) need not be direct, but rather may exist
through indirect pathways from social partners. Specific results from each
project will be used to test assumptions and predictions of phenotypic models of
parental care evolution. Moreover, this work will represent the first
quantitative genetic study of parental care behavior to consider the importance
of social context. &lt;br/&gt;