* 0130869
* CISE Research Resources:  A Shared Data Cluster  For Real Time Interaction With Massive Datasets
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2003
* Benjamin Watson, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2003
* USD 105,252.00

EIA-0130869 &lt;br/&gt;Benjamin Watson&lt;br/&gt;Northwestern
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CISE Research Resources: A Shared Data Cluster
for Real Time Interaction With Massive Datasets&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research at Northwestern is increasingly concerned with the issues involved in
providing interactive and affordable access to massive (terabyte scale)
datasets. In particular, they focus on visualization of these datasets using
perceptually based computer graphics techniques and display the visualizations
using a combination PC CAVE and Active Mural. They also study the issues
involved with ubiquitous access to high-resolution spatial datasets from mobile
devices, and leverage a powerful wireless network. They focus on prediction-
based adaptation and scheduling for distributed interactive applications and are
building a compute cluster to support this work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What is
missing in the existing shared research infrastructure is a facility to store
and serve massive datasets interactively, with low latency and high bandwidth.
The researchers will build such a shared data cluster. The data cluster will be
very high performance and capacity PC RAIDs interconnected with a multi-GB/sec
SAN. The SAN will connect to their compute cluster, CAVE/Mural, mobile devices
and wired client machines. The combined data and compute clusters will be
sufficient to pump 200 MB/s from disk to the CAVE/Mural screens. The combination
of the data cluster, compute cluster, CAVE/Mural, local network infrastructure,
and desktop and mobile clients will let them study interactivity in the
large.&lt;br/&gt;