* 0130853
* FASEB Conference: Transcriptional Regulation During Cell Growth, Differentiation and Development; June 29 - July 4, 2002,  Saxtons River, Vermont
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2003
* Marian Carlson, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Tornow
* 05/31/2003
* USD 10,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This project provides partial funding for a conference on
"Transcriptional Regulation During Cell Growth, Differentiation, and
Development" to be held under the auspices of FASEB at Saxtons River, Vermont,
from June 29-July 4, 2002. Gene regulation through transcription is a
fundamental process common to all biological systems. Transcriptional regulation
underlies critical aspects of cell behavior including proliferation, response to
environmental signals, differentiation, and the development of multicellular
organisms. The intent of this conference is to bring together researchers
engaged in studying a broad range of transcriptional processes in different
biological systems and using different methodologies. The sessions are designed
to communicate recent advances in knowledge of fundamental mechanisms of
transcriptional activation and repression, chromatin structure, and long-range
and epigenetic effects on gene expression, and the relationship of these
mechanisms to the biology of response to environmental signals, development, and
cell-cycle control. The conference will underscore the important role that
transcriptional regulation plays in normal differentiation and development and
the manner in which aberrant gene expression is involved in cancer and other
diseases. This conference differs from other transcription meetings in that it
does not focus simply on molecular mechanisms but rather emphasizes how
transcription is used by cells to solve particular problems of development and
differentiation. As such, the meeting will include problems encountered and
solved across a wide range of species, including yeast, worms, flies, and
mammals, such that the similarities and differences can be appreciated. The
meeting will include formal talks, discussion periods, two informal 2-day poster
sessions, and excellent opportunities for interaction among the attending
scientists. Attendees will include principal investigators, postdoctoral
fellows, and graduate students. 33% of the invited speakers and 8/9 session
chairs are women, and 54% of the invited speakers are new to this meeting. The
conference will provide an up-to-date overview of one of the most fundamental
and rapidly moving fields in biology and is expected to generate new directions
for future research.