* 0130624
* Function of an Unconventional Myosin in Tetrahymena
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Ray Gavin, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Continuing Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 03/31/2006
* USD 359,850.00

Myo1p is a novel, unconventional myosin discovered by Dr. Gavin and colleagues
in the model protozoan Tetrahymena thermophila that has been implicated as
playing a role in two fundamental cellular processes: endocytosis/phagocytosis
and nuclear motility. In a recently completed project, the Gavin laboratory used
targeted gene disruption to create a Tetrahymena strain that lacked a functional
MYO1 gene. In transformed MYO1 cells, food vacuoles (endosomes) formed at a
slower rate than in wild-type cells, and the macronucleus frequently failed to
elongate properly during amitotic cell division, resulting in grossly unequal
segregation of DNA to progeny. In this renewal project, experiments will be
performed to directly and specifically link Myo1p to the machinery for both
endocytosis and macronuclear elongation. Two general hypotheses for Myo1p
function in Tetrahymena will be tested. (1) Hypothesis: MYO1 is required for
both endosome maturation and endosome recycling. The rate of endosome formation
could be regulated, in part, by the rate of endosome maturation in the cytosol
and subsequent endosome recycling at the membrane structure known as the
cytoproct. If Myo1p is involved in endosome maturation, a MYO1-knockout strain
might exhibit defects in expansion and/or acidification of nascent endosomes. If
Myo1p is involved in endosome recycling at the cytoproct, a MYO1-knockout strain
might have a reduced rate of endosome degradation. (2) Hypothesis: Macronuclear
elongation is mediated by cooperative action of microtubules, actin
microfilaments, and Myo1p. One can envision at least two, non-mutually
exclusive, arrangements for the putative molecular machinery that could power
macronuclear elongation. The elongation machinery could be concentrated near the
midzone of the macronuclear interior or membrane. Alternatively, the machinery
for elongation could be concentrated throughout the periphery of the
macronucleus either directly on the macronuclear membrane or in the surrounding
cytosol. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to test these hypotheses, a full-length
MYO1 sequence will have to be acquired and new reagents developed. Therefore,
Project I will involve completion of MYO1 sequencing, generation of polyclonal
antibodies against Tetrahymena actin and Myo1p, and creation of GFP- expression
constructs for three Tetrahymena proteins: actin, tubulin, and Myo1p. Project II
focuses on Myo1p function in endocytosis. Three areas of investigation will be
pursued: (1) localization of actin and Myo1p to components of the endocytic
pathway, (2) maturation of endosomes, and (3) endosome recycling at the
cytoproct. Cells expressing either GFP-actin or GFP-Myo1p and MYO1-knockout
cells expressing GFP-actin will be investigated with time-lapse confocal
microscopy. Fluorescent polystyrene beads and membrane marker dyes will be used
in assays for endosome maturation and endosome recycling. In project III,
confocal microscopy of cells expressing either GFP-actin, GFP-tubulin, or GFP-
Myo1p and MYO1-knockout cells expressing either GFP-actin or GFP-tubulin will
determine whether actin microfilaments, microtubules, and Myo1p are components
of a molecular machinery that could power macronuclear elongation. An in vitro
motility assay will obtain direct evidence for Myo1p-powered movement of
macronuclei. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Functional studies of Myo1p have the
potential for expanding our understanding of endocytosis /phagocytosis and
nuclear motility and may reveal novel mechanisms for the role of unconventional
myosins in these processes. Studies of endocytosis/phagocytosis have
implications far beyond the Tetrahymena model. Cell regulation of surface
receptors is mediated by endocytosis, and the phagocytic process is important
for the feeding of many protists, and in metazoa it is an essential part of the
immune system. The underlying basis for macronuclear motility may be related to
nuclear migration and positioning that take place during development in many
cell types and are known to involve cytoskeletal elements.&lt;br/&gt;