* 0130263
* RCN: Communication, Training and Resources for the Phytophthora Molecular Genetics Community
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2008
* Brett Tyler, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 04/30/2008
* USD 497,467.00

Because of their economic impact as plant pathogens, Phytophthora species are
being intensively studied through molecular genetic and genomics approaches.
These organisms have served as lead species for the entire Stramenopiles
lineage, a major radiation of crown eukaryotes distinct from plants, animals and
fungi. The Phytophthora molecular genetics community has developed a strong
culture of collaboration, communication, and sharing techniques and resources.
With the recent blossoming of genetic and genomic tools for Phytophthora, many
new investigators from a variety of backgrounds have become interested in
Phytophthora molecular genetics. This award will facilitate the integration of
these investigators into the community and will further strengthen the
cooperative culture of this community. The specific goals of the network
follow:&lt;br/&gt;1. To promote communication and collaboration, and to minimize
duplication of effort, within the worldwide Phytophthora molecular genetics
community by means of an annual workshop, exchange visits among laboratories,
and a community web site.&lt;br/&gt;2. To produce and distribute research
resources including libraries, specific DNA clones, genetic strains and cDNA
microarrays, that will benefit the whole community,&lt;br/&gt;3. To promote the
entry, participation and training of students, postdoctoral fellows, junior
faculty, and more established faculty in the field of Phytophthora molecular
genetics. The network is especially interested in facilitating the participation
of minority individuals and those from predominantly undergraduate institutions,
institutions with high percentages of students from groups underrepresented in
the U.S. research infrastructure, and institutions in states that have
traditionally received lower amounts of federal funding for research and
development. This will be done by means of travel awards to the annual workshop,
training internships, and facilitated access to techniques and resources.
Faculty from nations without established research infracstructures will also be
eligible for some support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Coordination
Network is open to all researchers with an interest in Phytophthora molecular
genetics. It promises to broaden the diversity of scientists working in this
field and to advance our understanding of the biology of these important plant
pathogens. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;