* 0130962
* Na and Ca Transport Across the Plasma Membrane of Squid Giant Axons: Mechanisms of Metabolic Control of the Na/Ca Exchanger
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2002,09/30/2005
* Luis Beauge, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 09/30/2005
* USD 187,912.00

The Sodium/Calcium exchanger is an integral cell membrane protein in charge of
regulation of intracellular Calcium concentration. It works as a counter-
transport, exchanging one Calcium ion (two positive charges) for three Sodium
ions (three positive charges) from different membrane sides; i.e. it is
electrogenic because the unbalance of transported charges generates current. The
energy for Calcium transport against a gradient is taken from the gradient of
Sodium ions plus the electrical membrane potential difference across the
membrane. In addition to Sodium-Calcium competition for the transporting sites,
this mechanism displays regulation by intra- and extracellular ligands. There
are two main types of regulation on the intracellular side: (1) Ionic: Sodium
inactivation, Calcium stimulation and Proton inhibition, and (2) Metabolic: ATP
and phosphoarginine (PA) stimulation. Regulation by ATP requires Magnesium and
also a low molecular weight soluble cytosolic regulatory protein (SCRP); PA
needs Magnesium but no SCRP The metabolic pathways for ATP and PA are different.
In the proposed work the investigator aims to individualize and characterize the
interrelationships between ionic and metabolic regulation of the squid
Sodium/Calcium exchanger by using two experimental preparations: (i) Squid axons
under internal dialysis, an essentially "in vivo" preparation that permits ionic
and biochemical control of intra- and extracellular environments, and (ii) Squid
nerve membrane vesicles, that allow to perform parallel transport and
biochemical assays. The plan includes: (i) To study the links between ATP, PA,
Sodium and Protons and the relevance of the intracellular Magnesium in the
modulation of the Sodium/Calcium exchanger; (ii) To use 32P-labeled PA to
investigate if there are membrane phosphorylations involved in the PA
stimulation. (iii) To isolate and identify the low molecular weight soluble
cytosolic regulatory protein (SCRP) essential for ATP regulation. It must be
emphasized the broad impact of the expected results: First, provide insights on
normal function of the cardiovascular system and brain. Second, help to
understand diseases, like cardiac and brain hypoxia and ischemia, and
hypertension, situations where the is a large imbalance of the ligands affecting
one of the most important membrane system for cell Calcium regulation in brain
and cardiovascular system, the Sodium/Calcium
exchanger.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;