* 0130394
* Collaborative Research: Scale-Recursive Estimation of Precipitation for Applications to Quantitative Precipitation Forecast (QPF) Verification and Multisensor Estimation
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2006
* Efi Foufoula-Georgiou, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 02/28/2006
* USD 286,340.00

Atmospheric precipitation, whether in convective storms or quasi-uniformly
stratified cloud layers, generally is highly inhomogeneous and exhibits
considerable natural variability at scales ranging from a few meters to several
hundreds of kilometers. A variety of sensors (e.g. rain gauges, radars, and
satellites) are used to monitor precipitation rate and total accumulation and
provide both direct and indirect measurements at different scales based upon
instrument resolution and sampling or analysis strategies. Physically-based
computer models, both of the atmosphere and solid earth, rely upon these
observed data for initialization/assimilation as well as forecast validation.
However, owing to the tremendous scale-dependent variability of precipitation
and the discrepancies in scale and resolution among different types/sources of
data, merging or comparing observations at different scales, or comparing model
outputs to observations, is difficult. Yet, quantitative precipitation
estimation (QPE) and model forecast verification are foundational aspects of
both atmospheric and hydrologic prediction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In an effort to
address issues associated with both scale variability and scale discrepancy in
merging or comparing information from multiple sources, the Principal
Investigators seek to use a recently-developed scale-recursive estimation (SRE)
framework. They will utilize the SRE framework for (1) Quantitative
Precipitation Forecast (QPF) verification when observations are available at one
or more scales different than the scale of the numerical model; (2) derivation
of products or analyses in situations where observations and model outputs at
different scales are to be merged to produce a single field; and (3) estimation
of background error covariances from fields produced via the comparison of
observations and model outputs at different scales. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
problems to be addressed require combined expertise in statistical multi-scale
analysis of precipitation, optimal estimation theory, radar data analysis and
interpretation, data assimilation, and numerical weather prediction modeling.
This collaborative team involves two statistical hydrologists and two
meteorologists having demonstrated expertise in the above areas, and builds upon
a previous successful collaboration in the analysis of the spatio-temporal
structure of forecasted and observed precipitation at the scale of individual
convective storms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In previous collaborative research, an
extensive analysis was made of the spatio-temporal structure of forecasted and
observed precipitation with an emphasis on one fundamental question: Do storm-
resolving forecast models produce precipitation fields that exhibit the same
scale invariant structures as observations, and if not, why? The shortcomings of
typical distance-based deterministic interpolators (or averaging operators) for
converting data from one scale to another, i.e., downscaling (up-scaling), were
documented, and the need for a rigorous methodology capable of handling scale-
dependent variability and uncertainty in observations was
demonstrated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present interdisciplinary proposal builds
upon this body of previous work and proposes to explore a framework within which
issues of variability and scale-dependency can be properly addressed for the
purpose of QPF verification and multi-sensor rainfall estimation.