* 0130107
* Collaborative Research:  Focused Research Group: Analysis and Simulation of Magnetic Devices
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2004
* Weinan E, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2004
* USD 299,427.00

Nanoscale magnetic devices are of critical technological importance. This
project will advance our understanding of their properties through a coordinated
program of modeling, analysis, simulation and experiment. Topics to be addressed
include (a) development of improved numerical methods for the simulation of
magnetic materials and devices; (b) exploration of the micromagnetic "energy
landscape" and the role of noise in thermally activated switching; and (c)
investigation of specific nanoscale effects such as configurational anisotropy
and geometrically constrained walls. Mathematics has much to contribute and much
to gain. The study of appropriate limits leads to challenging problems of
analysis whose solution will shed light on the essential physics. The analysis
of noise and switching leads to the study of the energy landscape and to
physically relevant examples of stochastic partial differential equations.
Modeling coordinated with laboratory experiments will refine our understanding
of the relevant phenomena. This Focused Research Group activity will draw
expertise from a multidisciplinary group of mathematicians, physicists and
computational scientists. The project includes a collaboration with IBM and
training of postdoctoral scientists and graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic storage devices lie at the foundation of modern
computing. Their modeling, simulation, analysis and design raise fundamental
questions of physics and mathematics, many still unanswered. As device size
decreases, the relevant science changes: defects, spatial disorder and thermal
fluctuations become crucial in the nanoscale regime. Mathematics has much to
contribute and much to gain. The study of appropriate limits leads to
challenging problems of analysis whose solution will shed light on the essential
physics. The analysis of noise and switching will be studied in a three-pronged
approach: by mathematical analysis, numerical modeling and experimental
investigation. Modeling coordinated with laboratory experiments will refine our
understanding of the relevant phenomena. This Focused Research Group activity
will draw expertise from a multidisciplinary group of mathematicians, physicists
and computational scientists. The project includes a collaboration with IBM and
training of postdoctoral scientists and graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;