* 0130883
* Biological Information Technology  Systems - BITS: Neurobiological Nonlinear Dynamics for Biomimetic Signal Processing
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Theodore Berger, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 02/28/2006
* USD 959,711.00

EIA-0130883-Theodore W. Berger-University of Southern California-Title:
Neurobiological Nonlinear Dynamics for Biomimetic Signal Processing-Title-The
fundamental goal of the proposed research is to derived a new generation of
temporal and spatio-temporal pattern recognition systems based on the nonlinear
dynamics, network architecture, and synaptic plasticity properties of the
hippocampus, a cortical brain system responsible for the formation of new
pattern recognition memories. From a neurobiological perspective, the proposed
experimental/modeling work promises to generate (1) first-characterizations of
high-order nonlinearities of cortical brain tissue, i.e., predictive models of
the input/output transformations in spatio-temporal activity performed by
individual hippocampal neurons, and to (2) investigate the increasingly likely
possibility of dynamic neural "learning rules", i.e., requisite conditions for
the induction of synaptic plasticity that depend on the past history of
activity. In addition, the proposed research will investigate (3) the role of
known hippocampal network topology in neurobiological signal processing and
hierarchical feature extraction. From a theoretical/computational perspective,
the proposed work is designed to (4) develop novel methodologies essential for
characterizing nonlinearities of neurobiological systems, as well as to (5)
further expand a newly developed paradigm for biologically realistic neural
system modeling (the "dynamic synapse neural network architecture") that has
already demonstrated a heretofore unmatched capability for identifying optimal
feature sets for temporally and spatio-temporally coded information.&lt;br/&gt;