* 0130887
* CISE Research Resources: Parallel Logic and Constraint Programming, with Applications to Planning and Web Accessibility
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2003
* Desh Ranjan, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2003
* USD 43,431.00

EIA-0130887 &lt;br/&gt;Enrico Pontelli&lt;br/&gt;New Mexico State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Laboratory for Logic, Databases, and
Advanced Programming (LLDAP) plans to acquire modern computing equipment to
create an infrastructure for parallel and distributed computing and for software
development for autonomous agents. The equipment requested consists of four
Pentium III shared memory machines (with four CPUs each) to provide shared
memory programming support. The four machines will be connected using fast
gigabit Ethernet, creating the testbed for experimenting with distributed memory
programming. The Project will also involve the acquisition of a set&lt;br/&gt;of
five autonomous robots. The equipment will be used to support research in three
inter-related projects: (1) The goal of the first project is to pursue the
development of technology to support exploitation of different forms of
parallelism from traditional logic programming and from constraint programming
languages, (2) The second project develops technology for the creation of
planners capable of dealing with incomplete knowledge, dynamic domains, and
sensing actions, (3) The goal of the third project is to develop technology to
promote accessibility of Web documents in the context of Web-based course-ware
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;