* 0130385
* Bio-QuBIC: NSF QuBIC: Modeling and Manufacture of Huge DNA Oligonucleotide Libraries for Computation
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* David Wood, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2005
* USD 705,900.00

EIA-0130385&lt;br/&gt;Russell J. Deaton&lt;br/&gt;University of
Arkansas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Modeling and Manufacture of Huge DNA
Oligonucleotide Libraries for Computation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computing with
DNA, with its advantages of massive parallelism and huge information density,
promises a number of revolutionary applications, as well as the potential to
solve problems beyond the capabilities of conventional computers. A critical
barrier, however, is unplanned crosshybridization among oligonucleotides. In
order for the computations to be reliable and efficient, and to scale to larger
problems, the DNA sequences have to be designed to minimize these unplanned
crosshybridizations. Though pairwise hybridization is well modeled and
understood, design of such libraries is challenging because of the huge number
of pairwise hybridization's, and the conflicting constraints of maximizing the
library size while minimizing crosshybridization.Therefore, to overcome these
limitations, huge libraries of non-crosshybridizing DNA oligonucleotides are
manufactured by in vitro evolution with a PCR-based protocol that selects from a
random pool those oligonucleotides that are maximally mismatched. In addition,
because enumeration of all pairwise hybridization energetic in a huge library is
computationally prohibitive, a statistical approach, which is based upon spin
glass physics, is used to model the library. The model is the basis for a set of
analysis and design tools for application to the
libraries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of the fundamental importance of DNA
hybridization in DNA computing, the modeling and manufacture of huge libraries
of DNA oligonucleotides is producing foundational principles and results for the
field. The size of the largest libraries of non-crosshybridizing
oligonucleotides is also the limit on the size of feasible computation. The
libraries are an enabling resource not only for large-scale DNA computations,
but also biotechnology applications, such as reusable, universal DNA
microarrays. In addition, the libraries, as well as the software tools, are
available for reproduction and use by other researchers in DNA computing and
biotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;