* 0130773
* BITS:    Reconfigurable and Multifunctional Behavioral Pattern Generators
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2005
* Michael Branicky, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2005
* USD 399,033.00

EIA-0130773 Randall D. Beer-Case Western Reserve-Reconfigurable and
Multifunctional Behavior Pattern Generators

We propose to develop new theories and models that extend current computational
frameworks by understanding and implementing the dynamically reconfigurable and
multifunctional information processing architectures of biological systems. We
will address this challenge through a collaborative interdisciplinary research
program focusing on multifunctional neuromechanical components and their
reconfiguration into multiple behavioral patterns in animals. The ultimate goal
of our proposed research is to abstract general design principles that can
eventually be applied in a variety of other contexts. Specifically, we propose
the following four closely intertwined experimental and modeling/theoretical
projects:

1)We will undertake a detailed experimental analysis of the feeding system of
the mollusk Aplysia California, which dynamically reconfigures its feeding
behavior in response to changing environmental circumstances, and does so
through the multifuntionality of its neuromechanics. First, we will characterize
the conditions under which the animal switches between distant behavioral
patterns. Second, we will examine the neural and mechanical basis of these
switches.

2)We will create and analyze models of behavioral pattern switching as the basis
for new design principles. First, we will construct interconnected semi-Markov
models to capture behavioral pattern reconfiguration observed in biological
systems. Second, we will pursue the development of a systematic design
methodology for engineered systems, with potential applications to robotic
assembly.

3)We will create and analyze models of multifunctional pattern generations in
order to identify general design principles. First, we will use genetic
algorithms to evolve multifunctional neural pattern generators that can switch
between distinct behavioral patterns. Second, we will undertake a detailed study
of the "design space" of these model pattern generators.

4)We will explore the implementation of multifunctional neural pattern
generators in analog VLSI. First, we will develop compact, low-power pattern
generators based on the experimental and theoretical work proposed above.
Second, we will study the effects of noise and component mismatch on the
performance of these networks.

