* 0130420
* "Statistical analysis of cross-language color naming data."
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2006
* Paul Kay, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 02/28/2006
* USD 120,034.00

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Paul Kay and Terry Regier will
build a web-accessible database to test the hypothesis of universal constraints
on color naming across languages. Anthropologists and linguists used to think
that the meanings of color words (e.g., "red", "black", etc.) differ arbitrarily
from language to language. It was also thought that these words, rather than
being constrained by biological constants of human color perception, vary
arbitrarily across cultures and that the words cause speakers of different
languages to see color differently. A 1969 study by Kay and colleagues
challenged this view, maintaining that patterns in color naming across languages
reveal certain constants. That study was followed up by the NSF-supported World
Color Survey, in which data on color naming in 110 unwritten languages were
gathered in the field by linguists highly familiar with the languages. The World
Color Survey resulted in a number of publications, generally supporting the view
of universal constraints on color naming. Because these data were collected in
the early days of computers, they were not entered into a uniform database that
would make them amenable to comprehensive statistical testing or to web
publication. The current project will (1) convert the World Color Survey data to
a uniform database, (2) make this database available to everyone via the web,
and (3) perform comprehensive statistical testing on the data to test hypotheses
about color naming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The question of universal constraints
on systems of color naming has broad implications. Color words provide a natural
laboratory in cross-language comparison of meanings because their meanings -
colors - can be specified in a scientific system of description that is
independent of any particular natural language. Color has thus been the
vocabulary domain most often cited both by proponents of linguistic/cultural
relativity and by their opponents, who tend to emphasize biologically and
evolutionary based universals in human behavior. As a consequence, color words
have come to occupy a special position in the very general nature versus nurture
debate, a controversy within the biological and social sciences, as well as the
general educated public and many issues of public policy, at least since Darwin.
Increased scientific clarity with regard to universality versus arbitrariness in
color naming is consequently of general interest.&lt;br/&gt;