* 0130861
* CISE Research Resources: Acquisition of a cluster for experimental parallel computing research in scientific computing and computational biology
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2004
* Srinivas Aluru, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2004
* USD 166,518.00

0130861 &lt;br/&gt;Srinivas Aluru&lt;br/&gt;Iowa Stae
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CISE Research Resources: Acquisition of a
Cluster for Experimental Parallel Computing Research in Scientific Computing and
Computational Biology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides funding to
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at Iowa State University for
acquisition of a cluster of 64 Pentium workstations connected by a high-speed
network. The cluster will be used as a distributed memory parallel computer and
will be dedicated to support research in parallel computing, bioinformatics and
computational biology, and scientific computing. More specifically, the
equipment will be used for research in: parallel algorithms and software for
gene identification, parallel algorithms and software for electromagnetic
scattering analysis, scalable parallelization of tree-based data structures, and
integrated software visualization environments for program correctness,
validation and optimization. Experimental studies will be conducted to evaluate
the performance of the parallel algorithms developed and the knowledge gained
from such studies will be used to derive efficient, scalable, parallel
implementations. Acquisition of the instrumentation will enable researchers to
develop, demonstrate and disseminate comprehensive software systems that are
capable of solving large-scale scientific applications of current relevance.
&lt;br/&gt;