* 0130375
* Evolution of Axis Formation
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2006
* Hans Bode, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 01/31/2006
* USD 344,972.00

0130375&lt;br/&gt;Hans Bode&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; During the last 20 years a
great deal has been learned about the genes and the molecular mechanisms that
regulate the processes underlying the development of an embryo into a
functioning animal. One of the most interesting aspects of the accumulating
knowledge is that similar sets of genes and mechanisms underlie similar
developmental processes in many of the diverse animals studied so far. These
common features raise a number of important questions. When during animal
evolution did these genes arise? Were they already present in the earliest
metazoan? To what extent has the function of a particular gene, or pathway of
genes been conserved throughout metazoan evolution?&lt;br/&gt; One approach to
these issues is to study these genes and their functions in organisms that
belong to groups of animals that arose very early during metazoan evolution. One
of the earliest groups is the Cnidaria, whose members include jellyfish, sea
anemones, and the freshwater hydra. Of these, hydra, is particularly useful
since the developmental processes are well-understood. &lt;br/&gt; The overall
aim of the proposed work is to determine the extent that the genes and
mechanisms underlying axis formation in hydra are similar to those found
vertebrates and arthropods. Though hydra, and all cnidarians, have a single axis
compared to the two axes [anterior-posterior and dorsal-ventral] in bilaterians,
a number of genes known to be involved in axis formation in vertebrates and
arthropods play similar roles in hydra.&lt;br/&gt; A specific problem that needs
to be addressed concerns the genes and mechanisms involved in the initiation of
axis formation. In vertebrates, a region termed the organizer plays a central
role. Recently, a region of the hydra head, the hypostome, has been shown to
have clear similarities with this vertebrate structure. Thus, the focus of this
proposal is to isolate genes from the hydra organizer, determine their roles,
and determine to what extent the same or similar genes are involved in hydra and
vertebrate organizers as well as arthropod organizing regions.&lt;br/&gt; The
common approach is to look for homologues of genes that function in the
organizer activity of a vertebtate or the fruit fly, Drosophila. This approach
has been very successful but is slow and tedious. DNA array analysis provides a
means for identifying a subset of genes among several thousand that are
candidates for roles in organizer activity in hydra. Sequence analysis will
reveal which are homologues of known genes, which belong to a specific class of
gene and which are novel genes. Thereafter, the role of each of these genes will
be analyzed by examining their expression patterns during the development and
functioning of the organizer region as well as with the use of a functional
assay.&lt;br/&gt; The information gained will provide (a) a more detailed
understanding of the organizer in hydra, (b) a more detailed understanding of
the molecular evolution of this structure, (c) and possibly the identification
of novel genes that may generally be involved in organizer development and
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;