* 0130858
* CISE Research Resources: Coordination, Control and Communications Strategies for Teams of Mobile Robots
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2003
* R. Vijay Kumar, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2003
* USD 198,400.00

EIA-0130858 &lt;br/&gt;Camillo Taylor&lt;br/&gt;University of
Pennsylvania&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The idea of deploying teams of small,
inexpensive robotic agents to accomplish various sensing, manipulation and
communication tasks is one that has gained increasing currency over the last few
years. This project will involve three interrelated research thrusts that
investigate various aspects of this paradigm. The first thrust deals with the
problems associated with coordinating the motion of teams of robots. Some of the
questions that are addressed by this effort include the problem of controlling
the motion of robots moving in formation and coordinating the action of robots
engaged in cooperative manipulation of an object. The second thrust focuses on
the issues associated with combining the information obtained from distributed
robots to form a coherent model of the environment. The third area of research
concerns the problems associated with designing and analyzing networking
strategies that are appropriate for use with distributed teams of robotic
agents. Since the platforms are mobile, many of the traditional networking
strategies, which were designed with fixed infrastructure in mind, are not
applicable. As part of this proposal we intend to investigate questions
concerning the appropriateness of various wireless networking technologies such
as IEEE 802.11b and Bluetooth. This proposal requests funding to purchase the
equipment required to develop a fleet of networked robots that would serve as a
shared testbed for our research efforts.&lt;br/&gt;