* 0130634
* RUI: Using Direct Evidence to Determine the Energetic and Ecological Significance of Dissolved Organic Matter (DOM) for the Bryozoan Bugula Neritina
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2002,08/31/2002
* Dean Wendt, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 08/31/2002
* USD 106,892.00

All organisms ranging from the simplest bacterium to the most sophisticated
multicellular animal need energy for metabolic maintenance, growth, and
reproduction. It is thus not surprising that a wide variety of mechanisms have
evolved for acquiring the energy needed to carry out these vital processes. One
such system that has developed among aquatic organisms involves cellular
transport and utilization of dissolved organic matter (DOM) directly from the
surrounding medium. The work from this project will add much needed direct
evidence on the ecological and energetic role of DOM for marine invertebrate
animals. Most of the current studies examining use of DOM by marine
invertebrates are limited to indirect evidence based on comparisons of metabolic
expenditure and potential contribution of DOM calculated from uptake rates of
dissolved compounds. Although this approach is useful in determining the
theoretical contribution of DOM, it does not directly characterize the realized
contribution to an animal's energy budget. A more direct approach based on
comparisons of metabolic expenditure of animals in the presence versus absence
of DOM is needed. The proposed work seeks to establish this for the bryozoan
Bugula neritina through a series of laboratory and field experiments examining
how the availability of DOM during larval swimming and metamorphosis effects
ecological relevant parameters such as, larval swimming duration, metamorphic
competence, size after metamorphosis, adult growth rate, and onset and amount of
reproduction. In addition, direct evidence for incorporation of DOM into larval
tissues and those of early post-metamorphic stages will be established through
autoradiographic techniques. These data will provide insight into how and when
the transported compounds are being used (e.g., for swimming, metamorphosis,
early juvenile growth). Taken together, the proposed experiments will provide
direct evidence on the realized contribution of DOM to the nutritional biology
of invertebrates, adding significantly to our current understanding of the
ecological and energetic importance of DOM.