* 0130799
* CISE Research Resources: Experimental Testbed for Mobile Network Protocols
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2001,04/30/2005
* Essam El-Kwae, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 04/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

EIA-0130799 &lt;br/&gt;Teresa Dahlberg&lt;br/&gt;University of North Carolina
Charlotte&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CISE Research Resources: Experimental Testbed for
Mobile Network Protocols&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this
project is to experimentally analyze mobile network protocols that support
multimedia services. A wireless, mobile multimedia network will be built to add
an experimental component to four ongoing research projects at UNC Charlotte.
The experimental work will focus on the component of each project that involves
development and analysis of mobile network protocols. Experimentation will
enable critical analysis of protocol behavior in dynamic environments where
real-world entities replace simulation models, especially, network traffic
models, wireless channel models, fault and vulnerability models, and power usage
models. The testbed will encompass both cellular and ad hoc network
architectures with components that include PCs and laptops with IEEE 802.11
radios and FreeBSD operating system. Network nodes to be configured include
multimedia nodes that generate variable bit rate streaming audio and video and a
security authentication node. The testbed will support individual research
activities as well as facilitate synergy among the researchers who possess
expertise in the areas of multimedia, security, ad hoc networking, and cellular
networking. The outcome of the experimental studies will contribute to the
limited body of knowledge of mobile network protocol behavior within highly
dynamic environments. &lt;br/&gt;