* 0130857
* CISE Research Resources: Information Visualization and Incremental Knowledge Discovery in a Cluster Computing Environment
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2003
* Elise deDoncker, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2003
* USD 195,247.00

EIA-0130857 &lt;br/&gt;Elise deDoncker&lt;br/&gt;Western Michigan
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CISE Research Resources: Information
Visualization and Incremental Knowledge Discovery in a Cluster Computing
Environment&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks funding to enhance a
64-node PC cluster at Western Michigan University, obtained in part on a
previous National Science Foundation grant and university funding. Improving the
cluster will give hardware support for on-going research and education on
parallel and distributed algorithm design and development. Although the cluster
is currently used for various research efforts by different groups in the
university, this proposal focuses on two of these projects: parallel integration
and distributed incremental knowledge discovery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
requested infrastructure includes a networking upgrade to support the current
communication intensive (high bandwidth/low latency) projects. These include the
tailoring of load balancing methods underlying the migration of regions in
adaptive partitioning. The system will also provide a better environment for our
study of the scalability of task partitioning methods in numerical integration
and other areas. The proposed project on the development of methods for
incremental knowledge discovery from large databases will further be supported
by the visualization components of the infrastructure. This effort includes 3D
interactive visual exploration of large relational data sets. The techniques
will be incorporated in a systematic way into a software system for incremental
knowledge discovery, and evaluated for effectiveness and suitability in
different scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;