* 0130057
* Molecular/Biochemical Investigations of PEPC (and its Novel Ser/Thr-Kinase) and SuSy (Nodulin-100), Two Phosphorylated Metabolic Enzymes in Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2007
* Raymond Chollet, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Vierling
* 04/30/2007
* USD 749,024.00

This basic research project is focused on this laboratory's long-standing
interest in plant metabolic enzymes and their regulation by the ubiquitous
process of "reversible protein phosphorylation". The overall investigation deals
specifically with phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (PEPC) and sucrose synthase
(SuSy), two "target" enzymes that undergo phosphorylation in photosynthesizing
leaves and/or nitrogen-fixing root nodules of soybeans, peas, and other legumes.
While PEPC is best known for its cardinal role in the initial fixation of
atmospheric carbon dioxide during photosynthesis by such crop plants as sorghum,
corn, sugarcane and pineapple, it also functions in a diverse array of non-
photosynthetic contexts, e.g., carbon/nitrogen-metabolism in legume root nodules
and unicellular green algae. This "multifaceted" nature of plant PEPC makes it
an extremely attractive subject for continued study of its (a) intricate control
by "PEPC-kinase" (PpcK), the novel, highly regulated protein-kinase enzyme that
phosphorylates/activates PEPC, and (b) emerging biochemical structure-function
relationships. Along these lines, two of the three specific experimental
objectives of this renewal project focus on the molecular/biochemical analysis
of plant PpcK, and sorghum-leaf and green-algal PEPC. The third and final focus
of this investigation is SuSy, likely the major sucrose-metabolizing enzyme in a
variety of non-photosynthetic "sink" tissues in plants, including legume root
nodules, developing leaves, fruits and seeds, and tubers. Continued interest in
this metabolic enzyme largely stems from the fact that, like PEPC, it is one of
but a handful of phosphorylated plant enzymes with a specific "target" amino-
acid residue(s) identified both in planta and in vitro. In addition, this
"target" enzyme has the documented potential for phosphorylation at multiple
sites by at least two distinct subfamilies of plant protein kinases. However,
neither the exact role of this phosphorylation event(s) nor its dynamic
reversibility in planta is established. These uncertainties will be addressed
experimentally during this project by a combination of biochemical,
immunological and mass-spectroscopic approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
significance of this multi-pronged, basic research and discovery project is that
it will (a) enhance the fundamental understanding of two important enzymes
involved in plant primary metabolism in terms of their intricate regulation and
structure-function relationships, and (b) provide detailed molecular insight
into the unique protein kinase that "targets" one of them exclusively. As such,
the results from this research will contribute significantly to the requisite
underpinning for the constructive manipulation of plant carbon/nitrogen-
metabolism and its control mechanisms in leaves and legume root nodules by
biotechnological approaches.&lt;br/&gt;