* 0130446
* U.S.-Hungary Materials Theory Research on Strongly Correlated and Mesoscopic Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Piers Coleman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 05/31/2007
* USD 42,795.00

This U.S.-Hungarian research project involves two teams led by Piers Coleman of
Rutgers University, New Brunswick, and his partner Alfred Zawadowski of the
Physics Institute at the Technical University, Budapest. Their collaboration
features examination of strongly correlated systems with an emphasis on quantum
criticality and superconductivity in heavy fermion systems and electronic
correlation effects in mesoscopic devices. These researchers found motivation in
recent experiments performed at the magnetic quantum critical point of a heavy
fermion metal and in nano-science developments that enable measurements and
observations of strongly correlated states in single electron
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's research plan features study of: 1)
magnetic quantum critical point in the Kondo lattice; 2) superconducting order
in heavy fermion compounds and 3) dynamical and out-of equilibrium properties of
quantum dots. Various numerical and analytical methods will be employed
including slave particle methods and large N expansions; perturbative
renormalization group techniques and e-expansions; and dynamical mean field
theory calculations combined with numerical renormalization group methods. If
successful, findings should contribute to our knowledge of new phenomena on a
nanometer scale that may be applicable in specially fabricated materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This international research project in materials theory
fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling
experts in the Untied States and Central Europe to combine complementary talents
and share research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence.