* 0130062
* Organization of Plant Metabolic Pathways and Subcellular Trafficking of Phytochemicals
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2005
* Erich Grotewold, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 02/28/2005
* USD 377,750.00

Very little is known on how plant metabolic pathways are physically organized in
the cell, or how plant metabolites are transported within or between cells.
These are problems of central importance for plants, because many metabolites
are toxic or are synthesized distantly from where they accumulate. The
biosynthesis of flavonoid pigments and related metabolites provides a useful
system to investigate the significance of the formation of large multi-enzyme
complexes in the biosynthesis of phytochemicals, and to dissect the basic
mechanisms by which plant metabolites are transported within cells. The two main
goals of this project are: 1) to investigate the subcellular localization and
association of enzymes corresponding to two branches of maize flavonoid
biosynthesis, and 2) to explore the distinct trafficking pathways of plant
metabolites using inducible auto-fluorescent compounds. To accomplish the first
task, the subcellular localization of GFP-tagged enzymes corresponding to the
two main branches of maize flavonoid biosynthesis will be examined in the
presence and absence of the other enzymes in the pathway. Each branch of the
pathway can be independently induced using specific transcription factors. The
possibility that flavonoid biosynthetic enzymes physically interact will also be
investigated, using complementary genetic and biochemical approaches. Together,
these studies will determine whether multi-enzyme complexes corresponding to
different branches of a metabolic pathway form, and whether these complexes
localize to different places in the cell. For the second goal, previously
identified green and yellow auto-fluorescent compounds will be isolated and
chemically characterized. The green auto-fluorescent compounds accumulate in
structures, the green fluorescent bodies (GFBs), previously not recognized in
plants, and which fuse with the plasma membrane. These GFBs will be isolated and
the proteins associated with them will be characterized. These proteins will
provide useful markers to investigate the biogenesis, cargo transport and fusion
of these bodies to particular membrane domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;