* 0130576
* Molecular Genetic and Biochemical Analysis of the Fimbrin Gene Family From Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* David McCurdy, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 03/31/2006
* USD 380,000.00

The central importance of the actin cytoskeleton to plant development has been
widely accepted for some years now; however, little detailed biochemical
analysis of the individual components that regulate actin-based function has
been performed. This project addresses this deficiency by characterizing at the
biochemical, cellular and genetic levels, the family of fimbrin-like actin
filament crosslinking proteins from Arabidopsis thaliana. A major component of
this project will exploit reverse-genetic approaches by identifying knockout
mutants for each of the five fimbrin sequences. Phenotypic analysis of these
knockout lines will include determining whole plant defects and examining the
detailed structure of the actin cytoskeleton in different cell types by using
immunofluorescence and GFP technology. Specific actin-based functions such as
chloroplast orientation, cytoplasmic streaming, determination of division
planes, response to fungal pathogens, and cell expansion will be analyzed in the
knockout lines. Collectively, this study will test the hypothesis that
Arabidopsis contains members of the fimbrin family with distinct biochemical and
cellular properties and which, therefore, have the potential to contribute to
the diversity of actin-based function within individual plant cells.
Furthermore, this potential for diverse functions will be tested directly by
exploiting the power of reverse genetics. The results obtained will provide
important insight into fundamental mechanisms that underpin cellular
morphogenesis and responses to extracellular stimuli.