* 0130768
* CISE Research Resources: A Compute-Intensive Sensor-Based Environment for Research in Computer Vision and Artificial Intelligence
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2003
* Lawrence Hall, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2003
* USD 149,713.00

EIA-0130768 &lt;br/&gt;Sudeep Sarkar&lt;br/&gt;University of South
Florida&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CISE Research Resources: A Compute-Intensive
Sensor-Based Environment for Research in Computer Vision and Artificial
Intelligence&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Automated learning of grouping parameters for
perceptual organization of complex images, modeling and reconstruction of
elastic objects from image sequences, real-time matching of buyers and sellers
for E-commerce, and learning models from extremely large databases, all require
large data storage and a computing environment that supports exploring extremely
large parameter spaces along with the ability to process huge quantities of
data. A multiprocessor computing environment with substantial memory and disk
storage is requested for high-performance computing associated with these four
research projects in the general areas of computer vision and artificial
intelligence. The compute server will increase the present capabilities by an
order of magnitude.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, image acquisition devices,
including high-resolution color cameras, digital video cameras, stereo cameras,
and laser range scanners are requested for gathering color, motion, and range
data. The ability to acquire fast range images and motion sequences will enable
the consideration of the problem of integrating motion and range into the
perceptual organization process. Also, the ability to acquire fast and high-
resolution range, with registered color, will facilitate development of physics-
based non-rigid algorithms and models that incorporate true material properties,
which have, heretofore, not been possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;