* 0130986
* Mechanisms of Long-Term Monogamous Relationships in Zebra Finches
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2002,09/30/2008
* Elizabeth Adkins-Regan, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* daniel wiegmann
* 09/30/2008
* USD 513,931.00

PI: Elizabeth Adkins-Regan

This project will explore the mechanisms of the lifetime pair bond that forms
between male and female zebra finches. Biology seeks to explain not only general
features of most organisms (fundamental processes of life) but also the
diversity in organismal forms and lifestyles. There is great diversity in animal
mating systems. This diversity includes interesting variation in whether males
and females form long-term close social relationships in order to reproduce.
Long-term monogamous relationships, including pairing for the life of the
animals, are scattered throughout the animal world (including some human
populations) but are most common in birds. This kind of mating system is poorly
understood. The objective of this research is to explain the function (how such
relationships lead to better reproduction) and the physiology responsible for
the formation and maintenance of these relationships using a species, the zebra
finch, that pairs for life. The research will answer questions such as: are the
birds more reproductively successful if they continue with the same partner
rather than choose a new partner? Are sex hormone actions required for birds to
pair and to remain paired? Do pubertal sex hormones have any long-term effect on
pairing? Are they responsible for the transition from attachment to the parents
to attachment to the pairing partner? What is the role of the physiological
stress response following separation of the pair in re-pairing following loss of
the partner? Are physiological changes following separation part of the costs
that normally prevent separation? The methods will include hormonal and social
manipulations during juvenile development and adulthood, behavioral testing
designed to measure pairing preference and status, and determination of
reproductive success and hormone levels. By discovering what is responsible for
pairing and remaining together, this research will answer important questions
and will offer and test new hypotheses about the physiology of ecologically
relevant behavior applicable to a broad array of socially monogamous animals.
The research will also provide valuable training and an important start to a
scientific career for a large number of undergraduate and graduate students of
both genders and of diverse backgrounds and origins.