* 0130833
* Technician Support: Syracuse University Noble Gas Isotope Research Laboratory (SUNGIRL)
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Suzanne Baldwin, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 02/28/2006
* USD 210,000.00

EAR-0130833&lt;br/&gt;Baldwin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF award supports a
technical position in Syracuse University's Noble Gas Isotope Research
Laboratory (SUNGIRL). The position, currently filled by Dr. Laura Webb, is cost
shared with contributions from Syracuse University. SUNGIRL consists of 1) a
state-of-the-art Micromass 5400 noble gas mass spectrometer and extraction line
used primarily for 40Ar/39Ar analyses, and 2) a quadrupole mass spectrometer and
automated extraction line for He analysis in conjunction with (U-Th)/He dating.
The laboratory is shared by two faculty members in Earth Sciences, Suzanne
Baldwin and Paul Fitzgerald, whose research focuses on the thermochronologic
evolution of crustal terranes. The award will initially allow timely completion
and commissioning of the lab, including automation of the noble gas extraction
line. During the course of this award we also plan to build a laser system for
in situ analysis of minerals in thick sections, as well as outgassing of mineral
grains in conjunction with (U-Th)/He and 40Ar/39Ar thermochronology. The
laboratory will be utilized by Syracuse University faculty, researchers, post-
doctoral fellows, graduate and undergraduate students, and visiting U.S. and
international researchers. Under the general direction of the PIs, Dr. Webb will
be responsible for the day-to-day management and operation of the laboratory
including maintenance of equipment, design modifications, and development of
noble gas mass spectrometric techniques. Dr. Webb will also participate in
ongoing NSF-sponsored research which presently includes thermochronologic
analyses (40Ar/39Ar, (U-Th)/He, and fission track) in areas of continental
extension (Basin and Range Province, Transantarctic Mountains) and oblique
convergence (Southern Alps of New Zealand). We are also dating late Quaternary
volcanic ashes from the Peruvian-Bolivian Altiplano in collaboration with Geoff
Seltzer and colleagues in order to provide a geochronological framework for
paleoclimatic research of the tropical Andes utilizing drill cores obtained
through NSF funded research. Pending NSF proposals that will utilize SUNGIRL
include thermochronologic research in the Pyrenean collisional orogen and in the
active metamorphic core complexes of the Western Woodlark Basin of Papua New
Guinea. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;