* 0130318
* Elementary, Secondary and Informal Education:  Advancing the Public Understanding of Research Through Science and Technology Centers -- A Planning Grant
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Cary Sneider, Museum of Science
* Standard Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 08/31/2002
* USD 44,265.00

The Museum of Science in Boston is proposing to work with eight other science
centers to investigate how science centers might collaborate to enhance the
public understanding of research. The purpose of the planning effort is to
identify and elaborate on promising approaches to increase the public
understanding of the nature of scientific research, the process of technological
innovation, and the interaction between science and technology and societal
issues. Planning will be conducted in the context of three topics (tentative):
global climate change, alternative energy sources, and genetically modified
foods. Questions to be explored include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;what it would take
for each science center to offer exhibits and presentations on all three
topics,&lt;br/&gt;how can the exhibits be kept current,&lt;br/&gt;what is the
best mechanism for keeping science centers informed about current
research,&lt;br/&gt;what would motivate visitors to return in order to follow a
single line of research,&lt;br/&gt;how can visitors best continue their
connection with the science centers after their visits,&lt;br/&gt;what will
science centers change in the way they develop exhibits and programs in order to
present current science and technology,&lt;br/&gt;what costs and logistical
factors will need to be taken into consideration,&lt;br/&gt;will "one size fit
all" or will different designs be needed for different science centers,
and&lt;br/&gt;how might the exhibits and programs be designed to encourage the
incorporation of local resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be
coordinated with other media that are developing efforts to convey on-going
science to the public. Evan Hadingham, Science Editor for NOVA at WGBH, will
bring the perspective of television production; Rob Semper from the
Exploratorium will represent the Internet; and Bruce Lowenstein, Editor of
Public Understanding of Science, will represent print. The science centers
participating in the planning effort include: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Museum of
Science, Boston&lt;br/&gt;New York Hall of Science&lt;br/&gt;Science Museum of
Minnesota&lt;br/&gt;Arizona Science Center&lt;br/&gt;Tech Museum of
Innovation&lt;br/&gt;California Science Center&lt;br/&gt;The
Exploratorium&lt;br/&gt;Pacific Science Center&lt;br/&gt;American Museum of
Natural History&lt;br/&gt;