* 0130024
* Cellular Creatine/Phosphocreatine Homeostasis
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2006
* W. Ross Ellington, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ione Hunt Von Herbing
* 02/28/2006
* USD 417,567.00

The basic laws of thermodynamics apply to organisms as they do to the physical
world. As a consequence, all living cells must metabolically breakdown large
organic molecules such as carbohydrates and in the process trap some of the
energy released in the form of a compound known as adenosine triphosphate, ATP
for short. ATP functions as the cell's energy currency. Its chemical breakdown
is used to drive a variety of energetically unfavorable processes such as
biosynthesis, cellular movement like contraction, and pumping substances uphill
across biological membranes. There are instances where demand for ATP exceeds
supply as might take place at the onset of burst muscle contraction. In many
cells a compound known as phosphocreatine is present which, through the action
of an enzyme called creatine kinase, is capable of replenishing ATP as quickly
as it is used (at least in the short term). This energy buffering role of
phosphocreatine is critical in the functioning of a broad spectrum of cells. The
precursor for phosphocreatine is creatine. In vertebrates, a fraction of the
creatine required is obtained from the diet while the rest is synthesized in the
liver and pancreas. Creatine is then carried in the blood to cells where it is
transported by a special membrane transport protein (creatine transporter) into
the cell and then converted to phosphocreatine. Genetic defects in creatine
biosynthesis and transport produce severe pathological effects in humans
including profound mental retardation. Many diverse invertebrate groups
accumulate large quantities of creatine/phosphocreatine in their cells. This is
particularly true of certain marine species such as sea urchins which are broad-
cast fertilizers. These animals literally shed their eggs and sperm into to the
sea water; this strategy necessitates production of massive amounts of sperm
which have very high levels of creatine/phosphocreatine. Thus, there is a
seasonally high demand for creatine yet it is not clear at all how these animals
obtain and transport this vital substance to cells where it is needed. The
proposed research effort seeks to trace the evolution of creatine biosynthetic
and membrane transport capacities by investigating these processes in selected
groups of invertebrates. Initial efforts will focus on 1) using sensitive
isotopic labeling techniques to determine whether the two key enzymes of
creatine biosynthesis are present in these animals; and 2) using modern
molecular genetic approaches to localize the tissue expression of these enzymes,
and to determine whether there is increased presence of these proteins at peak
reproductive activity (when demand for creatine is high). A second facet of this
research will center on determining the nature of creatine transport into cells
where it accumulates as high concentrations of creatine/phosphocreatine. Once
again, molecular genetic methods will be used to express the transport proteins
in a cell system where they can be studied and characterized most efficiently.
The overall results will yield mechanistic information about creatine
biosynthesis and transport as well as provide a picture of the evolution of
these processes from the lower invertebrates to more advanced animals.