* 0130870
* Collaborative Research: RUI:Linking Xylem Functional Traits to Life-History Type in California Chaparral
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Stephen Davis, Pepperdine University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Winner
* 05/31/2005
* USD 300,000.00

The climate of southern California is a Mediterranean-type, characterized by
mild winters, protracted summer drought, and periodic wildfire. The dominant
vegetation is chaparral, which is uniquely adapted to summer dehydration and
fires. There are three strategies by which chaparral survive and persist through
periodic fire: non-sprouters after fire, facultative sprouters after fire, and
obligate sprouters after fire. We hypothesize that these three strategies are
coupled to dehydration tolerance. We will estimate dehydration tolerance by
determining the threshold in dehydration that causes the water transport system
of plants to fail. This failure is caused by xylem embolism formation under
severe water stress, that is, when the plumbing system (xylem conduits) of
plants become blocked by air bubbles, cutting off water flow to leaves, leading
to shoot death.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of our research is to
elucidate the mechanisms linking xylem functional traits to life history type
among diverse species of chaparral shrubs. We hypothesize that there are trade-
offs among xylem embolism-resistance, xylem conductivity efficiency and xylem
mechanical strength and these depend on the three life history strategies that
chaparral species have in response to wildfire.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Issues
related to recurrent wildfire, water conservation, erosion control, urban
expansion and recreation are more pronounced in regions of chaparral than in any
other type of wild land in California. Results from the research will be
disseminated widely to local agencies responsible for management and
conservation of natural resources in the Santa Monica Mountains, and to
educational groups including docents for the State Park Service and the National
Park Service. The findings will allow generalizations to the broader chaparral
community of California and to the other four Mediterranean-type climate regions
of the world. Results from the proposed work will refine predictions of expected
shifts in chaparral distribution and community structure over the next century
in response to an anticipate climate change to a warmer, drier California with
increased episodic Santa Ana winds and wildfire.&lt;br/&gt;