* 0130713
* Excavations at Cave 13B, Pinnacle Point at Mossel Bay, South Africa: Faunal Exploitation, Raw Material Procurement, and Organization of Domestic Space During the Middle Stone Age
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Curtis Marean, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2006
* USD 246,746.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Curtis Marean conducted
exploratory archaeological investigations in July of 2000 of three caves near
Mossel Bay in the Western Cape province of South Africa. That project was funded
by the high risk exploratory grants provided by the Archaeology Program. The
goal of those investigations was to evaluate the suitability of several caves
for more intensive excavations. Two of those caves proved to have very well
preserved archaeological sediments dating to the Middle Stone Age, with
excellent fossil bone preservation. Two hominid fossils were found, suggesting
that further investigations could yield more and contribute to a currently small
sample. Furthermore, features such as hearths are well preserved, and ochre
pencils were found, suggesting that the occupants had been involved in symbolic
activities. Based on those results, Dr. Marean will conduct with National
Science Foundation support more intensive excavations at one of those caves,
named Cave 13B.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study is part of a wide ranging
international and interdisciplinary research effort that seeks to understand the
cultural transition from "archaic" to "modern" human behavior. This research
effort, focusing on the interval of time between about 250,000 and 30,000 years
ago, involves scholars working primarily in Eurasia and Africa. To date the
evidence has been dominated by that from Europe, where scientists have been
working intensively for the last 100 years. The results of that research have
led many scientists to argue that those aspects of modern human culture that we
associate with modern people appear first shortly after 40,000 years ago. These
indicators of modernity include such things as symboling behavior as suggested
by the presence of artistic expression and religion, and complex social
structures such as trade networks as indicated by the presence of raw materials
from distant sources. Recently, new results from the poorly sampled African
continent, particularly in coastal South Africa, suggest that these indicators
of modernity may have appeared earlier there than in Eurasia, and that this
once-secure Rubicon at 40,000 years ago may be an artifact of an empirical
record weak in African evidence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to
expand the African record for this crucial transition. The excavations at Mossel
Bay should help provide a more secure understanding of the timing of these
events in Africa. The analysis of the excavated materials will focus on
geochemical analyses of raw materials to investigate trade networks, spatial
analysis of the artifacts and faunal remains relative to hearth placement to
investigate the organization of social activities, and faunal remains to
understand the sophistication of hunting behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;