* 0130825
* Neuropeptide Control of Ecdysone Biosynthesis
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2005
* James Warren, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Dona Boggs
* 12/31/2005
* USD 492,102.00

In order for insects to grow and undergo metamorphosis, they must shed their
restrictive outer skin (exoskeleton). They have used this process very
efficiently over hundreds of millions of years in order to grow at times when
predators and other endangering environmental factors are less threatening. Many
of the structural, physiological, biochemical and molecular events that occur
during the molting process are elicited by the principle molting hormone of
insects, a polyhydroxylated steroid hormone 20-hydroxyecdysone, which is
synthesized in many tissues of the insect from another steroid, ecdysone.
Ecdysone is synthesized in special glands in the insect, the prothoracic glands.
The stimulus to synthesize this very important molecule is a peptide,
prothoracicotropic hormone, secreted by four specialized neurosecretory cells in
the insect's brain. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;About 40 years ago, ecdysone was
extracted and characterized from two tons of commercial silkworm, but during the
past four decades there has been little progress in elucidating the individual
biochemical steps in ecdysone synthesis. Understanding the synthetic steps is
important not only to further our basic knowledge of this very important group
of animals that intimately affects human welfare, but also because if one is
able to characterize the individual steps in the ecdysone biosynthetic pathway,
and clone the genes for the enzymes that mediate each of these steps, there is
the possibility of introducing this sequence of genes (transfection) into
agriculturally important plants. They would then synthesize this steroid
hormone, which is a natural deterrent to insect pests. Thus, when the hormone is
ingested by an insect consuming such transfected plants, it will molt out of
synchrony and will not be viable. Ecdysone is nontoxic to higher organisms, so
that this possibility of introducing the necessary genes into host plants is a
reasonable goal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Little progress had been made using
classical biochemical techniques to elucidate the pathway of ecdysone
biosynthesis because the intermediate compounds are in very low quantity and are
extremely unstable. Almost all laboratories that have attempted this feat have
given up after years of negative results. In collaboration with the O'Connor
laboratory at the University of Minnesota, the principal investigator has made
critical progress in elucidating the biosynthetic pathway between cholesterol
and ecdysone. For these studies, the fruitfly Drosophila melanogaster has been
employed because its genetics are better known than any other animal, and its
short life cycle makes both the molecular genetics and biochemistry more
feasible. This combined use of molecular genetics and biochemical analysis has
resulted in the identification, cloning, and functional genomic studies of two
enzymes in the ecdysone biosynthetic pathway, and has provided insights into
experimental approaches for elucidating the remaining enzymes in that pathway.
By cloning and sequencing certain genes (Halloween genes) from Drosophila
embryos that have less than the normal amount of ecdysone, the principal
investigator and his colleagues learned that mutations in these genes cause
lethality in the embryo. Transfection of these genes into a Drosophila cell line
and use of biochemical technology has shown that two of these mutants,
disembodied and shadow, code for mitochondrial ecdysterol 22- and
2-hydroxylases, respectively. The purpose of continued work over the next
several years will be to fully identify these two enzymes through more
sophisticated analyses (mass spectrometry) and identify as many of the remaining
(5) enzymes (P450 enzymes) in this biosynthetic pathway. Expression of these
genes will be examined during Drosophila development, and a search will be
conducted for counterparts in other insect model systems, such as the tobacco
hornworm. Not only will these experiments result in a complete knowledge of how
ecdysone is biosynthesized, but they will also provide the genes for
transfection into plants of agricultural importance. In addition, the data
should provide a clear understanding of the rate-limiting control mechanisms
that modulate ecdysone biosynthesis, and perhaps will permit identification of
the specific biosynthetic reactions that are controlled by the brain
neuropeptide, prothoracicotropic hormone. This new paradigm of combining
molecular genetics with biochemical analysis can be used in the future for
studying biosynthetic pathways in a variety of organisms, including pathogens.
&lt;br/&gt;