* 0130847
* CISE Research Resources:  Resources for Research in Scalable Parallel Computing and Networking Simulation
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2001,02/28/2006
* Gopal Gupta, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 02/28/2006
* USD 63,330.00

EIA-0130847 &lt;br/&gt;Gopal Gupta&lt;br/&gt;University of Texas
Dallas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CISE Research Resources: Resources for Research in
Scalable Parallel Computing and Networking Simulation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PIs seek to acquire a network of six 4-cpu multiprocessors and a data storage
system connected with 100 Mbit/s Ethernet. This equipment will be used for
building scalable parallel and distributed systems for tabled logic programming
(LP), for computational geometry projects, as well as for quantitatively
studying mobile ad-hoc networks (MANETs). The logic programming project seeks to
combine dynamic reordering of alternatives with stack-splitting for realizing
or-parallel tabled LP systems on distributed networks of SMPs. The computational
geometry projects are related to research on design and implementation of
scalable parallel and distributed algorithms for the weighted regions optimal
trajectory problem, with applications in surgery planning, geographic
information systems, and radiation therapy. The parallel implementations will be
carried out on the network of SMPs. The MANET project will conduct a
quantitative evaluation of unidirectional wireless links in MANETs: the impact
of interference and battery life on the occurrence of unidirectional links, and
MAC sub-layer issues for such links. Routing protocols designed to use both
bidirectional and unidirectional links will be evaluated via simulations. The
network of multiprocessors and the data storage system will be used,
respectively, for conducting large simulations and for storing large simulation
data. &lt;br/&gt;