* 0130775
* Neural mechanisms of orientation and navigation Symposium, January 5, 2002 combined with The Society of Integrative &amp; Comparative Biology, January 2-5, 2002, Anaheim, CA
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2002
* James Murray, Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 11/30/2002
* USD 8,270.00

Lay Abstract Murray&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This one-day symposium has the goals of
bringing together investigators working on diverse taxa, and moving the field
toward a unified framework of the neural mechanisms underlying navigational
behaviors. Previous conferences on the subject of orientation and navigation
have not emphasized neural mechanisms, and a greater understanding of such
neural mechanisms is now possible using multichannel recording, and newly-
developed techniques for recording from freely-moving animals. Eleven speakers
will each present a 30-minute talk on their work followed by 10 minutes of
questions. All speakers will address common problems, models, and mechanisms
shared among all investigators, with the goal of developing a unifying framework
to understand the neural circuits utilized as animals find their way over both
short and long distances. The objectives of this symposium are as follows: To
exchange ideas about state-of-the-art neuronal, computational, and behavioral
approaches to the analysis of oriented locomotion; To seek common neural
mechanisms of orientation and navigation used by multiple phyla and in diverse
sensory contexts; And to set short-term and long-term goals common to those
working on the mechanisms of oriented locomotion toward establishing a general
theory of the neuronal mechanisms of oriented locomotion. These general
mechanisms will inform technologies now developing in the form of mobile robots.
This symposium will provide an opportunity for a rich cross-fertilization of
ideas among researchers studying animal behavior and those studying
neurobiology.&lt;br/&gt;