* 0130839
* CISE Research Resources:  Instrumentation for Multidimensional Imaging and Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2001,12/31/2009
* Patrick Flynn, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 12/31/2009
* USD 1,960,408.00

0130839 &lt;br/&gt;Patrick Flynn&lt;br/&gt;University of Notre
Dame&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CISE Research Resources: Instrumentation for
Multidimensional Imaging and Applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award
contributes to the purchase of (a) specialized sensors and actuators (range
scanners, digital video facilities, 3D fabrication equipment), (b) high-
performance computing equipment (a Beowulf cluster and high-performance
workstations), and (c) infrastructure (including a network-attached disk array
and networking hardware). The proposed equipment will support current and
planned research in image processing and understanding. Research in planning and
currently underway that will employ the facility includes image and video
processing (range image compression techniques, image compression artifact
mitigation, and high-resolution video from sensor fusion), image analysis and
solid modeling (image segmentation, skeletonization, object representation, and
applications in orthopedics and gait analysis), and empirical evaluation of
image understanding algorithms (performance of low-level and high-level image
understanding tasks as well as 3D modeling techniques). The planned facility
will foster the continued development of a nascent image processing and
understanding research group at the University of Notre Dame, and the research
topics to be supported were carefully examined to validate their ability to take
advantage of the proposed equipment acquisition.&lt;br/&gt;