* 0130154
* Incorporating the Uncertainty of Atmosphere-Land Surface Interactions into Ensemble Forecasts
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2006
* Georg Grell, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 05/31/2006
* USD 327,721.00

A common problem with ensemble weather forecasts is the insufficient spread of
the ensemble members so that often the true state lies outside the span of the
ensemble forecasts. Previous studies indicate that this "lack of spread" is
worse near the surface than it is in mid-troposphere, suggesting that part of
the problem may be due to the land surface conditions in the model. The PIs seek
to improve this situation by perturbing the land surface condition and treating
the insolation (incoming solar radiation at the surface) stochastically in the
ensemble forecasts. The research has two components: first, an
observational/diagnostic study geared toward the understanding of the spatial
and temporal characteristics of errors in surface fluxes and insolation. The
second component is to design methodologies to link the errors of the surface
fluxes to the surface moisture and perturb it. The isolation will be perturbed
with stochastic noise. Once suitable candidate methods have been developed, they
will be tested in the Rapid Update Cycle or Weather Research and Forecast model
ensemble runs by the Forecast System Laboratory, NOAA. Results from this
research have the potential of finding their way into operational ensemble
weather forecasts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Probabilistic forecasts generated by
ensemble predictions are increasing used for a wide variety of purposes, from
flood forecasting to assessing the demand for electricity. This research is
aimed at improving the quality of ensemble forecasts and enhancing their
usefulness. The training that the graduate students receive will help to prepare
them for careers in ensemble forecasting where there is a shortage of talented
manpower.