* 0130486
* Recovery of Replication Following UV-induced DNA damage
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Justin Courcelle, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 03/31/2006
* USD 443,146.00

Inaccurate replication in the presence of DNA damage is often responsible for
cellular rearrangements and mutagenesis. Nevertheless, the cellular mechanisms
by which replication-blocking lesions are processed and repaired remain largely
uncharacterized. UV-induced DNA damage severely inhibits chromosomal
replication. In Escherichia coli, the recovery of replication following UV
irradiation is dependent on nucleotide excision repair proteins and some
proteins of the recF pathway. It is speculated that several additional genes may
be involved in replication recovery but they have not been examined directly in
vivo. This project will determine the cellular mechanism by which chromosomal
replication recovers when it is blocked by UV-induced DNA damage. The
investigator will identify the structural properties of lesion-arrested
replication forks throughout replication recovery. This portion of the project
will be done by isolating the post-irradiation DNA from uvr mutants in sucrose
gradients to quantitate the number of UV-induced lesions that can be bypassed
(or skipped) by DNA replication machinery before replication arrest occurs.
Post-irradiation DNA synthesis will then be analyzed using strand-specific
32P-labeled probes to determine on which template strand replication blockage
occurs. In addition, the investigator will use two-dimensional agarose gel
electrophoresis to characterize the structural integrity of the replication fork
throughout the recovery process and identify the structural intermediates that
arise at blocked replication forks during recovery. He will further identify
which candidate genes are directly involved in the resumption of replication at
DNA damage-blocked replication forks and characterize at which step they act.
This will be done by isolating DNA synthesized during the period of replication
recovery in CsCl gradients and quantifying it. The role that these candidate
genes play in replication recovery will further be characterized by examining
the nascent DNA degradation at blocked replication forks following UV
irradiation. &lt;br/&gt; Through an understanding of how faithful replication
resumes when it is blocked by DNA damage, the investigator hopes to identify the
conditions and events which can lead to illegitimate recovery, genomic
rearrangements, and lethality in the presence of DNA damage. Because changes in
DNA affect all aspects of biology, these insights could profoundly affect human
interactions with the natural world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;