* 0131424
* Elementary, Secondary and Informal Education: Research News for Local NBC Newscasts -- A Planning Grant
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2002
* Eliene Augenbraun, ScienCentral Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 09/30/2002
* USD 49,687.00

ScienCentral, with major support from NSF, has been developing and distributing
short science stories for inclusion in local ABC news broadcasts. They are now
developing a plan, in cooperation with NBC News Channel, to produce stories
about cutting edge research to be carried on local NBC stations during their
local news broadcasts. During this planning phase, ScienCentral will produce,
distribute and evaluate three stories about current research in the area of
global climate change. Specific planning tasks include: determining the
technical and editorial processes for working with NBC News; conducting
formative evaluations for topics, format and desired frequency of stories; and
developing an auditable cost sharing process.

The Editorial Board for the project includes Eliene Augenbraun, PI/Executive
Producer and former research scientist; Besty Rosenfield, Vice President of
ScienCentral; Jack Penland, News Director; and Curt Epstein, Senior Producer.
They will work closely with an advisory panel consisting of Greg Kohler, Senior
Producer, NBC News Channel; Leon Lederman, Office of Strategic Initiative,
Illinois Institute of Technology; Jane Lubchenco, Environmental Scientist,
Oregon State University; and Danielle Gray, Deputy Director for Emory University
Integration of Education and Research, Center for Behavioral Neuroscience.
Members of the advisory board will review scripts and roughcuts of all segments.