* 0131241
* Cooperative Interactions in Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2007
* Ernesto Freire, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/2007
* USD 670,000.00

The long-range objective of this research is to develop a fundamental
description of protein interactions and the mechanisms by which these
interactions elicit long-range cooperative effects existing at the core of
signaling processes. The goal of this project is to study the interactions of
the HIV protein Nef with Lck and Fyn SH3 domains. The following issues will be
addressed: 1) The coupling of binding affinity to long range cooperative
effects. The proline-rich Nef peptide, the conserved core of Nef, and full
length Nef, all bind to SH3 with similar binding affinity but different
thermodynamics (different enthalpy/entropy balance; 2) The structural
stabilization of Nef by inter-domain interactions; 3) The coupling of binding
and inter-domain interactions. These studies will involve a combination of
approaches such as experimental thermodynamics (isothermal titration calorimetry
and differential scanning calorimetry), hydrogen/deuterium exchange studies,
statistical thermodynamic analysis and structure-based thermodynamic
computations. The identification and separation of interactions that contribute
to binding affinity and cooperative effects from those contributing to binding
affinity only, will permit the design of ligands that elicit variable
cooperative effects and are able to better modulate protein function.

Cells are not bags containing different biological macromolecules performing
their function in a random and chaotic fashion. On the contrary, biological
macromolecules are tightly regulated by an intricate net of interactions.
Different macromolecules communicate with each other through interactions among
themselves or with small molecules. These interactions provide the foundation to
all the regulatory processes found within living organisms. The long-range
objective of this project is to develop a fundamental description of protein
interactions and the mechanisms by which these interactions elicit the responses
existing at the core of signaling processes.