* 0131931
* Comparative Social Biology of Sponge-Dwelling Snapping Shrimp (Synalpheus)
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* J. Emmett Duffy, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Michael D. Beecher
* 03/31/2006
* USD 250,438.00

COMPARATIVE SOCIOBIOLOGY OF SPONGE-DWELLING SNAPPING
SHRIMPS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;J. Emmett Duffy&lt;br/&gt;School of Marine
Science&lt;br/&gt;The College of William and
Mary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Eusociality, characterized by cooperative
colonies in which most members sacrifice individual reproduction, has long
presented a fundamental paradox for behavioral and evolutionary ecology.
According to Hamilton's rule, social behaviors can be understood as solutions to
challenges imposed by the environment mediated through the genetic relatedness
of interactants. A full understanding of social evolution thus entails an
accounting of the genetic relationships among group members, the basic
ecological constraints on populations, and some means of assessing the
evolutionary consequences of their interplay. This proposal employs
complementary genetic, behavioral, and comparative approaches to assess the
interplay between kin structure and social biology, and some of its
macroevolutionary consequences, in fostering social evolution in the species-
rich and socially diverse sponge-dwelling shrimps (Synalpheus), one of the rare
animal groups in which eusociality has arisen repeatedly among closely related
species. The project has two principal objectives:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1)
Assess the influence of breeding system, and consequent genetic structure of
colonies, on behavioral dynamics and the maintenance of extreme reproductive
skew in two independently evolved, and demographically divergent, eusocial
shrimp species Synalpheus regalis and S. chacei. This will be accomplished by
genotyping individuals from field-collected colonies of each species at eight
microsatellite loci, and experimentally assessing levels of conflict and
cooperation among individuals in captive colonies in the laboratory. This
research will characterize the distributions of relatedness, aggressive
dominance, mating success, and parentage among individuals within colonies, and
of relatedness within vs. among colonies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) The longer-
term evolutionary consequences of these social dynamics will be approached in a
comparative framework by exploiting the social diversity among species of
Synalpheus, building on the recently completed phylogenetic reconstruction of
the sponge-dwelling clade. Phylogenetically independent contrasts will test the
association, predicted by theory and empirical studies of social insects, among
colony size, reproductive skew, and caste differentiation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide a new window on the origin,
adaptive significance, and macroevolutionary consequences of eusociality in a
unique, socially diverse clade of non-insect invertebrates, and will contribute
to evaluating the generality at a broad taxonomic level of theories for the
evolution of advanced animal societies based primarily on data from social
insects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;