* 0131326
* Structure-Function Studies of Lipid Binding Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2005
* David Bernlohr, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 02/28/2005
* USD 374,005.00

The prevalence of water-insoluble compounds in biological systems has driven the
evolutionary development of families of hydrophobic ligand carrier proteins.
Just as there are carrier proteins that function to solubilize and deliver
hydrophobic molecules in the circulatory system (e.g., lipoprotein particles,
albumin, etc.), there exists a homologous family of proteins that are found
intracellularly. These proteins, which have been termed the fatty acid binding
proteins (FABPs), are responsible for the solubilization and delivery of
hydrophobic ligands within a cell. The FABPs bind most avidly to fatty acids and
retinoids. The signature feature of all FABPs is a Beta-barrel fold forming an
internal, water-filled cavity that serves as the ligand-binding domain. A 1:1
non-covalent complex is typically formed between the protein and the ligand and
once inside, the ligand is sequestered from the external milieu. The adipocyte
FABP (FABP4) has been studied in detail as a model for structure-function
relationships of the fatty acid binding proteins. The investigators hypothesize
that FABP4 functions to donate insoluble long chain fatty acids to acyl CoA
synthetase producing a soluble lipid (acyl CoA). To test this hypothesis, they
will: (I) evaluate the effect of FABP4 on the catalytic activity and ligand
binding properties of very long chain acyl CoA synthetase and (ii) examine the
physical interaction of FABP4 with the acyl CoA synthetase using
microcalorimetry and map the interaction site(s).&lt;br/&gt;