* 0131048
* Acquisition of a Pulsed Fourier Transform Electron Paramagnetic Resonance Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2005
* Hilary Godwin, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Joan M. Frye
* 01/31/2005
* USD 325,338.00

With this award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities
(CRIF) Program, the Department of Chemistry at Northwestern University will
acquire a Pulsed Fourier Transform Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR)
Spectrometer. The new instrument will support research in the following areas:
a) mapping electronic coupling within photogenerated radical ion pairs at fixed
distances using time-resolved EPR spectroscopy (Wasielewski); b) direct
observation of guanine cation radical in duplex DNA (Lewis); c) time-resolved
applications in energy conversion chemistry: finding and identifying electron
traps at photo-active interfaces (Hupp); d) time-resolved EPR of electron
transfer within protein complexes (Hoffman); e) EPR studies on cobalt
(II)-substituted zinc-binding domains (Godwin); and f) EPR studies of monoamine
oxidase (Silverman). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An electron paramagnetic resonance
(EPR) spectrometer is an instrument used to obtain information about the
molecular and electronic structure of molecules. It may also be used to obtain
information about the lifetimes of free radicals which are often essential for
the initiation of tumor growth and/or a variety of chemical reactions. These
studies will have an impact in a number of areas, in particular the chemistry of
photofunctional materials and biophysical chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;