* 0131776
* Controlling the Pathway of Electron Transfer in Bacterial Reaction Centers
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2007
* Su Lin, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/28/2007
* USD 720,000.00

Light-initiated electron transfer within the photosynthetic reaction center is
the primary event in solar energy conversion by photosynthetic organisms. The
core of the photosynthetic reaction center from purple nonsulfur bacteria is a
quasi-symmetric heterodimer, providing two potential pathways for transmembrane
electron transfer. Past measurements have demonstrated that only one of the two
pathways (the A-side) is used to any significant extent upon excitation with red
or near infrared light. Recently, Dr. Woodbury has found that excitation with
blue light into the Soret band of the reaction center gives rise to
photochemistry along the alternate or B-side pathway apparently within a 200 fs
laser pulse. The spectral signature of the states formed, and their long
(nanosecond) lifetime at low temperature, are characteristic of charge separated
states involving the anion of the B-side bacteriopheophytin. This opens the door
to a whole new array of measurements attempting to understand both the mechanism
and the function of B-side electron transfer in the reaction center. This
research project centers around the interplay between the free energy of the
charge separated states, which can be varied over a large range using mutants
that alter the P/P+ potential, and the energy of the photon used in excitation.
Preliminary data suggests that the more favorable the energetics of B-side
electron transfer, the lower the energy of the photon that is required to
initiate B-side transfer. The physiological function of B-side electron transfer
is not yet known. One possibility is that it could rapidly quench the excited
states formed from blue or UV light absorption by reaction center cofactors and
surrounding tryptophan residues. Several experiments involving mutants that
disrupt B-side transfer are planned to see if reaction centers are more
susceptible to UV and blue light damage without functional B-side
photochemistry. Finally, in order to generate a series of new mutants with
spectrally defined functional properties (loss or A-side electron transfer,
increased B-side transfer, etc.), Dr. Woodbury will develop a directed evolution
methodology that utilizes entirely optical means of both screening and selecting
cells from a large library of reaction center mutants.&lt;br/&gt;