* 0131111
* Bubbles, Drops, and Vortices in Cryogenic Liquids
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Gary Williams, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 12/31/2005
* USD 375,000.00

This condensed matter physics project investigates the properties of transient,
laser-produced bubbles that are created in liquids such as water, ethanol, and
liquid argon. As the bubble collapses, the gas inside is compressed and heated,
giving rise to emission of a fast pulse of luminescence at the minimum-radius
collapse point. The spectrum of the luminescence will be measured, and high-
resolution studies of the bubble dynamics near the collapse point should lead to
a detailed understanding of the nature of the light-emission mechanism and its
relation to sonoluminescence. A second area of interest is superfluid fog
generated by an ultrasonic transducer under the surface of liquid helium. These
novel aerosols will be investigated to examine if there are significant
differences from normal fogs. Sound attenuation measurements in the fog will be
undertaken to examine the coupling to the superfluid second-sound mode in the
droplets. The third area of interest is the superfluid phase transition of
submonolayer helium-4 films adsorbed on a new mesoporous silica ceramic
substrate known as MCM-41. This substrate has long uniform cylindrical pores,
and materials can be fabricated with pore diameters between 18 and 100
Angstroms. This will allow theories of the superfluid transition involving
quantized vortex pairs to be be tested, and should allow a measurement of the
vortex core size in these submonolayer superfluids. This research will
contribute to the Ph.D. training of several graduate students. They will learn a
broad range of skills useful in many different fields of science and technology,
including cryogenic techniques, acoustics methods, and applications of lasers
and optical spectroscopy.

This condensed matter physics project involves three different activities. In
one, a pulsed laser focused to a point is used to create bubbles in liquids such
as water, ethanol, and liquid argon. As the bubble collapses, the gas inside is
compressed and heated, giving rise to a fast pulse of light. The spectrum of the
light will be measured, and the bubble motion will be studied. This will allow
an understanding of the nature of the light emission, and how it is related to a
similar phenomenon known as sonoluminescence. In the second project, the
properties of fogs generated in the vapor above liquid helium will be
investigated. Since the droplets making up the fog are superfluid, this system
is different from ordinary fogs. The attenuation of sound in the fog will be
measured, to examine if there is any coupling to the superfluid waves in the
droplets. In the final project superfluid properties of very thin helium films
(less than an atomic layer in thickness) will be studied. These films are
adsorbed on a new type of substrate, a silica ceramic, which has long
cylindrical pores, with very fine pore diameters that are only tens of atoms in
diameter. The work will test theories of the superfluid properties in the
ceramic, and will allow fundamental parameters of the superfluid to be measured.
This research will contribute to the Ph.D. training of several graduate
students. They will learn a broad range of skills useful in many different
fields of science and technology, including cryogenics, acoustics, and
applications of lasers and optics.