* 0131229
* Linking Ecology, Physiology and Human Land Use: The Impact of Environmental Stress on Disease Susceptibility in Larval Amphibians
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Peter Hudson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 07/31/2004
* USD 176,164.00

Understanding the role that infectious diseases play in natural communities is a
key question in community ecology. Host-pathogen interactions, perhaps more so
than other types of interactions (e.g. predator-prey &amp; competition), are
largely determined by the physiological condition of the host. To gain a
predictive understanding of the impact that infection may have on host
population dynamics requires a detailed understanding of host physiology and
immunology. Freshwater wetlands are primary habitat for snails serving as
intermediate hosts for a variety of helminthic parasites including digenetic
trematodes. Trematodes are responsible for hundreds of thousands of cases of
human disease each year (e.g., schistosomiasis) and have been linked with
developmental abnormalities in amphibians. Amphibian deformities, in particular
those related to limb development, have now been reported throughout North
America. The widespread nature and apparent increase in the prevalence of
deformities has lead to substantial interest from scientists and the general
public. While preliminary laboratory experiments suggest that infection by
trematodes can cause some deformities, researchers have pointed out that there
is a need for more fieldwork to evaluate the association in nature. In addition,
some research has suggested that land use changes in wetlands, such as increased
eutrophication and altered hydrology, may precipitate outbreaks of deformities
by increasing abundance of intermediate hosts (snails). We propose to examine
the role of the host's hormonal response to land use changes (environmental
stress) in terms of how it can regulate disease susceptibility. The proposed
project will complement an ongoing study examining how land use changes affect
snail (intermediate host) abundance and therefore influence amphibian infection
rates. This proposal will add significantly to our knowledge of how free-living
animals respond physiologically to anthropogenic land use changes, and the data
generated on host susceptibility will add significantly to the development of a
predictive model for disease outbreak in this host/parasite system.