* 0131928
* Biodiversity and Ecosystem Informatics - BDEI - Overcoming nomenclatural complications while searching in a distributed database environment:  One step toward true interoperability
* CSE,EIA
* 09/01/2001,02/28/2003
* Steven Shattuck, Academy of Natural Sciences Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Brandt
* 02/28/2003
* USD 100,000.00

EIA-0131928&lt;br/&gt;Lane, Meredith &lt;br/&gt;Academy of Natural Sciences -
Philadelphia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BDEI: Overcoming nomenclatural
complications while searching in a distributed database environment: One step
toward true
interoperability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
biological information content growing exponentially on the Web, the average
member of the public&lt;br/&gt;(and for that matter, many scientists) may not be
able to access all of the high-quality information actually&lt;br/&gt;available
and/or that they need because organisms are often known by more than one
scientific name (many of which will perhaps be unknown to the user), and
different information providers may use different names for the same
organism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Important international projects such as the
Global Biodiversity Information Facility (see www.gbif.org)&lt;br/&gt;have
identified organism names as the core means for interconnecting databases from
different domains&lt;br/&gt;(e.g., specimen databases with GenBank or ecological
databases, etc.) because the organism name is&lt;br/&gt;highly likely to be the
only database field common to both databases. True interoperability
among&lt;br/&gt;databases is required to answer complex biological questions.
This goal cannot be reached without a&lt;br/&gt;mechanism to allow access to all
available information on a particular organism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Therefore,
a foundation component in the development of the GBIF and associated national
efforts&lt;br/&gt;must be a means to provide a list of all the names that should
be searched for a given organism. The need&lt;br/&gt;for this component of
interoperability was clearly recognized by the proposers of GBIF, but to date
there&lt;br/&gt;have been no efforts specifically directed at providing software
tools to make it possible. In this project,&lt;br/&gt;we will implement such a
mechanism. It will allow even the most naive Web user to obtain
biological&lt;br/&gt;information without needing to understand the complexities
of nomenclature and associated arcana. To do&lt;br/&gt;this, we will develop a
query interface/portal understandable to any user; a set of standards and
protocols for representing search requests (which will be sent as a URL) and
result sets (which will be returned as XML using HTTP) that is platform-
independent; and a set of platform-specific translators and search routines for
retrieving data from participating&lt;br/&gt;nomenclatural data
providers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;