* 0131314
* Molecular Mechanisms of Pharyngeal Endoderm Evolution in Vertebrates
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2008
* Nancy Manley, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 05/31/2008
* USD 520,000.00

0131314&lt;br/&gt;Manley&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During embryonic development the
pharyngeal endoderm forms a series of pharyngeal pouches in many, if not all
chordates. The pharyngeal pouches develop into a diverse array of specialized
structures in different organisms. For example, the pharyngeal pouches form
gills in many invertebrate and vertebrate species, while in terrestrial animals,
the pouches form pharyngeal organs, such as the thymus, but do not form gills.
Recent work from the P.I.'s laboratory suggests that in mice, Hoxa3 expression
in the 3rd pharyngeal pouch endoderm is required for both initiation of thymus
organogenesis and suppression of gill formation. Hoxa3 is also required to up
regulate the Pax1/9 genes in the 3rd pouch endoderm. The proposed experiments
will test the hypothesis that the expression of Hoxa3 in the pharyngeal pouch
endoderm in higher vertebrates modifies Pax1/9 gene expression, resulting in the
development of different pharyngeal pouch-derived structures in different
vertebrate species. The proposed studies will use 3 different vertebrate
species, the lamprey, zebrafish, and mouse, representing a range of vertebrate
body plans. Specific aim 1 will determine whether Hox3 and Pax1/9 gene
expression patterns in the pharyngeal region in these three species can be
correlated with differences in pharyngeal morphogenesis and organogenesis. The
second aim will test whether zfHoxa3a is required for thymus formation in the
zebrafish, as it is in mouse. In aim 3, misexpression of the lamprey, zebrafish,
and mouse Hox3 genes will test whether Hox3 proteins from all of these species
can induce an ectopic thymus and/or block gill formation. The fourth aim will
use gene targeting to "knock-in" the lamprey Hox3 and zebrafish zfHoxa3a gene
sequences to the mouse Hoxa3 locus, thereby determining to what extent these
genes can substitute functionally for mouse Hoxa3. The experiments in Aims 3 and
4 will test whether there has been an acquisition of new functions by the Hoxa3
protein during vertebrate evolution. The results from the proposed studies will
provide evidence for possible mechanisms by which vertebrates have evolved
"newer" functions, such as adaptive immunity, from evolutionarily ancient
embryonic structures. In addition, these studies may provide molecular insights
into the loss of gills in air-breathing
vertebrates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;