* 0131355
* Molecular and Genetic Dissection of Hyphal Anastomosis
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2006
* N. Louise Glass, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 04/30/2006
* USD 630,000.00

Filamentous fungi grow by tip extension, branching and hyphal fusion to form a
hyphal network that makes up a fungal individual. Although tip growth and
branching have been extensively studied in filamentous fungi, essentially
nothing is known about the mechanism of hyphal fusion or the function of the
formation of a hyphal network. Studies by this laboratory on the hyphal fusion
process using live cell imaging and confocal microscopy in the filamentous
fungus, Neurospora crassa, have revealed a complex and carefully regulated
biological process with obvious consequences to the fungal individual. Hyphal
fusion is a way to increase cytoplasmic flow and interconnectedness of hyphae,
which may be important in intra-hyphal communication that influences hyphal
pattern formation and developmental processes. Hyphal fusion in filamentous
fungi is comparable to cell fusion events in other organisms, such as
fertilization events between egg and sperm and somatic cell fusion events that
result in syncytia, such as myoblast fusion during muscle differentiation. The
hyphal fusion process must be carefully regulated because inappropriate cell
wall breakdown would result in lysis of the hyphae. N. crassa is the best
filamentous fungus to assess the process and function of hyphal fusion in
filamentous fungi because of its tractability for live cell imaging techniques
(http://www.neurospora.com/), full genome sequence information (http://www-
genome.wi.mit.edu/annotation/fungi/neurospora/), the availability of hyphal
fusion mutants, and the ease of genetic and molecular techniques. Preliminary
results indicate that a series of signaling events are required for hyphal
fusion, one of which is mediated by a map kinase pathway. Hyphal fusion mutants
show physiological and developmental defects, suggesting that the failure to
form a hyphal network has physiological consequences. The objectives of this
project are to characterize hyphal fusion mutants using a combination of live
cell imaging via confocal microscopy, and genetic and biochemical analysis to
elucidate the mechanism of self-signaling, polarization and membrane fusion. The
ultimate goal is to understand how the formation of the hyphal network allows a
fungal individual to perform the physiological and developmental processes
required to complete its life cycle. Understanding the hyphal fusion process in
filamentous fungi will not only reveal the function of the formation of the
hyphal network, but will provide a model for cell fusion events in other
eukaryotic organisms.