* 0131935
* Spectroscopic Investigations of Vibrational Potential Energy Surfaces and Molecular Structures in Singlet and Triplet Electronic Excited States
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2007
* Jaan Laane, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 02/28/2007
* USD 491,774.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Proposal : CHE-0131935&lt;br/&gt;PI : Laane,
J.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; There has been great interest in potential energy
surfaces (PESs) in recent years, particularly in those for electronic excited
states, since they can provide a wealth of data on molecular structure, bonding,
and photochemical and photophysical processes. However, very few experimental
PESs, rigorously determined from vibronic data, have been reported. Several
different spectroscopic methods will be used to map the vibronic energy levels
for structurally and conformationally important vibrations. The computational
methodology for kinetic and potential energy calculations will be applied to
determine the PESs of several types of electronic excited states in several
different kinds of molecules. For singlet states (generally S1) laser induced
fluorescence (LIF) spectroscopy of jet-cooled molecules and ultraviolet
absorption spectroscopy will be utilized to establish the vibronic levels while
far-infrared and Raman spectra will provide the complementary ground state data.
A time of flight mass spectrometer, which allows mass resolution, will be used
for ionization detection and resonance enhanced multiphoton ionization (REMPI)
studies. This will allow access to non-fluorescing states and to transitions
forbidden in one-photon LIF studies. Two-color experiments will be carried out
to study higher singlet states. Considerable use will be made of sensitized
phosphorescence excitation spectroscopy (SPES) for studying triplet states. Aryl
ketones will be thoroughly investigated as these molecules show strong
phosphorescence and are thus ideal for SPES studies of triplet states. The
triplet and higher singlet states for molecules in the indan family will also be
investigated. Several molecules with unusual bonding properties, such as the
anomeric effect, will also be studied in ground and excited states in order to
ascertain the effect of the electronic transitions on the bonding and
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spectroscopic methods using lasers for the
absorption of light will be used to study the structures and energies of
molecules in both their normal and "excited" forms. The excited forms are
produced when electrons are excited by light to attain higher energies.
Photochemistry, such as photosynthesis, typically occurs only after molecules
have been excited in this manner. The goal of this research is to characterize
the excited molecules and to compare them to their normal forms. The results of
this work can prove beneficial to a variety of areas based on the interaction of
light with molecules, such as the development of solar energy devices or the
design of photochemical reactions. Students and postdoctoral research associates
will participate in this research and will receive training to prepare them for
entry into the scientific/technical workforce.&lt;br/&gt;