* 0131348
* Plant PolIII Biochemistry
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2006
* William Folk, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Ming Lei
* 01/31/2006
* USD 330,000.00

Elegant studies of human and yeast RNA polymerase III (Pol III) transcription
machineries have contributed extensively to our current understanding of the
mechanism and regulation of gene expression. In contrast, the plant Pol III
machinery is virtually undescribed. An in vitro transcription system from whole
cell extracts of Arabidopsis thaliana suspension cell cultures has been
developed that will permit purification and biochemical analysis of the plant
Pol III machinery. This project has the following objectives:1) To assemble a
biochemically defined in vitro plant Pol III transcription system capable of
transcribing tRNA and other genes; of particular interest are the plant TFIIIC
subunits, which are highly divergent between yeast and human, and that differ
dramatically in structure and the capacity to acetylate chromatin; and 2) To
define whether the plant TFIIIC has histone acetyltransferase (HAT) activity and
if so, to determine whether such activity is important for Pol III dependent
gene transcription in vitro and in vivo. Approaches that will be used include:
1) capturing the Pol III machinery on tRNALys1 gene fragments immobilized on
magnetic beads; and 2) expressing and purifying Pol III machinery from
transformed suspension cells. Components will be reconstituted into a robust in
vitro system capable of transcribing tRNA genes. A variety of functional assays,
in combination with reconstitution experiments, will be used to define the
minimal plant Pol III machinery, and the properties conferred on the complex by
accessory factors. Components of the plant Pol III and transcription factor
complexes will be assayed for HAT activity, known to be important for modifying
chromatin. If HAT activity is found, the responsible proteins and domains will
be identified, mutated to eliminate the HAT activity, and the mutated proteins
expressed in transgenic A. thaliana to assess the consequences of HAT
inactivation on in vivo activity of Pol III and on plant growth and
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this project are expected to
significantly advance current understanding of gene expression in plants and
other eukaryotes, supplying important information and tools for both further
basic and applied research in the plant sciences. The project will support
educational experiences for undergraduates and for a postdoctoral fellow, and
will contribute to the environment responsible for training students for
professional careers. These opportunities will be enhanced by institutional and
other federal programs also intended to increase the diversity of
underrepresented scientists in the workforce.