* 0131285
* What Do Lake Malawi Cichlid Fishes See?
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2002,12/31/2006
* Karen Carleton, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Robert Paul Malchow
* 12/31/2006
* USD 286,972.00

&lt;br/&gt;The cichlid fishes of the Great Lakes of East Africa are a classic
example of rapid adaptive radiation. Hundreds of species of these fishes have
evolved from a common ancester in the past one million years. Their rapid
speciation is thought to result in part from sexual selection, in which female
mate preferences drive the evolution of male color patterns. As male color
patterns change to better match the preferences of females, fish with these new
color patterns become new species which no longer interbreed with fish having
the old color patterns. In order to understand how this happens, we need to know
how cichlids choose mates. This requires an understanding of t he visual
sensitivities of these fish and whether visual sensitivities differ among
species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine several aspects of
visual communication in the cichlid fishes of Lake Malawi, Africa. First, we
will quantify the diversity of visual sensitivities in a broad range of cichlid
species by sequencing the five cone opsin genes and measuring their relative
expression levels in the retina. We already know that some Malawi cichlids are
sensitive to ultraviolet wavelengths while others are not. This survey will
determine whether ultraviolet sensitivity is widespread in this group and how it
evolved. Second, we will measure the hues of cichlid color patterns as compared
to their natural environment. This will determine whether color patterns also
contain significant contributions in the ultraviolet part of the spectrum.
Third, we will relate the visual system and color patterns in order to determine
the conspicuousness of the color patterns as seen"through cichlid eyes." These
studies will be related to ecological or behavioral factors to determine whether
color usage is modified in different localities or under different social
situations. We will also examine the importance of water quality and optical
transmission for visual communication. Lake Malawi has historically been one of
the clearest lakes in the world. Maintaining its clarity may be an important
factor in preserving the spectacular diversity of these
fishes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed effort will provide important
scientific contributions to our understanding of how species diversity arises
and is maintained. In addition, this work will integrate biological and physical
approaches to understanding visual communication. It will also support the
scientific training of a minority graduate student who will be fully funded by
this project. &lt;br/&gt;