* 0131573
* Numerical Simulations of Topological Defects in Liquid Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2002,12/31/2005
* George Loriot, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 12/31/2005
* USD 294,000.00

This award supports theoretical and computational research and education on
topological defects in liquid crystals. The PI seeks to elucidate the structure
and dynamics of topological defects in liquid crystals with the use of large-
scale numerical simulations of phenomenological liquid models of liquid
crystals. Topological defects will be created by molecular dynamics simulations
of rapid quenches to ordered phases of systems consisting of 500,000 or more
liquid crystalline molecules. A variety of methods will be used to locate
defects, including finite element analysis and visualization techniques.
Particular attention will be paid to the core structure of defects and the
effects of hydrodynamic flow on the dynamics of the defects. Students will be
trained in the arts of parallel programming, scientific simulation, and
visualization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education on liquid crystals which are materials with properties intermediate
between those of solids and liquids. They are important for technological
applications such as display devices, and layered liquid crystalline structures
are relevant to biological research on lipid bilayers. The phase diagrams of
liquid crystalline materials are particularly rich, as is their topological
defect structure. Topological defects play an important role in a range of
condensed matter physics phenomena including equilibration processes, certain
phase transitions, and confined systems. The PI seeks to elucidate the structure
and dynamics of topological defects in liquid crystals with the use of large-
scale numerical simulations of phenomenological liquid models of liquid
crystals. Topological defects will be created by molecular dynamics simulations
of rapid quenches to ordered phases of systems consisting of 500,000 or more
liquid crystalline molecules. A variety of methods will be used to locate
defects, including finite element analysis and visualization techniques.
Particular attention will be paid to the core structure of defects and the
effects of hydrodynamic flow on the dynamics of the defects. Students will be
trained in the arts of parallel programming, scientific simulation, and
visualization&lt;br/&gt;