* 0131647
* Developmental Regulation of Axon Pathway Formation
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Christine Beattie, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 02/28/2006
* USD 506,000.00

Beattie Lay Summary Movement is controlled by connections established during
development between motor neurons and muscle cells. Motor neurons extend
processes called axons out from their cell bodies, which leave the spinal cord
and extend through the developing embryo to contact the appropriate muscle
fibers. This process, referred to as axon guidance, is a fundamental component
of development and is essential for survival. Axon guidance is highly precise
with growth cones, the growing tip of axons, making few navigational errors as
they extend along stereotyped routes or pathways. While numerous examples of
axon guidance events in vertebrates have been described at the cellular level,
less is known about the molecules that control these events. The goal of this
research is to elucidate the molecules and mechanisms that control motor axon
guidance in vertebrates. To this end, the experiments outlined in this proposal
focus on mutations that disrupt motor axon guidance in the embryonic zebrafish.
Zebrafish is an excellent model system for studying vertebrate motor axon
guidance due to its relatively simple nervous system, the ability to study
embryos at early stages of development, and the capability to induce, recover,
and clone mutations. The mutation stumpy dramatically and specifically affects
the ability of motor axons to reach their target muscles. Instead of progressing
along their pathways, motor axons in stumpy mutants stop at intermediate
targets; places along the pathway where growth cones normally pause, branch, or
turn. Stumpy functions to enable growth cones to proceed past intermediate
targets and to reach their target muscle fibers. A series of genetic, cellular,
and molecular approaches will elucidate what kind of molecule stumpy is and how
it is functioning. Moreover, another mutation has been identified that interacts
with stumpy at the genetic level indicating that these genes work together to
promote normal motor axon guidance. Studying these mutations will provide novel
insights into the genetic control of vertebrate motor axon guidance and will
identify molecules that function in this essential developmental process.