* 0131557
* Physiology and Molecular Ecology of Microbial Filamentous Sulfur Formation
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2005
* Carl Wirsen, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* William E. Winner
* 02/28/2005
* USD 260,000.00

In recent years, we have discovered an unusual marine bacterium that oxidizes
hydrogen sulfide into a novel filamentous form of elemental sulfur, while fixing
CO2 into cell material. Phylogenetic studies have placed this organism into the
genus Arcobacter of the epsilon subdivision of the Proteobacteria. Microbial
filamentous sulfur production occurs in high fluid flow marine sulfidic
environments, including coastal salt marsh creeks, sulfidic sediments, and
marine hydrothermal vents worldwide. During the previous research period, we
were able to cultivate this filament-producing organism from coastal sediments
(coastal strain putatively named "Candidatus Arcobacter sulfidicus") and deep-
sea hydrothermal environments, and have investigated the physiology, morphology
and phylogeny of this interesting group.&lt;br/&gt; The overall goal of the
present project will be to expand studies on the microbial ecology of
filamentous sulfur formation. So far, little is known of the abundance,
distribution, diversity, and function of "Candidatus Arcobacter sulfidicus"-like
organisms in situ. Abundance and distribution will be assessed in environmental
samples by employing fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) with existing and
newly developed fluorescently labeled oligonucleotides of different specificity
targeting the 16S rRNA. Genomic DNA and RNA will be extracted from sulfidic
marine and hydrothermal environments for diversity analyses using denaturing
gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE), small-subunit rRNA gene cloning and
sequencing. These data will form the basis for the design of more refined
group-, species-, and strain-specific 16S rRNA probes. Microelectrode
measurements will be used in concert with FISH to measure relevant
physicochemical parameters in laboratory and environmental samples. "Candidatus
Arcobacter sulfidicus" is likely to fix CO2 by an alternative pathway other than
the Calvin-Bassham-Benson cycle based on 1) the absence of Rubisco, a key enzyme
of a metabolic pathway used by many bacteria and green plants for incorporating
CO2 into cell material, and 2) the small d13C fractionation by the cells. Thus,
this organism seems to be the first colorless sulfur-oxidizing
chemolithoautotrophic bacterium that does not use the widespread Calvin-Bassham-
Benson pathway for carbon fixation. This is a finding of evolutionary
significance and we propose to elucidate the pathway in our model coastal
strain. Evidence also suggests that this organism is capable of fixing nitrogen
and this will be confirmed in additional studies.&lt;br/&gt; The overall
significance of this research lies in the characterization of the parameters and
mechanisms by which this unique process of autotrophic sulfide oxidation occurs,
as well as the abundance, distribution and genotypic diversity of the
responsible microbes in a number of different environments. Finally, the results
will enhance our knowledge of the physiology and ecology of a novel, and
heretofore-unconsidered component of the sulfur cycle. Filamentous sulfur
formation may be an important process at hydrothermal vents, extending into the
shallow subsurface biosphere and driven by inorganic nutrients alone (i.e. H2S
and CO2, N2).&lt;br/&gt;