* 0131221
* Role of TOR Signaling in Mitochondrial Metabolism
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2007
* Edmund (Ted) Powers, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 05/31/2007
* USD 344,750.00



The primary objective of the proposed research is to further our understanding
of the mechanisms by which the highly conserved TOR (Target Of Rapamycin)
signaling pathway regulates cell growth in eukaryotic organisms. This pathway
was discovered by the action of the antibiotic rapamycin, a potent immune
suppressor, which targets the large, evolutionarily conserved TOR kinase.
Insight into the function of this pathway has come from recent studies of the
simple eukaryote, S. cerevisiae, where it has been shown that TOR controls the
expression of genes involved in several essential nutrient-responsive
biosynthetic pathways. In particular, TOR regulates the expression of a concise
cluster of genes (termed RTG-target genes) that encode mitochondrial and
peroxisomal enzymes whose activities are required for the de novo biosynthesis
of glutamate and glutamine. The RTG-target genes are also regulated by a
mitochondria-to-nucleus signaling pathway, termed the retrograde response
pathway, that is induced when mitochondrial respiratory function is impaired.
The aims of this project are three-fold. First, the pathway by which TOR
regulates RTG target gene expression will be elucidated. Research underlying
this project has determined that TOR acts in part by regulating the
nucleocytoplasmic localization of a transcription factor complex, composed of
the Rtg1 and Rtg3 proteins. Thus, the research will examine a number of proteins
that may provide a link between TOR and this important regulatory step. Second,
functional genomic approaches will be used to determine the extent of cross talk
and/or overlap between TOR and retrograde signaling. Third, novel regulators of
RTG target gene expression will be identified and partitioned into the TOR
and/or retrograde branches of this signaling pathway. Together, these studies
will help elucidate the molecular mechanisms by which TOR regulates the activity
of an essential metabolic pathway. Moreover, we will learn how TOR collaborates
with another important intracellular signaling mechanism to maintain the normal
metabolic behavior of cells.