* 0131437
* LTREB:  The Ecological and Organismal Basis for Early-Season Life History Variation in Tree Swallows Tachycineta Bicolor
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2008
* David Winkler, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 03/31/2008
* USD 301,150.00

This project is to extend and upgrade a long-term study of the ecology and
reproductive biology of tree swallows (Tachycineta bicolor) nesting near Ithaca,
New York. This population numbers approximately 300 breeding pairs. The
population has been studied for the past fifteen years, and a large number of
techniques have been developed to efficiently explore tree swallow biology and
ecology. Many of these techniques take advantage of the fact that tree swallows
readily nest in artificial nest-boxes. Like many other songbirds, tree swallows
have about a 50% annual survival rate, so a five year study can sample many
birds during their entire reproductive lifetimes. Tree swallows are obligate
aerial insectivores. Thus, they are unusually sensitive to short-term changes in
weather, because their prey, flying insects, are unable to fly during cool
temperatures or rain. Previous research has developed the methods for sampling
and analyzing insect availability on a daily basis. One of the principal foci of
the research in Ithaca in the past ten years has been investigating the seasonal
decline of clutch size. Earlier laying females lay larger clutches, and they pay
no measurable cost for laying earlier. Tree swallows across North America have
advanced their date of laying, apparently in response to global climate change,
and understanding the determinants and consequences of lay-date variation is
thus of both basic and applied interest.

The current project would attempt to answer three related questions: 1) How does
variation in insect abundance and weather affect the lay-dates of individual
swallows? 2) Does variation in flight performance correlate with variations in
lay-date and chick-provisioning performance? 3) What are the consequences of
short-term variation in weather and food supply both in terms of organismal
biology and breeder fitness? Flight performance is clearly a critical trait for
an aerial insectivore, and it will be evaluated in a Flight Performance Test
Tunnel that is already constructed and in need of only slight modifications.
Chick-provisioning performance will be assessed through a series of detailed
behavioral observations coupled with samples of the food being delivered to the
chicks collected in a specially developed trap. Physiological health and stress
will be evaluated with repeated measurements of blood characteristics.

This project would bring a new level of detailed measurements to a long-term
study that has proved its worth both in basic research output and in education
of students at all levels. By studying swallow reactions to the dynamic weather
conditions of a temperate ecosystem, we can better understand the relationships
between an animal's biology and its environment, both today and in the past, and
make better predictions about how environmental changes will affect animal
populations.