* 0131958
* Biodiversity and Ecosystem Informatics - BDEI:  Designing an Infrastructure for Heterogeneity of Ecosystem Data, Collaborators and Organizations
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2004
* Geoffrey Bowker, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Brandt
* 08/31/2004
* USD 114,907.00

EIA-0131958&lt;br/&gt;Bowker, Geoffrey&lt;br/&gt;University of California - San
Diego&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BDEI: Designing an
Infrastructure for Heterogeneity in Ecosystem Data, Collaborators and
Organizations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biodiversity and ecosystems data are currently
being gathered in a large range of formats by a&lt;br/&gt;constellation of
loosely connected private, government and not-for-profit agencies. The normal
response&lt;br/&gt;to this double heterogeneity has been the development and
enforcement of metadata (data about data)&lt;br/&gt;standards; in this response
one tries to abstract data away from its organizational context in order
to&lt;br/&gt;render it universally accessible. This project takes the opposite
track, and seeks new ways of grounding&lt;br/&gt;environmental data in its
organizational context in such a way that it can both be used more flexibly
today&lt;br/&gt;and so it can retain its value longer. The hypothesis, based on
the last 25 years of work in the field of&lt;br/&gt;Science Studies, is that
formal data descriptions must be wrapped in informal descriptions in order
to&lt;br/&gt;be useful. The informal description for short-lived data is
provided by face-to-face contact, by&lt;br/&gt;exchanging graduate students,
through conference papers and so forth. It is precisely this layer which
is&lt;br/&gt;lost in highly distributed data collection efforts characteristic
of biodiversity and ecosystem informatics; it&lt;br/&gt;is also this layer which
is lost when data is wrapped in formal metadata and saved to disk. The goal
of&lt;br/&gt;this project is to open up a major new field of database inquiry
tied precisely to the specific problems of&lt;br/&gt;the biodiversity and
ecosystems communities generated by their need for very long lasting and
highly&lt;br/&gt;distributed data. The project will develop into a larger study
of the articulation between metadata and&lt;br/&gt;narrative modes of wrapping
data.&lt;br/&gt;