* 0131425
* Molecular and Cellular Structure of Gap Junctions
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Gina Sosinsky, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 04/30/2006
* USD 390,000.00

The gated connexin channels found in gap junctions regulate communication
between tissue cells. These membrane channels are critical for integrating and
regulating basic cell processes such as metabolic cooperation, ionic
transmission, differentiation and hormonal regulation. Breakdown in gap
junctional communication can lead to developmental defects, abnormal cell
proliferation and failure of tissue regulation as well as physical or
developmental diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The channels consist of a dimer of
two hexamers each called a connexon, of the constituent protein, connexin. These
channels are unique in that when the two hexamers pair up, they self-assemble
into distinct cellular junctional areas that are morphologically distinct. The
connexins are a family of related proteins sharing a common folding motif.
Different connexins are found in the same tissue and different connexins can be
localized to the same gap junctional plaques. In the current structural model of
the protein, the C and N termini are located on the cytoplasmic side of the
membrane and cross the membrane four times in a helical segments. Mutagenesis
studies have indicated that the extracellular domains may contain b sheet
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this research is to image
at the electron microscopic level the molecular structure of gap junction
proteins as well as their arrangements within and between cells. This project is
divided into two parts. Both address organizational principles that determine
not only the molecular structure of connexins but also how these connexins are
organized and interact with other cellular components. This is, in essence, the
cellular structure of connexins.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project
are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) To significantly improve the resolution of the
present 3d molecular structure of the Cx26 channel:&lt;br/&gt;Connexin26 (Cx26)
is the smallest of the gap junction family. This connexin isoform has the
potential for molecular structure determination since it has been hypothesized
that the smaller the carboxy terminus, the tighter the packing and less disorder
within the connexon unit. Using the large gap junction two-dimensional crystals
obtainable from these HeLa Cx26 transfectants, computational methods will be
developed and applied to increase the resolution of the reconstructions. An
approach using single particle/correlation averaging in combination with a
crystallographic analysis will be used in order to circumvent the lattice
disorder inherent in these crystals. Development and application of this
methodology will be useful not only for Cx26 crystals but also for application
to other connexin crystals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) To continue to specifically
label gap junction proteins in situ using photooxidation of either genetically
tagged connexins or specific antibodies and then determine their 3D spatial
arrangements and interactions with other cellular components using fluorescence
photooxidation and electron tomography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential
impact of this project is to advance the present knowledge of connexin channel
structure, cellular organization, assembly and disassembly. Results from these
experiments would impact the interpretation of other channel structures and
understanding of how membrane proteins traffic. These results should also help
to understand the molecular basis of connexin-related
diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;