* 0131166
* Remote Determinants of EF-hand Divalent Ion Affinity
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2006
* John Tanner, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/2006
* USD 315,000.00

The parvalbumins - containing two "EF-hand Ca2+-binding motifs - offer an
attractive system for examining protein-ligand interactions. Despite extensive
homology, parvalbumin (PV) isoforms exhibit disparate metal ion-binding
properties. There is compelling experimental evidence that PV divalent ion
affinity is influenced by structural features outside the EF-hand motifs. The PV
molecule consists of a 70-residue ion-binding domain (the CD-EF domain) and a
40-residue N-terminal AB domain. Others have previously shown that the AB/CD-EF
interaction in pike PV is Ca2+-dependent. This project will extend this
observation, exploring the hypothesis that the AB domain is a primary modulator
of divalent ion-binding behavior. Recombinant AB and CD-EF domains from several
a and b parvalbumin isoforms - and select site-specific variants - will be
purified and characterized. Following examination of the isolated domains, the
energetics of the AB/CD-EF interaction will be delineated in the presence and
absence of divalent ions. These issues will be addressed by diverse methods:
x-ray crystallography, optical spectroscopy, NMR spectroscopy, analytical
ultracentrifugation, surface plasmon resonance, 45Ca2+-binding assays, and
titration and scanning calorimetries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broadly defined,
protein-ligand interactions underlie all aspects of protein function - from
structure to transport to regulation to catalysis. Importantly, the precise
orientation of the coordinating groups in a ligand-binding site can be
influenced by structural reorganization events distant from the ligand-binding
site. These conformationally mediated "action at a distance" phenomena are among
the most intriguing aspects of protein/enzyme action. The parvalbumin molecule -
with its juxtaposition of a single EF-hand domain and an autonomous structural
element - offers an elegant model system for examining the influence of remote
determinants on ligand-binding events and, conversely, the propagation of a
ligand-binding signal to neighboring structural elements. Thus, the relevance of
these studies extends well beyond structure-affinity correlations in EF-hand
proteins.&lt;br/&gt;