* 0131184
* Antimicrobial Peptide Defenses in Amphibian Skin
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Louise Rollins-Smith, Vanderbilt University Medical Center
* Continuing Grant
* Ione Hunt Von Herbing
* 12/31/2005
* USD 460,556.00

Global declines of amphibian populations are a source of great concern. Several
decades ago, Rachel Carson drew the attention of the world to the plight of wild
birds suffering from the effects of DDT. Her book raised the grim prospect of a
"silent spring" without the optimistic choruses of song birds. Today, we are
faced with the prospect of a new silent spring as the world's populations of
colorful and remarkable amphibians continue to decline and even disappear. The
causes of global amphibian declines are unknown. Recent studies have implicated
one or more skin-invasive pathogens in the declines. Among the immune defense
mechanisms used by amphibians is the production of antimicrobial peptides in
specialized granular glands (also called poison glands) in the skin. These
packets of natural antibiotics can be emptied onto the skin when the amphibian
is injured or when danger is sensed. Although the antimicrobial peptides made
and secreted by amphibian skin are thought to play a role in protection from
environmental pathogens, there is very little direct evidence to demonstrate
this. The studies proposed here are designed to test the hypothesis that
antimicrobial peptides produced in the skin are synthesized, processed, stored,
and secreted in sufficient concentrations to play a role in defense of the skin
from pathogens present in the immediate environment of the skin. The project
will address a number of specific questions about these immune defenses and
provide greater insight into this important innate immune defense mechanism. The
first objective is to examine the relative abundance and pattern of secretion of
antimicrobial peptides on the skin surface of model amphibians at rest in
comparison with the levels present following maximal secretion induced by agents
that stimulate the sympathetic nervous system and thus mimic a natural attack by
a predator. This analysis will be accomplished by using mass spectrometry (MS)
in which a highly sophisticated instrument separates individual peptides from a
mixture of peptides based on their unique molecular weights. These studies will
establish reproducible sampling and analysis protocols and provide baseline data
for additional studies. Other experiments are designed to deplete antimicrobial
skin peptides in some frogs and examine the susceptibility of these frogs to
infection by skin pathogens in comparison with other frogs that contain the full
set of skin peptides. The second objective is to study the synthesis of
precursors of antimicrobial peptides in the skin of model amphibians at rest and
following discharge of peptides. The immediate precursors of peptides are
messenger RNAs that have been transcribed from DNA. These studies will examine
the levels of steady state synthesis, and kinetics of induction of new synthesis
following secretion of peptides. They will provide baseline data for studies of
how environmental factors may affect the synthesis of antimicrobial peptides.
The third objective is to examine the effects of cold temperature,
glucocorticoid hormones (stress hormones), and local inflammatory responses on
synthesis and secretion of antimicrobial peptides in the skin. These studies are
designed to determine whether environmental "stressors" may inhibit the natural
production of antimicrobial peptides and thus render the amphibian host more
susceptible to disease.