* 0131764
* Bacterial Reaction Centers with New Photochemical Properties
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2007
* James Allen, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/2007
* USD 570,000.00

In this project, modifications of the photosynthetic reaction center from the
purple bacterium, Rhodobacter sphaeroides, will be designed to incorporate
original oxidation reactions involving the primary electron donor, a
bacteriochlorophyll dimer. This strategy has already been shown to be successful
in elevating the oxidizing capacity of the reaction center, enabling the
oxidation of nearby tyrosine amino acid residues. A variety of techniques such
as vibrational, magnetic resonance, and transient optical spectroscopy will be
employed in the characterization of the modified reaction centers. Specific
goals include: (1) To understand the role of proton transfer in the generation
of amino acid radicals. Recently developed hydrogen abstraction models have
proposed a critical role for protons in the function of tyrosyl radicals. The
involvement of specific protons will be identified by performing measurements on
mutants with alterations of possible proton-accepting amino acid residues. (2)
To incorporate binding sites for manganese compounds that can be oxidized by the
reaction center. Water oxidation in photosystem II takes place at a manganese
cluster that remains a challenging aspect of photosynthesis to understand at the
molecular level. The ability of the highly oxidizing reaction centers to oxidize
manganese at increasingly more complex levels will be characterized. (3) To
increase the yield of electron transfer in the highly oxidizing reaction centers
by replacement of bacteriochlorophyll with chlorophyll in the dimer. The yield
of the modified reaction centers is presently restricted because the
bacteriochlorophyll dimer uses relatively low energy near infrared radiation for
excitation. This limitation will be overcome by incorporation of chlorophyll,
which absorbs higher energy visible radiation, into this site.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In all photosynthetic systems, the primary conversion of
light into chemical energy occurs in pigment-protein complexes. By coupling the
primary process in these complexes to secondary events, the photosynthetic
apparatus is capable of creating energy-rich compounds. Although the specific
pathways vary among organisms, the general pattern of energy conversion is
remarkably conserved, and an understanding of this process serves as the basis
for current designs of artificial systems that mimic the photosynthesis. The
expansion of the capabilities of the reaction center by the design of reactions
involving amino acid radicals, metal complexes, and alternate pigments will not
only provide a novel strategy for studying reactions that are crucial in
photosynthesis and other biological processes, but also will lead to the
development of a well-controlled system for oxidation of specific
substrates.&lt;br/&gt;