* 0131253
* Cloning and Functional Analysis of the Arabidopsis lut1 Locus: A Noval Activity Required for Hydroxylation of Epsilon Ring Carotenoids in Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Dean DellaPenna, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 02/28/2006
* USD 350,000.00

Plants synthesize two major groups of carotenoids: carotenes, which
are&lt;br/&gt;cyclized or uncyclized hydrocarbons (e.g. lycopene and beta
carotene), and&lt;br/&gt;xanthophylls, which are variously oxygenated
derivatives of carotenes (e.g.&lt;br/&gt;lutein and zeaxanthin). Carotene
hydroxylases (OHases) add hydroxyl groups&lt;br/&gt;to the rings of cyclic
carotenes and are essential for the synthesis of all&lt;br/&gt;xanthophylls in
plants. This proposal performs a detailed analysis of&lt;br/&gt;carotene
hydroxylases in plant tissues by isolating genes defining
specific&lt;br/&gt;carotene hydroxylases and modifying the expression of one or
more activity&lt;br/&gt;by mutant analysis. The consequences of such
modifications on carotenoid&lt;br/&gt;and xanthophyll synthesis and composition
in photosynthetic tissues will&lt;br/&gt;provide important insights into the
role of each enzyme in the pathway and&lt;br/&gt;the consequences of pathway
engineering in food crops. Given the importance&lt;br/&gt;of carotenes as
antioxidants in the human diet and the role(s) of&lt;br/&gt;carotenoids in
decreasing the incidence and progression of macular&lt;br/&gt;degeneration,
various cancers and vitamin A deficiency in certain subgroups&lt;br/&gt;of the
global population, a further understanding of the enzymes involved&lt;br/&gt;in
carotenoid and xanthophyll synthesis may have beneficial impacts on
the&lt;br/&gt;overall health of the population.&lt;br/&gt;