* 0131782
* The Mechanism of RNA Binding by the U1A Protein: A Model for Understanding the Kinetics of RNA/Protein Interactions
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Ite Laird-Offringa, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 12/31/2006
* USD 315,000.00

RNA-binding proteins are critically important to many regulatory processes in
the cell. The&lt;br/&gt;largest family of RNA-binding proteins carries one of
more RNA recognition motif domains&lt;br/&gt;(RRMs). RRM-containing proteins
occur in all living organisms, and play a role in most&lt;br/&gt;processes
involving RNA, including splicing, RNA export, translation, and mRNA decay.
U1A&lt;br/&gt;is a spliceosomal protein that carries two RRMs. Its N-terminal
RRM mediates tight and specific&lt;br/&gt;binding to its RNA hairpin target
(U1hpII)in U1 small nuclear RNA. U1A is one of the most&lt;br/&gt;extensively
studied RNA-binding proteins and has been used as a paradigm for specific and
tight&lt;br/&gt;RNA recognition by RRM-type proteins. However, to date the
knowledge of the mechanism of&lt;br/&gt;RNA-binding by U1A and other RNA-binding
proteins has been largely limited to a static&lt;br/&gt;image, in which the
dynamics underlying the interactions are poorly understood. This project
is&lt;br/&gt;aimed at obtaining detailed kinetic insight into the U1A/U1hpII
interaction using powerful state-&lt;br/&gt;of-the-art BIACORE technology to
observe, in real time, the assembly and dissociation of
the&lt;br/&gt;RNA/protein complex. Analysis of the kinetics of the U1A/U1hpII
interaction will help elucidate&lt;br/&gt;the sequence of events that occurs
during binding. More importantly, it will also provide
general&lt;br/&gt;insights into the dynamics of RNA/protein interactions, an
area that has thus far remained largely&lt;br/&gt;unexplored. Knowledge of the
kinetics of RNA/protein interactions is highly relevant,
since&lt;br/&gt;biological systems are dynamic; the rates of binding and release
can affect the sequential&lt;br/&gt;assembly of RNA/protein complexes and the
function and intracellular localization of RNA-&lt;br/&gt;binding proteins, as
well as their ability to compete for binding sites on RNA.