* 0131108
* Lipid Metabolism in the Oyster Protozoan Parasite, Perkinsus Marinus
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2006
* Kimberly Reece, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 02/28/2006
* USD 392,516.00

Diseases caused by parasitic species of the genus, Perkinsus, in bivalve
mollusks are a worldwide problem. The parasite, Perkinsus marinus (Dermo) has
been one of the two most important protozoan parasites causing severe mortality
in the American oyster, Crassostrea virginica, on the east and Gulf coasts since
the 1950s. Although this parasite's host is an ecologically and economically
important aquatic species, previously no information existed on its lipid
metabolism and biosynthesis. A previous NSF award, revealed important
information concerning lipid metabolism in P. marinus in relation to its host.
Some of the important findings are that this parasite has a capability for
phospholipid synthesis similar to the Plasmodium spp. that cause malarial
disease and as most other parasitic protozoans, can acquire and metabolize
exogenous lipids. However, unlike other parasitic protozoans, which rely on
their host for essential lipids, P. marinus is able to synthesize a range of
saturated and unsaturated fatty acids, including the essential fatty acid,
arachidonic acid. No other parasitic protozoans have been reported to have such
a capability. Interestingly, this parasite appears to have different metabolic
phases depending upon whether or not it is associated with its host or not. To
further elucidate the lipid metabolism in this parasite and its relation to the
parasite's development, life cycle completion, disease transmission, and
virulence and pathogenesis of the host, the present project employs advanced
analytical technology and molecular and genomic approaches to test the key
hypotheses built on the previous findings. The study addresses not only basic
lipid metabolism questions with potential application to disease control for
oyster acquaculture production, but to diseases caused by other Perkinsus spp.
in other bivalve species such as clams. An in-depth understanding of the
significance of de novo lipid and fatty acid synthesis in P. marinus may lead to
the development of parasiticidal drugs to control this parasite and other
parasitic protozoans, including those species affecting humans. Lipid
biosynthetic pathways are currently being investigated as potential drug targets
in several protozoan parasites of humans including Plasmodium and Trypanosoma
species. Importantly, this project will provide opportunities to post-graduate,
graduate, undergraduate, and high school students to receive hands-on research
experience and training in marine science in general and lipid biochemistry,
molecular genetics, and parasitology in particular.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;