* 0131328
* Effect of a Unique Maize Defense Proteinase on Caterpillar Midgut Structure
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2003
* Tibor Pechan, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 01/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

When plants are attacked by herbivorous insects, they often respond by producing
proteins that protect them from being eaten. We have shown that a unique enzyme,
a protease, coded for by the gebe mir1, accumulates in certain insect-resistant
corn lines when they are attacked by the fall armyworm caterpillar. We have
transferred the gene, mir1, into other plant cells using genetic engineering
technology. When caterpillars eat these transgenic plant cells, their growth is
retarded by 60 to 80%. It appears that caterpillars feeding on resistant plants
or transgenic plant cells cannot use the nutrients in the plant for growth. Our
hypothesis is that the protease damages the insect gut and prevents normal
nutrient utilization. The purpose of this research project is to determine if
the unique corn protease damages specific structures in the insect gut. To test
this we will make mutations in mir1 that will change the characteristics of the
enzyme. One mutation will eliminate protease activity, the other will remove a
unique region of the enzyme. The mutated forms of mir1 will be transferred to
plant cells. Transgenic plant cells that express mutated proteases will be fed
to caterpillars. Then growth and gut structure of caterpillars fed transgenic
plant cells expressing normal and mutated proteases will be assessed. If the
protease activity is required to retard caterpillar growth and damage gut
structure, then we expect that the normal protease will harm the caterpillars
and the mutated forms will not. In addition, we will make pure preparations of
the normal and mutated proteases by expressing mir1 and its mutated forms in
insect cells. The purified proteases will be directly fed to the caterpillars to
determine if they attack the insect gut. If the unique protease does
specifically attack the insect gut, it may be possible, in the future, to use
mir1 to genetically engineer plants to resist insect feeding.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;