* 0131020
* GerE-dependent Transcription in B. subtilis
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Charles Moran, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 04/30/2005
* USD 370,000.00

As the bacterium Bacillus subtilis differentiates from the vegetative form into
a dormant endospore, complex morphological and physiological changes occur that
require the sequential expression of many genes. During the process, new RNA
polymerase sigma factors appear (sF,sE,sG,sK), displacing one another in a
sequential cascade and conferring on the RNA polymerase a changing specificity
for the recognition of different classes of promoters. This mechanism of
altering transcriptional specificity is a fundamental element in the regulation
of sporulation gene expression. However, during sporulation repressors and
activators control the use of some promoters by RNA polymerase containing the
sporulation-specific sigma factors. GerE is a DNA binding protein that is
required for activation or repression of several specific sK-dependent promoters
during the final stage of endospore development. GerE is the smallest member of
the LuxR-FixJ family, a widespread, large family of transcriptional activators
that includes two-component type response regulators (e.g., DegU, ComA, FixJ,
and BvgA) and activators regulated by low molecular weight cofactors (e.g., LuxR
and MalT). Most members of the LuxR-FixJ family contain an amino terminal
receiver domain linked by a small region to a carboxy-terminal domain that
contains an amino acid sequence similar to the helix-turn-helix (HTH) motif
found in other DNA-binding proteins and RNA polymerase sigma factors. The 74
amino acid sequence of GerE is similar over its entire length to the DNA binding
domain of this protein family, including the HTH motif. Moreover, recently the
structure of GerE has been solved by X-ray crystallography. Therefore, GerE
provides a simple model for studies of transcription activation by this family.
It is not known how GerE stimulates promoter activity. However, the small size
of GerE makes it somewhat surprising that it stimulates transcription from
various positions at different promoters. The mechanism of GerE-dependent
promoter activation will be examined in this project by testing a model in which
two specific surfaces of GerE interact with RNA polymerase during activation of
the cotC and cotX promoters, respectively. Genetic and biochemical approaches
also will be used to test the hypothesis that GerE interacts with sK at some
promoters, and with other subunits of sK RNA polymerase at other promoters to
stimulate transcription. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this project are
expected to yield insights into the mechanism of promoter activation by this
important family of transcription factors found in a wide variety of bacteria.
Because transcription factors play a key role in determining which genes are
active in which cells and at what time, their importance cannot be overstated.
This project will help us understand how they work. &lt;br/&gt;