* 0131726
* Regulation of Somitic Cell Migration by Paraxis
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Alan Rawls, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 06/30/2006
* USD 375,002.00

0131726&lt;br/&gt;Rawls&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In vertebrates, the metameric
pattern of the axial skeleton and peripheral nerves is dependent on the
establishment of the anterior/posterior (A/P) polarity of somites during early
embryogenesis. Individual vertebrae are derived from the anterior and posterior
halves of the sclerotome compartment of adjacent somites. The proper
segmentation of these axial structures is critical to the viability of the
animal. Therefore, determining the molecular basis of A/P polarity is of
fundamental importance. Preliminary studies in Dr. Rawl's laboratory, tracing
cell migration in the presomitic mesoderm of mouse embryos indicates the
presence of active sorting of cells into anterior- and posterior-specific
domains. Similar cell sorting mechanisms have been shown to regulate
compartmental boundaries between segments of the vertebrate hindbrain. The first
aim of this proposal is to perform a detailed analysis of cell sorting in the
presomitic mesoderm and epithelial somite. Cell migration will be examined using
a novel in vivo assay developed in the laboratory for tracing the movement of
cells in the somites of mouse embryos. This technique also will allow for the
comparison of cell migration in wild type embryos to that of existing genetic
mutations that are deficient in A/P polarity. Preliminary studies indicate that
the cell sorting activity is compromised in embryos deficient for paraxis, a
bHLH transcription factor required for proper epithelialization of the somite.
Migration and sorting are dependent on the cell adhesion properties of the
cells. Therefore, the loss of somite epithelialization and increased cell
migration associated with the paraxis mutant are both consistent with a
reduction in the cell adhesiveness of the presomitic cells. The cell adhesion
properties of the mutant cells will be examined using in vitro aggregation
assays and gene expression studies. The specificity of the cell migration
activity will also be assessed by examining cell movement in Dll1 and Lunatic
Fringe embryos. In these mutants A/P polarity is disrupted but epithelialization
occurs normally, Collectively these experiments will provide valuable insight
into a mechanism for regulating spatial identity during somitogenesis.
Examination of targeted null mutations will be used to identify the genes that
regulate this process. Because segmentation and compartmental boundaries are a
common strategy for patterning during development, the information gained from
these experiments can potentially be used to understand other
systems.&lt;br/&gt;