* 0131043
* Organoiron Complexes in Organic Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Anthony Pearson, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 12/31/2004
* USD 390,000.00

The objectives of this work are two fold. 1) Diene-iron tricarbonyl complexes
with appended olefins will be coupled to make spirocyclic compounds. This
coupling reaction allows stereospecific construction of densely functionalized
molecules that contain proximal quaternary centers. This methodology will be
applied to the synthesis of the core structures of the natural products,
stemodinone and aphidicolin. 2) Diene-iron tricarbonyl complexes with proximal
hydroxyl groups will be used in stereoselective intramolecular cyclization
reactions. The diene-iron complex stabilizes cations formed by acid promoted
ionization of the hydroxyl group allowing stereocontrolled intramolecular
cyclizations to be effected. Use of optically pure complexes in these
cyclizations should lead to asymmetric cascade reactions.

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting
the research of Dr. Anthony J. Pearson of the Department of Chemistry at Case
Western Reserve University. Dr. Pearson will explore stereoselective cyclization
reactions of organoiron reagents. The ability to form carbon-carbon bonds in
molecules which are chiral (have two nonsuperimposable mirror images) and make
only one of the two possible forms (a single enantiomer) is one of the most
important problems facing the pharmaceutical industry today. When developed, Dr.
Pearson's work could be applied to the synthesis of natural products such as
stemodinone and aphidicolin. Students trained during the course of this work
will gain skills needed by the pharmaceutical industry which now produces a
number of single enantiomer compounds.