* 0131829
* RUI: Self-organization and the Acquisition, Representation, and Processing of Language
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2003,12/31/2006
* Ping Li, University of Richmond
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher T. Kello
* 12/31/2006
* USD 373,063.00

An ordinary adult speaker has active control of tens of thousands of words in
any given language. Unlike a dictionary that lists words alphabetically, the
mental dictionary organizes words in the mind in complex ways according to their
uses in language, for example, their grammatical and semantic functions. This
research will address how such organization arises in childhood, settles in
adulthood, and sometimes breaks down in disordered minds. The research will
provide an alternative approach to current neural network models of language,
because it aims at developing a cognitively and neuropsychologically plausible
model that relies on self-organizing principles. Self-organization, a dynamic
process of human learning, allows the learner to gather information about the
"input space" (i.e., the limits, constraints, and possibilities of things) and
to continuously organize the information in ways optimal for the task at hand.
Building on Li's developmental lexicon model (DevLex), the new model will
incorporate properties of self-organization, Hebbian learning, lexical co-
occurrence learning, and dynamic growth. These computational properties should
make the model well suited for the study of the human mental lexicon, its
structure, representation, and processing in children, normal adults, second
language learners, and brain-injured patients. The model will attempt to account
for a wide variety of phenomena in language use. In particular, its design
characteristics will permit the evaluation of important problems from a number
of domains: (1) the development of structurally organized representation as a
function of learning the linguistic input, and the impact of the organizational
structure on linguistic generalization (child language acquisition); (2) the
distinct versus integrated nature of bilingual lexicon, and crosslinguistic
differences in bilingual lexical representation and acquisition (bilingual
language processing); (3) the development of lexical ambiguity and grammatical
ambiguity, and the processing of ambiguity in patients (lexical ambiguity
processing); (4) the interaction between orthography, phonology, and semantics
in reading acquisition, and the crosslinguistic differences in normal reading
and developmental dyslexia (normal and impaired reading); and (5) the
acquisition of category-specific representation, and the structure of lesioned
semantic representations in patients (category-specific language impairment).
Results from the modeling of these aspects will provide significant insights
into theoretical and empirical issues in psycholinguistics and cognitive
science. Understanding of normal and disordered processes in different languages
will also have significant implications for language education.