* 0131053
* Development of a Computer Tool for Georeferencing Natural History Collection Data
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2006
* Henry Bart, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Manfred D. Zorn
* 01/31/2006
* USD 237,439.00

Natural history collections are a resource for research on the taxonomy and
systematics of organisms. Specimens and the associated data are now used in
studies of ecology, conservation and environmental biology. Much of the museum
data lacks geo-referenced collection locations, such as map coordinates or
latitude and longitude. It is estimated that the number of specimens in US
collections alone exceeds 750 million. Usually, the collection location is
recorded as a string of text that describes the location as position along a
road and/or distance from a town or other point of reference. Capture map
coordinates from these text descriptions is tedious and time consuming. In this
activity, a suite of software tools will be developed that will enable the
biological collection community to geo-reference quickly all of the locality
data associated with their collections. A prototype system, using a pattern-
matching algorithm to break down the text string, has been developed. Available
place names in a database are associated with latitude and longitude
coordinates. When place-name data are missing, a database of other
geographically-referenced information is compiled and used. The tools will also
include visualization, correction and error estimation features for more precise
location and updates to the database.