* 0131459
* Presynaptic Direct Structure-Function Analysis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Kert Viele, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 07/31/2006
* USD 262,276.00

The accepted model for chemical transmission at the neuromuscular junction is
that when an action potential reaches the nerve terminal, voltage-sensitive
calcium channels open which leads to a cascade of events resulting in vesicles
fusing with the presynaptic membrane to release their contents into the synaptic
cleft. The number of active zones within synapses, and not necessarily the size
or numbers of synapses per se, is correlated to the degree of synaptic efficacy.
Additional factors besides structural elements have a role in synaptic efficacy,
but the purpose of this study is to focus on structural correlations.
Investigating the function of individual synapses is essential to understanding
the mechanisms that influence the efficacy of chemical synaptic transmission.
The known simplicity of the synaptic structure at the crayfish opener
neuromuscular junction and its quantal nature of release allow an assessment of
discrete synapses within the motor nerve terminals. By analyzing areas of a
quantal current trace using modern statistical techniques, it is noted that the
&gt;gold standard= of directly counting quantal events is unstable in
determining the number of release sites (n) and the probability of release at
these sites (p) when the probability of release is low. This classical approach
estimates one site even when there are clearly multiple sites operating. Modern
methods used in this investigation estimate the probability of release at each
site (p) to determine whether new sites are recruited as the firing frequency is
increased. The proposed investigations directly correlate quantal parameters by
various statistical methods to synaptic structure. An established method of
identifying and recording from a synaptic site allows for its subsequent serial
reconstruction using electron microscopic techniques. Thus, the same region can
be serial sectioned and reconstructed from electron micrographs to directly
correlate function to synaptic ultra structure. This effort will provide a
clearer understanding of the mechanisms employed by structural elements that
influence synaptic efficacy and mechanisms underlying frequency facilitation of
transmitter release in crustaceans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;