* 0131308
* Biophysical and Behavioral Agents of Natural Selection in a Hybrid Zone
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2005
* Brian Helmuth, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 03/31/2005
* USD 229,500.00

The structure of hybrid zones depends on the interaction of natural selection
and dispersal. Simple models using different forms of natural selection have
been generated to explain the structure and maintenance of hybrid zones.
However, field studies have shown that natural selection can be very complex and
that an understanding of hybrid zones cannot be obtained through simple models.
It is necessary to determine the agent of natural selection and the ecological
circumstances under which it operates to understand how hybrid zones are formed
and maintained. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study proposes to determine the
selective forces operating in a hybrid zone formed between two species of marine
mussels. Results from a previous grant demonstrated that the two species
differed in their physiological capacity to tolerate elevated silt. One possible
adaptation to elevated silt is increased mobility so that the animal can move
and avoid smothering. This adaptation may be detrimental in open coast
environments where silt concentrations are low and mussels may be dislodged by
exposure to increased wave action. Mussels that are more mobile may be exposed
to greater wave action if they migrate to the top of mussel beds or into other
locations where they are more likely to be dislodged. This study will test the
hypothesis that these two species of mussels differ in their behavioral
adaptations to silt and that these differences result in strong natural
selection against the more mobile species in open coast environments.
&lt;br/&gt;