* 0131431
* The Role of Knotted1-Like Homeobox Genes in Shoot Development
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Sarah Hake, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Susan J. Lolle
* 12/31/2004
* USD 441,000.00

0131431 Hake

Knotted1 is the founding member of the knox (knotted1-like homeobox) gene family
that has been identified in all plants surveyed so far. Homeobox genes encode
transcription factors that regulate the activities of other genes. Class I knox
genes are expressed in the meristem and stem. The initial down-regulation of
knox genes in the meristem marks the site of leaf initiation. Ectopic expression
of knox genes in leaves due to spontaneous mutations or overexpression results
in dramatic alterations in leaf morphology, occasional ectopic meristems and
changes in hormone levels. Loss-of-function knox mutants have begun to reveal
specific roles for different members. The maize knotted1 (kn1) and Arabidopsis
STM genes are required for meristem initiation and/or maintenance, whereas rice
osh15 and Arabidopsis KNAT1, also known as brevipedicellus (bp), are required in
stem tissues. There are two other class I knox genes in Arabidopsis, KNAT2 and
KNAT6. Insertion alleles will be obtained for these two genes. A mosaic analysis
of bp will be carried out to determine the role of KNAT1 in different tissues.
Genetic analysis will help sort out the roles for different knox genes in
Arabidopsis. A number of approaches will be taken to identify targets of the
KNOX family that include expression profiling, sequence comparisons and
biochemistry. Identification of a large number of potential targets will provide
the opportunity to determine which target genes are in common or distinct to
different KNOX proteins. A select number of the target genes will be analyzed to
determine their function. The long range goal is to understand the role of KNOX
proteins in meristem maintenance and plant architecture.