* 0131809
* CAREER: Robust Digital Model-Based Fault Detection and Isolation for Nonlinear Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2002,09/30/2008
* Nikolaos Kazantzis, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 09/30/2008
* USD 375,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Nikolaos Kazantzis &lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Worcester Polytechnic Institute&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0131809&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main area of the planned research project is
the development of a systematic, comprehensive and practical framework for
digital monitoring, and fault detection and isolation (FDI), of chemical,
biochemical, microelectronics, etc. manufacturing facilities. In particular, the
primary objectives include:&lt;br/&gt;(i) The study of the fundamental problem
of the design of reliable robust digital model-based monitoring and FDI systems
for nonlinear processes in the presence of model uncertainty and unknown
disturbances.&lt;br/&gt;(ii) The development of the appropriate software tools
for the effective digital implementation of the planned process monitoring and
FDI scheme.&lt;br/&gt;(iii) The real-time experimental implementation of the
results of the aforementioned theoretical and computational studies on a pilot-
scale polymerization reactor, as well as a bioreactor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
integral part of this project is the realization of educational goals that could
complement and enrich these research activities. Aligned with the principles and
vision of an innovative educational framework being developed at the Worcester
Polytechnic Institute (WPI), the primary educational objectives
are:&lt;br/&gt;(i) The formulation of open-ended projects with a concrete flavor
and orientation towards process dynamic modeling, monitoring and diagnostics,
that will be jointly defined by professional practitioners in industry and the
PI. These projects will be conducted on the industrial site, and occasionally,
in an international setting.&lt;br/&gt;(ii) The utilization of recent
advancements in computing and communications technology in order to provide a
virtual learning environment that can (a) enhance the learning experience of
current WPI students by elucidating key concepts in process modeling, dynamics,
monitoring and diagnostics through animation and advanced graphics, and (b) be
remotely accessed by educational institutions in socioeconomically distressed
zones in the state of Massachusetts with a large minority student population.
The objective is to provide direct remote access to real, as well as a virtual
process control, monitoring and diagnostics laboratory, in order to enhance
scientific literacy and awareness, and to broaden current educational
opportunities for those who need them most.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;