* 0131471
* Determinants of Conjugative Transposition
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Gordon Churchward, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 02/28/2006
* USD 360,000.00

Movement of conjugative transposons from one bacterial host to another requires
transposon excision from the donor chromosome, conjugal transfer of the excised
transposon from donor to recipient and integration of the transposon into the
recipient chromosome. The best-studied conjugative transposon is Tn916. Movement
of Tn916 is catalyzed by the transposon-encoded bivalent Int protein, whose
domains recognize and bind to two distinct DNA sequences. Tn916 does not
mobilize adjacent chromosomal genetic markers and expression of the genes
involved in conjugal transfer is dependent upon excision and circularization of
the transposon. Thus, the first step in conjugative transposition of Tn916 is
excision of the element, and conjugal transfer does not occur prior to excision.
A second transposon encoded protein that is required for excision, Xis, plays a
regulatory role in transposon excision and a model for Xis function has recently
been suggested. This model will be tested. Transposon excision and transfer can
be dissociated by expression of Int and Xis from a heterologous promoter.
Transposon excision occurs at a greatly elevated frequency in the donor cell
population but the frequency of conjugative transfer and integration remain
unchanged under these conditions. This implies that the step of conjugal
transfer may also be regulated. The Int recombinase, in addition to its binding
and cleavage of the transposon ends, has been shown to bind specifically to the
origin of conjugal DNA transfer, oriT. Whether Int is required for conjugal
transfer of Tn916, or if Int plays a regulatory role in this process will be
determined. Examinion of Int binding to oriT has suggested that the N-terminal
DNA binding domain of Int may exert an effect on the activities of the
C-terminal catalytic domain. The possible role of such interactions between the
two DNA binding domains of Int will be
examined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conjugative transposons such as Tn916 have the
remarkable property of being not only able to move from place to place in the
genome of a single bacterial species, but to transfer themselves between an
amazingly large number of diverse bacterial species. They also have the ability
to mobilize other genetic elements that normally are not self-transmissible.
These properties mean that conjugative transposons are likely to be of major
importance in promoting genetic exchange in the complex microbial communities
that exist in natural environments. These complex communities have a great
impact on human activities. The study of agents of genetic exchange in these
communities will increase our understanding of how microbial populations adapt
to changing conditions and prosper.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;