* 0131862
* CAREER: An Integrated Framework for Semantic-Based Analysis of Logic Programs
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2002,12/31/2008
* Lunjin Lu, Oakland University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 12/31/2008
* USD 300,000.00

CCR-0131862

Lunjin Lu

Semantic-based program analysis provides useful information to compilers,
debuggers and other program manipulation tools. Existing frameworks for logic
program analysis do not provide support for backward or parametric analyses that
are emerging as useful tools in logic program development. Nor do they provide
sufficient support for context-sensitive analyses. The project seeks to create a
new framework that will support these new classes of analyses as well as those
supported by existing frameworks. The research focuses on (i) developing
systematic methods for designing parametric, backward and context-sensitive
analyses and methods for efficient computation of these analyses; (ii)
integrating research findings in logic program analysis; (iii) implementing a
software environment that facilitates design, implementation and evaluation of
program analyses; and (iv) identifying, implementing and evaluating new program
analyses. A better understanding of parametric analysis, backward analysis and
context-sensitive analysis may be obtained out of the research and that would
provide a breakthrough in the field of logic program analysis. This project
plans to incorporate research results into the classroom by developing and
enhancing several courses in computer science and software engineering. It also
offers educational opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students to work
on leading edge research projects.