* 0131937
* Biodiversity and  Ecosystem Informatics - BDEI - Spatio-temporal Models of Biogeophysical Fields for Ecological Forecasting: A Cross-Disciplinary Incubation Activity
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2001,02/29/2004
* Jan Chomicki, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Brandt
* 02/29/2004
* USD 100,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;EIA-0131937&lt;br/&gt;Henebry, Geoffrey&lt;br/&gt;University of
Nebraska - Lincoln&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BDEI: Spatio-temporal models of
Biogeophysical Fields for Ecological Forecasting:&lt;br/&gt;A Cross-Disciplinary
Incubation Activity
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We are
now in an era of intensive earth observation: orbital platforms generate myriad
remote sensing&lt;br/&gt;datastreams across a range of spatial, temporal,
spectral, and radiometric resolutions. The number and&lt;br/&gt;variety of "eyes
in the skies" are scheduled to increase significantly over the next few years.
This&lt;br/&gt;veritable data deluge necessitates new ways of thinking about
transforming remote sensing data into&lt;br/&gt;information about ecological
patterns and processes. These datastreams hold the promise
for&lt;br/&gt;environmental decision support. Yet, there is a critical need for
theories and tools that will enable efficient&lt;br/&gt;and reliable
characterization of spatio-temporal patterns contained in image time series. We
think that&lt;br/&gt;such tools must be based on ecological expectations of land
surface dynamics, analogous to&lt;br/&gt;climatological expectations. Ecological
expectations would summarize across specific regions the
typical&lt;br/&gt;temporal development of spatial pattern in biogeophysical
fields. We have a robust principal method for&lt;br/&gt;extracting ecological
expectations from remote sensing datastreams: projecting image time series
into&lt;br/&gt;pattern metric spaces. To make ecological forecasting an
operational possibility, we need the capability&lt;br/&gt;to establish and to
update complex spatio-temporal baselines that will enable prediction of the
usual and&lt;br/&gt;identification, quantification, and assessment of the
unusual. A recent NASA workshop on Earth Science&lt;br/&gt;data mining
identified anomaly detection as a key characteristic of scientific data mining;
yet, there are&lt;br/&gt;relatively few examples of spatio-temporal data mining
of biogeophysical data. Our approach is spatio-temporal datamining that is
informed by relevant domain expertise. Representation of the spatio-
temporal&lt;br/&gt;entities and fields in databases must support sophisticated
spatio-temporal queries: a capability that does&lt;br/&gt;not currently
exist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;