* 0131523
* Mitochondrial Function During Insect Programmed Cell Death
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Mary Chamberlin, Ohio University
* Continuing grant
* Dona Boggs
* 07/31/2006
* USD 301,800.00

The dramatic and predictable changes in external and internal structures during
molting and metamorphosis make insects ideal systems for studying the mechanisms
underlying animal development. During the developmental process, tissues are
restructured and obsolete cells are destroyed by a process called programmed
cell death (PCD), which destroys specific cells in a manner that does not damage
neighboring cells. It is now clear from studies on mammalian cells that
mitochondria, organelles that provide most of the energy (ATP) for the cell,
play a key role in the early steps of PCD. It is not known, however, if these
organelles play a role in this process in insect cells. The proposed research
will reveal changes in insect mitochondrial function during PCD by studying the
mitochondria isolated from the midgut epithelium of the tobacco hornworm
(Manduca sexta). This epithelium is an ideal system for studying mitochondrial
function during PCD because the larval midgut dies at a predictable time in
development and the epithelium's large size allows for biochemical studies not
possible on small tissues or single cells. If insect mitochondria are involved
in PCD in a manner similar to that in mammalian cells, then early in the PCD
process the mitochondrial membrane potential (DY) will depolarize (dissipate)
and the organelle will release a small protein, cytochrome c, into the
cytoplasm. To test this hypothesis, mitochondria will be isolated from the
midguts of larvae at different stages of metamorphosis, before and after the
process of PCD begins. The DY of isolated mitochondria will be determined by
monitoring the transmembrane distribution of a lipophilic cation. In addition,
the cytochrome c content of the mitochondria as well as the cytoplasm will be
measured to determine if release of this protein into the cytosol is an early
event in insect PCD. The fact that changes in mitochondrial function occur early
in PCD presents an interesting dilemma for cells. The process of PCD requires
ATP, yet the organelle that generates ATP is being altered during the cell death
process. In order to understand how cells deal with this problem, the proposed
research will employ metabolic control analysis to quantify how oxidative
phosphorylation, the process by which mitochondria make ATP, is altered during
PCD. In addition to studying mitochondrial function, the proposed studies will
use electron microscopy to reveal how the structure of midgut mitochondria
changes during metamorphosis and PCD. Finally it is hypothesized that the
molting hormones, the ecdysteroids, are ultimately responsible for initiating
PCD in the midgut epithelium. This hypothesis will be tested by studying whether
an ecdysteroid agonist effects structural and functional changes in midgut
mitochondria similar to those seen during metamorphosis.