* 0131690
* Dissecting the Molecular Pathways that Coordinate Lateral Root Initiation with Environmental Signals
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Jocelyn Malamy, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 07/31/2005
* USD 341,588.00

Plants are completely dependent on the resources that are available in their
immediate vicinity. Unfortunately, nutrient availability and distribution are in
constant flux in the environment. Plants must be able to sense these changes and
respond appropriately. This developmental plasticity can be clearly observed in
the plant root system. The root system is a highly branched structure that
extracts water and nutrients from the soil. Both the number and placement of
lateral roots are dramatically affected by environmental cues. This allows the
plant to optimize its root system to its unique habitat, compete effectively for
soil resources and survive adverse conditions. Lateral roots are formed from
mature pericycle cells in the parent root. We have almost no understanding of
how pericycle cells are triggered to re-enter the cell-cycle and re-
differentiate to create the lateral root primordium. Similarly, very little is
known about how certain pericycle cells are selected to proliferate while their
neighbors remain quiescent. Finally, it is unclear how external conditions are
sensed and the information integrated into decisions about where and when a new
lateral root will be formed. The objective of this proposal is to dissect the
mechanisms that regulate the initiation of lateral roots. Our main strategy
involves the analysis of a lateral root initiation mutant, lin1, that we have
recently isolated in Arabidopsis thaliana. While wild-type Arabidopsis plants
drastically repress lateral root initiation under certain environmental
conditions, the lin1 mutant maintains a highly branched root system.
Furthermore, lin1 shows altered patterns of accumulation of auxin, a hormone
known to be critical for lateral root initiation. We will clone the LIN1 gene
and characterize the LIN1 pathway using genetic, physiological and genomic
approaches. These studies will begin to shed light on one of the fundamental
mysteries in plant biology: How are the decisions made that coordinate plant
development with environmental cues? They will also impact our understanding of
how plants are able to selectively activate cell proliferation and organogenesis
during vegetative growth. By focusing on the root system, our work will also
provide important insights into plant adaptation to water and nutrient stress
and may lead to the development of crops able to survive under adverse
conditions.