* 0131944
* Approaches to Improved Synthesis Design:  Mechanistic and Synthetic Studies on New Annelation Methods
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2004
* Paul Wender, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 11/30/2004
* USD 640,000.00

The focus of this research will include the exploration of [5+2] cycloaddition
of simple, unactivated vinylcyclopropanes, of substituent effects in the
rearrangement and [5+1] cycloaddition of vinylcyclopropanes and of asymmetric
[5+2] cycloadditions. Metal-catalyzed cycloadditions in water, studies on [6+2]
cycloadditions, and studies on [8+1], [8+2] and [8+4] cycloadditions will also
be carried out. Exploration of [3+2] and [4+2] cycloadditions involving
cyclobutanones and of multicomponent cycloadditions such as [4+2+1], [5+2+1] and
[5+2+1+1] cases will be carried out and serial cycloadditions will be studied as
well. The overall goal is to develop new reactions and strategies for the
synthesis of complex molecules. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this renewal award,
the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research of
Dr. Paul A. Wender of the Department of Chemistry at Stanford University.
Professor Wender will focus his work on developing fundamentally new reactions,
reagents and strategies for organic synthesis. A special emphasis is placed on
catalyzed reactions that, in the absence of catalyst, are forbidden or hard to
achieve. Further significance derives from the enormous potential of transition
metal catalysis in the development of environmentally acceptable syntheses that
provide little reagent-derived waste. The project provides an excellent training
program for pre-professionals and the results of the research could have a
strong impact in areas outside chemistry, such as the pharmaceutical industry.