* 0131470
* Vesicle Associated Myosin-V Motor Complex
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* George Langford, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 05/31/2006
* USD 449,547.00

Our nervous system contains over a billion nerve cells. Nerve cells are
specialized to transit electrical signals from cell to cell and from nerve cell
to an effector cell such as a muscle cell. Nerve cells are able to store
information in the form of learning and memory. To accomplish these tasks, the
terminals of nerve cells, the sites of communication between cells, change in
response to electrical activity. Actin filaments mediate the structural changes
of the nerve terminal. Actin filaments also serve as tracks for the movement of
cargo to the nerve terminal. An understanding of the mechanism by which actin
filaments remodel nerve terminals and support the movement of membranous cargo
to terminals are required to understand the processes of learning and memory.
This project is designed to study how cargo is transported to the nerve terminal
by the motor protein myosin-V. The nervous system of the squid, a marine
invertebrate, will be used for these studies. The giant nerve fiber of squid is
chosen for these studies because it is large enough to be dissected for
observation without damaging its activity. The principal goal is to determine
the mechanism by which transport of cargo is regulated. The proposal is divided
into 3 projects. The first project is designed to understand how myosin-V binds
to its cargo. The second project is to determine if binding of the motor to its
cargo changes it from an inactive to an active state. The third project is to
purify myosin-V in association with its binding partners and to identify the
proteins that link the motor to its cargo. A combination of biochemical and cell
biological experiments will be performed. FRET, a form of fluorescence
microscopy that detects the direct binding of one protein to another will be
used to determine whether regulatory proteins that bind to it affect the
activity of myosin-V. Chemical cross-linking and antibody precipitation
experiments will be used to identify protein partners of myosin-V that link it
to its cargo. These studies will advance our understanding of the mechanisms of
learning and memory.