* 0131899
* Biodiversity and Ecosystem Informatics - BDEI -Bioinformatic Prediction of Functions of Unculturable Microbes in Ecosystems
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2003
* Brett Tyler, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Brandt
* 09/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

EIA-0131899&lt;br/&gt;Dickerson, Allan&lt;br/&gt;Virginia Polytechnic Institute
and State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cells
routinely perform complex computational tasks that enable them to control the
orchestration&lt;br/&gt;of thousands of genes and communicate with other cells
to manifest emergent properties such as growth&lt;br/&gt;and
differentiation.Understanding and engineering the algorithms underlying the
complex computational&lt;br/&gt;machinery of cells should have significant
impact in science and technology,particularly
biotechnology,&lt;br/&gt;biocomputation and
medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several notable recent reports demonstrate that
it is possible to design and construct simple de&lt;br/&gt;novo genetic circuits
such as a switch and an oscillator in Escherichia coli .This work also revealed
that&lt;br/&gt;implementation of even the most simple circuits in vivo requires
tedious optimization of often poorly-&lt;br/&gt;understood protein-DNA
interactions and mRNA and protein stabilities,among other
parameters.We&lt;br/&gt;propose to develop efficient,evolutionary design
strategies for constructing functional de novo genetic&lt;br/&gt;circuits.We
will apply methods of molecular evolution,which have proven highly successful
for&lt;br/&gt;engineering proteins with improved or altered properties,to
complex genetic systems involving multiple&lt;br/&gt;repressors,operators,and
promoters.We believe that evolution will prove to be generally applicable
for&lt;br/&gt;optimizing individual devices as well as complex genetic
circuits,and our goal will be to demonstrate&lt;br/&gt;how evolutionary searches
are best performed in order to build libraries of devices and assemble
them&lt;br/&gt;into functional circuits.&lt;br/&gt;