* 0131657
* RUI: The Role of APH-1 and APH-2 in Notch-Mediated Cell Interactions in C. Elegans
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2009
* Caroline Goutte, Amherst College
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 03/31/2009
* USD 491,094.00

Abstract for Proposal #0131657 Caroline Goutte

The Notch signaling pathway represents a conserved mechanism of cell
communication. During the development of C. elegans there are multiple events in
which the Notch signaling pathway plays a critical role in cell fate induction.
Our work focuses on two newly identified components of Notch signaling events,
the C. elegans aph-1 and aph-2 gene products. Previous work has shown that the
aph-1 and aph-2 genes encode novel proteins that are well conserved in other
systems, including humans; however, their function in Notch signaling events
remains unknown. The primary objective of this proposal is to examine the roles
of the APH-1 and APH-2 proteins in facilitating cell-cell interactions. To this
end three general areas of investigation will be pursued. First, a series of
experiments will be carried out to delineate where in the Notch signaling
pathway the APH-1 and APH-2 proteins function. Which cells require APH-1 and
APH-2 activity, and is their function required before or after receptor
interaction with its ligand? The methods will include analysis of APH-1 cellular
and subcellular expression patterns, manipulation of individual embryonic cells,
and genetic epistasis analysis. Second, we will use standard mapping and cloning
procedures to pursue the molecular identity of four new genes that were
previously isolated as genetic suppressors of an aph-1 mutation. Because
mutations in these genes can compensate for defective APH-1 activity,
elucidation of their molecular identity will shed light on the normal function
of APH-1, as well as identify potential new players of Notch-mediated events.
Third, an exploration into post-embryonic roles for APH-1 and APH-2 will be
initiated by examining post-embryonic mutant phenotypes, genetic interactions
with other Notch pathway components, and an analysis of post-embryonic APH-1
expression patterns. Because APH-1 and APH-2 are found in other systems, it is
expected that results from this study will contribute to the general
understanding of Notch signaling in all species.