* 0131316
* Role of Hoxa-10 and Hoxa-11 in Mouse Implantation
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2002,11/30/2004
* Liang Ma, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 11/30/2004
* USD 334,079.00

0131316 Ma

Mammalian implantation is an essential step during early embryonic development
and involves the synchronization of endocrine, paracrine, and cellular events
which confers uterine receptivity to the early embryo. However, very little is
known about the molecular interactions between implanting blastocysts and the
hormonally primed uterus. Two maternally expressed AbdominalB-like homeobox
genes, Hoxa-10 and Hoxa-11, have been implicated in the preparation and
functioning of the implanting uterus. Mice deficient for Hoxa-10 exhibit reduced
female fertility due to defects in the uterine stroma to confer uterine
receptivity. Molecularly, Hoxa-10 functions in a hormonally regulated pathway
and likely converges with another implantation pathway involving prostaglandin
E2 and its receptors. In addition, both Hoxa-10 and its neighboring gene Hoxa-11
have been shown to be required for hormone-mediated stromal cell proliferation
during implantation. Collectively, these results place Hoxa-10 and Hoxa-11 at
the top of a hormone-regulated implantation pathway and suggest that these two
genes may be responsible for many hormone-induced physiological changes.

This grant proposes to test the current model, first by demonstrating in site-
specific knockout mice that progesterone directly regulate Hoxa-10 and Hoxa-11
gene expression in vivo during implantation through the two putative
progesterone response elements. Second, Dr. Ma will search for candidate target
genes controlled by these two transcription factors, with special focus on cell
cycle regulatory factors which could mediate hormone-induced cellular
proliferation in the implantation uterus. Results from these experiments should
contribute substantially to the understanding of the implantation process and
will start the process of building a genetic pathway controlling mammalian
implantation.