* 0131835
* Biodiversity and  Ecosystem Informatics (BDEI):  Biodiversity Information Organization Using Taxonomy [BIOT]
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2002,05/31/2003
* James Ashe, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Brandt
* 05/31/2003
* USD 99,820.00

EIA-0131835&lt;br/&gt;Guach, Susan&lt;br/&gt;University of Kansas Center for
Research Inc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BDEI: Biodiversity Information Organization
using Taxonomy
(BIOT)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological resources
are the basis of much of this Nations prosperity. The wise&lt;br/&gt;stewardship
of these riches affects current and future generations and, therefore, must
be&lt;br/&gt;rooted in decisions based on the best information available.
Because of the rapid growth&lt;br/&gt;of all content on the Internet, there is a
corresponding increase in online biological&lt;br/&gt;information of all types.
However, the sheer volume of data, and its widely varying&lt;br/&gt;quality and
physical distribution make it impossible for decision makers to make
critical&lt;br/&gt;decisions without the benefit of the existing body of
information. This project aims to&lt;br/&gt;investigate and develop intelligent
knowledge management tools and deploy them in this&lt;br/&gt;important domain.
In particular, we will investigate the use of a taxonomy as a
reference&lt;br/&gt;ontology to provide a conceptual framework to allow
intelligent agents to browse&lt;br/&gt;biodiversity information in a variety of
formats widely distributed on the World
Wide&lt;br/&gt;Web.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our goals are four fold: 1) to
investigate the use of a taxonomy as a reference ontology&lt;br/&gt;for browsing
biodiverity information; 2) to evaluate techniques to automatically
classify&lt;br/&gt;biodiversity information (web sites and individual web pages;
3) to personalize the&lt;br/&gt;information presented to the users expertise and
needs; and 4) lay the groundwork for&lt;br/&gt;larger, multidisciplinary,
efforts in intelligent search, visualization, and personalization
of&lt;br/&gt;biodiversity information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
proposes to build on existing work currently being done at the University
of&lt;br/&gt;Kansas related to information discovery, retrieval, and delivery,
particularly the&lt;br/&gt;OBIWAN project for ontology based search, browsing
and visualization of Web&lt;br/&gt;resources and the PEET project for preserving
and extending biodiversity information. A&lt;br/&gt;partnership has already been
established between the University of Kansas and the&lt;br/&gt;National
Biological Information Infrastructure (NBII) to capitalize on the
knowledge,&lt;br/&gt;expertise, and tools that have grown out of the existing
University of Kansas NSF&lt;br/&gt;research agreement. As a result of this
partnership, the first intelligent search agent for&lt;br/&gt;biodiversity
information, BioBot, has been developed.&lt;br/&gt;