* 0131486
* Positive and Negative Regulation of Rop Signaling in the Response to Oxygen Deprivation
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Julia Bailey-Serres, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Jermelina Tupas
* 04/30/2005
* USD 270,000.00

We have identified an ON/OFF signaling mechanism that is required for tolerance
of oxygen deprivation (anoxia) in Arabidopsis thaliana. Activation of Rop, a
monomeric RHO-like G-protein, is required for alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH)
induction and ethanolic fermentation but is insufficient for anoxia tolerance.
Tolerance of anoxia requires initiation of Rop signaling as well as the
subsequent termination of Rop signaling by the GTPase activating protein
RopGAP4. Our data support a model in which Rop-signaling promotes NADPH oxidase
activity and H2O2 production required for ADH induction; in addition the
negative regulation of Rop signaling by RopGAP4 reduces H2O2-induced damage,
prolongs cell viability and increases anoxia tolerance. We propose that an
increase in cytosolic free calcium, a second messenger in response to oxygen
deprivation, is necessary to complete the activation of Rop signaling. We
predict that interplay between Rop signaling and cytosolic free calcium levels
governs changes in gene expression necessary for stress tolerance. Our goals are
to: (1) Determine if a mitochondrial signal initiates Rop signaling in response
to oxygen deprivation; (2) Elucidate the role of cytosolic free calcium fluxes
in the regulation of Rop activity and RopGAP4 gene expression; (3) Determine
whether Rop-mediated activation of NADPH oxidase involves the relocation of Rop
and requires an increase in cytosolic calcium; (4) Test whether an H2O2 signal
is sufficient to induce ADH and RopGAP4 expression; and (5) Explore the
signaling mechanisms downstream of Rop that are involved in anoxia tolerance. We
will use genomic and genetic analyses to effectively study this signaling
network. These studies will include: (1) Analysis of changes in gene expression
regulated by anoxia-induced Rop signaling using total and large polysomal mRNA;
(2) A screen for dominant suppressor mutations that restore anoxia tolerance to
ropgap4-KO seedlings; and (3) Continued screening of gene-trap lines for
mutations altering ADH expression. The elucidation of the role of positive and
negative regulation of Rop in the low-oxygen stress response should enable the
engineering of flooding tolerance in crop plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will elucidate the mechanisms that allow plant cells to sense a
depletion of cellular oxygen and respond by stimulating fermentation. The
project will study how the strict control of the stress response is tantamount
for survival. The understanding of the signaling process that controls this
response will enable scientists to manipulate flooding tolerance. The results
may have additional relevance to plant and animal biology, due to similarities
between stress responses in plants and the low-oxygen stress response in plants
and animals.&lt;br/&gt;