* 0131604
* Molecular and Genetic Analysis of Drosophila Chromosome Structure
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Karen Weiler, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Teutonico
* 06/30/2005
* USD 357,005.00

The genomes of multicellular eukaryotes exist in two distinct chromatin states,
the loosely compacted euchromatin and the generally condensed heterochromatin.
Scientific studies using the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, first revealed
that this structural subdivision correlated with differences in gene activity
over 60 years ago. There is growing appreciation for the importance of chromatin
structure in gene expression, but our understanding of chromosome structural
differences at the protein level and how this impacts gene expression is still
in its infancy. One focus of this research project is the analysis of two
Drosophila genes genetically identified as important for antagonizing
heterochromatin formation and promoting a euchromatic chromatin state, E(var)3-5
and E(var)3-9. The specific objectives are to extend phenotypic characterization
of E(var)3-5 and E(var)3-9 mutants and to map, clone and molecularly analyze
each gene. Previous experiments showing that E(var)3-5 and E(var)3-9 mutations
affect gene expression will be extended and include multiple alleles. The
embryonic lethality associated with mutations in both genes will be investigated
to determine the timing and characteristics of developmental arrest, potentially
yielding insight into the normal activity of each gene product. Evidence for a
role in mitotic or meiotic chromosome function will be investigated through
assays for chromosome loss, and altered behavior and morphology. The E(var)3-5
and E(var)3-9 genes will be mapped and then cloned, followed by DNA sequence
analysis to predict features of the protein products. The expression pattern of
each gene will be examined. The second research focus is the functional analysis
of the D1 gene, which encodes an abundant protein that binds to satellite DNA
within heterochromatin. Mutant alleles of the D1 gene will be generated and
characterized, as a means to elucidate the function of the D1 protein. D1
mutants will be studied to determine if the D1 gene is essential for viability,
and if so, to characterize the timing and phenotypes associated with
developmental arrest. Through experiments analogous to those performed to
analyze the E(var) mutants, flies bearing mutant D1 alleles will be examined to
reveal a potential role for D1 in mitotic and interphase chromosome structure,
chromosome dynamics and gene expression. It is anticipated that the molecular
and genetic characterization of these three genes will increase our
understanding of protein determinants of chromosome structure and their role in
normal chromosome function.&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this research is to increase
the understanding of chromosome structure by the genetic analysis of several
structural components and regulators, using the fruit fly as a model system. Two
genes genetically identified as being important for chromosome structure will be
cloned and analyzed to better define their roles. The function of an abundant
chromosomal protein will be elucidated through the isolation and
characterization of mutant alleles of its gene. The findings of these studies
should be applicable to other organisms and contribute to our general
understanding of the importance of chromosome structure for cell
function.&lt;br/&gt;