* 0131022
* Conference: Macromolecular Organization &amp; Cell Function to be held August 4-9, 2002 at Queens College, Oxford University, England
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2003
* Brenda Winkel, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Clare M. O'Connor
* 05/31/2003
* USD 4,000.00

The Gordon Research Conference on Macromolecular Organization and Cell Function
has met biannually since 1987. This award will provide partial funding for the
ninth conference in this series (and the fourth consecutive one to be held at
Queens College, Oxford University), which is scheduled for August 4-9, 2002. The
first conferences concentrated on the role of enzyme organization in metabolic
regulation, but the subject matter has been greatly broadened over the years.
The conference now deals with virtually all aspects of cell function, focusing
on the intracellular organization of cellular components, the mechanisms
underlying and controlling this organization, and the essential role of
intracellular organization in cell function. Conference topics continue to
evolve in relation to the questions that can be effectively addressed by new
technologies and the integration of different disciplines. For example, many of
the focus areas of the conference are now especially relevant for the
application of emerging technologies in proteomics and structural biology.
Sessions in the upcoming conference include "Nucleic acid super-structures and
gene expression," "Organization of cellular metabolism," "The cytoskeleton and
cell function," "Organization of translation," "New technologies for the post-
genomic era," "The virtual cell," and "Molecular imaging in intact living
systems." This is a truly interdisciplinary conference that has, throughout its
history, successfully promoted the exchange of ideas among scientists with
diverse backgrounds, expertise, and interests. These range from the areas of
biochemistry, cell biology, and molecular biology to biophysics, physics, and
instrumentation, as well as theoretical biology and mathematical modeling.
Discussion leaders help to integrate the various presentations into cohesive
themes and speakers are asked to provide basic background information to enable
those in other disciplines to understand the material. Ample time for general
discussion at the end of each session typically leads to a lively exchange of
ideas and provides topics of conversation for poster sessions and mealtimes. A
priority is also placed on facilitating the participation of young scientists,
not only junior faculty members, but also postdocs and graduate students. This
has been accomplished both by providing supplemental funding (for 11 students
and 14 postdocs in 2000) and, starting with the 2000 conference, by establishing
a session of "poster flashes" in which junior attendees are invited to make a
brief oral presentation to promote interest in their posters. The conference has
consistently received high ratings in surveys completed by the participants and
attendance has been steadily increasing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;