* 0131028
* Collaborative Research:  Accessing Brain Collection Information and Images Via the Internet, CD-ROM  and Centralized Location
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2007
* Wallace Welker, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Martha Flanders
* 07/31/2007
* USD 318,131.00

Knowledge of brain structure is essential to understand brain function. The
evolution of mammals has resulted in many differences in brain anatomy, but we
know very little about how those differences correlate to the wide diversity of
animal behavior. This collaborative project is to consolidate and make more
accessible for research and education two major collections that form a unique,
extensive, remarkably preserved assembly of mammalian brain specimens for
comparative and evolutionary studies. Together they contain more than 275
sectioned and stained brains, including over a half million microscope slides,
representing over 150 species, from 50 families in 17 different orders of
Mammalia. Many specimens are irreplaceable, from rare or endangered species, and
provide critically unique data for questions about biodiversity and evolution as
well as neuroscience. The collections are being brought to a national museum
facility in Washington DC to join complementary extensive human brain
collections and establish a single site with long-term stability for storage,
curation, and research on comparative mammalian brain neuroanatomy. An
electronic website is being developed for worldwide access to images.
Researchers can use the images directly, or decide whether to visit the museum
itself to examine the original preserved biological material. The impact of this
project is high. First, it safely preserves for future research an irreplaceable
resource that represents a scientific investment of more than 50 years of
exacting work by dozens of people. Second, it promotes multidisciplinary
research on comparative neuroscience, behavior, evolution and systematics to
understand the diversity in the most complex organ known. Third, using
technology of digital imaging and multidimensional databases, it provides a
working base as well as a model for how to handle and share complex
morphological data with other collections, including those on non-mammalian
vertebrate brains. Fourth, the project will continue to have educational impact
by providing easy website access for schools and informal science education
about the vertebrate brain in the context of biodiversity.

