* 0131361
* Regulation of the Cytosolic Chaperonin Complex by Phosducin-like Protein
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Barry Willardson, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 03/31/2006
* USD 308,792.00

Eukaryotic cells have developed elaborate signal transduction pathways to
respond to changes in their environment. The phosducin-family of proteins is
believed to play a role in cellular signaling. This family consists of phosducin
(Pd), which is expressed principally in the retina and pineal gland, and
phosducin-like protein (PhLP), which is found in almost all tissues and cell
types. Both Pd and PhLP bind to G proteins and other effectors. Pd and PhLP are
regulators of G protein signaling pathways. Recent evidence suggests that Pd and
PhLP also have other functions in the cell. Both have been found to interact
with the SUG1 subunit of the 26S proteasome. Immunoprecipitation experiments and
mass spectrometry identify proteins that co-immunoprecipitate with PhLP. These
include subunits of the cytosolic chaperonin complex containing TCP1 1 (CCT).
This chaperone is required for the folding of actin and tubulin and several
other proteins. Thus, CCT is required for eukaryotic cell to produce essential
protein products in their native state. PhLP binding inhibits the ability of CCT
to fold these proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will elucidate the
interaction of PhLP with CCT and investigate its physiological role in
regulating CCT activity. The specific objectives are:&lt;br/&gt;1) To test the
hypothesis that PhLP is a physiological negative regulator of CCT
activity;&lt;br/&gt;2) To determine the mechanism of PhLP protein degradation
and its role in regulating CCT activity;&lt;br/&gt;3) To biochemically
characterize the interaction between PhLP and CCT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
methodology includes a variety of biochemical and molecular biological
techniques including gene silencing, analysis of site-directed mutants and
chimeric proteins, cross-linking studies, immunological methods and mass-
spectrometric approaches to elucidate PhLP functions and interactions. This
study explores a totally novel function of PhLP and a unique mechanism that
regulates CCT activity. Thus, it has the potential to forward our understanding
of the regulation of protein folding in a major way as well as to elucidate the
regulation and processing of proteins necessary for cell survival. This project
also provides a research experience for undergraduates since a unique
opportunity exists for undergraduate researchers to participate in this
significant research project.&lt;br/&gt;