* 0131924
* Biodiversity and Ecosystem Informatics: The Eco Flight Simulator: Visualizing landscape patterns, ecosystem processes and biodiversity information using flight simulator technology
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Robert Stevenson, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Brandt
* 08/31/2003
* USD 97,563.00

EIA-0131924 Stevenson, Robert University of Massachusetts - Boston.

BDEI: The Eco Flight Simulator: Visualizing landscape patterns, ecosystem
processes and biodiveresity information using flight simulator technology

Summary

This proposal develops the Eco Flight Simulator a system for visualizing
landscape patterns, ecosystem processes and biodiversity data. Many state and
federal agencies are currently gathering large amounts of spatial data via
aerial photographs and satellite imagery that can be used for seeing the
landscape (distribution and location of habitats, size of habitat fragments, the
relationships among political and ecosystem boundaries), the analysis of
ecosystem processes (water cycling, nutrient cycling, pollution movement) and
biodiversity issues (habitat types, population of invasive species, species
interactions, etc.). For the most part these data are currently presented in the
form of maps using GIS software. The view is static and the data displayed are
static (but see the USGS's National Map Initiative). However, flight simulator
technologies, developed first for the military and now common in the
entertainment industry, offer a much better visualization technology - a user
defined birds eye view of the landscape that can include the spatio-temporal
complexity of the environment. Using standard off the shelf hardware, open
source software and public domain data, marine (Stellwagen Bank National Marine
Sanctuary in the Gulf of Maine) and terrestrial flight simulations (Ipswich and
Parker River Watersheds of Essex County Massachusetts) (one simulator) are
developed that present environmental information in new ways.