* 0131010
* Subcellular Organization of the Flavonoid Enzyme Complex
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2006
* Brenda Winkel, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 02/28/2006
* USD 421,813.00

Enzymes function within cells to catalyze biochemical reactions, thereby
controlling the amounts and types of products that are produced by different
types of cells under different conditions. Work in many laboratories has
provided evidence that enzymes that cooperate in biosynthetic pathways and other
coordinated systems, such as DNA replication and protein synthesis, are often
physically associated as macromolecular complexes. This organization has the
potential to dramatically enhance the biochemical efficiency of living cells as
well as providing mechanisms for sequestering toxic or volatile intermediates,
regulating competition among branch pathways, and coordinating interdependent
processes. Some of these systems, such as the machinery of protein and nucleic
acid biosynthesis, are extremely stable and can be extracted from cells as
intact multienzyme structures. Others, such as the TCA cycle and the glycolytic
pathway, are organized as "dynamic" complexes that may dissociate and reform in
response to environmental or physiological stimuli. However, there are only a
few cases in which a specific physiological function for this organization has
been documented. At the same time, very little is known about the molecular
basis of enzyme complex formation and localization. This project aims to address
these questions using the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway in the plant,
Arabidopsis, as an experimental system. Numerous genetic, molecular, and
biochemical tools are available for this system, including cloned genes for
seven major flavonoid enzymes, purified recombinant enzymes produced in
bacterial cells, polyclonal antibodies against many of these proteins, and a
collection of mutants that includes null alleles for several key enzymatic
steps. The major goals of the current project are to 1) determine the three-
dimensional structures of two of the flavonoid enzymes, 2) use new technologies
to study the interactions between these enzymes, 3) track changes in the
subcellular locations of the enzymes in response to environmental stimuli such
as wounding and gravity, and 4) study the biochemical and physiological effects
of targeting flavonoid enzymes to inappropriate locations within the plant cell.
Expanding the knowledge of the structure and function of enzyme complexes is
essential to developing a complete understanding of how cells organize and
regulate metabolic activity. This information is crucial for efforts to alter
cellular metabolism via gene therapy and in the development of transgenic
organisms for industrial and agricultural applications. This project will also
provide a training ground in contemporary molecular genetic and biochemical
technologies for undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;