* 0131269
* Analysis of a Bifunctional Plastid Nucleoid Protein: Ferrodoxin-Sulfite Reductase
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2006
* Sabine Heinhorst, University of Southern Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Vicki B. Vance
* 02/28/2006
* USD 340,000.00

The importance of chloroplast-encoded genes for plant growth and productivity is
unquestionable, yet surprisingly, many aspects of molecular biology and
biochemistry of the organelle, such as the control of chloroplast development
and intracellular communication of signals related to this process are only
poorly understood. The sequencing of several higher plant plastomes has provided
valuable information of types and number of genes that are encoded by ctDNA and
has greatly increased our knowledge of organellar gene regulation on the
transcriptional and translational level. On the other hand, higher-level
structural determinants that very likely have profound effects on the expression
of plastome-encoded genes are essentially unknown. Since the plastome is
associated with proteins that condense the multiple genome copies into compact
complexes termed nucleoids, rearrangements of nucleoids must occur to allow
transcription, replication, recombination and repair to take place. While
nucleoid protein composition is known to change with plastid development, the
molecular details of these remodeling events and the way(s) in which they affect
the fundamental aspects of plastid nucleic acid metabolism are unknown. This
project addresses the molecular basis of nucleoid structure and function by
studying expression and regulation of interaction with DNA of a major structural
protein of plastid nucleoids. Through a combined genetic, biochemical and cell
biological approach, the biological significance of the association of DCP68/SiR
with the plastid nucleoid will be assessed. DCP68/SiR appears to be a
bifunctional plastid protein that fulfills dual roles in the organelle as a
nucleoid constituent and an enzyme of the sulfate reduction pathway that leads
to the biosynthesis of cysteine and other sulfur-containing metabolites. Because
of the intriguing possibility that regulation of nucleoid structure and function
is connected with that of the assimilatory sulfur metabolism, the results from
this study will contribute to an understanding of the molecular processes and
regulatory strategies in the plant cell that govern organellar development and
function. The study will begin to elucidate the contribution of nucleoid
structure in regulating plastid gene expression and plastome transmission and
maintenance, and will thereby aid future efforts to develop efficient plastome
genetic manipulation strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The photosynthetic
organelles (chloroplasts) of plant cells contain their own genetic material
(DNA) that encodes many products of great importance for plant growth and
productivity. Chloroplast DNA is bound to proteins that condense it into so-
called nucleoids whose structure and, presumably, function, change during plant
growth and development. This project addresses the effects chloroplast DNA-
compacting proteins have on the ability of the organelle's DNA to provide a
template for duplication and for information retrieval. The study focuses on the
chloroplast nucleoid protein DCP68, which condenses DNA and plays the additional
role in the chloroplast of converting sulfur minerals to a form that is usable
by the plant. The study will examine how environmental and internal signals
affect the interaction between DCP68 and chloroplast DNA and might connect
nucleoid structure and function with other metabolic aspects of the organelle.