* 0131317
* Symposium: "Physiological Ecology of Rocky Intertidal Organisms: From Molecules to Ecosystems," Anaheim, CA
* BIO,IOS
* 11/15/2001,10/31/2002
* Brian Helmuth, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 10/31/2002
* USD 6,000.00

The goal of this symposium is to assess the role of physiological performance in
driving the ecology of populations and communities in a key ecosystem, the rocky
intertidal zone. Physiological performance and its genetic determinants have
long been considered important determinants of community structure and of
species' distribution within the intertidal. However, an understanding of how
interactions between the physical environment and organismal physiology drive
community dynamics has remained elusive. With the advent of new molecular and
biochemical techniques, the potential for using physiological indicators of
state to address ecological questions is of increasing interest to ecologists.
Conversely, physiologists are actively investigating the role of complex
environmental signals (as opposed to constant conditions) in influencing
organismal physiology. This symposium will bring together researchers from a
range of disciplines to educate workers about the potential strengths and
limitations of each other's approaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This symposium has
three main goals: (1) to assess the state of knowledge in the field of
intertidal physiological ecology, and to determine what questions have yet to be
successfully addressed, (2) to introduce ecologists to the strengths, and
potential pitfalls, of using physiological indicators of state (e.g., heat shock
proteins, RNA:DNA ratios, etc) for examining ecological questions, and (3) to
discuss how best to merge studies conducted under necessarily simplified,
controlled conditions, with those conducted under more complex, time-varying
conditions in the field. This symposium will be hosted by the annual meeting of
the Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology (SICB) from January 2-6 in
Anaheim, California. &lt;br/&gt;