* 0131927
* Biodiversity and Ecosystem Informatics - BDEI - Planning a Community Science Approach to Biodiversity Monitoring: Extending the Spatial and Temporal Scales
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Robert Morris, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Brandt
* 08/31/2003
* USD 49,801.00

EIA-0131927 Stevenson, Robert University of Massachusetts - Boston

BDEI: Planning a Community Science Approach to Biodiversity Monitoring:
Extending the Spatial and Temporal Scales.

Increasing the spatial scales and temporal frequencies at which species
occurrences and locations are recorded is central to biodiversity informatics.
There are not nearly enough trained scientists to do the job and remote sensing
methods have severe limitations for most taxa. This project examines the idea
that it is now possible to rapidly build communities of people (academic
taxonomists, amateur natural historians, environmental educators, concerned
citizens and students) and institutions (universities, environmental NGOs,
governmental agencies and schools) to produce important scientific data about
biodiversity. Building monitoring communities is made possible by digital
technologies that permit three key advances: 1) Rapid Color Guides, the
production on demand of high quality yet relatively inexpensive mini color field
guides (here called Rapid Color Guides, Foster 1998) that will allow amateurs to
correctly identify many more species in the field. 2) Spatial Coordinates, the
ability to accurately record (within a 3 m radius under the best conditions) the
spatial coordinates of individuals or populations using new GPS (Global
Positioning System) units. 3) E-Vouchers, the availability of very high quality
digital cameras that are field portable and relatively easy to use that can
capture an electronic record of observations in the field.

Along with the wide acceptance of the WWW, these advances permit people to
gather and share biodiversity information in unprecedented ways. Three studies
are planned and prototyped to examine this general claim. First, the variety of
taxa recorded during Massachusetts Biodiversity Days, a three- day statewide
citizen-based effort to monitor biodiversity already established in
Massachusetts
(http://data.massgis.state.ma.us/Biodiversity/BiodiversityDays.htm) will be
expanded. Taxonomic specialists using digital cameras and printers will design
Rapid Color Guides for taxa, which are common (e.g. ants, bumblebees, spiders,
weeds) but rarely recorded by observers because of the lack of a suitable method
to identify them.