* 0131912
* Biodiversity and Ecosystem Informatics:  Event and Process Tagging for Information Integration for the International Gulf of Main Watershed
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2001,12/31/2002
* Marilyn Lutz, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Brandt
* 12/31/2002
* USD 99,967.00

EIA-0131912 Beard-Tisdale, Mary-Kate University of Maine

BDEI: Event and process tagging for information integration for the
International Gulf of Maine Watershed

Project Summary

This incubation proposal addresses the issue of integrating large, diverse, and
autonomous collections of scientific data within a complex institutional
setting. The goal is to convert these autonomous collections into a shareable
repository that supports synthesis of data through new metadata structures based
on events and processes. The institutional setting is the data and data-
gathering activities of over 80 agencies, NGOS, and academic and research
institutions operating within the Gulf of Maine watershed. The metadata
development will be coordinated by library and spatial information scientists
working jointly with domain scientists. An essential task of this incubation
effort will be the development of a shared understanding of environmental
processes and events that becomes a shareable ontology.

Libraries play a vital role in organizing intellectual access to creative works.
Scientific data has tended to be outside this traditional purview and has thus
lacked the benefits of cataloging and indexing that promote shared access. We
are proposing a new metadata structure that exploits common units of analysis in
environmental studies: events and processes. Associating scientific data sets
with event and process tags, in addition to other metadata elements, can
substantially improve the ability to integrate and synthesize diverse scientific
collections. The metadata initiative of this proposal will lay the foundation
for specifying events and processes through the collaboration of data
collections content specialists and information management specialists.

