* 0131321
* RUI: X-Chromosome Meiosis in Caenorhabditis Elegans
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Philip Meneely, Haverford College
* Continuing Grant
* Joanne Tornow
* 06/30/2005
* USD 287,829.00

Early in meiosis, homologous chromosomes pair, exchange, and synapse. Both the
number and the location of exchange events are highly regulated in a poorly
understood process called crossover control. Crossover control is postulated to
be closely related to chromosome compaction, although direct proof of this
postulate has been lacking. Mutations that alter the number or the distribution
of crossovers have been identified in many organisms, including C. elegans.
Recessive mutations in the autosomal gene him-5 reduce the number of crossovers
on the X chromosome and alter the distribution of the residual crossovers.
Preliminary molecular evidence indicates that the predicted HIM-5 protein has a
region of homology to RCC1, a well-known protein involved in chromosome
compaction in vertebrates. Direct proof that this gene corresponds to him-5 will
be obtained by determining the structure of transcripts from the locus and
sequencing these in him-5 mutants. The expression pattern of the gene will be
determined in both sexes, and in various mutant strains affecting meiosis and
germ-line development. Using immunofluorescence, the location of the HIM-5
protein in the gonad will be determined in order to infer the meiotic processes
affected. A closer homologue of RCC1 has also been shown to affect meiosis in C.
elegans, but the gene involved has not been studied. Mutations of this gene will
be identified and characterized genetically and cytologically. The expression of
this gene will be studied as well. Epistatic relationships between this gene and
him-5, as well as other meiotic mutants, will be used to clarify the functional
relationships among the genes. As RCC1 is well-known in other organisms, the
characterization of its role in meiosis in C. elegans could make a direct
connection between chromosome structure and crossover control. One familiar
genetic manifestation of crossover control is the phenomenon of interference,
whereby one crossover prevents the occurrence of a second crossover nearby.
Previous work has shown there is extremely high interference in C. elegans, and
that most chromosomes have exactly one exchange. Interestingly, all of the known
double crossover exceptions had one of the crossovers in a region of the X
chromosome known to have other unusual meiotic properties. Genetic mapping
experiments, combined with analysis from the genomic sequence, will be used to
examine the unusual meiotic properties in this region and to ask if these have a
common basis.&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate students under the direction of the
principal investigator will conduct all of these experiments. Because meiosis is
a fundamental process whose main characteristics have been known for decades,
most students are familiar with the basic properties. However, the molecular
basis for crossover control is quite obscure. Therefore, the students will be
carrying out significant research on a fundamental and familiar
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;