* 0131250
* Synthesis of Templates for Nucleation of Alpha-Helices
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Daniel Kemp, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 03/31/2006
* USD 450,000.00

This research has two immediate objectives and both rely on a novel approach to
the study of peptide helicities. This tool consists of a series reporting
conformational templates(RTC's) that can be linked to a peptide at its
N-terminus to initiate a helix and monitor its stability. The first objective of
this project is the design, testing, and optimization of new capping structures
that can be linked to both N and C-termini of peptides to substantially
stabilize their helical conformations. The second objective is to define
rigorously the functional dependence of fractional helicity on the experimental
value of the circular dichroism ellipticity [theta]222 measured for the peptide
at 222 nm. NMR methods applied to RCT-peptide conjugates will be used to
calibrate [theta]222 definitively.

With this renewal award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is
supporting the research of Dr. Daniel S. Kemp of the Department of Chemistry at
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The work aims at a complete
description at a chemical level of the folding process for the important case of
folded peptide helices. Folding in water can convert a highly flexible linear
polypeptide, defined by its ordered, linked sequence of particular amino acids,
into a compact, relatively rigid structure that can bind tightly to other
biomolecules. Understanding the structures and energetics of the folded forms of
proteins and shorter polypeptides is a fundamental problem of modern structural
biology and bioorganic chemistry. Helices provide key structural subunits formed
by local peptide sequences within most globular proteins. Moreover the docking
of folded, helical signal peptides to proteins found at cell surfaces have been
shown recently to control growth of abnormal cells found in a significant number
of human disease states. Success with the objectives of this proposal is
expected not only to allow a better predictive understanding of these docking
events but also to provide hitherto unavailable practical methods for tuning,
controlling and inhibiting such signal processes. The potential relevance to
improvements in cancer diagnosis and treatment is significant.