* 0131707
* Analysis of Drosophila Kekkon1: an Inhibitor of the Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2006
* Joseph Duffy, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 02/28/2006
* USD 365,750.00

0131707&lt;br/&gt;Duffy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Epidermal Growth Factor
Receptor (EGFR or ErbB) family of receptor tyrosine kinases has been implicated
in a myriad of developmental decisions including mitogenesis, apoptosis,
cellular migration, determination, differentiation, and dedifferentiation.
Despite our knowledge of the role of this family in cellular decisions, our
understanding of receptor activation and signal propagation is still in its
infancy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The studies proposed by Dr. Duffy will use the
model system, Drosophila melanogaster, to shed further light on the activation
of EGFR signaling. This will be accomplished by dissecting the role of the
inhibitory molecule, Kek1, in EGFR signaling. Kek1 encodes a transmembrane
protein of the Leucine Rich Repeat (LRR) and Immunoglobulin (Ig) family that
acts in a negative feedback loop to inhibit EGFR signaling. The availability of
an abundance of genetic and molecular tools in Drosophila provide the means to
decipher the mechanism of EGFR inhibition by Kek1 in vivo. This analysis will
determine if Kek1 represents a new mode of inhibition and contribute to an
improved understanding of EGFR signaling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific
objectives proposed by Dr. Duffy are: (1) to define the mechanism through which
Kek1 inhibits D-EGFR signaling by generating modified forms of Kek1. These
constructs will by assayed biochemically, genetically, and molecularly for their
effects on D-EGFR activity, both in vivo and in cell culture; (2) to define the
residues of Kek1 and D-EGFR that mediate their interaction; and (3) to determine
if Kek1's inhibitory function is conserved to the vertebrate
receptors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To elucidate the role of the EGFR/ErbB family in
development, a continuing effort must be made to characterize inhibitory
molecules, such as Kek1. &lt;br/&gt;