* 0131728
* The Influence of Fluctuating Countervailing Selection in Maintaining within Population Variation in Sexually Selected Traits
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Susan Bertram, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Godfrey R. Bourne
* 12/31/2005
* USD 299,188.00

Abstract: Susan Bertram 0131728&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses how
heritable variation may be maintained within a population. Research on heritable
variation is important because it has implications for biodiversity: extinction
removes species, speciation adds them; and heritable variation is the fodder for
speciation. While data suggests that genetic variation in traits that enhance
fitness is quite common, current theory predicts almost no heritable variation
in fitness conferring traits. This inconsistency between theory and data reveals
the importance of determining the underlying mechanisms responsible for
maintaining heritable variation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research
is to investigate how heritable variation may be maintained in sexually selected
traits by directly testing the hypothesis that heritable variation in mating
signals can be maintained by temporally fluctuating and opposing forces of
sexual and natural selection. The Texas field cricket, Gryllus texensis, is an
ideal system to test this hypothesis as male crickets display extensive mating
signal variation, all signaling components measured to date exhibit high
heritabilities, and signals are easily measured. Further, female crickets
discriminate between potential mates based on mating signals, and signaling
males are often attacked and killed by acoustically orienting parasitoids.
Crickets have two breeding seasons, spring and fall. In the spring cricket and
parasitoid densities are low, in the fall they are high. Density influences the
intensity of selection, because in the low-density spring populations female
crickets discriminate between mates with different songs. In the high-density
fall populations selection appears reversed, with female crickets selecting
mates randomly and signaling males being targeted by parasitoids. To test
whether temporally fluctuating natural versus sexual selection can maintain
variation, my research will first confirm that the mating signals are heritable.
Selection experiments will then determine how natural and sexual selection
influence variation in calling behavior over several generations. The proposed
research will be the first experimental test of the hypothesis that conflicting
selection forces shape mating signal variation within a population.&lt;br/&gt;