* 0131979
* Acquisition of Equipment to Establish a High-Pressure Single-Crystal X-Ray Laboratory
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2002,02/29/2004
* George Lager, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 02/29/2004
* USD 55,540.00

0131979 Lager

A high-pressure, single-crystal X-ray diffraction laboratory will be established
at the University of Louisville. An existing, fully operational CAD4
diffractometer will be adapted for high-pressure use with a diamond-anvil cell.
The laboratory will also house an electrostatic drilling machine and
stereomicroscope for loading the cell and a laser spectrometer for pressure
calibration. A second X-ray unit will also be upgraded with a solid-state
generator. A precession camera mounted on this unit will be used as a check on
crystal quality and to determine the orientation of single crystals in the
pressure cell. The new laboratory will be dedicated to studies of hydrous
minerals at high pressure. This group of earth materials plays an important role
in mantle processes related to earthquake activity. For example, volume changes
associated with phase transitions in hydrous minerals have been linked to the
localization of stress and the occurrence of earthquakes along subduction zones.
Experiments in this project will focus on hydrous magnesium silicate (OH-
clinohumite) and hydrogarnet. Phase-equilbria studies indicate that clinohumite
is a stable water-bearing phase in subduction zones to depths of ~400 km
(transition zone). Its high-pressure infrared spectrum shows several anomalies
at ~13 GPa. The possibility that these anomalies are related to a phase
transition will be investigated using the converted CAD4 diffractometer system.
Synthetic Si-free hydrogarnet (katoite) has been used as a model to understand
how OH is incorporated in silicate garnets that occur in the crust and mantle.
The katoite structure undergoes a phase transition at 5 GPa. X-ray data will be
collected with the CAD4 at high pressures to determine if a similar transition
is observed in naturally occurring hydrogarnets. ***