* 0131185
* Cellular Determinants of Differentiation Versus Apoptosis in Avian Granulosa Cells
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2006
* Alan Johnson, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing grant
* Ione Hunt Von Herbing
* 01/31/2006
* USD 406,700.00

This proposal describes studies of secreted and nonsecreted factors responsible
for promoting avian ovarian granulosa cell viability, and facilitating
differentiation at the time of ovarian follicle selection into the final stages
of development (the preovulatory hierarchy). In most vertebrates, including
avian species, the vast majority of growing ovarian follicles (> 90%) are lost
via the death of follicles (follicle atresia) at some point during development
prior to the preovulatory stage. It is now well established that ovarian
follicle atresia in all vertebrate species studied to date is mediated via
apoptosis, and that this process is initiated within the granulosa cell layer.
The identification of mechanisms that promote the survival of granulosa cells
and provide for sufficient numbers of ovarian follicles for optimal follicle
development and thus, optimal fertility, remains an active area of
investigation. Similarly, cellular processes that precisely control ovarian
follicle selection and the establishment of an orderly preovulatory hierarchy in
avian species are poorly understood. Throughout the reproductive life span of
the avian female, ongoing attrition of developing follicles eventually results
in the survival of a small cohort of follicles that are responsive to follicle
stimulating hormone. Subsequently, a single follicle from this cohort is
selected per day to rapidly grow and undergo final differentiation before
ovulation, thus establishing an orderly hierarchy of preovulatory follicles.
Significantly, follicle selection into the avian preovulatory hierarchy is
reflected by the concomitant expression of anti-apoptotic factors and cell
survival signaling pathways that render granulosa cells resistant to apoptosis,
and accordingly, results in diminished susceptibility to follicle atresia. Thus,
there is a clear relationship between the initiation of differentiation and
acquisition of apoptosis resistance within the granulosa cell layer at the time
of follicle selection. The present proposal describes experiments, using the
ovary of the domestic hen (Gallus gallus) as a model system, which study several
secreted and nonsecreted factors, plus a unique Inhibitor of Apoptosis Protein
(IAP), which together are proposed to mediate a balance between granulosa cell
apoptosis versus cell survival and differentiation. Utilizing a combination of
cell culture and gene transfection, in vitro assays and molecular techniques,
the principal investigator will approach the study of these processes by
achieving the following objectives: 1) establish signaling pathways within the
cell that are responsible for epidermal growth factor receptor- (EGF-R-)
mediated effects on promoting granulosa cell proliferation and cell survival,
while simultaneously inhibiting premature cell differentiation; 2) define the
role of transforming growth factor b (TGFb) and the related family member,
activin, in promoting granulosa cell differentiation at the time of follicle
selection. Related studies will define mechanisms by which EGF-R signaling
blocks TGFb/activin-induced differentiation; and 3) investigate the role of the
multifunctional IAP family member, survivin, as a regulator of cell
proliferation and inhibitor of apoptosis in prehierarchal follicle granulosa
cells. An important outcome of these studies will be a better understanding of
causative factors and associated cellular events that promote granulosa cell
resistance to apoptotic cell death and facilitate granulosa cell
differentiation. More broadly, the data generated will contribute to our
understanding of mechanisms responsible for the establishment of an ovarian
preovulatory follicle hierarchy that is prerequisite for egg laying in a variety
of egg-laying (oviparous) species, including reptiles. All studies described
will incorporate the training of both undergraduate and graduate students. It is
expected that during the course of investigations novel avian genes will be
identified and functionally characterized, thus contributing to the further
characterization of the avian genome. Accordingly, all results will be promptly
submitted to appropriate, publicly accessible databases (e.g., GenBank) and
subsequently published in first-tier journals.