* 0131774
* RUI: Folding Kinetic Studies of Permuted Myoglobins
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Spencer Anthony-Cahill, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/28/2006
* USD 204,965.00

An understanding of the principles that determine protein folding and stability
is critical for guiding the rational design of proteins with novel functional
properties, and for accurate predictions of tertiary structure from amino acid
sequence. This project will increase our understanding of the relationship
between altered topology and the folding pathway for a protein, and provide
experimental data that can be used to refine structure prediction algorithms.
The specific aims are: (1) to compare the folding and unfolding rates of wild-
type and three to four circularly permuted sperm whale myoglobins using stopped-
flow circular dichroism spectroscopy; (2) to map differences in the transition
state structures for wild-type and circularly permuted myoglobins using
perturbation methods. These studies entail generation and bacterial expression
of genes encoding permuted myoglobin proteins (permuteins) as well as site-
directed mutants of the permuteins and the wild-type myoglobin. Purified
apoproteins will be analyzed for stability to chemical denaturation and in
kinetic assays for folding and unfolding. CD spectroscopy will be used to derive
the stability parameters and kinetic studies will be carried out with stopped-
flow CD to measure rates of permutein folding and unfolding at various
denaturant concentrations. Kinetic and equilibrium stability data will be used
to map the relative energies of the denatured, native and transition states for
folding reactions. The long-term goals of this research include a thorough
determination of those regions of the myoglobin sequence that will tolerate
topological mutation, and characterization of the folding pathway for these
mutants.

This project will provide an opportunity for several undergraduate students to
integrate classroom teaching in biochemistry and biophysics with an intensive
research experience. The students will carry out all aspects of the proposed
work from cloning genes to CD studies, as well as presentation of results at
local and national meetings. Hands-on experience with equilibrium and kinetic
data collection and interpretation will greatly enhance student comprehension of
biophysical principles, and prepare these students well for further study in
biochemistry.