* 0131114
* A Proposed Enhancement of the Rhode Island Network for Computational Chemistry and Physics
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2005
* Paul Williard, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Joan M. Frye
* 01/31/2005
* USD 182,418.00

With support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF)
Program, the Departments of Chemistry at Brown University and at the University
of Rhode Island will acquire a computer system to enhance the Rhode Island
Network for Computational Chemistry and Physics. The system will consist of
Internet-2 linked computing clusters at Brown and URI. Clusters at each
institution will have a hybrid structure composed of two distinct layers.
Layer-I, the natural compute server for CPU-intensive, communications-tolerant
applications, will consist of a larger number of loosely coupled processors.
Layer-II, designed for more communications-intensive applications, will be a
smaller, more tightly coupled sub-cluster. This equipment will enhance research
in the following areas: a) structure structure (Freeman); b) the dynamical
behavior of liquids (Stratt); c) the generation of excited states of strongly
quantum systems (Nightingale); and d) many-body quantum dynamics (Doll).

A cluster of fast, modern computer workstations is vital to serving the
computing needs of active research departments. Such a "computer network" also
serves as a development environment for new theoretical codes and algorithms,
provides state-of-the-art graphics and visualization facilities, and supports
research in state-of-the-art applications of parallel processing.