* 0131151
* Biochemical and Genetic Analysis of the RNA Polymerase Specificity of Small Nuclear RNA Genes
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* William Stumph, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing grant
* Ming Lei
* 03/31/2006
* USD 379,999.00

The small nuclear RNAs (snRNAs) known as U1, U2, U4, U5, and U6 comprise a
highly abundant class of metabolically stable, non-polyadenylated RNA molecules
that are required for pre-messenger RNA splicing in eukaryotic organisms. These
snRNAs are all synthesized by RNA polymerase II, with the exception of U6, which
is synthesized by RNA polymerase III. Despite this difference in RNA polymerase
specificity, U6 genes and the RNA polymerase II-transcribed snRNA genes utilize
similar cis-acting regulatory signals and overlapping sets of transcription
factors for their expression. The main goal of this project is to gain an
understanding of the molecular mechanisms that are responsible for the selection
of the correct enzyme (either RNA polymerase II or RNA polymerase III) at
individual snRNA gene promoters. In higher eukaryotes, transcription of both
classes of snRNA genes requires an essential proximal sequence element (PSE)
within the region 40-75 base pairs upstream of the transcription start site. In
the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster, the PSE is recognized by the PSE binding
protein (termed DmPBP) that contains three distinct subunits that closely
approach the DNA. Previous work in the principal investigator's lab has led to a
working model in which the U1 and U6 PSEs act as differential allosteric
effectors of DmPBP. Conformational differences in DmPBP, in turn, are believed
to be responsible for the subsequent downstream recruitment of the correct RNA
polymerase. Two distinct yet highly synergistic approaches will be undertaken to
test the validity of this model. First, germline transformation and Drosophila
genetics will be employed to select mutants that have an altered RNA polymerase
specificity at snRNA gene promoters. The second approach involves targeted in
vitro mutagenesis of the genes that code for the subunits of DmPBP. The
biochemical mechanisms, including conformational differences in DmPBP, that lead
to changes in RNA polymerase specificity will be examined. Particular interest
will be focused upon identifying functional domains or amino acid residues
required specifically for the recruitment of one RNA polymerase but not the
other.

For the genetic information that resides in DNA to be correctly read out, it is
critical that the correct RNA polymerase must be recruited to any particular
gene of interest. This project will shed light on how this is accomplished at
the molecular level. The system under investigation in the principal
investigator's laboratory also serves as a general model for macromolecular
assembly and for understanding how subtle changes in macromolecular interactions
can lead to significantly different biological outcomes. The project will help
us to understand how decisions among alternative biological pathways are made
within cells. Research training will be provided for students engaged in
acquiring their B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in biochemistry and molecular
biology. Students with disabilities and from underrepresented groups will be
active participants.