* 0131383
* Genetic Analysis of Silenced Chromatin in Neurospora
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Eric Selker, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 05/31/2007
* USD 575,000.00

Eukaryotic genomes are more than just the sum of their genes. The chromosomal
context of genes is important and certain chromosomal parts, including the
centromeres, telomeres and rDNA regions, serve structural as well as coding
roles in the cell. Several lines of evidence indicate that the chromatin
structure of centromeric, telomeric and rDNA regions is more condensed than most
chromosomal regions and that this "heterochromatic" chromatin causes gene
silencing. The inactivated X chromosome in women represents an example of gene
silencing by heterochromatin. Centromeric, telomeric, and rDNA provide excellent
models to identify critical differences between alternative forms of chromatin.
Parallels are emerging among organisms whose heterochromatic regions have been
studied to date (principally yeasts and Drosophila) but significant differences
have also been detected. The current project will broaden our understanding of
the silencing that characterizes heterochromatic sequences by taking advantage
of a model eukaryote, the filamentous fungus Neurospora crassa. The study builds
on the well developed genetics of this organism and the recent availability of
the nearly complete sequence of its genome. Efficient genetic approaches will be
used to identify the important players in the cell that result in the formation,
and normal function of, heterochromatin. Reporter genes will be placed in
telomeric, centromeric and rDNA regions of Neurospora chromosomes by homologous
recombination in a strain bearing a mutation in a silencer gene, nst-1. The
resulting strains will be used as transformation hosts to test candidate genes
for involvement in heterochromatin silencing. This part of the project takes
advantage of a dominant post-transcriptional silencing process, quelling, to
efficiently screen a large number of genes. Approximately 30 candidate genes
identified by homology to genes of other organisms will be screened initially.
In addition, novel silencer genes will be sought in a non-redundant set of
sequenced cDNA clones. Genes showing evidence of involvement in silencing will
be selectively disrupted using RIP (repeat-induced point mutation). Silenced
reporter genes will also be used to select new silencing mutants generated by
insertional mutagenesis. The mutated DNA will be isolated and sequenced to
identify silencer genes. Finally, centromeric, telomeric and rDNA chromatin will
be characterized in wildtype Neurospora and in silencing mutants. Both genetic
and physical methods will be used to identify the nature of the defect(s) of the
silencing mutants.

Knowledge gained from this project should both improve our understanding of
specific mechanisms of gene silencing and shed light on mechanisms responsible
for normal and abnormal chromosome behavior in a variety of eukaryotes. In
addition to its scientific merit, this project will serve to train students and
to advance the use of Neurospora as a practical model system for functional
genomics.