* 0131193
* Role of the Tomato Gene Mi in Conferring Specific Resistance against Nematodes and Aphids
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Valerie Williamson, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Jermelina Tupas
* 09/30/2005
* USD 270,001.00

The tomato gene, Mi, confers resistance against several species of root-knot
nematodes (Meloidogyne spp.) as well as against specific isolates of potato
aphid (Macrosiphum euphorbiae). It is the only major gene for resistance to an
aphid to be cloned so far and the first discovered that can mediate gene-for-
gene resistance to two unrelated pests. Mi is a member of a diverse class of
plant resistance-genes (R-genes) involved in gene-specific resistance against
pathogens including viruses, bacteria and fungi. Members of this class of plant
proteins mediate specific pathogen recognition and signaling of host defense
responses. More than 20 such genes have been identified, yet how the pathogen is
recognized and resistance conferred is not known. The Mi clone constitutes a
unique resource for gaining insights into R-gene functions associated with
specific pest recognition and signaling in plants and for determining the
mechanism(s) by which a single gene can mediate resistance to multiple
organisms. Chimeric constructs of Mi that produce a lethal phenotype when
transiently expressed in Nicotiana benthamiana leaves are already available.
Specific in vitro mutations in Mi and in constitutively lethal constructs of Mi
will be produced. The phenotypes of the mutations will be examined in two
different assays to delineate the function in pathogen recognition and signal
transmission of particular regions of the gene. These assays will determine the
effects of mutated alleles on cell death in a leaf infiltration assay and on
nematode resistance in transformed roots. The phenotypes of in vitro-generated
alterations in Mi on the signalling of resistance will also be examined in
transgenic plants to identify the functional domains associated with nematode
and/or aphid recognition and downstream defense signaling. In addition, proteins
that interact with Mi will be identified using the yeast 2-hybrid system and the
role of these proteins in resistance will be examined.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Root- knot nematodes cause billions of dollars in damage
to the world's crops. Current agricultural control measures include application
of chemical pesticides or the use of resistant plants. A single gene present in
some tomato varieties can confer effective resistance against nematodes as well
as resistance against some aphids. This project explores the question of how a
single gene, which was bred into tomato from a wild plant species, can mediate
recognition of the nematode pest and trigger an effective defense. An increased
understanding of how plants defend themselves from pathogens and pests should
result from this work. Such understanding is essential for rational design of
strategies to improve pest and pathogen resistance in
plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;