* 0131847
* Plastid Sequestration in Mesodinium rubrum:  Physiological, Molecular, and Ecological Aspects
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Diane Stoecker, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Dianna K. Padilla
* 02/28/2006
* USD 320,000.00

Mesodinium rubrum is a one-celled member of the marine plankton that can form
extensive red-tides. It is unusual in that although it is a "Protozoa" (animal-
like cell) it contains numerous chloroplasts (the organelles in which
photosynthesis occurs) and can make its own food from carbon dioxide and water
using the energy in sunlight, and thus is plant-like. Although Mesodinium rubrum
appears to derive its plastids from ingestion of algae, it only occasionally
requires algal prey and the plastids appear to be capable of synthesizing
chlorophyll, the primary pigment used to capture light in photosynthesis. It
also temporarily harbors nuclei of algae. Because of its unusual attributes, it
may be a model for how ancestors of some algal groups acquired their
photosynthetic organelles.&lt;br/&gt; The objectives are to describe the
relationship of Mesodinium rubrum to its algal prey and to determine if
photosynthesis and growth depend on acquisition of new chloroplasts or nuclei
from algae and/or on digestion of prey as food. Another goal is to determine if
Mesodinium rubrum permanently harbors algal organelles or genes. These questions
will be approached using a combination of experimental studies of cultured
Mesodinium rubrum and of natural populations in the plankton. A combination of
microscopic, chemical, and isotopic techniques will be used to study the
physiological ecology of Mesodinium rubrum. Molecular techniques will be used to
measure algal gene content and expression in Mesodinium rubrum and to determine
relationships among different populations of Mesodinium rubrum and their
plastids. These parallel physiological and molecular investigations will
elucidate the possible role of organelle uptake from algae by protozoa in
cellular evolution.&lt;br/&gt;