* 0131017
* Cellular Structure and Biology of the Helicosporidia:  A Unique and Unknown Group of Invertebrate Pathogens
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/2002,09/30/2005
* Drion Boucias, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 09/30/2005
* USD 290,600.00

The Helicosporidia are a unique assemblage of pathogens isolated from a diverse
group of invertebrates with only one named species-Helicosporidium parasiticum.
Morphologically, this group is defined by the production of an unusual cyst
stage that encloses three ovoid cells and a single elongate, filamentous cell.
These organisms were at one time considered to be protozoa or fungi but have
been unclassified since 1931. Experiments outlined in this project utilize the
expertise of three research teams to explore the structure and function of this
novel pathogen. The approach taken in this project, dictated by the lack of
biological information on this organism, will provide a combination of
morphology, life history, and molecular data. The outlined objectives include a
complete analysis of the in vitro developmental cycle of the Helicosporidium sp.
with an emphasis on the ultrastructure and replication of vegetative cells and
the morphogenesis of the infectious cyst. Preliminary examination has revealed
that Helicosporidia possess many unique cytological features, such as a pellicle
that is formed by both vegetative and cyst phenotypes, nuclei that enclose the
cytosol, a number of undefined cell organelles, and a harpoon-like filamentous
cell. The combination of high-resolution light and electron microscopy will
provide detailed insight on the composition and structure of the surface, wall
structure, and internal morphology of this organism. Under controlled in vitro
conditions, time-lapse microscope studies will provide details on the
developmental cycle of this pathogen. Secondly, the in vivo infection process,
development, and host range of the Helicosporidium sp will be examined.
Throughout the course of this study, cell-tracking technologies will be
optimized to analyze the ingress of this pathogen through the midgut barrier and
its subsequent development in the hemocoel. Unlike many insect diseases,
Helicosporidium sp., although isolated from an aquatic environment, can infect a
wide range of terrestrial insect hosts. For comparative purposes, both mosquito
and lepidopteran larvae will be used to document the in vivo cell cycle. To
date, sequence data generated on rDNA and two proteins, actin and tubulin, have
demonstrated that Helicosporida belongs within the Chlorophyta and, as such, it
represents the first record of an insect-pathogenic alga. It should be noted
that Helicosporidia nests hierarchically within a group of organisms with
radically different morphologies and life history traits, allowing for
comparative studies that can shed light on genes and structures that were
modified to achieve parasitism. Molecular studies will be directed at generating
sequence information on select genes from the Helicosporidium sp. and on EST
libraries. A primary goal is analyze the relationship between the genera
Helicosporidium, Prototheca, and other members of the Trebouxiaphyceae in order
to gain a better understanding of the morphological, molecular, and genetic
changes that are correlated with the evolution of parasitism. Furthermore,
analysis of this sequence data in conjunction with morphological
(ultrastructural) features will define the taxonomic status and phylogeny of
this organism. This project will provide support and training for two graduate
students and two undergraduate research assistants. The goal is to leverage the
combined talents of this group to provide students interdisciplinary training in
molecular systematics, histology, and pathology. These skills are crucial for
the discovery, characterization, and evaluation of microbials for applications
to a broad range of scientific disciplines such as new pest control
technologies, novel protein and small molecule discovery, etc.