* 0131761
* Workshop on the Correlates of Verb-Initial Word Order; Tucson, Arizona; February 2003
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2002,03/31/2005
* Sheila Collberg, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 03/31/2005
* USD 22,725.00

A classic means of grouping languages typologically is in terms of the order of
their basic constituents: subject, object, and verb. In traditional typological
literature, these groups are thought to correlate with other syntactic
phenomenon. Most research on these correlates has focused on western European
languages, which primarily exhibit subject-verb-object (SVO) or subject-object-
verb (SOV) orders. Although these studies has been fruitful, more attention
needs to be given to languages that display other orders, particularly verb-
subject-object (VSO) ordering. VSO ordering characterizes less than nine percent
of the world's languages. Examples of VSO languages are Irish, Welsh, Arabic,
Chamorro, Berber, Breton, Samoan, and Tongan. VSO ordering relatively rare, and
it is highly problematic in terms of theoretical syntax. This has led to
considerable controversy among scholars with respect to the degree to which most
or all of the VSO languages share specific syntactical properties. This award
will support a workshop that will bring together about 18 leading scholars
representing diverse language families and different theoretical orientations to
share their findings regarding verb-initial word-order correlates and to discuss
the implications of structural approaches to word order and to the predictive
power of analyses to word-order correlations. The workshop is scheduled to be
held in Tucson, Arizona, in February 2003. In addition to invited speakers,
participation also will be open to other individuals who submit abstracts of
presentations for anonymous review beforehand. Outcomes are the workshop are
expected to be in the form of a compilation of papers presented in a special
issue of a journal or in a book.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will help
advance linguistics by increasing communication among linguists who have
employed different theoretical perspective and by increasing knowledge of how
expanded understanding of VSO languages can advance understanding of syntax and
linguistic theory as a whole. The workshop also will advance understanding about
VSO languages, many of which, like Irish, are in danger of
extinction.&lt;br/&gt;