* 0131957
* Microbial Observatories: Evolution and Diversity of Biochemical Pathways: A Methylotrophic Microbial Observatory
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2006
* Mary Lidstrom, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 01/31/2006
* USD 917,792.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. Mary Lidstrom and Ludmila Chistoserdova at the
University of Washington to investigate the breadth of diversity in an
environmentally important group of bacteria, those that grow on simple compounds
containing one carbon. These bacteria, called methylotrophs, have developed
unique biochemical pathways that allow them to grow on compounds such as methane
(natural gas), methanol (wood alcohol), and a variety of atmospheric pollutants
such as bromomethane and chloromethane. Evidence to date suggests that these
biochemical pathways evolved through a combination of borrowing genes from other
bacteria and creating new traits specific to methylotrophy. The approach that
will be taken in this project is to use the few known genome sequences for
methylotrophic bacteria and other bacteria in a comparative way to develop an
understanding of the shared and unique aspects of these bacteria. Both
laboratory cultures and natural populations of methylotrophs from the
environment will be studied, to maximize the diversity that is sampled, and
partial genomes from uncultured environmental methylotrophs will be identified
and sequenced. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will provide insights into the
complex communities in natural habitats that are responsible for the cycling of
one-carbon compounds. These bacteria play an important role in keeping natural
habitats healthy and thriving, and in addition they are the main consumers on
earth of a number of compounds that contribute to global warming. Understanding
which methylotrophs are present in specific environments and relating such
information to their natural roles is an important step in developing accurate
predictions regarding the relationship between natural resource utilization and
global conditions such as global warming. In addition, the comparative genomics
studies that will be carried out will provide insights into the evolution of
specialized metabolic pathways. These evolutionary approaches are important for
making the leap from genome sequences to understanding how cells
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;