* 0131485
* Function of Wnt Signaling During C. Elegans Vulval Induction
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* David Eisenmann, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Judith M. Venuti
* 07/31/2006
* USD 380,584.00

Function of Wnt Signaling during C. elegans Vulval Induction.&lt;br/&gt;David M.
Eisenmann, University of Maryland Baltimore
County&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;All metazoan organisms rely on
the use of extracellular signals to regulate cell division, migration and
differentiation during development. Several evolutionarily-conserved signal
transduction pathways are used to receive these signals and alter the regulation
of genes and proteins that bring about changes in the behavior of responding
cells. One of these conserved signaling pathways is the Wnt signaling pathway.
Wnt pathways function in vertebrates during the development of the nervous
system, the heart, the reproductive organs, and the skeletal system, and other
processes. Much of our knowledge of the function of the Wnt pathway has come
from genetic, molecular and biochemical analyses in model systems such as
Drosophila, Xenopus and C. elegans. This lab has previously shown that Wnt
signaling is involved in the development of the vulva of the C. elegans
hermaphrodite. During vulval induction, six equivalent vulval precursor cells
are instructed to adopt distinct cell fates by the action of extracellular
signals that activate receptor tyrosine kinase/Ras and Notch signaling pathways
in these cells. Previous work showed that the Wnt pathway acts with the Ras
pathway to coordinately regulate the levels of LIN-39, a member of the important
class of evolutionarily-conserved transcription factors encoded by Hox genes,
and current results indicate that the levels of LIN-39 in the vulval precursor
cells play an important role in which cell fate they adopt. &lt;br/&gt;The
experiments in this proposal aim to further characterize the role of Wnt
signaling in vulval induction in C. elegans Specifically, to identify novel
factors acting in C. elegans Wnt signaling, the mig-14 gene will be cloned and
characterized and suppressors of the mig-14 mutant phenotype will be isolated
and characterized. mig-14 is very interesting because mig-14 mutations lead to
defects in most processes regulated by Wnt signaling in C. elegans, yet the
mig-14 genomic region contains no known Wnt components or regulators. Also,
mig-14 is likely to act in the Wnt sending cell, suggesting it could shed light
on some of the unknown issues involved ligand production and secretion.
Additional Wnt pathway factors may also be identified by proteins which
physically interact with the C. elegans b-catenin BAR-1, which will be
characterized in this proposed work. To investigate how cells become responsive
to Wnt signals, cis- and trans-acting factors that control the BAR-1 expression
pattern will be identified. This work will hopefully identify novel Wnt pathway
components and regulators, and extend our knowledge of this important
evolutionarily-conserved signaling pathway. &lt;br/&gt;