* 0131496
* Young Children's Use of Mental State Information in Persuasion
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Karen Bartsch, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 08/31/2006
* USD 157,812.00

Children often attempt to persuade their parents and friends. At what age do
they begin to tailor their arguments to the beliefs and attitudes of those
individuals? Even preschoolers may possess such persuasive sophistication,
according to theoretical accounts of children's developing social cognition and
recent findings concerning young children's understanding of mental states. This
research will use experimental interviews and analysis of everyday conversations
to clarify whether, when, and how young children engage in psychologically
sensitive persuasion. Because recent findings have indicated that children
acquire an understanding of belief and its role in action during the preschool
years, this research will focus on whether and when young children utilize
belief information in their persuasion attempts, how typical are such efforts,
and how development of this ability occurs. Experimental studies will involve
individual interviews requiring young children to engage in persuasion with
puppets or other people. Information about the beliefs of each "persuadee" will
be systematically manipulated in order to measure effects on children's
persuasion. These experimental manipulations will address the basic question of
whether young children can engage in psychologically sensitive persuasion. They
will also compare children's reasoning about belief as measured by traditional
tasks to their belief reasoning on persuasion tasks, a first step towards
understanding developmental progression. Experimental studies will also address
questions concerning how "real" are the skills revealed in young children and
which task factors appear to facilitate children's use of belief information in
persuasion. Specifically, the research will examine how children's sensitivity
to belief information in persuasion depends on how belief information is
presented, how persuasive arguments are elicited, and whether interactions are
with puppets or real people. Whether young children consider beliefs as
representations or merely get ideas for arguments from belief information will
also be examined. Finally, an analysis of children's everyday talk with parents
(from transcripts of family conversations sampled throughout the preschool
period) will provide a complementary "real-life" and longitudinal perspective on
children's developing use of psychological information in persuasion. Together,
these studies will provide extensive and novel descriptive data concerning
children's use of their developing understanding of mental states in an
important and common type of social interaction, persuasion. Results will bear
on how development occurs, specifically with regard to belief understanding and
application to persuasion, and generally with regard to whether conceptual
development precedes social application or the reverse. The resulting
descriptive and explanatory data should inform educational and developmental
practices.