* 0131801
* Biodiversity and Ecosystem Informatics - BDEI -Quantifying Forest Ground Flora Biomass and Diversity Using Close-Range Remote Sensing
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2001,02/29/2004
* Robert Weih, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Brandt
* 02/29/2004
* USD 85,818.00

EIA-0131801&lt;br/&gt;Doruska, Paul &lt;br/&gt;University of
Arkansas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BDEI: Quantifying Forest Ground Flora Biomass and
Diversity Using Close-Range Remote Sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Summary&lt;br/&
gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers propose the use of close-range remote
sensing to estimate biomass per&lt;br/&gt;unit area and species diversity of
forest ground flora. Ground flora biomass and diversity&lt;br/&gt;information is
useful when describing forested ecosystems, gauging results in
scientific&lt;br/&gt;experiments and determining the need for herbicide
application to reduce unwanted&lt;br/&gt;competition in forest crops. Scientists
will use both color and color infrared digital&lt;br/&gt;imagery to study forest
ground flora biomass and species diversity of pine stands
in&lt;br/&gt;southeastern Arkansas and mixed pine-hardwood stands in the
Ouachita Mountains in&lt;br/&gt;central Arkansas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Airborne
and/or space-borne imagery have been used to estimate forest
overstory&lt;br/&gt;biomass. However, such platforms cannot be used to estimate
biomass of forest ground&lt;br/&gt;flora species because (a.) spatial resolution
is too coarse for the required level of detail,&lt;br/&gt;and (b.) the presence
of the overstory canopy can hinder use of such imagery. The&lt;br/&gt;objectives
of this project are to (1) determine if these metrics can be collected
through&lt;br/&gt;close-range remote sensing, and (2) identify spectral
signatures for a number of species&lt;br/&gt;of forest ground
flora.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;