* 0131691
* Biodiversity and Ecosystem Informatics - BDEI - Reconfigurable Wireless Sensor Networks for Dense Spatio-Temporal Environmental Monitoring
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2001,05/31/2003
* Paul Flikkema, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Brandt
* 05/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

EIA-0131691&lt;br/&gt;Flikkema, Paul &lt;br/&gt;Northern Arizona
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BDEI: Reconfigurable Wireless Sensor Networks
for Dense Spatio-Temporal Environmental
Monitoring&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improving
understanding of ecosystem processes requires the acquisition of multi-
component&lt;br/&gt;environmental time series at high spatial resolution.
Current environmental sensing systems typically rely on stand alone data loggers
or wired sensor arrays. Research and resource management that depend on
such&lt;br/&gt;systems are currently limited by initial cost and/or the effort
required to acquire the data. The nexus of this project is to integrate cutting-
edge, low-cost circuit and system technology into a wireless environmental
sensing network based on an evolvable architecture that will meet an immediate
and critical need: to dramatically improve coverage and spatial density while
greatly reducing the total cost. This first-generation network will also serve
as an experimental testbed for fundamental research in wireless sensor
networking that targets the unique characteristics of environmental monitoring
applications. This research includes distributed, adaptive source coding of
spatio-temporally correlated vector processes, multi-hop protocols with inter-
layer interaction, and coded macrodiversity for energy-constrained multi-hop
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since this project brings together wireless
networking and ecosystems and microclimate researchers, it also provides an
opportunity to initiate the development of a new interdisciplinary program of
study: Ecosystem Sciences and Informatics. This program will educate a new
generation of students who can develop and use technology for ecosystem
monitoring and modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;