* 0131846
* Regulation of Leptin Synthesis and Secretion in Pregnant Mammals
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2006
* Thomas Kunz, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Dona Boggs
* 01/31/2006
* USD 424,781.00

Collectively, rodents and bats comprise roughly 75% of all known mammalian
species. Within the Chiroptera, temperate bats such as the little brown bat
(Myotis lucifugus) play critical ecological and economic roles in the United
States and elsewhere. For example, these species are important in controlling
insect populations, which would otherwise flourish in the absence of
insectivorous bats. Understanding the regulation of basic reproductive processes
in these species is therefore of vital concern, but surprisingly many
fundamental aspects of reproductive control are still unclear in bats. The use
of a comparative approach will provide information on the ubiquity in nature of
these regulatory processes. Recently, the so-called obesity hormone, leptin, has
been suggested to serve a role in mammalian reproduction. This hypothesis
originally arose from the observation that levels of leptin in blood of pregnant
animals increase considerably. Leptin's established functions are to suppress
appetite and stimulate metabolic rate when body weight increases. As fat mass in
the body increases, adipose cells secrete leptin into the blood, which signals
the brain that sufficient fat reserves are available. Whether leptin exerts
regulatory effects during reproduction is still uncertain. Also uncertain is the
mechanism(s) by which plasma leptin levels are elevated during pregnancy. Recent
evidence suggests that both the placenta and adipose tissue are important in
secreting leptin during pregnancy, and that leptin may not only be secreted by
the placenta, but may act on it as well (e.g., to promote its growth and
development). In this project the regulatory factors that influence leptin
secretion from both tissue sources during this energetically-demanding period of
a mammal's life history will be identified. Further proposed experiments will
permit determination of whether leptin is actively synthesized from placentas of
rodents and bats. Finally, experiments will provide tests of the hypothesis that
changes in expression of brain leptin receptors account in part for observed
leptin-insensitivity during pregnancy (i.e., the ability of pregnant females to
continue eating above a normal amount despite elevated levels of this appetite-
suppressing hormone). Such experiments may help explain why some people are
apparently insensitive to the appetite-suppressing effects of leptin. These
studies will extend our knowledge of reproductive processes in Chiroptera,
specifically, of the placenta as a mammalian endocrine organ, and will also be
applicable to other mammalian orders, since the control of leptin secretion
during pregnancy appears similar in bats and humans, for example. Elucidation of
the sequence of leptin and its receptor in bats will provide useful probes for
detecting the presence of receptor in brain and placenta, and aid in future
phylogenetic and structure/function analyses of the protein. This project will
also contribute to science education by including numerous undergraduate
students who will participate in various phases of the project, plus several
graduate students or post-doctoral fellows. These students will gain valuable
dual experience in field and laboratory biology, while engaged in an extremely
topical project with wide-ranging ramifications and benefits to society at
large. The PI and the co-PI have a long and successful history of promoting
science through research and teaching at all levels, from K-12 through college,
and continuing education of high school science teachers. It is anticipated that
this trend will continue with this new project.