* 0131767
* Existentials at the Interface
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2005
* Sandra Chung, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 02/28/2005
* USD 75,118.00

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Sandra Chung and James McCloskey
will conduct three years of linguistic research on the form, meaning, and use of
expressions of existence in five languages whose linguistic profiles differ
radically from English. Previous research has established that these expressions
fall into a small range of types, closely connected in form to expressions of
location, possession, and impersonality. Relatively little is known about
variation in the meaning and use of such expressions. Consistent with the
intuition that existence is a fundamental concept, many linguists and
philosophers hold that sentences expressing existence have a constant function,
whatever their form. But most previous research involved a small number of well-
known and closely related languages. Broader investigation is needed to reveal
whether differences in form are correlated with specific differences in meaning
and in patterns of use in these expressions. Chung and McCloskey's research team
will investigate these questions in three languages of the Pacific (Chamorro,
Maori, and Samoan) and two languages of Europe (Breton and Irish). Data
collected through fieldwork with native speakers, from written language
materials, and in naturally occurring discourse will address these questions:
(1) In each language, what linguistic forms express existence? (2) How are these
forms used in discourse? In narrative, for instance, can sentences expressing
existence introduce new characters or reintroduce familiar characters? (3) What
meaning restrictions, if any, are imposed on expressions of existence? Can they
be used to assert the existence of a particular object, of a kind of object, of
every object of a certain kind? (4) Does the linguistic form of these
expressions correlate with their meaning or function?

This research is important for several reasons. First, it will broaden the range
of languages whose expressions of existence are studied in depth. Second, it
will contribute insights into the cross-linguistic interaction of linguistic
form, sentence meaning, and discourse function. Third, the five languages to be
investigated are endangered. This research will contribute significantly to
their documentation, which is especially important in the under-studied areas of
meaning and language use.