* 0131335
* Human Germline Ig Loci in Cloned Transgenic Cattle: Diversification & Immunophysiology
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2006
* Richard Goldsby, Amherst College
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 03/31/2006
* USD 330,000.00

It has been possible to construct a human artificial chromosome (HAC) containing
the entire unrearranged human heavy and light chain Ig loci and introduce it
into a bovine fibroblast. Using advances in the technology of cloning, it has
been possible to use these HAC-transgenic fibroblasts to generate bovine fetuses
and calves. These cloned transgenic bovines will provide the experimental
material for a project that will determine the ability of HAC-borne human Ig
loci to undergo rearrangement, Ig expression and the generation of a primary
antibody repertoire within the environment of bovine cells. While we hypothesize
that a diverse repertoire of human antibodies will be formed in these animals,
whether the bovine B lineage environment will support the generation of a
diverse repertoire of human antibodies is an open question. There are major
differences in the mechanisms and sites used by humans and Bovidae to diversify
antibody genes. There is no body of experiment that predicts whether the
rearrangement of HAC-borne human Ig loci will be limited, as is true of bovine
Ig loci, or extensive, as seen in humans and transgenic mice. This experiment
will allow us to investigate the interplay of species-specific cell physiology
with the sequences of entire unrearranged immunoglobulin loci in determining the
mechanism, extent and sites of immunoglobulin gene diversification. The
availability of bovines transgenic for the complete human heavy chain locus and
the complete human light chain locus make it possible to examine the
compatibility of unrearranged Ig loci from one species with the diversification
system of another. Although this question has been explored in genetic chimeras
(i.e. 'human to mouse') between species that use the same mechanisms and sites
of repertoire diversification, it has not been studied in those that do not. The
creation of 'human to bovine' Ig locus chimeras provides an opportunity to
determine the extent to which human Ig loci can be diversified by a xenogeneic
diversification system that employs sites and mechanisms that differ
significantly from those of humans. Some of the opportunities presented by the
advent of rearrangement of a guest human Ig locus in the bovine B lineage are
addressed by the following specific aims:

AIM 1: Determine the extent and mechanism of human antibody diversification in
HAC-transgenic, cloned cattle. AIM 2: Examine the synthesis, cell surface
display and secretion of human immunoglobulin by HAC-transgenic bovine B-lineage
cells. AIM 3: Study the humoral immune responses of cloned, HAC-transgenic
calves.

This study of cloned cattle containing a human artificial chromosome offers an
opportunity to determine the effects of transplanting the gene assemblies
responsible for human antibody production into cattle. The successful generation
of significant amounts of human antibodies has the important implications for
basic biology outlined above. Because cattle are large animals that have the
potential to produce very large amounts of antibody, these studies could have an
impact on the technology of human antibody production for use in the clinic.

