* 0131078
* Evolution of Ecophysiological Traits in a Species of Hybrid Origin, Helianthus Anomalus
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2006
* Lisa Donovan, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Winner
* 01/31/2006
* USD 356,001.00

Understanding the relationship between plant traits and plant performance is a
fundamental goal of both basic and applied plant sciences. This research will
determine the relationship between plant traits and performance (survival and
reproductive output) for a wild sunflower species of hybrid origin (Helianthus
anomalous) and early generation hybrids of its ancestral parents (Helianthus
annuus and Helianthus petiolaris). We are interested in plant traits related to
water use, photosynthetic carbon gain, growth, survival, and reproductive
output. The hybrid species complex provides a unique opportunity to look at how
these traits are evolving to improve the fitness of the hybrids in a desert dune
environment, and what trait combinations are associated with maximum performance
in this water and nutrient limited environment. The analyses will include a)
experimental gardens to show which plants do best in environments on and off the
dunes, b) phenotypic selection experiments to determine which traits account for
better performance, and c) selection experiments to determine whether or not
there is heritable genetic variation for these traits in Helianthus. This
research will further our understanding of how wild plants adapt to harsh
environments and identify traits that may be useful for development of stress
tolerant line of commercial Helianthus annuus.