* 0131278
* Conference: Yeast Chromosome Structure, Replication and Segregation; June 28 - July 3, 2002,  Snowmass Village, Colorado
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2003
* Ted Weinert, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 05/31/2003
* USD 5,000.00

Research into the structure of yeast chromosomes and the mechanisms and control
of their replication and segregation continues at a rapid pace. To bring
together scientists working in this area, the Federation of American Societies
for Experimental Biology (FASEB) will sponsor the seventh convening of the
research conference "Yeast Chromosome Structure, Replication and Segregation" to
be held June 28-July 3, 2002, at Snowmass Village, Colorado. The goal is to
provide a forum where members of all subdisciplines studying the metabolism,
structure and behavior of yeast chromosomes can meet to exchange ideas. This
conference has a strong tradition of presenting primarily unpublished results
and is attended by most of the leaders in the field. Principal investigators are
present for, and actively participate in, the entire meeting. This small
conference provides a good balance of students, postdoctoral fellows, and junior
and senior researchers, with an informal atmosphere that contributes greatly to
interactions between younger and older scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is
the only conference that is specifically devoted to this topic and brings
together its diverse subdisciplines. Integration across research fields has
become ever more critical, and assembling experts from separate but related
fields provides a unique opportunity for the intellectual cross-fertilization,
insight and understanding that can lead to discoveries beneficial to all
society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;