* 0131729
* Collaborative Research: Atomic Structure Determination of ADPGlucose Pyrophosphorylase
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2006
* Christopher Meyer, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 03/31/2006
* USD 70,250.00

Glycogen and starch serve as major energy storage compounds for nearly
all-&lt;br/&gt;living organisms and are an important energy component obtained
from&lt;br/&gt;plants. ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase (ADPGlc Ppase) catalyzes
the&lt;br/&gt;conversion of glucose-1-phosphate and ATP to ADP-glucose
and&lt;br/&gt;pyrophosphate and is a key regulated step in both bacterial
glycogen and&lt;br/&gt;plant starch biosynthesis. ADPGlc Ppase regulation is
mediated by the&lt;br/&gt;binding of a number of activators and inhibitors, many
of which are key&lt;br/&gt;metabolic intermediates. This research utilizes the
ADPGlc Ppase enzyme&lt;br/&gt;from the bacteria Agrobacterium tumefaciens
(Ag.t.) that is regulated by fructose-&lt;br/&gt;6-phosphate and pyruvate. This
project outlines x-ray crystal structural&lt;br/&gt;studies on Ag.t. ADPGlc
Ppase to examine substrate binding, allosteric&lt;br/&gt;effector binding, and
the mechanism of activation. Several roadblocks&lt;br/&gt;associated with x-ray
crystallography have already been overcome including&lt;br/&gt;crystallization
and heavy atom derivitization for phase determination. Once&lt;br/&gt;the three-
dimensional structure of one member of the ADPGlc Ppase protein&lt;br/&gt;family
is determined homology modeling can be used to construct
reasonable&lt;br/&gt;structures of the other proteins in the family. As a major
control point for the&lt;br/&gt;production of renewable and biodegradable carbon
sources, ADPGlc Ppase&lt;br/&gt;is an attractive enzyme target for protein
engineering. Understanding the&lt;br/&gt;regulation of the ADPGlc Ppase enzyme
family is necessary for the&lt;br/&gt;bioengineering of the enzyme and could
lead to rational protein engineering&lt;br/&gt;of the enzyme to increase starch
production&lt;br/&gt;