* 0131755
* Regulation of GSK3beta in Xenopus
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2005
* Jeremy Green, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 03/31/2005
* USD 375,000.00

0131755&lt;br/&gt;Green&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A central question in developmental
biology is how the body axes are established in the vertebrate embryo. Previous
studies in Xenopus have shown that the protein kinase GSK3b plays a pivotal role
in establishing dorsoventral asymmetry. However, it was believed that asymmetry
in GSK3b specific activity, rather than an asymmetry of GSK3b protein abundance
per se, provided spatial orientation for the embryo. In preliminary studies, Dr.
Green and colleagues have shown that dorsoventral regulation of GSK3b involves
an actual depletion of GSK3b, perhaps through differential stability of the
protein. The research proposed here builds upon this preliminary observation.
The broad goal is to define the GSK3b regulatory mechanisms that establish the
dorsoventral axis. The first aim is to characterize the mechanism of GSK3b
protein depletion. The stability of purified recombinant GSK3b will be measured
in early embryos. Ubiquitination/proteasome inhibitors will be tested for their
ability to prevent GSK3b depletion. The second aim is to clarify the role of Wnt
signaling in endogenous dorsoventral regulation of GSK3b. GSK3b abundance in
embryos depleted for Wnt receptors will be measured and maternal Wnts will be
compared with zygotic Wnts (that are known to reduce GSK3b specific activity
only) for their ability to deplete GSK3b. To identify a possible temporal shift
in GSK3b regulation from depletion to specific activity reduction, earlier and
later stage unperturbed embryos will be compared. The third aim is to examine
the role of GSK3b localization in its regulation. GSK3b protein depletion is
tightly localized to the cell cortex, and has been shown to be involved in Wnt-
dependent recruitment of the Wnt transduction protein Axin to the Wnt
transmembrane receptor LRP5. The hypothesis that membrane-associated GSK3b forms
a highly Wnt- and GBP-sensitive pool will be tested by examining GSK3b abundance
and activity in cortical membrane fractions of normal and manipulated embryos.
These projects will together provide a more precise molecular picture of GSK3b
regulation in early Xenopus development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;