* 0131395
* SBIR Phase II:  A Process for Preparing Nanometer-Sized Ceramic Particles at High Production Rates
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Junhai Liu, Nanotek Instruments, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 02/29/2004
* USD 382,093.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop
and commercialize a new technology for mass producing nanometer-sized ceramic
powders at dramatically reduced costs. The technology, Combined Atomization and
Reaction Technique (CART), involves providing an atomizing gas medium containing
a reactant element such as hydrogen, oxygen, carbon, nitrogen, chlorine,
fluorine, boron, or sulfur; preparing a metal alloy melt super-heated to a
spontaneous reaction temperature at which the alloy can undergo a self-
sustaining reaction with the selected reactant element; and introducing reactant
gas to concurrently mix, atomize, and react with the critically super-heated
alloy melt to form ultra-fine ceramic particles in an atomizer chamber. This
Phase II project will design and build a prototype pilot-scale CART apparatus to
demonstrate the commercial viability of the technology as applied to the
synthesis of nano-sized oxides of selected metals that are deemed to have the
greatest commercial potential.

The commercial potential of ultrafine powders are in the production of
catalysts, coatings and films, conductive pastes, cosmetics, electromagnetic
components, electronic devices, fire retardant materials, magnetic fluids,
sintered and injection-molded parts, ceramic composites, magnetic storage media,
phosphors, pigments, polishing media, and toners. Indium-tin oxide (ITO) powders
are used to prepare sputtering targets for deposition of transparent films for
use in flat-panel display technology. Nano-grained materials can be employed to
replace various load-bearing and non-structural parts in automobiles,
infrastructures, off-shore structures, piping, containers, electronic equipment
housings, etc. Nano-grained cermets and ceramics are outstanding cutting tool
materials. Transparent nano-grained ceramics can be utilized in a broad array of
applications, including transparent ceramic appliance components, clear
"glassware" and artistic artifacts. Transparent ceramics may also be used in
ballistic protection armor by law enforcement, security police and armored car
personnel.