* 0131664
* Parental Management of Peers in Three Ethnic Contexts
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Nina Mounts, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Paul A. Klaczynski
* 08/31/2006
* USD 136,967.00

The goal of this research is to examine parental management of adolescents'
peers in three ethnic contexts (African-American, Latino [primarily Mexican],
and White). In recent years, there has been growing interest in examining
parental management of adolescents' peer relationships. Given the increase in
importance of peers during adolescence and given that peer influence is also a
predictor of school adjustment, drug use, and delinquent behavior, it is
important to examine the ways in which parents manage the peer relationships of
adolescents. Much current research on parental management of peers focuses on
White adolescents. More research examining issues of normative development among
minority populations, such as parental management of peers, is needed. This
research will provide new information on the role of parental management of
peers for adolescents in non-White and White groups and its relation to
adolescent academic achievement and adjustment (e.g., drug use, delinquent
behavior, friendship quality, loneliness). The project will consist of two
studies. The first will identify the precursors of parental management of
adolescents' peer relationships (e.g., parental goals, parental beliefs,
parental perceptions of adolescents' behaviors) and it will identify the range
of strategies used by parents in the management of adolescents' peer
relationships. Ninety adolescents and their parents (30 African-American, 30
Latino, and 30 White) will participate in interviews regarding several facets of
parental management of peers, including precursors to parental management of
peer relationships. Information derived from the first study will be used to
refine and develop questionnaires to be used in the second study. That study
will assess the suitability of the measures for use across the three ethnic
groups, examine the relations between precursors of parental management of
peers, such as parental beliefs about authority over peer relationships or
adolescent adjustment, and examine adolescent outcomes (e.g., academic
achievement, friendship quality, drug use, and delinquent behavior) associated
with parental management practices. For the second, a total of 100 African-
American, 100 Latino, and 100 White seventh-graders, their parents, and their
best school friends will be followed for one year. All participants will
complete questionnaires at the beginning of the academic year and at the end of
the academic year. Analysis of the data will allow assessment of whether the
questionnaires function similarly across the three ethnic groups, as well as
whether particular precursors are related to management of peers and whether
management is, in turn, related to academic achievement, friendship quality,
drug use, and delinquent behavior. The data should ultimately be useful in
constructing training for parents in peer management techniques that would be
effective in achieving desired and socially acceptable outcomes.