* 0131883
* NSF-EC:  Magnetotransport in Layered Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2005
* Peter Levy, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 04/30/2005
* USD 172,000.00

This project is co-funded by the Division of Materials Research and the Office
of Multidisciplinary Activities, both within the Directorate for Mathematical
and Physical Sciences, and the International Division as a cooperative activity
in materials sciences between the National Science foundation and the European
Commission (NSF solicitation 01-105). The project involves the EC Research
Training Network (RTN) on Computational Magnetoelectronics whose lead
institutions include Daresbury Laboratory (United Kingdom), FZ Juelich
(Germany), MSP-MPI Halle (Germany), CNRS Orsay (France), TU Vienna (Austria),
University of Twente (Netherlands), Uppsala University (Sweden), Academy of
Sciences - Budapest (Hungary) and Institute of Physics of Materials Brno
(Czechia).

This grant will enable the US research group at NYU to collaborate with members
of the EC RTN. The NYU group is focused on analytic and model calculations in
magnetoelectronics, whereas the EC expertise is in ab initio calculations of
electronic structure and magnetic and transport properties of solids.

The RTN is using ab initio methods to assess the importance on the transport
properties of magnetic multilayers and tunnel junctions of features identified
from calculations based on model Hamiltonians. Specifically, for metallic
multilayers the role of spin flip scattering by impurities on magnetoresistance
(MR) will be studied, as well as resistivity and MR for currents perpendicular
to the layers and the role of anisotropy compared to giant MR in magnetic
multilayers. For magnetic tunnel junctions the in-plane lattice constant and the
interlayer distance at interfaces will be relaxed to determine the effects on
tunneling. In addition, the surface band structures at electrode/barrier
interfaces, determined by full potential methods, will be incorporated into the
calculations of junction MR. %%% This project is co-funded by the Division of
Materials Research and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities, both within
the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences, and the International
Division as a cooperative activity in materials sciences between the National
Science foundation and the European Commission (NSF solicitation 01-105). The
project involves the EC Research Training Network (RTN) on Computational
Magnetoelectronics whose lead institutions include Daresbury Laboratory (United
Kingdom), FZ Juelich (Germany), MSP-MPI Halle (Germany), CNRS Orsay (France), TU
Vienna (Austria), University of Twente (Netherlands), Uppsala University
(Sweden), Academy of Sciences - Budapest (Hungary) and Institute of Physics of
Materials Brno (Czechia).

This grant will enable the US research group at NYU to collaborate with members
of the EC RTN. The NYU group is focused on analytic and model calculations in
magnetoelectronics, whereas the EC expertise is in ab initio calculations of
electronic structure and magnetic and transport properties of solids. ***