* 0131905
* Biodiversity and Ecosystem Informatics - BDEI -Computation and Uncertainty in Ecological Forecasting
* CSE,CCF
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2003
* Michael Lavine, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Brandt
* 11/30/2003
* USD 99,431.00

EIA-0131905 -James Clark-Duke University-BDEI: Computation and Uncertainty in
Ecological Forecasting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Planning for global change and
decision making will be improved by access to reliable forecasts of ecosystem
change. A recent initiative by the Ecological Society of America identifies
three challenges that must be met for forecasts to be successful: 1)
computational approaches (algorithm development and data structures) that would
permit simulation of complex systems, 2) feasible methods to track statistical
uncertainty, and 3) data inadequacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The project "BDEI:
Computation and uncertainty in ecological forecasting" is an incubation that
addresses these three challenges with an integrated approach. We propose to
develop new computational and statistical techniques that will provide the
capacity to forecast at broader spatial and temporal extents than possible with
current approaches. The success of the proposed techniques will be evaluated
using the data gathered from field experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A team of
three researchers-an ecologist (Clark), a computer scientist (Agarwal), and a
statistician (Lavine)- propose a working group for Fall and Spring 2002 that
will focus on forecasting forest compositional change. The working group will
integrate new computational techniques into stand simulators and use models to
estimate&lt;br/&gt;uncertainty. The working group will develop an agenda for a
broad initiative in ecological forecasting as basis for future
proposals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;