* 0131907
* Steroid-Induced Gene Expression:  A link to Ca[2+]-Regulated Exocytosis
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2002,06/30/2002
* Andrew Andres, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 06/30/2002
* USD 139,999.00

Steroid hormones are small lipophilic regulatory molecules that profoundly
influence basic processes of growth, homeostasis, and disease progression in
developing organisms. Unlike peptide hormone signals, most of the physiological
responses mediated by steroids occur though a nuclear action of the
ligand/receptor complex on responding genes (a genomic mechanism). Although much
has been learned over the past decade concerning the molecular details of
receptor activation and transcriptional regulation of steroid-responsive DNA
targets, little is known about how the qualitative differences in gene
expression lead to long-term physiological changes in the responding tissue.
This remains a fundamental question of cell biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
fruitfly, Drosophila melanogaster, has contributed much to our understanding of
the conserved processes of developmental signaling. It is also an attractive
system in which to study steroid responses because only one steroid,
20-hydroxyecdysone (ecdysone), is known to regulate the important postembryonic
developmental transitions of molting and metamorphosis. Furthermore, the
salivary gland of the third larval stage offers a unique opportunity to
correlate changes in gene expression with a tissue-specific physiological
response. This is possible because the chromosomes within this tissue are
polytenized. Thus, hormone targets are easy to identify because they often form
puffs on the chromosomes (areas of local chromatin decondensation) in response
to ecdysone. In addition, it is known that the salivary gland will respond to
hormone by secreting massive amounts of glue proteins, which are later used by
the animal to cement itself to a solid surface during metamorphosis. Because
glue secretion and chromosome puffing occur over the same time interval, it has
been suggested that one or more products of the puffing cascade control the
secretion response. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work conducted in Dr. Andres'
laboratory has confirmed the above hypothesis. By investigating the function of
the puff genes in a secretion assay in which a GFP-tagged glue protein is used,
they have identified a role for E63-1. This protein is directly induced by
ecdysone, regulated by calcium ions, and associated with an unconventional
myosin that is required for glue secretion. The project supported by this award
will test the hypothesis that, as part of the genomic response of the salivary
gland to ecdysone, E63-1 is induced and cytoplasmic calcium levels are elevated,
and that once E63-1 is complexed with calcium, it acts as a bona fide light
chain for myosin VI to influence the movement of secretory granules.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of the work is to define the biochemical
interaction between the E63-1 and myosin VI proteins, and to identify key
molecules important in the ecdysone regulation of calcium levels using genetic
screens. The project has the potential to make important contributions to a
basic, but not well understood, mechanism of cell biology involving the
integration of steroid and calcium signaling pathways. In addition, since most
of the personnel conducting this work will be students, the project offers them
a unique learning and training experience using a multi- disciplinary approach
employing genetic, molecular, biochemical, and pharmacological
methodologies&lt;br/&gt;