* 0131855
* SPS: Multiple Description Coding with Correlating Transforms for Multiple Antenna Wireless Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2005
* Russell Mersereau, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/2005
* USD 416,789.00

Proposal #131855 Altunbasak, Yucel GA Tech Res. Corp - GIT

An effective way of providing error resilience for multimedia transmission in a
communication system with a relatively small reduction in efficiency is multiple
description coding (MDC), which assumes the existence of multiple independent
channels between the transmitter and receiver, each of which can be temporarily
down or can experience burst errors. With MDC several coded streams, called
descriptions, are generated and transmitted over different channels. At the
destination, if all of the streams are received error free, then the signal can
be reconstructed at its highest level of fidelity. However, if only one or a few
descriptions are received in a usable form, the receiver can still reconstruct
an acceptable signal. All multiple description coding methods to date assume an
on-off channel mode between the transmitter and the receiver; each link is
either broken, in which case the transmitted symbols, or packets, are lost
completely, or it functions properly, in which case the packets are received
free of errors. This model is appropriate for Internet transmission, but it is
not appropriate for wireless channels.

This study replaces the parallel in independent on-off channel model with a
wireless channel model, such a Rayleigh fading model. Communication is performed
using multiple transmit and received antennas over the channel. With these
models the signal at any of the receive antennas is the superposition of the
transmitted signals from each transmit antenna independently faded. Therefore,
even if the descriptions at the receiver side are completely independent, the
received signal at each antenna will include some information from each
description. This research involves finding the best multiple description coding
strategy for these channels, the theoretical limits of such a scheme, and the
efficiency