* 0131967
* STTR Phase II:   Long-Gage Fiber Bragg Sensors for Structural Health Monitoring and Damage Identification
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2005
* Eric Udd, BLUE ROAD RESEARCH, INC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 01/31/2005
* USD 553,249.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project will further
explore the use of long-gage fiber Bragg grating strain sensors in conjunction
with vibration-based system identification techniques for&lt;br/&gt;health
monitoring and damage identification of civil structures. In phase I, the proof
of concept was shown based on static and dynamic laboratory experiments on
small-scale structural models. In this Phase II effort, field tests on bridges
identified in Oregon and California will be performed to further validate this
very promising tool for structural health monitoring and damage identification.
These bridges provide unique opportunities as two of them are scheduled for
demolition and both State Departments of Transportation have agreed to support
testing as these bridges are systematically damaged to provide a true real-world
test of the damage identification system. These field tests will be an important
step in providing feasibility data for future commercialization of the
structural health monitoring and damage identification system. Once the proposed
methods are debugged and validated for field applications, the California and
Oregon DOT's will strongly consider adopting them for widespread use in their
structural health-monitoring and bridge rehabilitation
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed structural health monitoring and
damage identification system offers very promising advanced solutions to the
triple problem of: (1) monitoring the state-of-health of the civil
infrastructure system for optimum allocation of rehabilitation resources, (2)
optimally designing the rehabilitation scheme for a specific deficient civil
structure, and (3) evaluating the efficacy of the rehabilitation measure.