* 0131736
* Characterizing the Developmental Role and Signaling Specificity of a Novel TGF-Beta Related Ligand.
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2006
* Kavita Arora, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Chris T. Amemiya
* 01/31/2006
* USD 390,000.00

0131736&lt;br/&gt;Arora&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental feature of growth and
differentiation in multicellular organisms is the ability of one group of cells
to influence the fate of another through intercellular communication. Thus
understanding how signaling activity is regulated and modulated contributes to
an important aspect of developmental biology. A long-term goal of our research
is to understand the in vivo roles and mechanism of Transforming Growth Factor-B
(TGF-B) signaling during development in Drosophila. Ligands of the TGF-B
superfamily control a wide range of biological functions such as cell
proliferation, axial patterning, tissue specification and morphogenesis in
systems as diverse as worms, flies, frogs, and mice. Despite the evolutionary
distance, many components of the TGF-B signaling pathway show remarkable
functional conservation. Thus studies in a genetically tractable organism like
Drosophila can provide crucial insights into aspects of TGF-B signaling that are
relevant to both basic and clinical science.&lt;br/&gt; One key issue is
understanding how multiple ligands expressed in the same tissue can act through
a relatively limited number of receptors and downstream signal transducers to
elicit a variety of biological effects. This proposal focuses on characterizing
the mutant phenotype, and determining the signaling pathway utilized by a novel
ligand Alp. Since Alp is equally related to the Activin/TGF-B and BMP
subfamilies, it cannot be definitively assigned to a functional pathway based on
structural similarity alone. Molecular and genetic approaches will be used to
determine the functional requirement for alp, study how it generates spatial
pattern, and identify the proteins required for its signal-
transduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;