* 0131492
* REV Gene Family and Meristem Initiation
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2005
* Steven Clark, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Susan J. Lolle
* 01/31/2005
* USD 405,000.00

0131492&lt;br/&gt;Clark &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All above ground post-embryonic
development in Arabidopsis occurs through the initiation of organs at shoot and
flower meristems. Thus, the initiation of shoot and flower meristems is a
fundamental prerequisite for subsequent pattern formation and cell
differentiation. The role of the REVOLUTA (REV) gene in the initiation of
lateral shoot and flower meristems has recently been described. Genetic and
molecular analysis suggested that REV acts early in the process of lateral
meristem initiation, and is required, at least indirectly, for the reactivation
of known meristem regulators, such as the CLV loci, WUS and STM, at lateral
positions. REV encodes a type III HD-zip protein, containing a putative DNA-
binding homeodomain, a leucine zipper domain likely involved in dimerization,
and a START sterol/lipid binding domain. Other analysis has revealed that REV is
also required for normal vascular organ development. Consistent with these
developmental roles, REV is expressed early in vascular tissue, organs and
lateral meristems.&lt;br/&gt;REV is a member of a closely related gene family
consisting of five genes in Arabidopsis. The variable expressivity of rev mutant
phenotypes and the lack of phenotypes for loss-of-function alleles of other gene
family members suggest that these genes may exhibit functional redundancy.
Indeed, other gene family members have been implicated in organ
development/polarity and vascular development through the analysis of gain-of-
function alleles. Functional redundancy is likely to be very common among plant
genomes, where the level of gene duplication is significantly higher than among
animal genomes. However, little is known about the nature of functional
specification among an entire gene family that has evolved multiple
developmental roles. The REV gene family thus makes an excellent system in which
to determine the relationships between the various gene family members and the
potentially overlapping roles that each plays in plant
development.&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks to use the REV gene family to
characterize a functionally interrelated gene family, as well as advance
understanding of lateral meristem development. Loss-of-function alleles have
been identified for each family members and genetic analysis will determine to
which development processes each gene contributes. The mRNA expression patterns
of each gene will be assessed, as well as the functional equivalence of the
proteins encoded by each gene. Potential downstream targets will be
characterized. This work will provide a critical comprehensive understanding of
the relationships, and perhaps origins, of a functionally interrelated gene
family. This will be of significance to other plant developmental systems in
which the action of redundant genes are important. Furthermore, the roles of key
regulators of lateral meristem initiation will be
characterized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;