* 0131532
* Genetics of Sperm Migration and Gamete Recognition in Caenorhabditis Elegans
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Steven L'Hernault, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 12/31/2004
* USD 390,000.00

0131532&lt;br/&gt;L'Hernault&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During development, cells that
are destined to interact with one another are frequently born in different
locations. Such cells must locate and move towards the site where the
interactions with their partner(s)occur. Fertilization in the nematode
Caenorhabditis elegans is an attractive model in which to study the genetic
control of these phenomena. The superior genetic and cell biological tools that
either we developed or were previously available make C. elegans an experimental
system where it is feasible to approach these phenomena comprehensively. Several
mutants (spe-9, spe-13 and fer-14) produce cytologically normal spermatozoa that
are motile, but they cannot fertilize when they collide with an oocyte. The
spe-9 gene encodes an epidermal growth factor (EGF) domain containing integral
membrane protein, and such EGF cell surface proteins are known from much prior
work to play critical roles in cell-cell interactions. Therefore, spe-9 mutants
are likely defective in either sperm-oocyte recognition, adhesion or fusion. EGF
repeat containing proteins, like spe-9, are known to work with numerous other
components. spe-13 and fer-14 phenocopy all examined aspects of the spe-9
phenotype and their study should help clarify the genetic hierarchy that
operates during fertilization. The phenotypic, genetic and molecular analysis of
the fer-14 gene will be completed. fer-14 will be positionally cloned by SNP
mapping, deficiency end point mapping, a candidate gene approach and/or
transgenic rescue. Gamete interactions and motility in wild type spe-9, fer-14
and other mutants will continue to be followed in vivo by nontoxic methods we
have developed to fluorescently label sperm and allow real time observations
with new high resolution methods. New Spe mutants that produce spermatozoa with
no obvious cytological defects will be identified and further investigated.
Those that fulfill a set of six criteria based on the known phenotypic features
of spe-9, spe-13 and fer-14 will be subjected to detailed cell biological,
genetic, and molecular analyses. These studies should reveal novel information
about gamete recognition and cell surface phenomena that are important prior to
and during fertilization. Equivalent mutants affecting gamete interactions have
not been described in any other metazoan.&lt;br/&gt;