* 0131394
* One Site Fits Both: Catalysis in R67 Dihydrofolate Reductase
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2006
* Elizabeth Howell, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 01/31/2006
* USD 410,988.00

Dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) is an important enzyme in folate metabolism as
its reaction product, tetrahydrofolate, is required for the synthesis of
numerous metabolic intermediates. Inhibition of DHFR results in blockage of DNA
synthesis, leading to cell death. Type II DHFR, typified by R67 DHFR, is
unrelated genetically and structurally to chromosomal DHFRs. The active R67 DHFR
is a homotetramer, with a toroidal (doughnut) shape and a single pore that
contains a single active site. The presence of only one active site per oligomer
is because only two molecules can bind concurrently to the active enzyme, most
likely due to steric constraints. Among several possible complexes, the
productive complex is the one containing the substrate (dihydrofolate) and
cofactor (NADPH) bound to the active enzyme. The constraints imposed by the
symmetry of the oligomer as well as the absence of catalytic bases suggest R67
DHFR may be a primitive enzyme. R67 DHFR's ability to form multiple ligand
complexes as well as the dual roles for several active site residues supports
the hypothesis that R67 DHFR uses a variation of 'hot spot' binding which is
focused in an enzyme active site rather than at protein-protein interfaces. The
hot spot strategy is an excellent design for a primitive enzyme to adopt. A
drawback of the symmetry is that binding to NADPH and dihydrofolate cannot be
independently optimized. To further evolve R67 DHFR function would require a
gene duplication event, followed by divergence of the gene copies. In this
project, recombinant DNA technology has been used to produce quadruplicated R67
DHFR gene, resulting in a single polypeptide possessing the essential structure
of tetrameric R67 DHFR. The goal of this research is to introduce asymmetric
mutations that will allow independent manipulation of each half of the active
site pore, leading to favorable interactions with NADPH on one side and
complementary interactions with dihydrofalate on the other. This strategy may
result in a more efficient enzyme.