* 0131553
* Collaborative Research:  Chemical Orientation in Turbulent Environments Above Natural Stream Substrates:  The Role of Bed Roughness and Turbulence Structure on Search Mechanisms
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2008
* John Crimaldi, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Martha Flanders
* 06/30/2008
* USD 367,000.00

This collaborative proposal describes research that links stream hydrodynamics,
turbulent transport of odor signals, and the sensory ecology and behavior of the
crayfish Orconectes rusticus. Crayfish use water-borne chemical signals ("odor
plumes") as navigational cues for locating food, burrows, or mates, and for
avoiding predators. The nature of the spatial and temporal variability
("structure") of the odor plumes depends on the hydrodynamic conditions, which,
in turn, depends on the physical characteristics of the stream. The goal of the
proposed research is to understand how crayfish use odor plumes to locate
underwater objects. In particular, we plan to investigate how the crayfish
navigational behavior varies under different hydrodynamic conditions (associated
with different types of stream substrate materials). By focusing our attention
to the changes in odorant structure and associated orientation behavior over
different substrate types, we hope to gain insight into the specific algorithms
and information cues used by the animals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultimately, the
knowledge gained from the proposed study could be used to design robotic
vehicles to search for dangerous underwater objects, or to protect crayfish
habitat in managed ecosystems. Environmentally, crayfish are keystone species
for many stream habitats and understanding the physical, biological, and
chemical factors that influence their behavior will lead to a broader
understanding of stream ecology and the human impact on stream ecology. In
particular, detailed knowledge of how stream habitats influence the distribution
of chemicals will provide the information necessary to understand not only
crayfish and stream ecology, but will help elucidate the physical mechanisms
behind pollution transportation in streams and their possible impact on stream
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work outlined in this proposal is a
collaborative effort between a biologist and engineer that will lead to cross-
disciplinary training of both graduate and undergraduate students. In addition,
new technical advances will be achieved through the development of high-speed
and fine-scale three-dimensional measurements of chemical concentrations in
different natural flow regimes. The development and quantification of these
techniques will benefit a wide array of fields from oceanography to
environmental engineering. &lt;br/&gt;