* 0131236
* Continuation of Scholarships for Archaeological Training for Native Americans and Native Hawaiians
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2002,02/29/2008
* Miranda Warburton, Society For American Archaeology
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/29/2008
* USD 57,255.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Miranda Warburton and the Society
for American Archaeology will expand their Arthur C. Parker fellowship program
which provides archaeological training for Native Americans and Native
Hawaiians. Currently the fellowship provides $3,000 yearly to permit one student
to participate in a summer archaeological field school or similar training
activity. The NSF award allow an additional three awards to be made each year
for a total of five years. Thus an additional 15 individuals will be supported.
The program is administered by the Society for American Archaeology which has
established rules for the competition, organizes evaluation of proposals and
selects the awardees. The Society also widely announces the availability of
these funds. The most immediate goals of the fellowship are to encourage Native
Americans and Hawaiians to pursue archaeological careers and also to gain
insight and understanding which will be useful to the communities in which they
reside.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Native Americans and Hawaiians are under-
represented in the ranks of professional archaeologists and in part this is
because of lack of familiarity with the field. Unfortunately Native American and
Hawaiian communities are often at odds with archaeologists over who should
control cultural remains and how these should be treated. In good measure this
situation results from lack of mutual understanding in both communities. It is
essential for the future of archaeology in America that links between the two
groups be strengthened and that a corps of individuals who are familiar with
both worlds be developed. The Society for American Archaeology program should
help to accomplish these goals.&lt;br/&gt;