* 0132305
* First International Conference on Scour of Foundations (ICSF-1)to be held November 17 - 20, 2002 at Texas A&amp;M University
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2003
* Jean-Louis Briaud, Texas A&M Transportation Institute
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 06/30/2003
* USD 19,980.00

This action is to provide partial support for the First International Conference
on Scour of Foundations (ICSF-1), to be held 17-20 November 2002 at Texas
A&amp;M University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scouring of bridge foundations
during flood conditions is an area of major concern to transportation officials.
Poor correlation exists between calculated and observed scour depths, primarily
because scour prediction equations developed under laboratory conditions do not
adequately account for all the variables found in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scour is a major problem in the United States. From
1961 to 1991, 1000 bridges collapsed and 600 of these collapses were due to
scour, and lives were lost. The scour phenomenon is a water-soil interaction
phenomenon which needs to be addressed through the cooperation of a number of
disciplines, including hydraulic engineering, geotechnical engineering,
hydrology, structural engineering, and construction. This conference will bring
these disciplines together and enhance the participation of geotechnical
engineers in solving this problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this
conference are:&lt;br/&gt;1. To present and collect the latest international
information on scour of foundations.&lt;br/&gt;2. To promote international
discussion on research and practice of scour of foundations.&lt;br/&gt;3. To
organize a prediction event to evaluate the precision of scour prediction
methods.&lt;br/&gt;4. To promote the involvement of geotechnical engineers in
the study of scour.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The topics to be addressed include:
scour of foundations, erosion of soils, scour at bridges, dams, offshore
platforms, underwater pipelines, prediction of scour depth including pier scour,
abutment scour, contraction scour, general degradation and aggradation, meander
migration, countermeasures selection and design, monitoring, scour in gravel,
sand, silt, clay and rock, laboratory measurements of erosion properties, field
studies, case histories, failures and successes, international guidelines and
practices, numerical modeling, model tests, field inspection,
databases.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;