* 0132022
* Microbial Observatories: Linking Phylogeny and Biogeochemistry for the Discovery of Novel Chemolithotrophs Inhabiting Geothermal Gradients in Yellowstone National Park
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Gill Geesey, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2007
* USD 599,362.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. Timothy R. McDermott, William P. Inskeep, and
Gill G. Geesey of Montana State University to establish a Microbial Observatory
to study and discover novel chemolithotrophic microorganisms in Yellowstone
National Park (YNP). As a general physiological group, chemolithotrophs are
tremendously underrepresented, particularly given the predominance of inorganic
energy sources in our biosphere. These microbes acquire energy for growth from
the oxidation of inorganic chemicals such as ferrous iron, hydrogen sulfide,
elemental sulfur, arsenite, or hydrogen gas. Because geothermal springs
typically contain abundant levels of all or most of these chemical species, YNP
represents an ideal location to conduct this search. The research will utilize
novel cultivation and molecular techniques to describe, characterize, and
isolate the microbial populations present along geochemical and temperature
gradients. This detailed description of the microbial populations will be
accompanied by a complete analysis of the aqueous and solid phase geochemistry,
providing a comprehensive approach that will link molecular description with an
understanding of the ecological relevance of identified
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This observatory occupies a key link in the
study of the thermophilic microorganisms in Yellowstone, and it will work
closely with other observatories in YNP to maximize research synergy and
discovery. In addition to contributing to the general development of microbial
ecology principles, this research will foster the cross-disciplinary training of
graduate students. Further, the information derived from this work will
contribute to the continued development of databases that document and describe
microbial diversity occurring in YNP's geothermal features, which in turn will
facilitate extensive education-outreach opportunities of direct value to the
education mission of YNP. All cultures and DNA obtained from this project will
be stored in the Montana State University Thermal Biology Institute thermophile
culture collection, providing biological materials for future screening.
&lt;br/&gt;