* 0132278
* CAREER:  Semiflexible Macromolecules with Secondary Structure:  A Theoretical Approach based on the Edwards' Hamiltonian
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Gustavo Carri, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Raima Larter
* 05/31/2007
* USD 450,000.00

In this CAREER project funded by the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Carri will conduct fundamental research in
the field of theoretical physical chemistry of single macromolecules.
Specifically, he will construct first-principles models on the mesoscopic level
to explain recent experimental results in the field of oligomers, copolymers and
biopolymers. Models will be constructed from first-principles using an
appropriately designed Edwards Hamiltonian that will take into account not only
the stiffness of the polymer backbone, but also the tendency to form secondary
structures (alpha-helices and beta-sheets). In the case of heteropolymers the
effects of sequence distribution, stiffnesses of the different blocks, and the
tendency to form secondary structures on the thermodynamic and mechanical
properties of semiflexible copolymers will be explored. The second goal of this
project is to improve the education of young scientists and stimulate high
school students to pursue a career in science. The first objective will be
achieved by developing a class suitable for graduate and senior undergraduate
students in which the most important advances in theoretical physical chemistry
of macromolecules will be explained and discussed. The second goal will be
accomplished by giving simple though challenging problems to senior high school
students and freshmen and sophomore undergraduates, allowing them to explore the
world of computer simulations of macromolecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although
initially studies of polymer elasticity were mostly useful in an industrial
setting, they have proven more recently to be essential for understanding the
function of biological macromolecules. Unlike industrial polymers, biological
macromolecules have complex arrangements called secondary and tertiary
structures. The full extent to which these structural arrangements determine the
function of biological molecules has become clear only recently. In this work
Dr. Carri will extend the theory of polymer elasticity to include the effect of
structure on the computations of elastic behavior of complex macromolecules.
This project is of critical value to allow for a quantitative study that will
provide a deeper understanding of the physical properties of complex
macromolecules like biopolymers as well as of carefully designed synthetic
polymers that can form secondary structures. Ultimately these studies will
transform our understanding of biology and bring about a less descriptive and
more quantitative description of the cell. With respect to the education
component, there is a strong need to have more polymer physics courses available
for the non-polymer students as well as for those in polymer science.
Introducing more computer projects enables the students to visualize the
physics, something that excites them.&lt;br/&gt;