* 0132074
* Cognition East and West: Attention, Categorization and Reasoning for East Asians and European Americans
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Richard Nisbett, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 08/31/2007
* USD 505,006.00

In previous research, the PI found that people of European culture tend to
perceive and reason in a relatively analytic way; they focus their attention on
an object, categorize it on the basis of its attributes, and apply rules to
predict and explain its behavior. East Asians perceive and reason in a
relatively holistic way; they attend to the object and the context
simultaneously, they are attentive to relationships among events, and they
predict and explain behavior on the basis of presumed relationships between
object and context. Compared to East Asian participants, Western participants a)
notice less about the context, b) are less skilled at detecting covariation
among events, c) find it easier to separate objects from the contexts in which
they are embedded, d) are more likely to mistakenly attribute behavior
exclusively to the object while ignoring the role of contextual factors, e) are
less susceptible to the hindsight bias (the "I-knew-it-all-along" error), f)
more likely to organize objects and events in terms of rules and categories as
opposed to relationships and similarities, and g) are more likely to apply
logical rules to problems describing everyday situations. The origins of these
differences probably lie in the different social systems characteristic of East
and West. We find that Asian Americans resemble European Americans more than
they do Asians. The proposed research will explore the breadth of the perceptual
differences, including whether they extend to audition and whether they
influence learning processes; the depth of the perceptual differences, including
how controllable vs. automatic they are, whether they result in different
perceptual illusions for Easterners and Westerners, and whether they include
differences in peripheral vision capacity; how unified the perceptual
differences are; whether individual differences in perception are related to
individual differences in cognition; and how social factors affect perceptual
and cognitive functioning. The research is expected to indicate that educational
practices that benefit holistic thinkers may not be the same ones that benefit
analytic thinkers; that "culture fair" ability testing may be an illusory goal;
and that perceptual and thinking styles are sufficiently different that ethnic
diversity in work groups is likely to improve problem-
solving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;