* 0132328
* Building Object Categories in Developmental Time: The 32nd Carnegie Cognition Symposium, June 7-9, 2002
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2003
* Lisa Gershkoff-Stowe, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Guy Van Orden
* 03/31/2003
* USD 16,000.00

A three-day symposium, to be held June 7-9, 2002, will bring together leading
researchers in the fields of cognitive development, visual perception, language
acquisition, developmental neuroscience, and computational modeling to address
key questions about the nature of category representations and the mechanisms
that produce them. Speakers will focus on how children build object categories,
beginning with the basic architecture of the brain and with the constraints or
biases that provide the foundation of early perceptual experience. These
developments will be considered in the light of subsequent growth of categorical
and semantic abilities. Research will be presented that examines three
interrelated themes: (1) fundamental processes by which children are able to
individuate and categorize objects and their physical properties; (2) ways in
which language transforms children's emerging categories and the selection of
features relevant for object categorization; and (3) higher-level cognitive
processes that guide the formation of coherent systems of category knowledge.
The aim is to encourage the exchange of ideas, to synthesize the field's
progress, and to build links to broader theoretical concerns. An additional aim
is to contribute to the development of junior scientists and students. To this
end, an invited cohort of promising young scholars will attend the meeting and
interact with the speakers in an accessible and facilitating setting. A final
aim of the symposium is to provide early childhood educators and clinicians with
practical information about the way that infants perceive and learn about
objects in the world. This knowledge may serve as a valuable tool for assessing
aberrant development in at-risk infants in the earliest stages of life. The
results of the symposium will be published as the 32nd in the series of Carnegie
Cognition Symposium volumes.