* 0132032
* International Collaborative Expedition to Collect and Study Fish Indigenous to Sub-Antarctic Habitats
* GEO,OPP
* 12/01/2002,11/30/2006
* Harry Detrich, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 11/30/2006
* USD 163,753.00

Notothenioid fish are a major group of fish in the Southern Ocean. The ancestral
notothenioid fish stock of Antarctica probably arose as a sluggish, bottom-
dwelling perciform species that evolved some 40-60 million years ago in the then
temperate shelf waters of the Antarctic continent. The grounding of the ice
sheet on the continental shelf and changing trophic conditions may have
eliminated the taxonomically diverse late Eocene fauna and initiated the
original diversification of notothenioids. On the High Antarctic shelf,
notothenioids today dominate the ichthyofauna in terms of species diversity,
abundance and biomass, the latter two at levels of 90-95%. Since the
International Geophysical Year of 1957-58, fish biologists from the Antarctic
Treaty nations have made impressive progress in understanding the notothenioid
ichthyofauna of the cold Antarctic marine ecosystem. However, integration of
this work into the broader marine context has been limited, largely due to lack
of access to, and analysis of, specimens of Sub-Antarctic notothenioid fishes.
Sub-Antarctic fishes of the notothenioid suborder are critical for a complete
understanding of the evolution, population dynamics, eco-physiology, and eco-
biochemistry of their Antarctic relatives. This project will support an
international, collaborative research cruise to collect and study fish
indigenous to sub-antarctic habitats. The topics included in the research plans
of the international team of researchers includes Systematics and Evolutionary
Studies; Life History Strategies and Population Dynamics; Physiological,
Biochemical, and Molecular Biological Investigations of Major Organ and Tissue
Systems; Genomic Resources for the Sub-Antarctic Notothenioids; and Ecological
Studies of Transitional Benthic Invertebrates. In a world that is experiencing
changes in global climate, the loss of biological diversity, and the depletion
of marine fisheries, the Antarctic, Sub-Antarctic, and their biota offer
compelling natural laboratories for understanding the evolutionary impacts of
these processes. The proposed work will contribute to development of a baseline
understanding of these sensitive ecosystems, one against which future changes in
species distribution and survival may be evaluated judiciously.