* 0132099
* Investigations of Metal-Element Multiple Bonding and New Methods for Metal-Mediated Bond Activations
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2008
* T. Don Tilley, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Luigi G. Marzilli
* 01/31/2008
* USD 728,000.00

Professor T. Don Tilley, Department of Chemistry, University of California at
Berkeley is supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic
Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division to investigate complexes that
contain a transition metal-main group element multiple bond and to develop new
methods for transition metal mediated bond activations. A primary reaction type
by which transition metal centers cleave chemical bonds involves the migration
of a group from a donor atom to the metal (alpha - migration). This process
produces a metal-element multiple bond, which is a functionality with a rich
reaction chemistry and which is important in many metal-mediated
transformations. Although alpha-migrations are well established for metal-carbon
bonded systems, they are much less developed in M-N, M-O, M-Si, M-P, and other
metal heteroatom systems. This proposal aims to assess the generality and
synthetic utility of alpha-migration as a route to isolable species containing
multiple bonds between various main group and transition metal fragments. In
doing so, several fundamental questions will be addressed: (a) Can alpha-
migration be used to generate new types of metal-element multiple bonds? (b) How
does the electron count at the transition metal center influence alpha-migration
chemistry? (c) Does a formally charged metal center promote the alpha-migration
process? (d) What substituents in addition to hydrogen participate in alpha-
migration chemistry? (e) Can the design and implementation of new ligand sets
provide access to new bond activations? (f) Can alpha-migrations be incorporated
into new catalytic cycles? To address these questions, specially designed
complexes containing metals from throughout the transition series will be
prepared. Many of these will feature coordinative unsaturation, and ligands
designed to facilitate bond activations.

The goal of this work is to provide a basis for the development of new and
useful metal-mediated chemical processes. The discovery of new bonding patterns
and reactivity modes will be followed by attempts to use this information in the
design of new catalytic cycles. Many of these investigations will focus on
silylene complexes that have recently been discovered, but as other metal-
element multiple bonded compounds are obtained, their reactivities will be
explored in the search for useful transformations.