* 0132918
* CAREER: Ferroelectric Multilayers, Superlattices, and Compositionally Graded Films
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/2001,05/31/2007
* S. Pamir Alpay, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 05/31/2007
* USD 517,164.00

This CAREER project focuses on the study of artificially layered ferroelectric
superlattices and compositionally graded ferroelectric films for applications in
microelectronics. In the paraelectric state ferroelectric materials possess some
of the largest dielectric constants attainable, a property particularly relevant
for applications where transient charge storage is required, such as capacitors
in dyanmic random access memories(DRAM). Enhanced properties are sought through
spatial variations in internal stresses, film composition, and microstructure.
It is anticipated that through intrinsic characteristics of ferroelectric
materials and the introduction of compositional and internal stress gradients,
exceptional and unusual electrical and electromechanical properties can be
obtained which are not possible for bulk ferroelectrics and ferroelectric thin
films. The proposed work is a combined experimental and theoretical effort. The
theoretical part will be based on an extended mean field Landau-Ginzburg-
Devonshire phenomenology. Elastic and electrical interactions between individual
layers will be modeled and physical properties of ferroelectric multilayers and
compositionally graded films will be determined. The model developed will serve
as a basis to design ferroelectric stacks with enhanced physical properties via
artificially created non-uniformities such as compositional variations,
different stress levels, and interfacial defect structures. Ferroelectric and/or
paraelectric layers with systematic variations in composition, thickness, and
misfit with respect to the underlying substrate will be deposited by rf-
sputtering or pulsed lased deposition techniques. Initially, the focus will be
on the deposition of the prototypical BaTiO3/SrTiO3 system. Based on the
information gathered, multilayers of other perovskite systems such as
PbTiO3/CaTiO3, PbTiO3/SrTiO3, and KNbO3/KTaO3, will be grown. Ferroelectric
stacks and compositionally graded films will be characterized
crystallographically and microstructurally via x-ray diffraction and
transmission electron microscopy. Local compositional distribution of elements
will be determined by energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDXS) using an
electron energy filter. Physical properties such as polarization hysteresis,
dielectric, piezoelectric, and pyroelectric properties will be measured. The
unconventional ferroelectric properties of these multilayers due to chemical and
structural non-uniformity will be the basis for designing novel devices and
circuits. This part of the research will involve an established industrial
collaboration. &lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses fundamental
research issues in a topical area of materials science having high technological
relevance. The research is accompanied by an intensive educational plan. To
promote comprehensive and active learning, advanced interactive course web sites
will be developed for undergraduate and graduate level courses. Also, a "popular
science" interactive web site on thin film science and technology aimed at a
general, non-technical audience will be designed. The target audience for this
web site is high school teachers, juniors, and seniors. Two new
interdisciplinary graduate level classes will be designed and implemented.
Another educational benefit of the proposed project sought is summer internships
for graduate and undergraduate students involved in this research through
industrial collaboration. Overall, the project provides students with new
challenges and research approaches in materials synthesis, processing, and
characterization, and provides new tools and approaches to education and
training. Thus, an important feature of the project is the strong emphasis on
education, and the integration of research and education. &lt;br/&gt;***
&lt;br/&gt;