* 0132740
* West Virginia Blueprint for Science and Technology: Strengthening Statewide Multidisciplinary Academic Research Infrastructure
* O/D,EPS
* 01/01/2002,03/31/2003
* Frances Van Scoy, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Karen L. Sandberg
* 03/31/2003
* USD 3,000,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;West Virginia has developed a strong academic base on which to
support larger scale competitive programs and technology transfer in the areas
of Identification Science and Technology (Id S&amp;T) and High Performance
Computing (HPC) and deems them important to the future economic development for
the state. This project builds infrastructure at West Virginia University and
Marshall University to strengthen physical and intellectual capability in these
scientific areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Identification Science and Technology is
based on the growing synergy between molecular science and engineering
applications. It reflects the multidisciplinary research in areas defined by the
interfaces of molecular/life sciences, micro/nano science and information
science and technology. Research in the molecular/life sciences will develop
scientific understanding of life signatures at the most fundamental level by
focusing on biochemical complexity and the hierarchy of organization. Research
in the micro/nano sciences and engineering will focus on design and use of new
devices to acquire biometric information. Research in information science and
engineering will develop data analysis and interpretation of large volumes of
spacial and temporal biometric information. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The High
Performance Computing research area will enhance the infrastructure for
computational science and human/computer interfaces that support the numerical
and data analysis necessary to complement the physical research. The HPC effort
will: 1) link the EPSCoR HPC plan to the broader academic research computing and
information science and engineering infrastructure plan; 2) find new ways to
assist users interacting with computers and assist researchers in various
disciples; and 3) provide a resource for student research and education at
various levels including high school. The HPC effort includes use of an
established Virtual Environment Laboratory for a variety of innovative research
and educational activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to work in the
research areas, the project will integrate the NSF EPSCoR activities with on-
going educational and outreach initiatives in the state, create new initiatives,
and increase the participation of underrepresented groups in science,
mathematics, engineering, and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;