* 0132083
* Microbial Observatories: Collaborative Research: Salt Plains Microbial Observatory
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2002,08/31/2008
* Mark Buchheim, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2008
* USD 284,860.00

A collaborative grant has been awarded to Drs. William Henley and Robert Miller
(Oklahoma State University), Mark Buchheim (University of Tulsa) and Mark
Schneegurt (Wichita State University) to establish a Microbial Observatory at
the Salt Plains National Wildlife Refuge in northern Oklahoma. The briny remains
of an ancient sea that once covered middle America rise to the surface and
evaporate under dry conditions to leave a crust of white salt on the barren,
flat, 65-km2 Salt Plains. Rainfall events dissolve the salt crust and create
temporary streams and ponds, altering the landscape. Salt conditions change
rapidly in time with rainfall events and in space as the plains give way to
vegetated areas. The rapidly changing conditions and high surface temperatures,
salt concentrations and UV exposure make this an extreme environment. The Salt
Plains Microbial Observatory will use a combination of classic microbiology
techniques and leading-edge genetic techniques to characterize microbial
communities (bacteria and algae) and study how they survive in such a harsh
environment. It is expected that many novel microbes will be discovered, and a
repository of microbial biodiversity will be established, along with Internet
databases of genetic information. Educational opportunities will be available
for undergraduate and graduate students, including a summer course for students
from groups underrepresented in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Capturing the
biodiversity of this remarkable environment will preserve unique microbes that
have beneficial properties for man, as potential sources for new antibiotics,
drugs, and enzymes for industrial processes and 'green' chemistry. Fundamental
ecological questions will be addressed that have widespread application to the
management and conservation of our natural resources. Surviving under such harsh
conditions, the microbes on the Salt Plains will serve as models for organisms
that may be found on other planets. Representing the first extensive study of a
non-marine, terrestrial, hypersaline environment, the Salt Plains Microbial
Observatory is poised to make significant new discoveries.&lt;br/&gt;