* 0132965
* Hybrid Energy Transfer Power Factor Correction AC/DC Converters With Improved Efficiency
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Issa Batarseh, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Tomsovic
* 05/31/2004
* USD 180,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Power electronics technology is widely used in various industrial
sectors and has recently been&lt;br/&gt;identified by the Office of Science and
Technology Policy as critical for the future growth of the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;economy. Today innovations in electronic products are progressing
at an unprecedented rapid pace.&lt;br/&gt;However, power electronics technology
has not kept pace with the growth in low and medium power&lt;br/&gt;electronic
industries. With this proposal, the PIs seek to improve the power supply
performance by&lt;br/&gt;exploring new design techniques to develop a family of
efficient, high-frequency, low and medium&lt;br/&gt;power AC-DC converters with
reduced cost and improved reliability, and still achieve near
unity&lt;br/&gt;power factor. This effort targets future stringent power
requirements for high-speed microprocessor&lt;br/&gt;used in next generation
computer and communication systems.&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposed
research is to develop novel hybrid energy transfer AC-DC
converters&lt;br/&gt;improved efficiency and increased reliability and provides
Power Factor Correction (PFC). In a&lt;br/&gt;traditional single-stage AC/DC-PFC
scheme, the converter normally operates in Discontinuous&lt;br/&gt;Conduction
Mode (DCM) and has the advantages of simplicity, low cost and high reliability,
while&lt;br/&gt;less efficiency due to its inherent high voltage and current
stresses. Moreover, it cannot achieve&lt;br/&gt;simultaneously, the desired
input performance in terms of low power factor and harmonics,
and&lt;br/&gt;output performance in terms of voltage ripple and regulation
capabilities. The two-stage scheme can&lt;br/&gt;achieve unity power factor and
higher output performance, but at the expense of high component&lt;br/&gt;count
and increased system complexity. This in turn increases cost and degrades the
reliability of the&lt;br/&gt;whole power electronic system. In both single-stage
and two-stage AC/DC converters, the power is&lt;br/&gt;processed twice as all
the transferred energy would once store in an intermediate bulk capacitor.
Here,&lt;br/&gt;we propose a novel method that allows parallel path of energy
transfer to minimize power-processing&lt;br/&gt;times and to improve converter
efficiency and reliability. A lion share of the input power
directly&lt;br/&gt;transferred to the output without going through the input
current shaping stage while the converter&lt;br/&gt;remains a near-unity power
factor. Furthermore, considering the operation irrelevance of PFC
stage&lt;br/&gt;and DC-DC stage in two cascade stage converters, the PIs also
propose a novel concept to improve&lt;br/&gt;the efficiency by linking PFC stage
with DC-DC stage to provide soft-switching conditions for the&lt;br/&gt;PFC
stage or DC/DC stage without adding any auxiliary switch.&lt;br/&gt;During the
projects two-year period, the following major tasks will be carried
out:&lt;br/&gt;1) Investigate the limitations of improving efficiency in
existing PFC- AC/DC converters.&lt;br/&gt;2) Aiming at reducing the power losses
and processing time, analyze the power flow features,&lt;br/&gt;and build the
potential path to forward partial input power to the output side directly
to&lt;br/&gt;minimize the power processing times.&lt;br/&gt;3) Compare existing
practical soft-switching DC/DC topologies; develop the suitable
magnetic&lt;br/&gt;coupling paths between the PFC stage and DC/DC stage to
benefit each other, such as&lt;br/&gt;providing soft-switching condition for PFC
stage or/and DC/DC stage.&lt;br/&gt;4) Investigate integrated system issues and
possible solutions, focusing on interaction between&lt;br/&gt;different stages
and control schemes.&lt;br/&gt;5) Set-up simulation platform and physical test
bed, conduct comparative study for overall&lt;br/&gt;performance between the
proposed topology and existing AC/DC converters.