* 0132030
* SBIR Phase II: Nanoparticle Photostimulated Luminescence Based Optical Storage
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Wei Chen, NOMADICS, INC
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 07/31/2004
* USD 499,988.00

&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase II project will
demonstrate the ability to generate photostimulated luminescence (PSL) in
nanoparticles. The potential applications in digital imaging and storage offered
by PSL phosphors, including X-ray imaging could be significant. PSL phosphors
currently in use present several drawbacks including greater expense and poorer
resolution as compared to conventional screen-film methods. The quantum
confinement of nanoparticles offers solutions to many of the shortcomings of
existing PSL phosphors. The project will characterize nanoparticles with a goal
of optimizing these materials for use as phosphors in thin films. The project
will also fabricate the required thin films and compare them to commercially
available PSL phosphors for performance, longevity, and other factors of
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The commercial applications will be widely
applicable to digital imaging, offering high resolution, low cost, easy storage,
low complexity, easy portability, and other desirable features. Materials with
efficient PSL have great potential for technical applications such as optical
storage, X-ray imaging, radiation measurements and quality control, optical
dosimeters and dating, infrared sensors, image intensifiers, near-infrared-to-
visible light converters, and bio-molecular structure recording and
probing.&lt;br/&gt;