* 0132117
* Controlled Deletional Mutagenesis and Gene Homing in Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Nina Fedoroff, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 03/31/2006
* USD 370,000.00

Deletional mutagenesis has not been used as extensively as insertional
mutagenesis in Arabidopsis because large deletions are often not transmitted
through gametes or are lethal early in development. The investigator will carry
out a systematic study of small deletions by controlling their chromosomal
location, developmental timing, and parent of origin. She will make deletions of
known sizes using the site-specific bacteriophage P1-encoded Cre recombinase to
delete chromosomal segments between a loxP-containing T-DNA donor site and a
nearby loxP-containing transposon. Using an already tested transposon "launching
pad" containing loxP recognition sites for the Cre recombinase, she will
identify 3-4 transposons reinserted at different distances ranging from a few
kilobases to a few megabases from each of several transposon donor sites to
carry out these studies. She will use Cre recombinase genes expressed from a
constitutive plant promoter, as well as from a chemically inducible promoter.
She will detect deletions (and inversions) by both PCR-based and genetic
methods. She will determine the genetic transmissibility of deletions and
analyze the development of plants in which deletions are induced at different
times after germination. This work will both increase the understanding of the
detrimental effects of deletions and deletional heterozygosity and provide
methods to control the size, chromosomal location, and timing of
deletions.&lt;br/&gt;The second objective is to lay the groundwork for
development of a transposon-based method to target genes to their original
chromosomal locations. This technique, which the investigator calls gene
"homing" to distinguish it from homology-based gene targeting, will use site-
specific recombination to target a promoter-reporter cassette to a transposon-
disrupted gene. If successful, this work will make it possible for the first
time to study precise alterations in a plant gene's regulatory sequences in the
gene's original chromatin context. The gene homing method will use transposons
to target genes to their original chromatin environment by replacing a loxP-
bracketed marker gene on the transposon with a promoter-reporter gene cassette.
She will use existing plants with loxP transposons and transposon launching pads
to determine whether an efficient "cassette replacement" technique developed in
animal cells can also be used to integrate DNA segments efficiently between
pairs of loxP sites in Arabidopsis. This work will establish the feasibility of
replacing a transposon-borne marker gene cassette with a cassette carrying a
reporter gene driven by the promoter of the disrupted gene.&lt;br/&gt;This work
will provide basic information and techniques that will be widely applicable in
contemporary plant genomic research. Both the constructs that will be made and
the techniques that will be developed will be useful in other
plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;