* 0132611
* NSF-EC:  Tunable Mirrorless Lasing in Cholesteric Liquid Crystalline Elastomers
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Peter Palffy-Muhoray, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 05/31/2006
* USD 480,000.00

Liquid crystalline elastomers are a new class of soft materials, distinguished
by the coupling between orientational order and strain, whose mechanical
deformations give rise to changes in the dielectric tensor. Cholesteric liquid
crystal elastomers, due to their periodic structure, are photonic band-gap
materials whose band structure can be altered by mechanical strain. Optically
pumped cholesteric liquid crystal elastomers exhibit distributed cavity effects,
stimulated emission, and, above a threshold, mirrorless lasing at the band
edges. The proposed work is to study, in conjunction with EC collaborators, the
response of optically pumped helical cholesteric and other periodic liquid
crystalline elastomers under mechanical strain. Participating graduate and
undergraduate students will gain hands-on experience using the latest research
techniques in laser physics and spectroscopy studying photonic band gap
elastomers. In addition to gaining fundamental insights into the processes
underlying the optical response of these materials, the proposed research will
lead to mechanically tunable laser sources, switchable mirrors and tunable band-
gap materials.

Liquid crystal elastomers are novel rubber-like materials that dramatically
change their optical properties when mechanically deformed. This unique property
can be used to produce exceptional properties not possible with other materials;
for example, they can be used to produce mechanically tunable wavelength
selective mirrors, and large area, thin film lasers. The planned research will
focus on exploring and utilizing these unique properties and effects. The high-
risk materials research that led to the recent discovery of tunable 'rubber
band' lasers would not have been possible without public funding of basic
research. The proposed work, to be performed in collaboration with European
Community scientists already engaged in the study of elastomeric materials, is
needed to ensure U.S. presence at the forefront of this materials science and
technology area. The project will educate participating graduate and
undergraduate students in the cutting-edge interdisciplinary areas of soft
materials characterization, laser physics and photonics, and is expected to
impact on a variety of technologies ranging from telecommunications to
artificial muscles.