* 0132005
* Laboratory Phonology Conference, Yale University, June, 2002
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2003
* Louis Goldstein, Haskins Laboratories, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 03/31/2003
* USD 25,972.00

The National Science Foundation supports the Eighth Conference on Laboratory
Phonology, which will be hosted jointly by the Yale University Linguistics
Department and Haskins Laboratories. This conference will take place on the Yale
campus in New Haven, CT, June 27-30, 2002. The study of the human capacity to
communicate via speech has traditionally been carried out by separate groups of
scientists, experimental and theoretical, with little communication between
them. The experimental scientists examine the acoustical and physiological
characteristics of the speech process, while the theoretical scientists study
the ways that consonants and vowels pattern in the languages of the world. In
the last 15 years, increased interaction between these groups has been spurred
by a series of conferences on Laboratory Phonology, that seeks to relate
language patterns more directly to the physical activities of talking. Research
resulting from this cross-pollination has already had important implications for
both basic science and applications such as speech disorders, developmental
delays, and reading disabilities.

The Eighth Conference on Laboratory Phonology will focus on differences among
human languages, what those differences have to say about of the universal
properties of human speech and language, and the nature of the biological
specialization that underlies the universals. Much research has shown some
specialization for human speech and language, but there is no agreement on its
precise nature. In fact, two threads of recent research suggest conclusions in
opposite directions. On the one hand, there is evidence that phonological
universals have been shaped by the structure of the human vocal tract and the
constraints of communicating through an aural channel, sugesting a vocal-aural
specialization. On the other hand, there is evidence that manual (signed)
languages share important properties with spoken languages, suggesting a more
generic or abstract specialization. The conference will bring together leading
scientists working on spoken languages with those working on signed languages.
Their interaction should provide new insights into the human specialization for
speech and language, spur new techniques for investigating both signed and
spoken languages, and lead to new methods for teaching and learning signed and
spoken languages that take advantage of their underlying similarities.