* 0132784
* Elementary, Secondary, and Informal Education:  The Brain:  The Final Frontier -- Planning Proposal
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* JoAnna Baldwin-Mallory, Massachusetts General Hospital
* Standard Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 08/31/2002
* USD 49,545.00

The Massachusetts General Hospital is developing a large format film that will
take an interdisciplinary look at brain science and raise questions about the
nature and biological basis of consciousness. For the past two decades, the
field of cognitive neuroscience has begun to explore and understand some of the
most complex brain functions and, for the first time, research is pointing to
answers to such questions as, "What makes intelligence possible?" and "What
makes consciousness possible?" This film will examine the basic functions of the
brain and explore some of the cutting-edge research that is reaching into the
realms of intelligence and consciousness. The large format film will be
supported by outreach components that will include an educator's guide, a family
pamphlet, a poster and a website. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Science content for the
series will be developed by Anne Buckingham Young, Chief of the Department of
Neurology at the Massachusetts General Hospital; Dennis Selkow, Co-Founder and
Co-Director of the Center for Neurologic Diseases at Brigham and Women's
Hospital and Professor of Neurology and Neuroscience at Harvard Medical School;
and Gary L. Gottlieb, Professor of Psychiatry at Harvard Medical School. They
will work closely with advisors with expertise in cognitive neuroscience,
psychology, psychiatry, philosophy and biology. The project will be under the
direction of JoAnna Baldwin-Mallory, Director of the Office of New Ventures at
Partners HealthCare System. The film will be directed and produced by Peter
Georgi who is currently producing and directing the NSF supported large format
film, The Human Body, with the BBC. Front-end and formative evaluation will be
conducted by Ralph Adler of RMC Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As they have
developed the conceptualization and preliminary plans for the film, the staff
has identified several issues that would benefit from further, more in-depth
planning. These activities that would be conducted during the planning stage
include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Convening the scientific advisors and production
staff to develop the science content further and to design an approach for
presenting substantive content that is appropriate for the large format film
medium.&lt;br/&gt;Conducting front-end evaluation of popular understandings of
and interest in brain science.&lt;br/&gt;Carrying out formative testing of
preliminary script ideas.&lt;br/&gt;Investigating the potential for
supplementing the already planned outreach materials with additional components
such as a guide specifically designed for classroom teachers, an activity guide
for students, a CD-ROM and short radio spots that present stories from the front
lines of brain research.&lt;br/&gt;Developing a film script, print and web
components.&lt;br/&gt;Establishing partnerships in research and academic
communities and with science centers and natural history museums.&lt;br/&gt;