* 0132224
* RUI: Halogenation of Model Compounds of the Humic Acids: Investigation of Contaminant Formation During Drinking Water Treatment
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2005
* Victor Heasley, Point Loma Nazarene College
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 02/28/2005
* USD 110,000.00

The objective of this work is to investigate the formation of drinking water
contaminants. Compounds which are formed by the reaction of chlorinating (and in
some cases brominating) agents with humic acids and other organic materials will
be studied. A number of phenol and resorcinol related humic acid models, which
have received little attention previously, will be chlorinated and brominated in
a variety of solvents and the reaction products will be identified. Reactions of
dichloramine, the active chlorinating agent at near neutral pH in water, with
phenols will be studied. Reactions involving humic acid models and oxidants
containing chlorine-oxygen bonds will also receive attention. Similar studies
with brominating agents will also be performed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this
award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the
research of Dr. Victor L. Heasley of the Department of Chemistry at Point Loma
Nazarene College. Dr. Heasley will explore contaminant formation which occurs
during the treatment of drinking water with chlorinating agents. Models of
naturally occurring humic acids (plant material found in all waters) will be
treated with chlorine and bromine and the reaction products determined.
Understanding these reactions should provide information about how water
purification can be accomplished in conjunction with minimizing the amount of
these byproducts formed. Students trained as a result of working on this RUI
(Research in Undergraduate Institutions) project will gain experience in
environmental chemistry as well as organic chemistry. These undergraduate
students typically go on to work in the pharmaceutical or specialty chemical
industries or go on to advanced study in graduate or medical
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;