* 0132289
* Advancing Science Excellence in North Dakota (ASEND)
* O/D,EPS
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Philip Boudjouk, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Continuing Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 04/30/2006
* USD 6,000,000.00

The North Dakota "Advancing Science Excellence in North Dakota (ASEND)"
initiative is aimed at expanding the research capacity of North Dakota and to
strengthen its ability to participate in the nation's mainstream science,
engineering, and mathematics (SEM) enterprise. This initiative capitalizes on
North Dakota's existing research strengths and takes advantage of opportunities
to integrate research into education and into the economy of the state. The
ASEND initiative will develop SEM infrastructure at North Dakota State
University (NDSU) and the University of North Dakota (UND)
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;North Dakota (ND) will focus on three research areas:
catalysis, biocomplexity and multisensory integration. Each of these areas has
been identified as niche to the state and contributing to national interests. In
the area of catalysis, an interdisciplinary network of researchers will build on
ND's current expertise in polymers and combinatorial chemistry to develop novel
processes and materials, particularly those with technology
transfer/commercialization potential. The biocomplexity focus area will
concentrate initially on the influence of parasitism on biocomplexity. An
interdisciplinary team of researchers will investigate the role of parasites on
host population genetics, landscape ecology, sexual selection, host
bioenergetics, biodiversity and evolution. The multisensory integration research
area will bring together cognitive and sensory psychologists with
neurophysiologists to study sensation, perception, cognition and action.
Researchers will investigate the sites, structures and processes of neural
activity associated with multisensory integration. Potential applications
include the development and evaluation of virtual environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the research efforts, the ND project
includes a multifaceted human resource development program designed to increase
the opportunities available for students of the ND University System to
participate in research and to increase the number of members of
underrepresented groups (e.g., low income, first-generation college, women,
Native Americans) involved in SEM research activity. Moreover, a technology
transfer program designed to facilitate academic-private sector partnerships and
integration of research into the economy of the state will be implemented. The
technology transfer effort includes programs linking undergraduate students,
graduate students and faculty with local industries and a commercial feasibility
support program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;