* 0132726
* Collaborative Research:  Topic in Many-Body Theory
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Theodore Kirkpatrick, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2005
* USD 252,000.00

This is a collaborative award that supports theoretical research and education
in the area of condensed matter theory. The collaborator is professor Belitz at
the University of Oregon (DMR-0132555). The main objective of the project is to
enhance the current understanding of many-electron systems at very low
temperatures, and especially of phase transitions and other collective phenomena
in such systems. The PIs will apply an effective field theory, developed during
previous grant periods, to various collective phenomena of electrons in solids.
The methods employed are general field theoretic techniques and the
renormalization group. Specific systems for which this project is relevant
include, magnets, superconductors, and doped semiconductors. The successful
completion of this project will contribute to the understanding of an important
area of condensed matter physics, and will train technical personnel with
theoretical expertise in this field.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This is a
collaborative award that supports theoretical research and education in the area
of condensed matter theory. The collaborator is professor Belitz at the
University of Oregon (DMR-0132555). The research focuses on fundamental problems
of condensed matter physics involving strong electronic correlations in clean
and disordered systems. Specific topics of study include quantum phase
transitions in ferromagnets and superconductors, the coexistence of
superconductivity and ferromagnetism in UGe2, and how electronic correlations
affect the metal-insulator transition. Quantum phase transitions occur at zero
temperature and are driven by quantum fluctuations in contrast to the more
familiar and well-understood phase transitions that are driven by thermal
fluctuations and have non-zero transition temperatures. Critical fluctuations
associated with quantum phase transitions may influence electronic behavior over
a wide temperature range and may explain unusual electronic properties exhibited
by materials with strong electronic correlations and other condensed matter
systems. The award also supports education in advanced theoretical methods for
condensed matter phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;