* 0132684
* High-Temperature Sorption Process for Oxygen Removal and Air Separation
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Jerry Y.S. Lin, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Douglas D. Frey
* 06/30/2005
* USD 241,368.00

This project is aimed at studying fundamental issues related to the development
of a new, efficient high-temperature oxygen sorption process based on
perovskite-type ceramic sorbents for oxygen removal and air separation. The new
sorption process takes advantage of the unique properties of certain perovskite-
type ceramics which can adsorb a large quantity of oxygen, but not other gases,
at high temperatures (300-800oC). Three perovskite-type ceramic materials with
different compositions are selected as the sorbents for this study. The sorbent
pellets and particles of various sizes are prepared by citrate and press-
sintering methods. The thermodynamic defect equilibrium for oxygen sites in
these ceramics is being studied experimentally by the gravimetric method and
theoretically using point-defect and cluster-defect models. This defect
equilibrium study provides oxygen-sorption isotherm data for these sorbents.
Heat of sorption and order-disorder phase transformation of these ceramic
sorbents is studied also by TGA/DSC. Oxygen sorption kinetics on these ceramic
sorbents are investigated experimentally by the transient gravimetric method and
modeled using a simple linear-driving-force model and a more complex model based
on the ambipolar diffusion theory. The chemical and mechanical stability of the
ceramic sorbent particles is being studied systematically by dilatometry and
attrition tests. Finally, fixed-bed experiments for oxygen removal or air
separation are conducted to obtain data for design of a practical separation
process based on this new concept.

This project represents the first effort in developing sorption processes based
on this new group of non-traditional sorbents. On the fundamental side, this
project may lead to development of a large number of new sorption processes with
unique separation characteristics that are not offered by the traditional
sorption processes. If a hydrocarbon is used to regenerate the sorbent, this
process can be extended to provide new chemical reactors for partial oxidation
of hydrocarbons with improved selectivity. On the practical side, the proposed
sorption process is based on perovskite-type ceramics with preferential
equilibrium sorption for oxygen. Successful development of this sorption process
will have a significant impact on industrial processes for air separation and
oxygen removal.

