* 0132469
* Biological thought: A cross cultural view
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Douglas Medin, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Amy L. Sussman
* 08/31/2007
* USD 542,499.00

This project will study children's acquisition knowledge in the domain of
biology. The goal is to understand better what biological knowledge children
bring to the classroom and how this knowledge is organized to support reasoning
and explanation. Although children's understanding of biology has been examined
in quite a few studies, little attention has been directed at the question of
how biological knowledge might vary in children being raised in different
cultural settings and among adults with different levels of experience. Since
the existing work in the area suggests that adult conceptions of biological
kinds and ecological relationships varies with culture and experience,
children's understandings of nature likely also varies with culture and
experience. Identifying cross-cultural differences and commonalities in
biological knowledge is important if we are to meet the educational goals of the
21st century. It is also important to build theories that reflect accurately the
diversity in knowledge and experience of people around the world. The project
will include a number of under-studied populations, including urban and rural
majority culture children, urban Mexican immigrant children, rural Native
American children, rural Yukatek Maya and Ladino children. Children and adults
will be given a variety of tasks to probe their underlying biological concepts
(e.g. "alive"), processes, and relationships. In addition, the research will
examine parent-child dyads and other sources of information that help to shape
children's conceptions of biology. The research will test specific theories
about which aspects of biological knowledge are likely to be universal, which
aspects vary with culture and experience, and how these variations interact with
formal instruction. This research is directly relevant to science education. It
is important to engage the understandings that children bring to the classroom
in order to build on their real world experience and to address misconceptions
when they arise. To ignore real world experience would risk failure to
understand the educational possibilities for learning about science in general,
and biology in particular.