* 0132942
* CAREER: Improved Knowledge on Precipitation Microphysics for Advancing Radar Rainfall Estimation and Quantitative Precipitation Forecasting.
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2006
* Emmanouil Anagnostou, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 01/31/2006
* USD 224,804.00

0132942&lt;br/&gt;Anagnostou&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our understanding and ability
to predict and respond to changes in the hydrologic environment cannot be
properly addressed in the absence of reliable precipitation information.
Proposed research aims at investigating the following questions: What are the
quantitative limitations and uncertainty of current operational single
polarization radar (e.g., WSR-88D) in rainfall estimation, and what are the
advantages/disadvantages of X-band polarimetric measurements over current S-band
systems for various space and time scales? Those questions will be investigated
based on multi-instrument specialized field campaigns associated with warm
season convective storms and winter precipitation systems. This research
includes participation in two field projects (i.e., Wallops Area Cold season
Project, WACP, and the International H2O Project, IHOP) by deploying mobile
X-band polarimetric radar and a two-dimensional (2D) video disdrometer in
coordination with the other research instruments brought into the field. The
synergy of rainfall observations from multiple sensors available from the
experiments will be the fundamental building block to support the proposed
investigations on precipitation microphysics and rainfall estimation (and
validation) associated with different radar systems (i.e., X-band vs. S-band and
single vs. dual polarization measurements). Successful completion of the
research may provide compelling evidence of the advantages of X-band
polarimetric measurements against operational remote sensing systems for support
of local flood forecasting. This new remote sensing tool, if proven reliable,
would be an attractive and economically affordable solution to the problem of
monitoring remote basins and urban areas that are poorly covered by the National
radar network, and are prone to flash flooding.&lt;br/&gt;