* 0132070
* Microbial Observatories: Intra-annual Diversity and Dynamics of Chesapeake Bay Virioplankton
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2008
* Donald Coats, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 04/30/2008
* USD 989,663.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. K. Eric Wommack (University of Delaware), Feng
Chen (University of Maryland), and D. Wayne Coats (Smithsonian Environmental
Research Laboratory) to characterize novel viruses and investigate their role
and importance in the annual plankton cycle of the Chesapeake Bay. For over a
decade scientists have known that viruses are the most abundant biological
entities in marine and aquatic environments. In the rich, productive estuarine
waters of the Chesapeake, viral abundance is around 10 million viruses per
milliliter; exceeding bacterial abundance by a factor of 10. Collectively these
populations, comprised principally of bacterial and algal viruses, are known as
the virioplankton. The specific identity of the vast majority of these strains
is still unknown to science. This study will be the first to apply comprehensive
characterization and monitoring of virioplankton populations within an estuary
over several annual cycles. Methodological approaches will include the use of
molecular genetic and genomics tools to identify changes in the composition and
diversity of Chesapeake Bay virioplankton. These observations will be
interpreted in light of the physio-chemical and biological changes which occur
seasonally in the Chesapeake. In addition, viruses infecting important
microorganisms occurring in the Chesapeake will be isolated in an effort to
characterize specific virus-host interactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad
question poised to marine scientists since the discovery of high viral abundance
is: what is the diversity of these viruses, and what role do they play in the
maintenance and function of marine microbial ecosystems? Ultimately, these
microbial communities comprised of bacteria, unicellular protists, and viruses
determine the fate of nutrients and pollutants in coastal waters; and are at the
center of the marine food web. A more complete understanding of the inner
workings of marine microbial communities will assist in efforts to assess,
maintain and even restore the health of marine and estuarine
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;