* 0132635
* Fertilization in The Sea: The Ecological and Evolutionary Consequences of Sperm Chemoattraction
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Richard Zimmer, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Robert Paul Malchow
* 04/30/2006
* USD 270,000.00

Disentangling the effects of female choice, contest competition and scramble
competition for mates. M. Spritzer, D. Meikle, and N. Solomon lay abstract

Sexual selection is differential mating success caused by variation among
members of one sex in a trait that influences acquisition of mates. Although
sexual selection is one of the most intensively studied areas in the field of
behavioral ecology, surprisingly little is known about the relative importance
of the different mechanisms of sexual selection. The main goal of the proposed
research is to determine the relative importance of female choice, contest
competition, and scramble competition for mates in determining the mating
success of males. Female choice involves females choosing to mate with a male
based on conspicuous ornaments or behaviors. Contest competition involves direct
aggressive interactions between males and scramble competition, in contrast,
involves a male's ability to rapidly and accurately locate mates. Meadow voles
were used as the study species because past studies suggest that all three of
these mechanisms of sexual selection occur among these rodents. Male navigation
ability was chosen as a trait believed to be favored by scramble competition,
and male dominance rank was chosen as a trait believed to be favored by contest
competition. In addition, the influence of female choice upon both of these
traits will be tested. The specific objectives are to determine: (1) the
relationship between male navigation ability and male mating success, (2) the
relationship between dominance and navigation ability among male voles, (3) the
relative influence of dominance and navigation ability upon male mating success,
and (4) female mating preferences for males with varying levels of navigation
ability and dominance. A series of lab and field experiments will be used to
achieve these objectives. Navigation ability will be measured by scoring each
male's ability to complete a maze test, and male dominance will be tested by
scoring aggression between pairs of males in arena trials. Male reproductive
success will be determined using genetic paternity analyses. The results of this
project will be an important next step in understanding how sexual selection
shapes the evolution of a species.