* 0132474
* NSF-EC:  Third Workshop on Superconductivity and Magnetism of Advanced Materials; Krakow, Poland; July 14-18, 2002
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2003
* Bogdan Dabrowski, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 05/31/2003
* USD 20,000.00

The Third Workshop on Magnetism and Superconductivity of Advanced Materials
(Ladek Zdroj, Poland, July 15-20, 2002) will direct its focus on the interplay
between magnetism and superconductivity. A wide spectrum of new materials with
novel properties, which have been discovered during the last three years, will
be discussed at the workshop. Some of the materials presented will include new
oxide magnetic superconductors from the class of ruthenocuprates, selected
tripled state superconductors (UGe2, Sr2RuO4), heavy fermion compounds, modified
C60 fullerenes, MgB2 (a "classic" superconductor that is challenging our current
theoretical and experimental understanding of the electron-phonon interaction
and gap anisotropy), and new compounds in the related class of manganites and
ruthenates. Progress in the field of artificial heterostructures that consist of
spatially distinct superconducting and magnetic layers, including systems that
enable novel probes of the interaction of magnets and superconductors across an
intervening layer, will be also reviewed and discussed at the meeting. An
important goal of the Workshop will be providing an opportunity to strengthen
collaborations between U.S. and European scientists, as well as enabling new
collaborations to form. The workshop proceedings will be published in a special
issue of Physica C, and will include articles based on both oral and poster
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The Third Workshop on Magnetism and
Superconductivity of Advanced Materials (Ladek Zdroj, Poland, July 15-20, 2002)
addresses issues of novel superconducting and magnetic materials. Emphasis will
be placed on properties, characterization, and processing of compounds
exhibiting a range of novel phenomena arising from mutual interactions of
magnetism and superconductivity. The need for this conference arises from the
rapid development of this field, which is also of high interest in the community
of contemporary mainstream condensed matter physics. This Workshop will also
feature properties and processing of artificially grown magneto-superconducting,
layered heterostructures, as well as magnesium diboride - an exciting new
superconductor. Theoretical understanding of the properties of these materials
and development of applications of their unique magnetic and electronic
properties will be reviewed in depth at the meeting. An important goal of the
workshop will be to provide U.S. and European scientists the opportunity to
strengthen, as well as form new, collaborations. Young Polish and American
scientists attending the workshop will be exposed to world-class research in the
fields of superconductivity and magnetism. They will have the opportunity to
interact in the workshop as well. All talks will be thorough, with generous time
allowed for substantive discussions between the participants and speakers. The
workshop materials will be published in a special issue of Physica C, and will
include articles based on both oral and poster presentations.&lt;br/&gt; This
NSF project is co-funded between DMR and INT as a Cooperative. Activity in
Materials Sciences between the National Science Foundation and the European
Commission (NSF 01-105). The project is being carried out in collaboration with
the Center of Excellence for Physics and Fabrication of Low Dimensional
Structures for Technologies of Future Generations (CELDIS) operated by the
Polish Academy of Science within the 5th EC Framework Programme.&lt;br/&gt;