* 0132049
* Microbial Observatories: Anaerobic Bacteria and Methanogens in Northern Peatland Ecosystems
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2007
* Stephen Zinder, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2007
* USD 997,963.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. Joseph B. Yavitt and Stephen H. Zinder at
Cornell University to establish a microbial observatory to study the
microorganisms that produce methane and decompose organic matter in northern,
peat-forming wetland ecosystems. Although northern peatland ecosystems are
significant sources of methane, an important greenhouse gas in the Earth's
atmosphere, almost nothing is known about the microbes that produce methane
(methanogens) in peatlands or about other anaerobes (organisms living without
oxygen) that decompose organic matter to compounds used by methanogens. Because
northern peatlands are characterized by low nutrient availability and acidic
conditions, Drs. Yavitt and Zinder will concentrate on acid-tolerant bacteria.
They will study three contrasting sites in central New York State in which their
preliminary work suggests a rich diversity of as yet uncultivated methanogens.
Molecular biological techniques will be used to further characterize the
microbial populations at these sites, and methods will be systematically
developed for culturing methanogens and culturing other anaerobes using organic
compounds of particular importance in peatlands. Of particular interest will be
the highly acidic McLean Bog site with a pH near 3.6.

These studies will increase our understanding of microbial diversity and
physiology; moreover, some of the acid-tolerant organisms obtained may have
biotechnological uses. The microbiological studies will be integrated with
biogeochemical studies on carbon flow to methane at the sites, and on methane
flux to the atmosphere. As a result, we will be better able to predict how
microbial populations in peatlands function and, in particular, how methane
production will respond to changing environmental conditions, which will greatly
improve our ability to forecast trends in atmospheric methane concentrations.
Results of the project will be conveyed to the public through written documents,
an internet web site developed and maintained by students, and visits by
students to comparable sites in Canada and Europe.