* 0132025
* SBIR/STTR Phase II:   Machine Vision System for Automated Imaging and Process Control
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2002,04/30/2004
* Timothy Tiernan, TPL, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 04/30/2004
* USD 487,477.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop an
entirely new form of machine vision technology for process control of metallic
components. The technology is based on an array of giant magnetoresistance (GMR)
sensors that produce high-resolution images of hidden defects, missing parts,
and other features. Minute GMR sensors detect magnetic fields associated with
eddy currents induced in the component being imaged. High spatial resolution
images are achieved through the high density and small size of the sensors in
the array, coupled with the high sensitivity, low noise, and fast response of
the sensors. A GMR sensor array, combined with a magnetic field generator, can
produce high resolution, three-dimensional images of parts as they are produced,
using a rugged, non-contacting sensor system. The images provide on-line
feedback for process control, quality assurance, and safety protocols. The Phase
I project developed functional GMR sensor arrays, and successfully imaged
defects in metallic parts clearly demonstrating that the technology is feasible.
The commercial potential of the proposed technology will be in manufacturing,
quality assurance (QA), and process control. It will be used for rapid imaging
and inspection of parts used in electronics, aerospace, automotive,
transportation, construction, biomedical and other industries.