* 0132145
* Ethnic, Stylistic and Perceptual Aspects of the Southern Vowel Shift
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Valerie Fridland, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 02/28/2006
* USD 128,147.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Valerie Fridland will conduct two
years of linguistic research on vowel shifts in Southern dialects of American
English. She will compare recent changes in Southern vowels to both older
Southern speech and contemporary Northern speech. Recent research suggests that
vocalic positions in Northern and Southern speech are realigning. The systems
resulting from this realignment suggest increasing divergence between the two
dialects. Using Memphis as a field site, Fridland's research team will collect
both naturally occurring conversational data and elicited interview data and
analyze the acoustic position of vowels in those data. Perceptual tests will
measure the acoustic positioning of the vowels and the attitudinal load
associated with changes in individual vowels. By examining the social embedding
and the perceptual salience of each shifted vowel class, this project will
assess the internal (regional) and external (national) pressures affecting
dialect variation and determine how incoming norms are judged and how they
function as displays of local, ethnic, or national identity for speakers. Shared
speech norms generally suggest that speakers participate in the same
communication networks. Thus, an important part of this research is its
documentation of whether both European-Americans and African-Americans
participate in the changes, an indication of racial integration in the Memphis
area. African-Americans do not appear to participate in the vocalic changes
identified in Northern cities, but their role in the changes affecting Southern
speech might explain the origin of some changes in the Northern African-American
vowel system.

This sociolinguistic research will contribute to the emerging picture of
contemporary Southern speech and speech perceptions. This is significant for
both education and theory. First, Southern speech is stereotyped as non-standard
nationally. Understanding local norms and the perceptions behind them is crucial
to national testing in education. On an applied level then, the research has
implications for language specialists and educators concerned with how dialect
variation relates to educational and social disadvantages. Second, this survey
of changes in contemporary Southern English will document convergence and
divergence in dialects and reveal the social motivation of some sound changes.
On a theoretical level, the research will provide insight into the mechanisms
behind linguistic change, one of the fundamental questions driving
sociolinguistic research.