* 0132618
* Mississippi EPSCoR Research Infrastructure Improvement Program
* O/D,EPS
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2006
* Jonathan Pote, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Denise Barnes
* 04/30/2006
* USD 6,200,000.00

The Mississippi Research Infrastructure Improvement Program builds on successful
previous investments and targets five areas:&lt;br/&gt;1)Nanostructured Silicate
Systems with Designed Molecular and Supermolecular Architecture in Hybrid
Organic/Inorganic Materials; 2) Computational Chemistry; 3) Integrating
Molecular, Cellular and Organismal Responses of Bioregulatory Systems to
Environmental Stressors; 4) Protein Structure and Localization; and 5)
Computational Simulation and Information Technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Nanostructured Silicate Systems group involves chemists, physicists and polymer
scientists/engineers. It will develop nanostructured silicate systems and
"molecular silicas" to exploit the potential for the design of novel materials
with macroscopic properties that are a direct consequence of the unique
nanoscopic properties of the finely dispersed heterogeneous components. The
Computational Chemistry research group will concentrate on fundamental problems
of potential energy surfaces, geometry and structure of inclusion complexes,
hydrogen bonding in ground and excited states, and ring strain while improving
computational efficiencies of the methods employed. The research group involved
with Integrating Molecular, Cellular and Organismal Responses to Stress will
investigate the biochemical, physiological and behavioral responses of the
bioregulatory systems of animals and plants brought about by chemical and other
stressors, including delineation of changes in the proteome during stress
responses. The Protein Structure and Localization group will investigate
structures known to have important physiological roles and involves identifying
the compartment(s), in which protein acts, including movement from one
compartment to another that often regulates protein function. They will use
relatively low-resolution tools in conjunction with computational methods to
recognize domains and other elements of tertiary structure. The Computational
Simulation and Information Technology group will provide high performance
computing and information technology support to the other research areas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research infrastructure improvement project includes
researchers at the University of Mississippi (UM), the University of Mississippi
Medical Center (UMMC), the University of Southern Mississippi (USM), Jackson
State University (JSU), Mississippi State University MSU), and Mississippi
College (MC). Cross-cutting computational support will be provided by the
Mississippi State University Engineering Research
Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the research effort, the Mississippi
infrastructure improvement plan includes support for activities to strengthen
the campus environment for research. This support includes faculty start-up
funds, equipment, travel and stipends for undergraduate and graduate students.
Staff development activities such as seminars and workshops, commercialization
assistance, subscription services etc. will also be available to further
strengthen the research environment. The Mississippi project also includes
focused activities designed to increase the participation of women and members
of other underrepresented groups in the activities of the award.&lt;br/&gt;