* 0132508
* Brain and Cognitive Effects of Learning a String Instrument
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2005
* Ellen Winner, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher T. Kello
* 08/31/2005
* USD 300,001.00

Research has demonstrated structural differences in the brains of musicians
compared to non-musicians. However, it is not yet known whether these
differences are inborn or develop through long-term stimulation during critical
periods of brain development. On the one hand, the brain may be capable of
changes not only in functional brain networks, but also in structural components
as a response to increased use. On the other hand, the brains of musicians may
be atypical prior to training, both anatomically and functionally. If so,
becoming a professional musician may be partly genetically predetermined.
Research has also demonstrated that music training in children results in long-
term enhanced visual-spatial and mathematical performance. The underlying neural
basis of such enhancements is unknown. Possible explanations include changes in
arousal, mood, and priming of particular brain regions. However, long-term
changes in brain function or structure, such as strengthening of existing brain
connections or the formation of new connections or even new cells and a more
elaborate system of connections, might be induced by learning and practicing on
a musical instrument. This pilot longitudinal study will follow young children
at the beginning of their music training over a period of three years and
compare them to a control group of children matched in gender, SES, handedness,
age, and overall IQ.

Using high-resolution MR images within subjects over time, the research will
begin to answer questions such as the following: Does the amount of instrumental
practice correlate with structural brain differences and/or do levels of musical
talent/skill predict structural brain differences either prior to or as a
consequence of training? Is visual-spatial and mathematical reasoning enhanced
by music training? If so, are these non-musical cognitive outcomes related to
amount of time spent practicing, degree of improvement in reading music
notation, and/or level of musical talent/skill? Do gains in visual-spatial and
mathematical reasoning, if found, correlate with structural brain enhancements
over the course of musical training?

This research has potential far-reaching implications. First, children often
begin music study at an age when the brain is at a critical phase of development
and maturation. If structural brain changes or use-dependent brain growth occur,
it would have important implications for early childhood education. Second, the
results might help to explain why certain children succeed and others fail in
mastering musical instruments. Third, demonstrating improvements in domains
other than music as a function of music training would have strong implications
for both general and music educational practice. Fourth, this research will
provide testable hypotheses about the neural basis of transfer effects. Transfer
is a key issue in educational theory, and has not only applied value but also
theoretical value, since a demonstration of transfer helps us to understand how
mental capacities are organized and related to one another.