* 0132874
* CAREER:  Quantum Phases and Phase Transitions in Strongly Correlated Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2008
* Eugene Demler, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 01/31/2008
* USD 300,000.00

This is a CAREER award that combines research and educational activities. The
research topic is strongly correlated electron systems. The research component
adopts a strategy of considering particular systems with a goal of developing
general tools for studying the role of interactions in fermionic and bosonic
systems, and bringing out a common framework for understanding the physics of
strongly correlated states of matter. Intrplay of superconductivity and
antiferromagnetism in the high Tc cuprates will be investigated to understand
electron systems with competing instabilities. Stripes in the quantum Hall
systems at integer filling factors will be studied as an example of electron
systems with phase separation on mesoscopic scale. The relation between bosonic
and fermionic mechanisms of suppression of superconductivity and the role of
dissipation on the superconductor to insulator transition will be considered in
the case of one-dimensional systems (wires and chains of Josephson junctions) as
a typical example of quantum phase transitions. Spinor bosonic atoms in optical
lattices will be studied to learn about the role of interactions in bosonic
systems. Investigation of fundamental and universal properties will be
complemented by concrete calculations of observable quantities that can be
verified in experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational component
involves developing an undergraduate course that presents condensed matter
physics from the point of view of relevance to practical applications. By
discussing recent developments in technology the course will motivate students
to learn about progress in condensed matter physics and show the science in its
dynamics: from basic research to industrial innovations. The course will use
examples of modern microelectronics, semiconductor optics, magnetoelectronics
and others to show how discoveries in condensed matter physics initiated major
transformations in industry in the past. It will also address areas of current
academic research that may play a crucial role in technologies of the future,
for example, nanotechnology, and quantum computations and communications.
Presentations will be accessible to an audience with only a superficial
knowledge of quantum physics. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This is a CAREER award that
combines research and educational activities. The research topic is strongly
correlated electron systems. The research component adopts a strategy of
considering particular systems with a goal of developing general tools for
studying the role of interactions in fermionic and bosonic systems, and bringing
out a common framework for understanding the physics of strongly correlated
states of matter. Intrplay of superconductivity and antiferromagnetism in the
high Tc cuprates will be investigated to understand electron systems with
competing instabilities. Stripes in the quantum Hall systems at integer filling
factors will be studied as an example of electron systems with phase separation
on mesoscopic scale. The relation between bosonic and fermionic mechanisms of
suppression of superconductivity and the role of dissipation on the
superconductor to insulator transition will be considered in the case of one-
dimensional systems (wires and chains of Josephson junctions) as a typical
example of quantum phase transitions. Spinor bosonic atoms in optical lattices
will be studied to learn about the role of interactions in bosonic systems.
Investigation of fundamental and universal properties will be complemented by
concrete calculations of observable quantities that can be verified in
experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational component involves developing
an undergraduate course that presents condensed matter physics from the point of
view of relevance to practical applications. By discussing recent developments
in technology the course will motivate students to learn about progress in
condensed matter physics and show the science in its dynamics: from basic
research to industrial innovations. The course will use examples of modern
microelectronics, semiconductor optics, magnetoelectronics and others to show
how discoveries in condensed matter physics initiated major transformations in
industry in the past. It will also address areas of current academic research
that may play a crucial role in technologies of the future, for example,
nanotechnology, and quantum computations and communications. Presentations will
be accessible to an audience with only a superficial knowledge of quantum
physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;