* 0132780
* CAREER:  Structured Design of Embedded Software
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2008
* Luca De Alfaro, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 12/31/2008
* USD 642,030.00

Embedded software is ubiquitous: it is present in a vast array of everyday
products and appliances, and it accounts for an increasing share of the
functionality and development cost of systems such as cars and aircrafts.
Innovation in many fields, from transportation to military, from consumer
products to manufacturing, is increasingly dependent on our ability to design
ever more sophisticated embedded systems. Yet, the sophistication and complexity
of embedded software is fast approaching the limit of current design abilities.
This project aims at developing a formal approach to embedded software design
that copes with complexity through the exploitation of design structure, and in
particular, of modularity (the ability to assemble a system from components) and
hierarchy (the ability to implement a complex component as a collection of
simpler components).

The project is articulated in three directions. The first project direction
focuses on methods and tools for ensuring that the components used in a design
are compatible one with the other. This helps to avoid bugs stemming from the
interaction of multiple components, which are often among the hardest to prevent
and detect. The project develops theories of component interfaces that captures
the protocol, timing, and performance aspects of the interaction among embedded
software components. The resulting interface theories constitute an extended
type system that encompasses not only the values passed as inputs and outputs,
but also the dynamic behavior of the components, enabling to check at design
time whether the components interact in a compatible way. The second project
direction investigates methods for deriving the performance and reliability of a
system from that of its components. In parallel to this modular approach to
analysis, this project direction will pursue a modular approach to debugging, in
which the components are analyzed in isolation, and the results are used to
guide the simulation of the entire system. Finally, as embedded systems are
often used as controllers of a device or physical system, the third project
direction proposes the use of multi-modal stochastic systems, a model that
supports in an integrated fashion system identification, controller design, and
code generation. In addition to direct student involvement in the proposed
research, the educational component of this proposal consists in the development
of two courses: Introduction to systems engineering, and real-time embedded
software. The first course will introduce students to a structured, model-based
approach to system design; the second will present the techniques and challenges
of real-time embedded software development. These courses will be informed by
the philosophy that structure, in terms of composition and hierarchy, is the key
to the design of complex systems, and that models are the basis of reasoning
about systems. This model-based, structure-oriented approach is an innovative
element in the curriculum generally available in Computer Engineering and
Computer Science departments. The courses will play a pivotal role in the
planned growth of the Software Engineering discipline at UC Santa Cruz.