* 0132803
* Multidrug Resistance-Like Genes and Auxin Transport
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Edgar Spalding, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Gavin Thompson
* 04/30/2005
* USD 597,364.00

This project is designed to determine the functions of AtMDR1 and other proteins
encoded by a group of ABC transporter genes in Arabidopsis that are homologous
to multi-drug resistance (MDR) proteins of animals. The animal MDR proteins are
most often studied for their roles in the resistance of cancer tumors to
chemotherapeutic drugs. This research will investigate the roles these proteins
play in plants. Genetic, biochemical, and physiological evidence indicates that
at least two of the Arabidopsis MDR proteins participate in the transport of the
plant hormone auxin, and thus are important to plant growth and development. The
auxin-transport inhibitor NPA binds tightly to AtMDR1 and AtPGP1 proteins.
Knockout mutants lacking these proteins have severe defects in polar auxin
transport. The phenotypes of the knockout mutants are consistent with abnormal
auxin distribution being the cause. The research activities that produced the
substantial background information on these two genes will be reiterated to
reach some never-before studied genes within the MDR-like subcluster. In
addition, biochemical studies will test hypotheses about the mechanism of AtMDR1
function. For example, is it an auxin transporter or a regulator of an auxin
transporter? The experimental plan includes characterizing knockout phenotypes,
determining the effects of the knockout mutations on auxin distribution, and
biochemical studies of the AtMDR1 gene after expression in a heterologous
system. The two PIs responsible for the project have complementary areas of
expertise and will provide interdisciplinary training for postdoctoral research
associates and graduate students. The dissection of these interesting genes
genetically, biochemically, and physiologically is expected to provide new
insight into the hormonal control of plant growth and development.