* 0132732
* Modulation of NMDA Receptor Current by Protein Kinase C: Molecular and Synaptic Studies
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* John Leonard, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 07/31/2006
* USD 330,000.00

Glutamate is the most abundant neurotransmitter that brain cells use to trigger
electrical impulses in other brain cells they contact. At these sites of
contact, called synapses, many vital processes take place. There are many
different types of receptors for glutamate encoded by different gene families,
which have different specific actions at synapses. The NMDA family of glutamate
receptors is of particular importance because they can trigger changes in the
level of sensitivity of synaptic connections between brain cells. Modulation by
enzymes called kinases adds phosphate chemical groups to NMDA receptors causing
marked enhancement of current passing through these receptors and enhancing
signaling between brain cells. This modulatory effect has an important role in
processes related to learning, development, and degeneration of brain cells. The
identification of the sites on NMDA receptor subunits targeted by specific
kinases will provide research tools for studying the physiological importance of
NMDA receptor phosphorylation in brain cells. In the case of modulation by
protein kinases of the C-type (PKC), the presence of these sites may also depend
on the particular NMDA receptor family member present. In a particularly
exciting example of the importance of NMDA receptor subtype, the NMDA receptor
subunit that is more prevalent in young brains, NR2B, has been shown to give
rise to more easily modifiable synaptic connections. Receptors that contain NR2B
subunits pass larger calcium ion currents than other NMDA receptors. The present
proposal hypothesizes that this difference is due to an increased sensitivity to
PKC. Controlled expression of selectively mutated NMDA receptors in my
laboratory has recently demonstrated that direct phosphorylation of 2 specific
serine amino acid sites (S1303 and S1323) by protein kinase C controls current
amplification in NR2B receptors. This result motivates the aims of the proposal
and: 1) challenges a previous viewpoint that kinase modulation of current must
be entirely indirect via other proteins associated with NMDA receptors at the
synapse, and 2) provides a starting point for elucidating a mechanism of direct
kinase action. These studies uniquely focus on modulation of the NMDA current
that itself triggers long-term synaptic changes in brain cells. &lt;br/&gt;