* 0132664
* CAREER: Dynamically Adaptive Wavelet-Based Algorithms for Numerical Simulations of Complex Multi-Scale Phenomena
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2002,05/31/2003
* Oleg Vasilyev, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Xiaodong Zhang
* 05/31/2003
* USD 125,045.00

The past decade has witnessed the development of wavelet analysis, a brand-new
mathematical tool, which has been quickly adopted by diverse fields in science
and engineering. In a brief period it has reached a certain level of maturity as
a well-defined mathematical subject with a strong interdisciplinary character.
Wavelets have certainly begun to make an impact in many areas, including signal
processing, data and image compression. However, wavelet application to the
solution of diffcult partial differential equations (PDE) arising in different
areas of physics and engineering has been very limited. The objectives of this
CAREER proposal are manifold. The first objective concerns the advancement of
the state of the art of wavelet-based numerical algorithms. The second involves
the application of the method to challenging engineering problems, which
currently are difficult to solve using conventional numerical algorithms. The
final aim of this project is in education and dissemination of the use of
wavelets in large scale scientific computing. More specifically, our educational
goals are (a) to develop a comprehensive graduate/upper undergraduate level
course on the use of wavelet-based numerical algorithms for solving partial
differential equations, (b) to develop and disseminate ``easy-to-follow"
wavelet-based codes, and (c) to write a textbook ``Wavelets and Numerical
Solution of PDEs." The project will consist of three parts: (1) algorithmic
development, (2) high- performance computing applications, and (3) course and
textbook development. In the first part of the project we plan to improve and
further develop the dynamically adaptive second generation wavelet collocation
(DASGWC) algorithm in these two areas: (a) extension of the method to complex
geometries and (b) adaptation of the algorithm for efficient use on massively
parallel computers. At the same time, we plan to apply the further improved
second-generation wavelet collocation algorithm to the following two classes of
problems: (a) fluid-structure interaction and (b) micro-scale heat transfer.
These problems are chosen with an eye to testing the strength of the wavelet
method and to evaluating the degree in which it can really shine over
conventional numerical methods. Finally, we will develop a course and a textbook
on high- performance algorithms with particular emphasis on wavelet-based
adaptive methods and their implementation in modern computational environments.
We will also maintain a web site where we will post some of the rudimentary
wavelet codes for solving PDEs, homework assignments, and other relevant
material. We feel that such a service would be of immense educational value to
the graduate students in engineering and science, since very few universities
offer courses in scientific computing using wavelets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;