* 0132275
* Acquisition of a Laser-Flash Apparatus for Measurement of Thermal Diffusivity to 2000C
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2005
* Anne Hofmeister, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 03/31/2005
* USD 130,260.00

0132275 Hofmeister

Heat transport pertains to problems on all scales in Earth science, e.g.,
laboratory experiments, crystallization and texture of igneous rocks, ductile
faulting, mantle plumes, Earth's convection patterns, and planetary formation
and evolution. Understanding such processes requires knowledge of either the
thermal diffusivity (D) or the thermal conductivity (k = DrCV ). The physical
property k describes the rate at which heat flows from the hot to the cold end
of a rigid material, and thus pertains to conductive processes. When the
material flows as well (convective processes), D applies. Because density (r)
and heat capacity (CV) at temperature are well-constrained or readily predicted,
measurements of D provide the data needed to understand heat transport. However,
the temperature dependence of D is generally unknown for geological and
planetary materials and the available data are inconsistent. Disparities exist
in the previous methods because heat is transported as light over the short
scales of the experiments in a manner that is specific to a given experiment.
The results are thus not a material property. This complex situation exists
because planetary materials are transparent at some wavelengths of light (and
light is heat). Technological advances in materials science have led to a device
which overcomes this problem. Funds from this grant will support acquisition of
such a laser-flash apparatus to measure thermal diffusivity (D) from room
temperature to 2000oC. No comparable instrument exists in Earth Science research
facilities in the U.S. The apparatus not only doubles the 1000oC range typical
for the scant existing data, most of which are 30 years old, but is easy and
rapid to use, and provides D(T) on melts. The data generated by the laser flash
apparatus provide the needed tests for the T dependence for phenomenological
models for k. Combining theory and experiment not only allows extrapolation of
measured D and k to all conditions of interest to Earth science, but will
further our understanding of the microscopic basis of transport properties. ***