* 0132156
* Microbial Observatories: Viruses from Yellowstone Thermal Acidic Environments
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2008
* Francisco Roberto, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2008
* USD 749,920.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. Mark Young and David Mogk (Montana State
University-Bozeman) in collaboration with Drs. Kenneth Stedman (Portland State
University) and Frank Roberto (DOE-INEEL Idaho Falls) to identify and
characterize novel viruses from high temperature acidic environments present in
Yellowstone National Park. The goals of this grant are to discover and analyze
previously unknown viruses from very hot (&gt;178F) and acidic (pH &lt; 4)
environments, conditions approaching boiling battery acid, and to monitor the
virus populations in these environments over time. Preliminary data indicates
that the viruses in these environments are unique and quite unlike viruses found
in more "normal" environments. A combination of biochemical and molecular tools
will be used to cultivate these viruses in the laboratory and to monitor their
presence in Yellowstone's hot springs. In addition, detailed chemical analysis
of these environments in which these viruses live will be performed. All
cultures and DNA obtained from this project will be stored in the Montana State
University Thermal Biology Institute thermophile culture collection, providing
biological materials for future screening&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has
broad implications. The detailed analysis of viruses has often led the way to
fundamental breakthroughs in our understanding of the biochemistry of life (such
as the discovery of DNA as the genetic material). The research supported by this
grant to characterize viruses from extreme environments is likely to lead to new
and fundamental understanding of biological adaptations required for life at
high temperatures. Presently, we only have a rudimentary understanding of how
organisms survive in extreme environments and how they have adapted to their
unique chemical environments. The discovery and analysis of viruses from high
temperature environments is an important step in the understanding how these
unusual microbial communities operate. In addition, these studies will provide
additional insights into how life adapts to changes in all environments. This
research will also determine if viruses can act as sensitive biosensors of
chemical and biological change. Finally, these studies will not only impact our
understanding of life on earth but may also provide new insights in how to look
for extraterrestrial life. &lt;br/&gt;