* 0132600
* Fabry-Perot Studies of Equatorial Thermospheric Dynamics and Composition
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2006
* John Meriwether, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert B. Kerr
* 02/28/2006
* USD 282,475.00

In this project funds are requested to continue studies of the equatorial
thermospheric dynamics using the upgraded automated Arequipa Fabry-Perot
interferometer (FPI) observatory operating at Arequipa which is ~400km south of
the magnetic equator. The instrumental upgrade increase of the FPI sensitivity
by a factor of 15 is achieved by replacing the GaAs photomultipler with a back-
thinned CCD detector. The improved sensitivity of the Arequipa FPI will be used
to extend current studies of the midnight temperature maximum and the equatorial
wind and temperature anomaly (EWTA) with increased accuracy.

A new line of research is proposed that would be based upon the observations of
O+ and OH airglow emissions for the study of thermospheric [O]. The Doppler
widths of the O+ spectral feature would provide information regarding the
possible production of the hot oxygen corona that was previously observed with
this technique in 1980.

If such hot [O] atoms exist near the equatorial upper thermosphere and exobase,
aside from an increase in the effective Doppler width to equivalent temperatures
of ~4000, an excess of a few Rayleighs of 732nm emission rate relative to the
FLIP predictions normalized by the observations at earlier solar depression
angles should be seen. The proposed 732 nm measurements may resolve the question
as to whether there exists and influx of fast oxygen ions into the equatorial
ionosphere from the magnetosphere, which has been suggested to be caused by the
polar O+ outflow that is diverted to the low latitude ionosphere by
magnetospheric-ionospheric coupling processes.

During the night the Doppler shifts of the OH nightglow at 731.6 nm would be
observed to determine mesospheric winds averaged over the OH volume emission
profile with a centroid altitude of ~87km. These results would be particularly
useful in the support of the TIMED (thermosphere ionosphere mesosphere
energetics and dynamics) satellite tidal studies as ground-based observations of
mesospheric tidal winds in the Southern hemisphere are sparse. A filter changer
would select between the two filters, 630 nm and 732 nm, as necessary to get the
observations these science objectives require.