* 0132982
* CAREER:   Molecular Scale Electronic Devices and Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2007
* Chongwu Zhou, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Olufemi Olowolafe
* 01/31/2007
* USD 375,000.00

The relentless down-scaling of the conventional metal-oxide-semiconductor (MOS)
based integrated circuits is expected to slow down due to fundamental physical
limitations and increasingly prohibitive cost associated with fabrication
facilities. Molecular electronics, where the idea is that only a few or even
just one molecule could be used to perform basic electronic functions, holds
great promises for superior performance and substantially reduced cost. As a
bottom-up approach to fabricate nanostructures, molecular electronics employs
chemical synthesis and assembly to produce devices with critical dimensions
defined by the molecular wires and hence can eliminate the cost associated with
advanced lithography techniques. Such devices utilize various quantum effects
such as tunneling and conformational transitions to their advantages and thus
can deliver better performances than conventional MOS
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The eventual success of this program will firmly
establish molecular electronics as an intriguing and practical technology with
great potential to replace silicon-based electronics. We expect to produce the
molecular electronics version of two core elements in integrated circuits:
transistors and memories. Our molecular transistors will possess a channel
length around two nanometers, two orders of magnitude smaller than that of
today's most advanced silicon-based transistors. We also expect to demonstrate
nonvolatile spin-dependent memories with molecular wires as the active
component. This technique will likely produce ultra-small memory devices and add
a new direction to the by far "classical" molecular electronics. Finally we
expect to demonstrate a new scheme for integrated molecular systems with carbon
nanotubes as interconnects. This program will also serve to advance the
fundamental forefronts of molecular electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several
unique features distinguish this program from other existing programs in this
field.&lt;br/&gt;1. We will utilize the nanopore technique to produce molecular
transistors and spin-electronic devices. Our group is one of two existing groups
that have mastered this technique (the other being the Mark A. reed group at
Yale, who is currently focusing on two-terminal nanopore devices). This
technique can render devices with channel length defined by the molecular wire
length (~ 2 nm) and device areas ~ 10 nm in diameter. Such nanoscale devices
hold great promises for high-density integrations.&lt;br/&gt;2. We will
investigate both n-type and p-type molecular wires in our transistor structures,
making complementary circuitry possible. This important issue has by far being
unexplored by other research groups due to the apparent difficulty.&lt;br/&gt;3.
An intimate integration of the proposed research and education is guaranteed.
Substantial effort will be devoted to educate both graduate and undergraduate
students, especially the underrepresented, throughout this program. The research
activities will also be integrated into the Nanoelectronics and Nanotechnology
class I developed.&lt;br/&gt;4. We enjoy full support from our collaborators at
the Nanotechnology Center of NASA Ames Research Center. Dr. Wendy Fan and her
colleagues are currently devoting 100% of her time to the organic synthesis
component of this program, at no cost to NSF. Dr. Jie Han is focusing on the
theoretical modeling and simulations of the proposed molecular devices, again,
at no cost to NSF.&lt;br/&gt;In conclusion, the proposed program holds great
promises for future nanoscale electronics and has a great chance to succeed. The
financial support from NSF can be invaluable in helping me to achieve my goal to
develop a life-long career in scientific research, academic advising and
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;