* 0132692
* CAREER:  Microscale Structure/Function Studies Towards Development of Engineered Liver Tissue
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Sangeeta Bhatia, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 08/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

0132692&lt;br/&gt;Bhatia&lt;br/&gt;Under this CAREER Award, the investigator
will develop a comprehensive research program in Microscale Hepatic Tissue
Engineering oriented towards elucidating the structure/function relationship of
the liver. The liver architecture in vivo will be used as a guide to
quantitatively investigate and optimize hepatocyte-to-hepatocycte cell
interactions, hepatocycte-to-non-parenchymal cell interactions, cell-to-
extracellular matrix interactions, and the role of soluble cues. Micropatterned
surfaces conjugated with the adhesive peptide RGD as a model extracellular
matrix will be used to ligate integrins and control cell-to-cell interactions in
2D. Photopolymerized PEG hydrogels conjugated with RGD will be used to present
an adhesive peptide to aggregated hepatocytes in a 3D context. Photopatterning
of cell-containing hydrogels will be used to explore 3D features of tissue
structure. Collectively, the studies will provide fundamental insight into the
cross-talk between integrins, cadherins, and gap junctions as well as the
relative role of 2D and 3D environments in this cross-talk. Insights gained will
benefit design of bioartificial liver reactors and implantable constructs and
should have a major technological impact on the practice of 3D tissue
engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational plan focused on building and
maintaining the involvement of women in science and engineering and the need for
further integration across the fields of engineering, biology, and medicine. A
pilot outreach program for 11-13 year old girls would be expanded and a study of
reasons for attrition of women in engineering would be broadened. An
interdisciplinary undergraduate textbook on Tissue Engineering would be
completed. &lt;br/&gt;