* 0132632
* New Mexico EPSCoR Infrastructure Award
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2002,04/30/2005
* James Gosz, University of New Mexico
* Continuing grant
* Denise Barnes
* 04/30/2005
* USD 6,259,280.00

The New Mexico EPSCoR project focuses on natural resource analysis and
management and nanoscience. The goal is to strengthen the infrastructure in
these two focal areas and remove the barriers to competitive research and to
related educational and economic development. Improved computer connectivity and
communication among New Mexico's institutions undergirds both focal areas. Six
institutions will be participating: University of New Mexico, New Mexico State
University, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology, Eastern New Mexico
University, Western New Mexico University, New Mexico Highlands University, San
Juan College, and Dine College. In the Natural Resource Analysis and Management
area, new faculty in remote sensing/hydrology and forestry in addition to new
labs in environmental chemistry and spatial analysis will be featured in the new
Institute for Natural Resource Analysis and Management. In Nanoscience, the
purchase of high-resolution microscopes and increased connectivity will
contribute to the collaborations among the New Mexico campuses and between the
campuses and the national laboratories. The Center for Integrated
Nanotechnologies, designed as a collaboration between Sandia and Los Alamos
National Laboratories and the University of New Mexico, will participate in
fostering research collaborations and providing nanoscience education. The
Master of Science for Teachers program at New Mexico Institute of Mining and
Technology will introduce nanoscience and nanotechnology into the curriculum.

