* 0132356
* Assembly and Function of the Cyanobacterial H2O-Oxidation Complex
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Robert Burnap, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 07/31/2005
* USD 320,000.00

Oxygenic photosynthesis is ultimately the source of the vast majority of
biological energy that supports life on earth and is responsible for the
generation of oxygen strictly required for respiration in all animals, including
humans. Oxygenic photosynthesis depends upon a cluster of four manganese atoms,
(Mn)4, associated with the catalytic site of H 2 O-oxidation of the membrane-
bound photosystem II (PSII) complex. Recent advances in the determination of the
molecular structure confirms that the (Mn)4) is sequestered within a region of
the PSII complex formed by intrinsic and extrinsic proteins near the lumenal
surface of the thylakoid membrane. Many outstanding questions remain and their
mystery, in some cases, is only deepened by the newly available structure. The
overall objective of this project is to connect the structure features of the
cyanobacterial PSII H2O-oxidation complex (WOC) to the dynamical aspects of the
assembly and function of the Mn cluster. Cyanobacteria are being used as the
experimental model since the photosynthetic mechanism in these ubiquitous
organisms is fundamentally similar to that found in higher plants and algae, but
at the same time, more efficient methods for probing the photosynthetic process
at the molecular level are available thereby shortening the time necessary to
test the basic ideas of the research. The work combines molecular genetic,
biochemical and biophysical approaches to clarify the process of
photoactivation, which is the sequential light- dependent assembly of the
catalytic tetramer of Mn atoms that forms the core of the WOC. The research is
facilitated by the development of His-tag purification methods and strains for
the gentle isolation of highly active and pure detergent-solublized PSII
complexes. The ability to produce large amounts of mutant and wild-type PSII
particles and extrinsic proteins now permits systematic manipulations of the
ions and proteins of the WOC to better understand its assembly and function.
While most mutants are already produced, a few additional mutations are being
made to perform site-specific labeling to probe structural rearrangements using
a cysteine-scanning mutagenesis/chemical modification approach. The experiments
are of benefit to parallel biophysical analyses (e.g. FTIR, EPR) by defining the
compositional and kinetic properties of specific mutant His-tagged PSII
particles and highlighting the best preparative procedures for isolating and
analyzing them. Together, these efforts complement on-going developments in the
crystal structure determination by considering the dynamical aspects concerning
the mechanism of light-driven assembly and activation of the Mn cluster.