* 0132607
* Collaborative Research:  The Laterophysic Connection: Integration of the Auditory and Lateral Line Systems in Sound Reception
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Jacqueline Webb, Villanova University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Paul Malchow
* 07/31/2006
* USD 234,547.00

Butterflyfishes of the genus Chaetodon (Teleostei, Family Chaetodontidae) are
conspicuous inhabitants of coral reefs worldwide and are ecological indicators
of reef health due to their dependence on coral as a food source. These fishes
exhibit a wide range of social and feeding behaviors and their species-specific
color patterns provide visual cues used in social communication, but until
recently these fishes were not known to produce sound during natural social
behaviors. We have shown that territorial butterflyfishes produce sounds during
agonistic interactions in the field. Normally the ear is the organ responsive to
sound (as in all vertebrates). In fishes of the genus Chaetodon, however, it
appears that the mechanosensory lateral line system, which is normally
responsive only to water flow, may be sensitive to sound. This is thought to be
due to the presence of a unique linkage of the swim bladder with the lateral
line system (the laterophysic connection), found only in fishes in the genus
Chaetodon. &lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed research program is to understand
the functional significance of this unique structural specialization and the
ways in which the ear and lateral line system process and integrate sounds
produced during natural social behaviors. In order to do this, we will study 8
species of Chaetodon and test the more specific hypotheses: 1) that fishes in
the genus Chaetodon naturally produce sound in the context of specific
behavioral interactions, 2) that the presence of swim bladder horns enhances
sensitivity of the inner ear to sound pressure stimuli, 3) that the laterophysic
connection uniquely makes the lateral line system sound-sensitive, where it is
normally only sensitive to water flow (which is physically distinct from sound),
and 4) that variation in the structure of the laterophysic connection (already
defined in 21 species with prior NSF funding) has important functional
implications for the degree of sound sensitivity. These hypotheses will be
tested using comparative behavioral, anatomical, biomechanical and
neurophysiological approaches.&lt;br/&gt;We are using an exceptional model
system for an integrated, field and lab study of the sensory biology of an
diverse and ecologically important group of coral reef fishes. Students at both
Villanova University and the University of Hawaii will benefit from this
collaboration by interacting with both PI's who bring complementary approaches
and methodologies to the project. Undergraduates and graduate students will be
important contributors to this project. Several undergraduate, and graduate
theses and dissertations will arise from this research program, thus enhancing
the education of all student participants. In addition, Villanova students will
have the opportunity to carry out field research in Both PI's will continue to
involve women and minorities in their laboratories, as their records show they
have done in the past. Dissemination of research results will occur through
paper presentations at a variety of national conferences (e.g. SICB, ASIH,
Neurosciences, ARO), and international conferences by both PI's, and the
publication of several independent and collaborative peer-reviewed papers and
potential invited or review chapters. &lt;br/&gt;