* 0132817
* CAREER:   Enabling New Networking Applications and Distributed Systems with Mobile, Lightweight Protection Domains
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2002,02/29/2008
* Steven Gribble, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 02/29/2008
* USD 499,290.00

Advances in network and computing technologies have accelerated the
proliferation of infrastructure&lt;br/&gt;such as content distribution, caching,
middleware services, and network measurement testbeds.
Recently,&lt;br/&gt;however, a number of new application domains are beginning
to emerge that are not well-supported by&lt;br/&gt;existing technologies, such
as the ability to distribute dynamically generated or active content, to
rapidly&lt;br/&gt;deploy new and untrusted Internet services into existing
infrastructure, and the ability to dynamically inject&lt;br/&gt;network
measurement code into an existing network experimentation
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt; These new application domains all share several
security and resource management requirements: safely&lt;br/&gt;executing
untrusted code, scaling to a large number (100s or 1000s) of protection domains
per physical host, and supporting a large degree of multiplexing of physical
host resources across many concurrently active protection domains. Although
there have been many sandboxing technologies proposed in the past, none of them
have the combination of water-tight isolation and the ability to scale to a
large number of protection&lt;br/&gt;domains required by these new
applications.&lt;br/&gt; The goal of this CAREER proposal is to enable this wide
array of new networking and distributed&lt;br/&gt;middleware applications by
designing and implementing lightweight protection domains, technically
focusing&lt;br/&gt;on the notion of using virtual machine monitors (VMMs). A
virtual machine monitor is a software layer&lt;br/&gt;that runs immediately on
top of the hardware/software boundary, virtualizing all names exposed by
that&lt;br/&gt;boundary to give higher-level virtual machines the illusion of
their own dedicated physical machine. Virtual&lt;br/&gt;machines are known to
have strong isolation, and they are known to support code migration.
However,&lt;br/&gt;existing virtual machines and guest operating systems are
typically heavyweight, permitting only a small&lt;br/&gt;number (3-10) to
concurrently execute on a single physical machine. The first research challenge
posed in&lt;br/&gt;this proposal is designing and implementing mechanisms for
building lightweight VMMs, virtual machines,&lt;br/&gt;and guest operating
systems, so that 100s or 1000s can concurrently execute. An ancillary challenge
implied&lt;br/&gt;by this is resource management across virtual machines: to
fully isolate one VM from another, each VM's&lt;br/&gt;resource usage (e.g., CPU
consumption, I/O rates, memory footprint) must be bounded by the VMM.&lt;br/&gt;
Once the researchers have successfully implemented lightweight virtual machines,
they intend to heavily leverage this new mechanism to explore several new
research topics, as well as revisiting a few existing ones. For example,they
will use virtual machines as a sandboxing mechanism enabling web servers to
dynamically inject new content-generation code into content delivery networks or
web caching systems. As another example, they will use VMs to enable untrusted
code authors to upload new Internet services into a virtual hosting platform. As
a third example, the researchers plan on exploring the role of virtual machines
as a resource container in cluster-of-workstations, in particular exploring the
ability to dynamically alter relative resource consumption rates of virtual
machines to create the effect of isolated \virtual clusters" within a single
physical cluster.&lt;br/&gt; For the educational component of the CAREER
proposal, the researchs plan on exploring the use of their virtual machine
monitor as a substrate for supporting novel projects in undergraduate and
graduate advanced&lt;br/&gt;operating systems courses, such as CSE451 and CSE551
at the University of Washington. A virtual machine&lt;br/&gt;monitor is a
natural place for supporting intricate debugging mechanisms, and hardware device
emulation.&lt;br/&gt;Having students augment the virtual machine monitor and use
it to develop simple components of an&lt;br/&gt;operating system will radically
improve the students' understanding of OS issues, as they will be forced
to&lt;br/&gt;understand the interface between the OS and the hardware, as well
as the structure of the OS itself. Finally,&lt;br/&gt;this will also provide us
with an opportunity to revise the OS course curriculum to include modern topics
as&lt;br/&gt;security, isolation, mobility, and OS support for embedded devices
(which share characteristics of the virtual machines that we will emulate with
our VMM).