* 0132802
* CAREER:    Quality of Service Engineering with Multiple Time-Scale Traffic
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2009
* David Starobinski, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Victor S. Frost
* 07/31/2009
* USD 344,000.00

The multiple time-scale and long-range dependent behavior of network traffic
have been established by numerous experimental studies. In particular, power-law
and Zipf-like distributions appear to be inherent to the Internet (file size,
popularity of web documents, degrees of routers). These findings are raising the
questions of (i) whether effective and valid mathematical tools for modeling and
predicting network traffic can be developed and (ii) whether classical QoS
engineering methods, based on the exponential distribution and its variants, can
still be useful, if appropriately adapted. This project aims at providing
positive, constructive answers to these questions, through the development of
tractable, end-to-end QoS engineering solutions, applicable to current and
future networks. Specifcally, this project will focus on the development of a
new QoS methodology, tailored for multiple time-scale traffic, termed
Stochastically Bounded Burstiness (SBB) calculus. This methodology provides
robust statistical bounds on various performance measures, such as delay, at
each node of a network. The SBB calculus applies to very general network
settings and leads to high utilization of network resources. This project
proposes to address a number of fundamental research issues towards a possible
implementation of the SBB calculus into practical QoS architectures, such as,
but not limited to, DiffServ. These issues are related to (i) traffic
characterization and measurements (ii) policing (iii) admission control and QoS
routing and (iv) network topology (the SBB calculus currently applies only to
acyclic networks). In addition, the applicability of this methodology to new
types of networks, such as small ad-hoc networks, will be investigated, in a
collaborative effort with Nokia. Next, this project proposes to elaborate an
innovative framework for the modeling and the analysis of power-law
distributions, such as the Pareto distribution. The proposed framework is based
on a fitting procedure that can approximate a power-law distribution arbitrarily
closely by a mixture of exponential distributions. This modeling approach
provides novel perspectives on the design and analysis of important systems
where power-law distributions arise. In particular, this project proposes to
make use of this approach in order to analyze and improve the performance of
multi-server systems, such as clusters of web servers. The educational goals of
this project are to develop a rich and challenging curriculum in computer
networking, and to establish QoS engineering as one of its major disciplines.
For this purpose, a new Internet instruction laboratory is planned, where
students will get the opportunity to experiment with various networking
equipment and communication technologies. The PI intends to develop two new
networking courses, one undergraduate and one graduate, that will take advantage
of this facility. In addition, the PI plans to introduce innovative teaching
methods in order to enhance the communication skills of the students.