* 0132798
* AURA Management and Operations of the National Optical Astronomy Observatory and the National Solar Observatory
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2002,12/31/2013
* Jeremy Mould, Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Vernon Pankonin
* 12/31/2013
* USD 1.00

AST 0132798&lt;br/&gt;Smith, William&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will
support a five year Cooperative Agreement with the Association of Universities
for Research in Astronomy, Inc., for management and operations of the National
Optical Astronomy Observatories (NOAO) and the National Solar Observatory (NSO).
NOAO and NSO will administer observing time to the astronomical community via
peer reviewed observing proposals, providing access to research facilities for
over 1000 scientists per year in astronomy and solar physics. NOAO and NSO will
also administer public outreach through education programs, visitor centers, and
Web-based information and imagery. NOAO and NSO will also be responsible for
coordinating planning by the US community for major new federally funded
initiatives in ground based optical and infrared astronomy; this planning is in
close partnership with US universities and non-federal observatories.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NOAO's facilities are located at Kitt Peak National
Observatory (KPNO) near Tucson, Arizona, and Cerro Tololo Inter-American
Observatory (CTIO) near La Serena, Chile, which together include 4 telescopes of
4-meter class. NOAO is also responsible for the US Gemini Program Office (USGP),
which is the gateway for US astronomers to their share of observing resources on
the twin 8-meter Gemini Telescopes. Scientific studies will
include&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Wide field imaging studies in optical and infrared
wavelengths to locate and characterize the most distant visible objects in the
universe and the dark matter pervading the universe, &lt;br/&gt; Spectroscopic
studies to understand composition, distances, and ages of stars and
galaxies,&lt;br/&gt; Imaging studies to locate and characterize Kuiper Belt
Objects, the most distant bodies in the solar system, &lt;br/&gt; Imaging and
spectroscopic observations of supernovae and other stellar explosions, to
understand their intrinsic nature and their use a measures of the acceleration
of the universe by "dark energy",&lt;br/&gt; Spectroscopic studies of the
centers of galaxies and quasars to determine the nature of massive black holes
located in these active galactic nuclei. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSO's facilities
are located on Sacramento Peak, NM, and on Kitt Peak. The principal telescope at
Sacramento Peak is a vacuum tower telescope with world's best image quality for
solar studies, through use of solar adaptive optics. The principal telescope at
Kitt Peak is a 1.5-meter all-reflecting solar telescope, world's largest solar
telescope and optimized for infrared observations. NSO will also operate the
Synoptic Optical Long-term Investigations of the Sun (SOLIS) telescopes and the
worldwide telescopes for the Global Oscillation Network Group (GONG). Scientific
studies with the NSO telescopes will include&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; High
precision imaging of magnetic fields on the surface of the sun to understand the
energy release mechanisms in solar flares, &lt;br/&gt; Synoptic monitoring of
changes on the solar surface, including sunspots and explosive activity, to
determine how these changes affect the Earth, including global climate change,
&lt;br/&gt; Characterization of the internal structure of the sun using
helioseismology, to determine why the sun changes with the 11 year sunspot
cycle, &lt;br/&gt; Infrared spectroscopy of the solar chromosphere and corona to
determine the location and composition of cooler clouds of molecular material,
&lt;br/&gt; Infrared spectroscopy of the solar corona to understand the role of
magnetic fields in shaping and controlling the corona, where solar material is
ejected into interplanetary space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;