* 0132677
* Mechanism of Mucilage Formation in the North Adriatic Sea: A Component of CREICO (Cooperative Research on Ecological Interactions in the Coastal Oceans)
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2002,02/29/2008
* Farooq Azam, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 02/29/2008
* USD 247,620.00

The proposed research is a component of CREICO (Cooperative Research on
Ecological Interactions in the Coastal Oceans) program in the Adriatic Sea. This
international initiative is intended to develop cooperation between Croatia,
Slovenia, Italy and the US in environmental science in the Adriatic, in concert
with Adriatic Observing System (CAOS) being developed with NOAA. CREICO is
intended to increase understanding of the structure and function of ecological
systems in the Adriatic, and the system response to perturbations. The focus of
CREICO is on "bloom phenomena" and their causes and consequences. This proposal
focuses on the mucilage phenomenon (mare sporco). Over the last 3 centuries,
enormous accumulations of "mucilage" have occurred along the coasts of the
northern Adriatic Sea, affecting the coasts of Italy, Slovenia and Croatia. The
cause remains a mystery. Mucilage events damage local fisheries and tourism.
Scientifically, the huge organic matter accumulation represents an opportunity
to study the ecosystem level mechanisms of variability in the carbon
biogeochemistry, and North Adriatic offers a natural "laboratory." Predicting
the mucilage events would be an excellent test of models of oceanic carbon
biogeochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While phytoplankton blooms produce the
organic matter that ultimately forms mucilage Dr. Azam hypothesizes that
bacterial processing of phytoplankton biomass, to produce slow?to-degrade
polysaccharide plays a significant role. They will test hypotheses on bacterial
production of slow?to-degrade dissolved and colloidal organic matter (including
bacterial capsular material and exudates) and its aggregation to form mucilage
under relevant ecosystem conditions. This work will be done in collaboration
with Serena Fonda?Umani (Italy), Vera Zutic (Croatia) and Valentina Turk
(Slovenia). They will use mesocosms (in Fonda?Umani lab in Trieste, Italy) to
test hypotheses through perturbation experiments. Further, they will take
advantage of the planned two 15?d cruises. Bacterial studies will use molecular
approaches, to explore species?specific roles in mucilage production and
decomposition. Polysaccharide structure analysis will seek relationships between
bacterial biochemical profiles and polysaccharide utilizability. Dr. Azam and
his lab have been informally collaborating with Italian, Slovenia and Croatian
marine scientists and students on mucilage studies, in research and training.
This research will increase this collaboration; it will address a long?standing
oceanographic problem, with potential of discovering fundamental principles of
carbon cycling of relevance to research on global change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&
lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;