* 0132218
* Second International Conference on Semigroups of Operators, Theory and Applications.  To be held in Rio de Janero, Brazil, September 10-14, 2001.
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2001,12/31/2002
* Nhan Levan, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 12/31/2002
* USD 10,000.00

Due to the great success of the NSF supported First International Conference on
``Semigroups of Operators: Theory and Applications (SOTA 1),'' December 14-18,
1998, in Newport Beach, CA, the international community of researchers on SOTA
wishes to have SOTA 2 in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, September 10-14, 2001.

The central goal of SOTA 2 is, as before, to bring together experts as well as
young researchers in the Theory and Applications of Semigroups of Operators. The
Conference will concentrate on recent advances in the theory and latest results
in various applications. There is always a ``firewall'' between the abstract
theory and the applications, hence one of our key goals is to unite both in the
hope that it will be of value to both communities.

SOTA 2 will concentrate on the abstract theory of Semigroups of Operators as
well as Applications which include relevant areas of Science and Engineering.
The key topics of the Conference include: Evolution Equations; Nonlinear
Semigroups; Control Engineering (Structures, Aeroelasticity), Wavelets and
Signal Processing; Probability and Stochastic Processes; Mathematical Physics;
Electrical Propagation; Acoustics; and Optics.

The Conference Program will consist of plenary lectures, invited papers as well
as contributed papers. The Conference will be announced in the AMS Bulletin and
on the Web: http://www.ctc.puc-rio.br/SOTA2, as well as by mailing of Call-For
Papers. A Conference Proceedings will be published.

The Conference Chairman and Chairman of The International Program Committee is
Professor A.V. Balakrishnan (USA). The International Program Committee consists
of Mathematicians and Engineers from 4 continents.

This proposal requests travel support for 10 US participants. Minority, women,
and young researchers are the first, and hopefully, the only choices of the 10
participants.







