* 0132716
* PECASE: Hierarchical Abstractions of Hybrid Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2007
* George Pappas, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 04/30/2007
* USD 375,000.00

Proposal Title: PECASE: Hierarchical Abstractions of Hybrid Systems
Institution: University of Pennsylvania

Recent years have witnessed the availability of extremely powerful and
inexpensive computers, the explosion of communication networks, and revolutions
in sensor and actuator technology. These accelerating advances have found their
way inside many physical systems such as cars, aircraft, chemical processes,
power networks, micro-mechanical systems, and manufacturing systems, resulting
in the so-called embedded control systems or embedded software systems which
merge physical processes with information systems. These application domains are
important not only from an engineering perspective but also because of their
prevalence in everyday life and the well-being of the economy. Designing
efficient, yet robust, large-scale embedded systems is a significant systems
challenge. It is of immediate importance to develop the research foundations and
educational programs to enable next-generation engineers to optimally utilize
the opportunities offered by information technology. The difficulty with
embedded systems arises from the fact that the software design and the control
design is highly decoupled. As a result, physical constraints, such as
differential equations, are not taken explicitly into account in the software
design process. Consequently, fundamentally novel approaches to the design of
embedded systems are needed as well as the development of models and tools that
address the analysis and design of the integrated system with its many different
physical, functional and logical aspects. The research discipline of hybrid
systems provides a theoretical foundation for the modeling, analysis, and design
of embedded systems. Hybrid systems naturally combine discrete-event and
continuous-time systems in a manner that can capture software logic, physical
dynamics, and communication protocols, in a unified modeling framework. Hybrid
systems have been used as mathematical models for automated highway systems, air
traffic management systems, embedded automotive controllers, manufacturing
systems, chemical processes, and, more recently, biomolecular networks. The wide
applicability of hybrid systems has inspired a great deal of research from both
control theory and theoretical computer science. Despite the great success of
hybrid systems as a model, the applicability of state-of-the-art analysis and
design techniques for hybrid systems has been limited to examples of small size
due to complexity. One of the fundamental approaches for reducing complexity
involves the use of hierarchical decomposition. One of the main challenges in
hierarchical systems is the extraction of a hierarchy of models at various
levels of abstraction which are compatible with the functionality and objectives
of each layer. Hierarchies have been instrumental in separately managing the
complexity of both control and software designs. However, for hybrid systems
which re-integrate software and control, the right notion of hierarchy is a
great challenge, and is the critical obstacle for scaling our models, theories,
algorithms, and tools to large scale, embedded systems. Next-generation, large-
scale embedded systems have motivated new control as well as software paradigms.
As a result, there are numerous opportunities for fundamental and significant
contributions from both a theoretical and an applied perspective. In this
exciting intellectual landscape, the research and educational agenda of the
proposed research focuses on developing the theoretical foundations for the
hierarchical decomposition of hybrid systems at various levels of abstraction.
The long term goal of the research agenda will address the fundamental problem
of given a class of hybrid models, and a class of properties that must be
preserved, extract modeling abstractions that preserve the properties of
interest. Achieving this goal will consist of first developing robust notions of
bi-simulation for purely continuous systems, and then unifying the continuous
and discrete notions in a manner that is consistent with the dynamics of hybrid
systems.

Merging discrete and continuous systems creates serious educational issues in
order to combine the traditionally separate threads of discrete and continuous
mathematics. These issues must be addressed at all educational levels. At the
graduate level, creating new courses on hybrid systems are needed, but with
focus on complexity reduction methods in both control theory and computer
science. However, given the one-sided backgrounds of most undergraduate
students, what is needed at the undergraduate level, is a cross-departmental,
embedded systems course that will highlight both the discrete and continuous
nature of embedded systems in various application domains. This will allow the
earlier uniformization of educational backgrounds, expose students to related
application domains in other departments, as well as demonstrate the cross-
disciplinary power of the models, methods, and tools.

This project was originally funded as a CAREER award, and was converted to a
Presidential Early Career Award for Engineers and Scientists (PECASE) award in
May 2004.





