* 0132335
* CAREER: Neural control of coordinated movements
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2007
* Edward Freedman, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 01/31/2007
* USD 610,270.00

Lay Abstract: NSF# 0132335 - CAREER&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using psychophysical
and neurophysiological techniques, this research investigates several aspects of
the important neural computations that are required for execution of visual
orienting movements: 1) the mechanisms that mediate the transformation of
sensory information into motor commands; 2) the neural computations required to
decompose global motor commands observed at the level of the superior colliculus
into signals required for coordinated contraction of muscles; and 3) the
management of conflicting neural signals produced by the competition between
motor commands and the sensory signals that are a direct result of the executed
movements.&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this proposal will test the predictions of a
hypothesis that states that a gaze-related command signal issued by the superior
colliculus is decomposed by cells in the paramedian pontine reticular formation
(PPRF) into separate eye and head control signals, and that eye-head
coordination (observed during visual orienting movements) is mediated by the
interactions of these signals. The mechanisms for controlling head movements are
largely unknown, and this proposal seeks to correlate cell activity with head
movements during coordinated eye-head movements, during pursuit of moving
targets, and during more natural movements that combine gaze shifts and pursuit
movements. This proposal will contribute to understanding how the brain
accomplishes the required computations to coordinate more than 40 muscles and
muscle groups to produce a smoothly coordinated re-direction of the line of
sight.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, this proposal will contribute to the
development of courses based on the idea that students' desire to understand
general principles will lead to their own investigation of the details, using
in-class lectures and small group discussions. Increased numbers of
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students will participate in the
laboratory research proposed, both during the academic year and in a summer
undergraduate internship program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;