* 0132823
* RUI:  Proteinaceous Bioadhesive Structure Elucidation
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2002,07/31/2008
* Marion Olivieri, D'Youville College
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2008
* USD 271,697.00

The goal of this project is to determine the molecular structure of
proteinaceous domains that exhibit bioadhesive functionality. Model peptides in
the solvated adsorbed-state will be examined using a combination of biophysical
techniques to monitor the conformational changes that occur upon substrate
binding. This project seeks to develop a protocol for structural elucidation of
adsorbed molecules in solution. Mussel adhesive protein, MAP, extracted from
Mytilus edulis has provided information to create the initial model compounds.
Solid-state techniques, such as multiple attenuated internal reflectance
infrared (MAIR-IR) spectroscopy, ellipsometry, contact angle analysis, combined
with solution-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy and molecular
modeling have already given some structural information, but have not been used
to their fullest potential. When warranted, these techniques, in addition to
newly proposed "adsorbed-state" NMR spectroscopy, crystallization attempts for
x-ray diffraction and cell attachment assays, will be employed. The information
would be compiled to create molecular models of the peptides in close
approximation to a surface to view and better understand changes that occur upon
substrate binding.

The investigator has worked to combine research with teaching. The variety of
courses the PI has taught at D'Youville College reflects her multi-disciplinary
background (e.g., chemistry, biochemistry, mathematics and computer science).
Most of the PI's students are female non-science majors. Although these students
did not choose science as their major field of study, the scientific
information, process and tools that they are exposed to have a significant
impact on their overall education. Many of these students will be required to
complete a Master's thesis or project. Additionally, the school has increased
the number of education students drastically. These (K-12) pre-teacher's
exposure to this project enhances not only their education, but of each of their
students to follow. Exposure to this project may be the only opportunity
D'Youville students have to witness basic research before they graduate.