* 0132631
* CAREER: Learning in the Woods - Decadal Climate, Water Supply, and Fire Frequency in the Great Basin
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2002,02/29/2008
* Franco Biondi, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 02/29/2008
* USD 408,997.00

This award funds the 'Learning in the Woods' project which aims to use a multi-
faceted approach to integrate research and education on environmental change at
interannual to interdecadal scales in the Great Basin, where rapid population
growth is testing the vulnerability of natural and human-dominated ecosystems to
climatic fluctuations.

The primary goal of the research is to obtain a baseline representation, over
the last millennium, of interannual to interdecadal changes in water supply and
fire regime. The spatial and temporal patterns of wildfire will be analyzed in
the context of climatic fluctuations. Tree-ring chronologies from moisture-
sensitive species will be developed for selected watersheds, including the
Truckee, Carson, Walker, Owens, and Humboldt River Basins. The annual to
seasonal resolution of such natural archives allows for accurate calibration
with instrumental records, so that multi-century long proxy series of annual to
seasonal precipitation and stream flow can be obtained.

In addition, a four-day science experience for K-12 teachers and students will
be held every year, and aimed at Hispanic middle- and high-school students in
Nevada.

The specific scientific and educational objectives include testing the spatial
coherence of decadal-scale variability in Great Basin hydroclimatology,
determining the amplitude of interannual to interdecadal fluctuations of
freshwater input to selected watersheds of the Intermountain West over the past
millennium, examining spatial and temporal changes of fire regime in connection
to local and regional climate at annual resolution for several centuries,
educating new generations on the dynamic relationships that exist both in space
and in time between climate and surface processes such as precipitation, runoff,
and wildfire, developing a web-based information system showing the spatial
variability of precipitation, stream flow, and fire regime over Great Basin
watersheds for the period of instrumental observations and for the period of
proxy climatic records, and providing under-represented groups an incentive,
early in their educational careers, for pursuing science careers.