* 0132282
* Orbital Order and Bond-Length Fluctuations in Narrow-Band Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2005
* John Goodenough, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 01/31/2005
* USD 392,000.00

This project aims to study the novel physical properties encountered in
transition-metal oxides at the transition from localized to itinerant electronic
behavior and at orbital order-disorder transitions. The localized-itinerant
electronic transition occurs where the dominant electronic energies change from
intra-atomic to inter-atomic. This transition is first-order, and where phase
separation would occur at too low a temperature for atomic diffusion, a dynamic
spinodal segregation on a small length scale is accomplished by locally
cooperative bond-length fluctuations. On lowering the temperature, ordering of
the fluctuations may result in a charge-density wave that can be mobile or
pinned. Orbital order-disorder transitions occur at localized configurations
having an orbital degeneracy that is removed by lowering the local site
symmetry. These Jahn-Teller distortions may be long-range cooperative and static
or short-range dynamic to give another mechanism for bond-length fluctuations.
Experiments have shown that the high-temperature superconductivity in the copper
oxides occurs at a crossover from localized to itinerant electronic behavior.
Colossal magnetoresistance in the manganese-oxide perovskites is associated with
both a localized to itinerant electronic transition and the stabilization in a
magnetic field of orbital fluctuations over long-range cooperative orbital
ordering because orbital fluctuations give isotropic ferromagnetic interactions
whereas static, long-range-cooperative distortions give antiferromagnetic order.
Also, the importance of measuring on single crystals the transport and magnetic
properties as a function of pressure as well as temperature allows fine tuning
of the intraatomic versus interatomic interactions without changing the
chemistry. The suppression of the phonon contribution to the thermal
conductivity by bond-length fluctuations with an eye on how this phenomenon
might be useful for peltier cooling will be studied. This project has a very
strong educational component that provides graduate and post-doctoral students
an opportunity to learn how to synthesize and characterize both chemically and
structurally polycrystalline and single-crystal samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
This class of transition-metal oxides exhibits magnetic, transport,
thermoelectric power, specific heat, and thermal conductivity behavior that
suggests significant potential for high impact applications such as high
performance magnetic and electronic devices and solid state refrigeration.
Students trained in these areas will compete very well for available industrial
and academic positions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;