* 0132534
* EPSCoR Research Infrastructure Improvement Plan
* O/D,EPS
* 02/01/2002,03/31/2006
* James Wicksted, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen L. Sandberg
* 03/31/2006
* USD 9,000,000.00

The Oklahoma EPSCoR Research Infrastructure Improvement Award will build two new
statewide research programs, the Oklahoma Functional Genomics Consortium and the
Oklahoma Network for Nanostructured Materials (NanoNet). Both programs are based
on existing strengths at State research universities and each addresses a field
of current national priority. Functional genomics follows the completion of
large-scale genome projects and enables biologists to explore how genes interact
with each other and the environment in complex biological systems. Research in
this field is vital not only for enhancing fundamental understanding of
genetics, but also for improving both human health and the agricultural
industry, which is critically important to the economy of both Oklahoma and the
nation. Nanotechnology is based on the observation that nanostructured materials
have electrical, optical, and chemical properties that are different from those
of molecules and different from those of bulk materials. Future technology that
exploits these new properties will have major impact on the economy of the
State, the nation and the world. Development of nanotechnology research
infrastructure will enable Oklahoma both to compete for major research funding
and to grow industries that depend upon highly skilled workers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oklahoma has developed a strong spirit of
interdisciplinary and inter-institutional collaboration among its research-
intensive campuses. The Oklahoma Network for Nanostructured Materials (NanoNet)
and the Oklahoma Functional Genomics Consortium will be formed by investigators
at Oklahoma State University, the University of Oklahoma at Norman, the
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, the University of Tulsa, and the
nonprofit Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, in partnership with the private
sector to implement the goal of attaining sustainable research infrastructure
through nanotechnolgy and genomics. &lt;br/&gt;