* 0132111
* Microbial Observatories: Collaborative Research: A Cold Microbial Observatory in an Alaskan Boreal Forest Soil
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2006
* William Metcalf, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 01/31/2006
* USD 55,166.00

A collaborative grant has been awarded to Drs. Jo Handelsman at the University
of Wisconsin, Roger Ruess at the University of Alaska, Jill Banfield at the
University of California-Berkeley, and William Metcalf at the University of
Illinois to describe the diversity and function of the microbial life in Alaskan
soil in a Long Term Ecological Research site. Microbial diversity and mechanisms
of phosphorous acquisition will be studied by culturing and culture-independent
molecular methods to access a wide spectrum of organisms. The culture
independent methods will include "metagenomics," an approach involving cloning
the genes from organisms directly from the environment, without requiring them
to grow in culture. Diversity will be assessed by methods that rely on the
sequences of genes that act as molecular signatures for microbial species.
Cultured organisms and metagenomic clones will be screened for the ability (1)
to grow on reduced forms of phosphorous as the sole P source and (2) to
solubilize the dominant mineral forms of P in the forest soil that are
identified by our mineralogical characterization.

Soil contains a rich variety of uncultured microorganisms that outnumber the
cultured organisms by a factor of 100 or 1000. The soils of interior Alaska
represent a large and diverse habitat of the boreal forest whose micoorganisms,
both cultured and uncultured, have been largely ignored. Recent studies of other
cold environments have revealed novel and diverse microbial life, suggesting
that the soils of Alaska will be a productive hunting ground for new
microorganisms and new microbial functions. Little is known about phosphorous
acquisition, which is essential to ecosystem function. The Microbial Observatory
will contribute to our knowledge of the microbiology of cold soils, increase the
diversity of cultured microorganisms, and potentially identify new microbial
functions for coping with phosphorous limitation. The microorganisms cultured in
this study and the metagenomic clones may also provide a new resource for
biotechnology research for enzyme, drug, and agrichemical discovery.

