* 0132225
* Microporosity Formation in Alloy Solidification
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2006
* Christoph Beckermann, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 01/31/2006
* USD 308,264.00

The objective of this research is to advance fundamental understanding of
microporosity formation during solidification of alloys. The single most
important feature of the research is that it focuses solely on the microscopic
scale (on the order of microns) where nucleation, interfaces, growth
morphologies, and micro-flows can be directly observed. Previous studies of
microporosity formation have been concerned with larger length scales and have
not resolved the actual solid and pore microstructures. The study will provide
valuable knowledge of pore nucleation and growth rates, microscopic flow and
solute fields in the solid-liquid-gas system present during pore formation, and
the interactions between the pores and the evolving microstructure. The research
will be accomplished through the combined use of novel modeling, numerical
simulation, and experimental techniques. A phase-field method will be developed
to model the complex phase transformation and transport phenomena present,
including multi-component thermodynamics, curvature effects, and convection.
Modern numerical techniques, such as deforming finite element meshes and highly
efficient parallel solvers, will be employed to solve the model equations. The
experiments will use transparent model alloys inside a Hele-Shaw cell under a
high-resolution microscope. In the experiments, the initial gas content and the
solidification conditions will be carefully controlled. The model predictions
will be validated by the experimental measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
work finds application in nearly every metal casting process. The problem of
microporosity is of renewed interest because of the dramatically increased use
of castings in the automotive and aerospace industries. Only the detailed
prediction of microporosity can aid in its prevention and in assessing its
influence on the strength and fatigue life of cast components. The transfer of
the knowledge obtained through the proposed project will take place through
continued collaboration with the casting industry, the development of improved
microporosity models for use in casting simulation software, and the education
of students. From a more fundamental point of view, the project will advance a
largely uncharted area of research that is concerned with micro-scale, multi-
component, multi-phase systems with phase change. Such systems are important not
only in metal casting, but also in other materials processing operations, in
nature, and in living organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;