* 0132101
* Microbial Observatories: Microbial Nitrogen Transformations in Suboxic Environments
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2007
* James Murray, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2007
* USD 755,164.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. James Murray and James Staley at the University
of Washington to study microorganisms that mediate nitrogen transformations in
low oxygen, or suboxic, environments. Such reactions are important because
nitrogen is a critical element for life processes. The geochemical distributions
in the Black Sea suggest that this is an ideal location to study these novel
reactions. The research goals of this project are to discover, isolate and
characterize the bacteria that are responsible for these nitrogen
transformations. Closely coordinated microbial and geochemical approaches will
be used. Samples will be collected on a research cruise to the Black Sea in 2002
from depths where the chemical transformations are inferred to occur. These
samples will be used to enrich and isolate bacterial metabolic groups that can
carry out these transformations. Laboratory studies will be used on a second
research cruise in 2003 to develop molecular markers for identification of
organisms in fresh environmental samples. In addition, probes will be developed
to identify genes of enzymes that are involved in various redox reactions.
Geochemical studies will be conducted to determine the stoichiometries, rates
and nitrogen isotope fractionation in water samples from the reaction
layers.&lt;br/&gt; Results of this investigation are expected to lead to
discovery of novel, previously uncharacterized bacteria that carry out these
important processes. The microorganism to be studied may be present in many
ecosystems (such as sediments, anoxic aquatic environments, biofilms and
microbial mats) where waters have low oxygen concentrations. This knowledge will
increase our understanding of microbial diversity and anaerobic respiration in
such marine environments. Human society is impacting aquatic environments more
than ever, leading to an increase in suboxic aquatic habitats, and resulting in
threats to fisheries and wildlife. Understanding the biological processes
occurring in suboxic environments will lead to new approaches that could be
undertaken for habitat restoration. &lt;br/&gt;