* 0132638
* Collaborative Research: Biology and phylogeny of marine planktonic cyanobacterial symbioses
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Edward Carpenter, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/28/2006
* USD 178,334.00

This is a study of symbioses between cyanobacteria and planktonic diatoms,
dinoflagellates, radiolarians, silicoflagellates and other planktonic protozoans
in the equatorial oligotrophic Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. The investigators
have recently observed that these symbioses are diverse and abundant, and some
have not yet been reported in the scientific literature. The biology and the
phylogeny of these symbioses are virtually unstudied. The 16S rDNA sequences of
cyanobacterial symbionts within a diatom (Climacodium) showed that they are
closely related to the N2 fixing genus Cyanothece (which fixes during the
night), which suggests that some of these symbioses may involve N2
fixation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drs. Carpenter and Zehr hypothesize that cyanelle
symbionts may benefit host species either via incorporation of fixed N or C (via
DON or DOC release or by being phagocyticized). The research approach will use
combined microscopy and molecular biology approaches to link observed
relationships between cyanobacteria and the eukaryotic microalgae with
phylogenetic information and detection of the genes involved in nitrogen
fixation. Using samples collected directly by microscopy, and bulk filtered
water samples, the identity, nitrogen fixation potential (presence of
nitrogenase genes) and expression of nitrogen fixation genes will be related to
specific organisms and quantified in the water column. These approaches will be
based on amplification and sequencing of 16S rDNA from the symbionts to
understand the phylogeny of the cyanobacteria, and detection of the presence of
nifH as an indicator of capacity to fix N2, examination of the ultrastructure of
host and cyanelle, use of 14 C autoradiography to examine C transfer,
measurements of abundance and distribution to quantify ecological importance,
along with culture attempts to allow laboratory studies directed at determining
the nature of the symbiotic interactions using GC/MS. The research will take
advantage of four already- funded (NSF) research cruises scheduled over the next
three years in the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.&lt;br/&gt;