* 0132221
* The Development of New Olefin Metatheses-Based Processes
* MPS,CHE
* 11/15/2001,10/31/2005
* Marc Snapper, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 10/31/2005
* USD 369,000.00

The objective of this work is to expand the scope and utility of olefin
metathesis reactions. In an expansion of the PI's prior work, the types of
olefins that can be used in cross metathesis reactions will first be
investigated. Intermolecular cross metatheses of functionalized and cyclic
olefins will be studied and the incorporation of allenes and alkynes into ring
opening metatheses will be investigated. Secondly, metathesis based
isomerization reactions will be developed and novel skeletal rearrangements of
polyolefinic ring systems using this approach will be effected. Ruthenium
catalyzed enantioselective metathesis isomerizations will be explored in
addition to the sequential coupling of metathesis reactions with Kharasch
reactions to build more complicated structures in a single reaction
flask.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Dr. Marc L. Snapper of the
Department of Chemistry at Boston College. Dr. Snapper will explore the scope
and utility of olefin metathesis reactions. Olefin metathesis is an industrially
important process used to make a number of specialty chemicals and starting
materials for pharmaceutical syntheses from petroleum feedstocks. Developing
shorter, more environmentally friendly routes to specialty chemicals (which are
catalytic in metals used to effect the bond forming metathesis reactions) is one
likely outcome of the proposed work. Students trained during the course of this
work will gain skills needed by the pharmaceutical as well as specialty chemical
industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;