* 0132997
* Acquisition of a Laser Furnace System to Develop U-Th-He Dating in the UCLA Noble Gas Laboratory
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Marty Grove, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 02/29/2004
* USD 43,424.00

EAR-0132997&lt;br/&gt;Grove&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Laser heating of metal-
encapsulated accessory minerals has emerged as the most viable technique for
accomplishing high-throughput, low-blank, and readily-tracked helium analysis
for (U-Th)/He dating. This award will provide funds for a CW TEMoo mode, Nd-YAG
laser and optomechanical equipment for automated beam attenuation to develop a
temperature controlled, laser-heated furnace system for helium analysis in the
UCLA noble gas laboratory. The laser system will become an essential component
of the newly refurbished VG3600 extraction line that is now set up to perform
3He isotope dilution measurements. The newly developed (U-Th)/He dating
capabilities will support a number of NSF-sponsored projects that require
efficient (U-Th)/He analysis of apatite and sphene. The majority of these
investigations are structural studies that rely upon low-temperature
thermochronology to detect and characterize the magnitude and timing of Late
Cenozoic crustal deformation. The itinerary of planned activities is broad and
ranges from studies of the timing of the transition from water to steam-
dominated conditions at The Geysers hydrothermal systems to detrital
thermochronology in basins that border tectonically active areas. An overarching
consideration in all this activity is our desire to develop self-consistent
interpretive models that incorporate both 40Ar/39Ar K-feldspar and (U-Th)/He
apatite and sphene thermochronometers to derive nearly continuous thermal
histories from middle crustal to surface conditions.&lt;br/&gt;