* 0132270
* Development of High-Temperature Technique with Diamond Anvil Window Cells for use in Geophysical Sciences
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2005
* Guoyin Shen, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 03/31/2005
* USD 292,367.00

0132270 Saxena

To obtain high quality data at physical conditions of Earth's core and mantle,
we need to modify our present equipment and develop new techniques of heating
our samples at ultra-high pressures and for measuring the temperature and
pressure. Funds from this grant will fully exploit the diamond-anvil techniques
to study materials of geophysical importance at high to ultra-high pressures and
temperatures. We will study the nature of the problems in laser heating as
related to large temperature gradients (cool diamond to the hot sample),
chromatic aberration (use of refractive optical elements, even chromatically
corrected, results in the severe temperature errors that vary significantly with
the chosen position of a spectral region) and poor knowledge of emissivity
(wavelength dependent emissivity, needed for use of the Planck function). A
combination of laser-heating systems, optical systems and methods for the
determination of emissivity of several metals and oxides will be explored. A new
method of temperature determination using a digital imaging camera will also be
tested. Additional developments will include: i) the use of moissanite (SiC)
anvils at high pressures (~ 50 GPa) to reach temperatures close to 2000 K, ii)
design of a cell that provides easy access to the sample for the electrical
leads and still maintains all the benefits of the Mao- Bell design and is easily
cooled with a good inert atmosphere around the diamonds, and iii) building of
cells which can be both electrically and laser heated with in-situ x-ray
diffraction of the heated sample at one bar or few bars of pressure to measure
thermal expansion and melting temperatures of solids. We will attempt to provide
a solution to the key problem of simultaneous measurement of pressure and
temperature. ***



