* 0132038
* CAREER:  Scheduling of Multiclass Queueing Networks via Fluid Models
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2002,08/31/2008
* John Hasenbein, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Robert L. Smith
* 08/31/2008
* USD 375,000.00

Due to the advent of highly complex manufacturing, communication, and computer
systems, there has been an increased need for more complex and realistic
mathematical models to analyze and control such systems. A particularly striking
example is seen in semiconductor wafer fabrication, where one facility may
manufacture multiple products which traverse a labyrinthine route consisting of
hundreds of steps. Factors such as reentrant routing, varied processing speeds,
setup times, and machine downtimes make such systems particularly difficult to
evaluate and control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fluid models in queueing can be
thought of as a relaxation of an original multiclass queuing network which can
provide crucial insight into the operation of complex reentrant systems. The
proposed research plan involves exploring fluid model techniques for efficient
scheduling of multiclass queuing models. First we propose developing robust and
efficient algorithms for solving a fluid model control problem. Then we will
develop techniques for translating the solution to the fluid control problem
into a feasible near-optimal schedule for the original. Finally, we will test
the applicability of our methods using realistic wafer fab data of practical
size and scope, drawing on a partnership with International SEMATECH for fab
data and benchmark simulation models. The proposed education plan is tied in
with the research plan and involves new course development and software
development for undergraduate courses and graduate courses in operations
research modeling and queueing theory. &lt;br/&gt;