* 0132391
* Structural and Pragmatic Constraints on the Interpretation of Reflexives and Pronouns
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2007
* Jeffrey Runner, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 02/28/2007
* USD 105,324.00

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Jeffrey T. Runner and Michael K.
Tanenhaus will conduct three years of linguistic research examining how
participants interpret two important classes of referring words: pronouns and
reflexives. The project will use a lightweight head-mounted eye tracker to
monitor eye movements as participants identify a picture in a scene while
listening to descriptions of the depicted activities (e.g., "John told Bill
about the picture of himself."). Which objects participants look at, and when
they look at them, provides evidence about which referents they are considering
as they interpret the referring words. The goals of this research are to (a)
investigate the interpretation of these referring words with on-line tasks
rather than explicit judgments; (b) evaluate the extent to which grammatical
factors define the initial set of referents for pronouns and reflexives; (c)
examine the interaction of grammatical factors with pragmatic and discourse
factors; and (d) explore the extent to which the potential set of referents for
pronouns and reflexives is mutually exclusive. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results
of this research will be important for understanding how people assign
reference, which is a central goal of current research in theoretical and
applied linguistics. Reference resolution is one of the most central and
challenging problems in developing efficient language understanding systems,
including systems that are being developed for bio-medical applications.
Difficulties in reference resolution are also associated with some types of
language difficulties that arise due to brain damage. Information about the
timing of eye movements and speech will also inform scientists who are
developing computer-based language understanding systems that use eye movements
to help resolve ambiguous words and referring expressions.&lt;br/&gt;