* 0132444
* Object Cognition in Infants and Adults
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* M. Karen Wynn, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher T. Kello
* 03/31/2006
* USD 499,998.00

One of the central lessons we have learned from the emerging discipline of
cognitive science is that most seemingly effortless mental tasks, for instance
recognizing faces and understanding speech, are in fact the result of incredibly
complex feats of cognitive processing. Our minds not only make such
accomplishments possible, but they do so in a seemingly effortless way that
hides their complexity and difficulty from us. This research project will focus
on the cognitive processing responsible for one such seemingly obvious aspect of
our mental lives, our intuitive ability to perceive the world in terms of
discrete objects (such as people, cars, and chairs). This ability seems somehow
obvious and necessary to us; after all, the world is populated by such discrete
objects. In fact, however, interpreting the world in terms of discrete objects
is a Herculean task for the brain, since the incoming visual information
consists of an undivided wash of colors, shapes, and motions. Our brains must
grapple with such information, and through great efforts turn it into the
orderly scenes of discrete objects that we perceive during almost every moment
of our lives. This cognitive processing is critical to our lives, as it makes
our visual experience coherent. This research project will explore how these
"object cognition" processes work, answering a number of important and specific
questions: What information does the brain use to infer the existence of a
discrete object in a visual scene? What information is used to determine whether
a briefly glimpsed object is in fact the same object that was viewed earlier?
What are the limits on such abilities? The answers to such questions will help
us understand how the brain accomplishes some of its most important but least
appreciated tasks. This research will also address other critical questions:
Where do these abilities come from? Are they hardwired into our visual systems
from birth, or are they learned gradually? Are the cognitive processes which
young infants use to make sense of the world in terms of discrete objects the
same processes that guide our mature perception of objects in the world?
Previous research on "object cognition" has studied both infants and adults, but
these investigations have typically proceeded completely independently, in
different sub-fields of cognitive science. This research will bridge this gap,
by comparing object cognition in infants and adults, and by directly testing the
hypothesis that researchers in these two areas have been exploring the same
underlying brain mechanisms. This research thus has the potential to unite two
previously independent areas of cognitive science, while pursuing the main goal
of understanding the cognitive processing which provides us with the coherent
perception of a world filled with discrete persisting objects, which we rely on
but take for granted during almost every waking moment. In addition, this
research on object cognition in normal adults and infants has implications for
better understanding of, and perhaps improved treatment for, certain object-
based visual disorders in impaired patient populations (such as "Balint
Syndrome"). In addition, it may be useful in the development of artificial
systems that implement similar processes for dividing visual scenes into
discrete objects and tracking them over time and motion.