* 0132250
* Hula-Twist, A Supramolecular Photochemical Reaction Mechanism.  A New Perspective of Photoisomerization
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Alfred Asato, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 02/28/2006
* USD 313,800.00

With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program in the
Chemistry Division, Professor Robert S. H. Liu, of the Department of Chemistry
at the University of Hawaii- Manoa, will study a volume-conserving photochemical
cis-trans isomerization reaction mechanism postulated in 1985 to account for the
rapid photoisomerization reaction of the retinyl chromophore in the visual
pigment rhodopsin. This mechanism is referred to as the Hula-Twist (HT). Its
salient stereochemical feature is the simultaneous configurational and
conformational transformation of two adjacent double and single bonds. Model
compounds designed to provide distinguishable chemistry between Hula-Twist (HT)
and the conventional one-bond-flip (OBF) mechanism will be prepared and their
photochemical and photophysical properties will be examined. The medium is
expected to play an important role to inhibit the OBF process allowing detection
of the normally more difficult HT process. However, other conditions that might
result in re-directing molecules from reacting in an OBF manner to the HT manner
are also present and discussed. Meaningful model compounds used for test
experiments are proposed. Among photosensitive bio-molecules containing a
Pollyanna chromophore, the isomerization of PYP (photoactive yellow protein that
makes bacteria response repulsively toward blue light) and bilirubin (the yellow
bile pigment involved in jaundice and its phototherapy) can be rationalized by
the involvement of HT in their photochemical reactions. Experiments are now
proposed to prove unambiguously of its involvement. For the visual pigment
rhodopsin and the energy storage system bacteriorhodopsin, HT is no longer
considered likely to be the sole process responsible for the observed
photochemistry. Recent X-ray crystal structural work on the primary photoproduct
of bR (K) showed that the structure is not that from the once proposed HT -I 4
process. A modified pathway for both bR and rhodopsin is now proposed. HT has
been retained in the initial photochemical process. However, before its
completion, the process is likely to be re-directed by the rigid protein cavity
to a series of volume-conserving bicycle pedal (BP) processes (in the ground
state) leading to the more stable 13-cis or all-trans products. New experiments
designed to test these ideas are proposed. The proposed experiments will be
carried out by Professor Liu's group, concentrating on chemical synthesis and
low temperature photochemical-spectroscopic studies in collaboration with a
network of international specialists (time-resolved UV-Vis and FT-IR and other
spectroscopic and biophysical studies). The common goal is to understand the
nature of the very fundamental photochemical cis-trans isomerization that
happens in native systems as well as in laboratories and to determine the scope
of the novel two-bond twist mechanism. Perhaps this research can finally provide
a definitive answer to the question of how the seemingly volume-demanding
photoisomerization process of a polyene chromophore in a highly specific protein
binding site can take place in less than a picosecond, a time scale much too
fast for protein reorganization.&lt;br/&gt;