* 0132821
* CAREER: Intelligent Argument Generation in Text and Information Graphics
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2010
* Nancy Green, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 05/31/2010
* USD 331,697.00

This is a Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award. The research will
develop techniques for computer systems to communicate technical arguments to
people without technical training, using integrated text and data graphics. It
will integrate empirical methods from computational linguistics and human-
computer interaction. Empirical methods will be used to determine appropriate
techniques for conveying technical arguments to people with non-technical
backgrounds. Initially, the project will develop analytical methods based on a
corpus of human-authored multimedia presentations. For example, corpus studies
can determine which features of arguments suggest where supporting graphics
should be placed. Next, human-computer interaction experiments will be used to
determine the effectiveness of techniques based on the analytical models, and to
investigate alternatives to the techniques that are shown not to be sufficient.
The resulting empirically-based techniques will be incorporated into
computational models that will extend current approaches in natural language
generation, automated graphic design, and intelligent multimedia presentation
systems. The computational models will be demonstrated with a prototype system
for genetic counseling. The educational component of this project will include
new course curriculum, provide undergraduate and graduate computer science
students with the opportunity to participate in research, and develop a
laboratory for human-computer interaction studies that will be a resource for
students and other faculty members.

This CAREER award recognizes and supports the early career-development
activities of a teacher-scholar who is likely to become an academic leader of
the twenty-first century. Her research seeks solutions for the problem that
people who lack appropriate technical training are faced with increasing
responsibility for making vital decisions based on technical arguments, often
involving quantitative and statistical data. If successful in the area of
genetic counseling, the approach could be applied to many other areas where
decision makers need help in using technical information and analyses.