* 0132158
* RUI: Microbial Observatories: Microbial Observatory at Soap Lake: Biogeochemistry, Microbial Diversity, and Productivity of Anaerobic Haloalkaliphilic Bacterial Communites
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Brent Peyton, Central Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2007
* USD 840,461.00

An NSF Microbial Observatories grant has been awarded to Drs. Holly Pinkart
(Central Washington University), Melanie Mormile (University of Missouri-Rolla),
and Brent Peyton (Washington State University) to study the anaerobic microbial
ecology of a saline, alkaline lake. Soap Lake is a permanently stratified lake
consisting two separate water layers which have not mixed for over two thousand
years. Although both layers are quite alkaline and lack significant amounts of
oxygen, the lower layer is an order of magnitude more saline. Additionally, this
lake has concentrations of sulfide generally considered toxic for most life
forms. In spite of the extreme chemistry of this environment, the lake supports
thriving communities of algae, zooplankton, and bacteria. The Microbial
Observatory will allow the study and quantification of the ecology and metabolic
capabilities of the relatively unknown microorganisms that thrive in this
extreme environment. The goals of the project are to characterize the microbial
communities that inhabit this system, and determine how they affect, and are
affected by, the geochemistry of Soap Lake. The methods that will be used
include the culturing of microorganisms, cloning and sequencing of microbial
DNA, and the use of satellite imaging for detection of microbial activities. The
Soap Lake Microbial Observatory will serve as a model for studying interactions
of the anaerobic communities in haloalkaline environments and their contribution
to biomass production.&lt;br/&gt; Results generated by this project will
supplement data available for the search for biological activity on Mars and
extra-solar terrestrial environments, and will augment the Virtual Planet
Laboratory Program being developed at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The
Microbial Observatory at Soap Lake will likely lead to discovery of novel
microorganisms useful in industry and biotechnology. Additionally, this project
will allow for the significant involvement of undergraduate students, and could
serve as a model for the integration of research into undergraduate education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;