* 0132409
* Collaborative Research: Parenting and Sociocognitive Correlates of Prosocial Behaviors in Mexican American and European American Children
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* George Knight, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 12/31/2006
* USD 225,731.00

Sharing, comforting, volunteerism, and charitable donations are all considered
different forms of prosocial behaviors (i.e., actions intended to benefit
others) which are beneficial to society and therefore highly valued and desired.
Developmental researchers have provided evidence that there are growth spurts in
these behaviors across childhood and adolescence. However, existing models of
prosocial development have been guided mostly by theories that emphasize the
role of social cognitions and/or emotions on prosocial and moral behaviors. For
the most part, the role of culture and ethnicity on prosocial development has
been less clear in these theories, even though there is clear evidence of
cultural and ethnic differences in prosocial development. Although both social
cognitions and emotions are significant correlates of prosocial behaviors, new
theories of prosocial development are needed that integrate the role of culture
and ethnicity in prosocial development. Unfortunately, the bulk of the research
investigating the developmental mechanisms that lead to prosocial development
has been conducted with white, mostly middle class, children. Thus, our
understanding of the development and predictors of prosocial behaviors in ethnic
minority children is quite limited. To begin to address these issues, research
is needed on the development of prosocial behaviors in ethnic minority children
and adolescents. This project is designed to examine parenting, sociocognitive,
and culture-related correlates of prosocial behaviors across childhood and early
adolescence in one ethnic minority group (i.e., Mexican Americans). The two-
phased systematic research agenda will combine qualitative and quantitative
approaches. The overarching goal of the project is to gain an understanding of
positive, social behaviors in Mexican American and European American children in
the United States. The project is designed primarily (a) to examine ethnic group
similarities and differences with respect to prosocial traits and behaviors in
Mexican American and European American children and (b) to investigate the
parenting, familial, and sociocognitive correlates of prosocial behaviors in
Mexican American and European American children. When completed, the research
will answer a number of questions that social and developmental psychologists
have advanced in recent years. These questions include, but are not limited to,
the following: (1) Is normal development of the abilities to understand
another's point of view, to feel sorrow or concern for needy others, and to make
moral decisions when faced with a context in which there are societially defined
right and wrong behaviors associated with high levels of prosocial behaviors in
both Mexican- and European-American children? (2) Do both Mexican- and European-
American children who exhibit high levels of prosocial behaviors have parents
who are warm and supportive and use explanatory and empathy-inducing
disciplining practices? (3) Do Mexican American parents, compared to European
American parents, emphasize collectivism (i.e., orientation towards greater
social group) and familial interdependence, which in turn accounts for ethnic
group differences in prosocial behaviors? (4) Do family and parenting processes
impact or explain the relations of the abilities to understand another's point
of view, to feel sorrow or concern for needy others, and to make moral decisions
to prosocial behaviors in Mexican- and European-American children? (5) Do the
adaptations that Mexican American children make to the mainstream and ethnic
cultures as a result of the processes of acculturation and enculturation impact
prosocial development. By addressing these questions, this study is expected to
yield important information about variables that might promote prosocial
behaviors and produce useful and valuable new measures of prosocial behaviors to
use with Mexican American children and adolescents. These products will inform
existing theories of prosocial development and will enhance intervention
programs aimed at increasing behaviors that benefit others and society.