* 0132926
* Dissertation Research Improvement Grants: Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Menominee Metrical Structure
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2002,12/31/2003
* Thomas Purnell, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 12/31/2003
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Drs. Monica Macaulay and Thomas Purnell, Ms. Marianne
Milligan will conduct fieldwork for her doctoral dissertation. She will work
with the remaining speakers of Menominee, an endangered language spoken on the
Menominee Reservation in Wisconsin. Her dissertation emphasizes the metrical
structure of Menominee, in particular the placement of accent and the pattern of
long and short vowels. The topic is theoretically interesting because
Menominee's metrical rules are very unusual. These rules have received several
different theoretical analyses, one of which is used as evidence against certain
current trends in linguistic theory. However, all analyses of Menominee metrical
structure are based on the published works of American linguist Leonard
Bloomfield, and so inherit various problems his work contains. First, while his
grammar is considered one of the most comprehensive descriptions of an
Amerindian language, it was completed after his death by another linguist. It is
thus contradictory in places. Second, because Bloomfield used a standardized
spelling system rather than phonetic transcription, his work does not show
variation in pronunciation. Theoretical claims about Menominee require more
accurate description of the data. This project's data will also be used in
pedagogical materials for the tribe's language preservation programs. All
materials recorded on audiotape will be transferred to CD for archiving
purposes, distribution to tribal organizations, and acoustic analysis.

This research is significant in two ways. First, it will extend research on
Menominee metrical structure by providing both an accurate description and a
theoretical analysis of the Menominee data. Understanding the unusual metrical
structure of Menominee will not only add to our general understanding of human
language, but the issues raised by these data may also affect current debates
within linguistic theory. Second, the language teaching materials that this
project will contribute to producing, such as tapes of stories with accompanying
text, tapes of vocabulary items, and grammatical lessons, will be used in the
tribe's efforts to retain the language and culture in the schools on their
reservation.

