* 0132216
* CAREER:  Stoichiometric and Catalytic Reaction Transformations at Group 10 Zwitterions Supported by Bis(phosphino)borate Ligands
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2007
* Jonas Peters, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Clarke-Williams, Mark K.
* 01/31/2007
* USD 525,000.00

Dr. Jonas Peters, Department of Chemistry, California Institute of Technology is
supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program of
the Division of Chemistry, National Science Foundation, for his work under a
CAREER Award to investigate whether neutral, zwitterionic complexes can mediate
reactions typically catalyzed by cationic, coordinatively unsaturated complexes.
Such processes are industrially important and include: the tailored synthesis of
polymeric materials; catalytic bond forming reactions critical to organic
synthesis and pharmaceutical drug development; and activation and
functionalization chemistry, relevant to the utilization of simple hydrocarbon
feedstocks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The zwitterionic strategy uses
(phosphino)borate ligands to effectively tether a borate counter-anion to a
cationic metal center. The potential advantages of the zwitterionic approach
are: 1) Zwitterionic catalysts remove the need for a counter-anion cocatalyst
and minimize counter-anion binding thereby simplifying the fundamental
mechanistic studies. 2) The zwitterions should be both soluble and catalytically
active in relatively non-polar solvent media; whereas, more coordinating
solvents are typically required to solubilize cationic catalysts, rendering them
less active. 3) Because neutral, zwitterionic complexes are expected to be less
electrophilic than their cationic counterparts, they should increase reaction
rates in catalytic systems that require loss of a donor ligand as a rate-
determining step. Preliminary studies with zwitterionic model systems lend
support to these hypotheses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education will be integrated
with research by using a case study&lt;br/&gt;approach for understanding and
solving problems in frontier topics in inorganic chemistry. Interactive
software, used in the research effort to perform theoretical calculations on
experimental systems, will also be used in a course supplement to teach
molecular orbital theory and its practical application in inorganic chemistry.
An advanced laboratory synthesis course to complement the lecture course in
inorganic chemistry will be developed. The research group will continue its
outreach efforts to local elementary and high school students in the Pasadena
and Los Angeles school districts by using laboratory tours, laboratory
demonstrations, and informal discussions to communicate enthusiasm for science
in a way that suggests many opportunities for younger
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Simplified analogs of industrially important
catalysts will be developed. Their reaction pathways will be determined with a
view toward optimizing catalytic systems. The educational program is integrated
with this research and extends to undergraduate courses and area elementary and
high school students.&lt;br/&gt;