* 0132869
* CAREER: INVESTIGATING ELECTROSTATIC DISCHARGE PROTECTION IN ULSI ICs DOWN TO NANO-SCALE: SIMULATION, MODELING &amp; EXPERIMENTS
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2002,02/29/2008
* Albert Wang, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 02/29/2008
* USD 404,184.00

Electrostatic Discharge (ESD) failure is a devastating reliability problem
&lt;br/&gt;to VDSM (very-deep-sub-micron) and nano-scale Si ULSI IC
technologies. &lt;br/&gt;It is imperative to investigate ESD failure
fundamentals and on-chip ESD&lt;br/&gt; protection theories focusing on the
following challenges: 3D mixed-mode &lt;br/&gt;ESD simulation methodology;
accurate high-current ESD modeling; whole-chip &lt;br/&gt;ESD design synthesis,
advanced ESD protection solutions for ULSI ICs, ESD&lt;br/&gt;protection for
super-GHz RF ICs, ESD protection for nano-scale as well &lt;br/&gt;as wide-
bandgap semiconductor IC technologies. The PI proposes a &lt;br/&gt;career
development plan that addresses these challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposed
research activities consist of six tasks: to investigate &lt;br/&gt;advanced on-
chip ESD protection phenomena in ULSI ICs by developing a novel &lt;br/&gt;3D
mixed-mode ESD simulation methodology; to investigate ESD &lt;br/&gt;protection
fundamentals by developing accurate high-current ESD device &lt;br/&gt;models;
to develop a full-chip ESD design verification CAD tool called
&lt;br/&gt;ESDcat; to explore novel ultra-fast ESD protection solutions for
&lt;br/&gt;sub-100nm ULSI ICs, to explore ESD protection for future nano-
technologies, &lt;br/&gt;and to extend ESD research to super-GHz RF ICs and
wide-bandgap &lt;br/&gt;semiconductor, GaN. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since ESD
phenomena are geometry-dependent involving complex&lt;br/&gt; electro-thermal-
process-device-circuit coupling, the proposed &lt;br/&gt;research procedures
take full-scale mixed-mode approaches that investigate &lt;br/&gt;ESD
fundamentals in a fully-coupled process-device-circuit-electronic-
thermal&lt;br/&gt; closed-loop in 3D format. A 3D parallel ESD model network is
proposed &lt;br/&gt;for accurate high-current ESD modeling. ESDcat enables chip
level ESD &lt;br/&gt;synthesis and verification at both schematic and layout
levels. Nano-scale &lt;br/&gt;ESD research will take into account the ballistic
phonon scattering &lt;br/&gt;effect. ESD for wide-bandgaps will focus on Si-
compatible GaN ICs. &lt;br/&gt;End results include insights into ESD mechanisms,
CAD tools for further &lt;br/&gt;investigation and design of ESD protections for
various IC technologies, &lt;br/&gt;e.g., CMOS, BiCMOS, SOI, SiGe, GaN, RFIC,
and Cu interconnects. Both &lt;br/&gt;new ESD theory and immediate industrial
applications are expected.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education plan centers on:
new curriculum development; integration &lt;br/&gt;of microelectronics research
and education; student mentoring and &lt;br/&gt;community services; and
university-industry collaboration. Specifically,&lt;br/&gt; activities include:
develop five courses/labs in a five-year period; &lt;br/&gt;pursue an improved
microelectronics teaching approach; establish an &lt;br/&gt;Integrated
Electronics Laboratory, a Virtual IC Fab facility, and &lt;br/&gt;TCAD/ECAD
Design Studios; advising students in conducting &lt;br/&gt;inter-professional
projects; develop a undergraduate industrial &lt;br/&gt;co-op program; and
involving minority/women students in microelectronics&lt;br/&gt; research. This
five-year education proposal is integrated into &lt;br/&gt;the departmental
redevelopment plan in microelectronics&lt;br/&gt;