* 0132258
* Exploring the Effects of Group Mood on Group Decision Making
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Janice Kelly, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 08/31/2005
* USD 163,414.00

Social psychologists have recognized the importance of a group's emotional life
for its performance, development, and health. Until recently, however,
relatively little research attention has been paid to the role of affect in
group performance. Over the past few decades, research on individual people has
shown that moods and emotions have profound influences on many areas of
cognitive functioning. For example, mood has been found to affect persuasion and
person perception, and it appears to do so through influencing the processes of
memory, attention, and type of information processing. In terms of information
processing, positive moods lead to less systematic and greater heuristic
processing of information, whereas negative moods lead to less heuristic and
greater systematic processing of information. Recent group level models suggest
that group mood will also have similarly important influences on group
performance through its impact on the information processing abilities of
groups. That is, group moods will also affect the heuristic and systematic
processing qualities of the group interaction. The main objective of this
project is to examine the effect of group mood on group decision making.
Specific aims are to demonstrate that (1) group moods can be successfully
manipulated in the laboratory, (2) group moods influence group decision making
outcomes, (3) these differences occur through altering the way that groups
process information, similar to how moods affect how individuals process
information, and (4) these information processing differences can be assessed
through the observation of group interactions, as well as through some self-
report measures.

This research program provides training in small group experimental methods for
several graduate students and up to fifty undergraduates. The results of these
studies will form the empirical core of an understanding of how group mood
affects group decision making. In the long term, this research program is
intended to advance our understanding of affective influences on group
performance in a wide variety of contexts, including work, friendship, and
school groups, as well as experimental research groups.