* 0132428
* Acquisition of Advanced Equipment for Measurement of Metal Speciation in Fresh Waters
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Gaboury Benoit, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 02/29/2004
* USD 55,607.00

0132428&lt;br/&gt;Benoit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides support for
the acquisition of a Brinkmann automated voltammetry system (VA Trace Analyzer,
Model 746) and a MARS 5 microwave digestion system (CEM Corp.) to facilitate
measurement of rapid changes in chemical speciation that occur in freshwater
systems as a result of both natural biogeochemical processes and point and
nonpoint source pollution. The Brinkmann voltammetry system automates basic
voltammetric functions and combines this ability with an automatic titration
system and 80 position autosampler. The MARS 5 Microwave Digestion system is
able to digest colloids and particles in multiple samples rapidly and
completely, and has the unique ability to increase analyte concentration through
evaporation of the digestion matrix. The information on total metal
concentrations provided by analysis of digested samples is a necessary component
in the process of evaluating chemical speciation. The increased sample
processing efficiency and reproducibility of the MARS 5 microwave digestion
system will complement the increased sample throughput of the Brinkmann
automated voltammetry system in improving the ability of researchers in our
laboratory to measure rapid changes in metal speciation within freshwater
systems. Current research on metal complexation by NOM (natural organic matter)
aims to identify easily measurable characteristics of NOM (e.g., spectroscopic)
that can be used to estimate their complexation characteristics (abundance and
strength of binding sites). Future work on NOM will evaluate rapid variations in
quantity and quality that occur during storm events and with changing water
flowpaths through soils. Other projects study metal binding by reduced sulfur
compounds in fully-oxygenated surface waters. This newly discovered class of
ligands is poorly understood, but may be as important as NOM in many instances.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;