* 0132389
* Request for a Technical Associate to Support the Isotope Geochemistry Laboratories at the University of Rochester-Phase II
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Ariel Anbar, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 04/30/2006
* USD 137,500.00

0132389&lt;br/&gt;Basu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds from this grant provide
continued partial salary support for a technician to oversee operation and
maintenance of the isotope geochemistry facility at the University of Rochester.
This is a Phase II technician support grant and follows three years of initial
NSF support (EAR-9730743). The isotope geochemistry facility at Rochester houses
four mass spectrometers including a thermal ionization mass spectrometer (TIMS),
a multicollector inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer (MC-ICP-MS), a
quadrapole based ICP-MS and a noble gas mass spectrometer. These instruments are
use by faculty members Basu, Anbar and Poreda for research projects ranging from
studies of the petrogenesis of flood basalts to investigations of biological
fractionation of heavy metal isotopes during mineral weathering to studies of
cosmic dust fluxes to the surface of the earth over geologic time. The
instruments supported by this technician will continue to provide a valuable
research and educational tool to the University and to a number of collaborating
geoscientists. As the University has committed to picking up full time support
for this position following this Phase II award, NSF support has aided in the
creation of an university funded job in the geosciences field that is an
alternative to traditional academic career paths.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;