* 0132768
* CAREER:  Research and Education:  Biomimetic Routes to Design of Biomaterials
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2008
* Kalpana Katti, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 01/31/2008
* USD 375,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Research and educational activities tied to biomaterials and bio-
inspired materials are the theme of the career plan of the PI. A fundamental
approach is followed towards design of composites of hydroxyapatite and polymers
for development of new biomaterials for bone replacement. The new approach takes
inspiration from biology. A molecular control of polymer-HAP interactions is
attempted with synthetic macromolecules, mimicking the formation of
biocomposites in nature. Experiments will involve vibrational microspectroscopy
and scanning electron microscopy to elucidate the molecular interactions between
polymeric additives and mineral components under simulated body fluid
environments. These interactions and understanding their role on bulk
macroscopic mechanical response of the composite to loading is the focus of
these studies. This research will attempt to understand the molecular mechanisms
involved in formation of insitu composites and develop fundamental science based
on this understanding to design composites with properties tailored for bone
replacement. &lt;br/&gt;The educational activities proposed are very closely
linked to the research. PI plans to 1.) Improve awareness of the biomaterials
field at NDSU through a new course on biomaterials, summer research projects for
undergraduate students and establishing a NDSU chapter of Materials Research
Society. 2.) Stimulate interest in engineering and materials related research in
middle school girls and 3.) Bring excitement of the materials and biomaterials
field into middle school classrooms. &lt;br/&gt;