* 0132035
* SBIR Phase II:   The Auto-Autodidact -  A Web-Delivered Learning Environment Based on Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA)
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2005
* Darrell Laham, Knowledge Analysis Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 02/28/2005
* USD 671,257.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will combine the
Internet, electronic libraries, and a new machine learning technique that
simulates human understanding of text to produce an independent learning and
problem-solving environment for individuals and groups. Using Latent Semantic
Analysis (LSA), Auto-autodidact (autodidact: a self-taught person) first learns
the vocabulary and concepts of a topic by automatic training on textbooks. Then,
as students study and write, and groups discuss and plan, it will continuously
evaluate what they know and do not know, find relevant information anywhere in
an electronic library, and connect participants with complementary needs and
knowledge. Auto-autodidact capitalizes on the motivational power of peer
interaction, the instant availability of enormous textual resources, and the
possibility of sharing individual knowledge over time and space. Auto-autodidact
will integrate LSA with a state-of-art environment for distributed knowledge-
building discussion and newly available electronic libraries to provide
continuous embedded assessment, tutorial dialogue, and meaning-based information
insertion. It will be unique in its ability to construct a learning environment
for a new domain, customizing it for the needs of either an individual learner
or a collaborating team, in a matter of days or even minutes.

As we move into a networked world, Knowledge Analysis Technologies' proffered
technology has the potential to weave together people and ideas, generating
knowledge and fostering collaboration. If the project realizes its potential and
consistently delivers useful results to users, it could transform how we
interact with data and with one another.