* 0132210
* Deciphering the Evolution of the Opioid/Orphanin Gene Family
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2006
* Robert Dores, University of Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 06/30/2006
* USD 247,986.00

A striking feature of chemical communication systems in the brains of jawed
vertebrates (gnathostomes) is the apparent duplication of genes that produce
useful neuropeptide compounds. For example, in mammals there are four
neuropeptide precursors (proenkephalin, prodynorphin, proopiomelanocortin, and
proorphanin) that produce opiate-like peptides (opioids) or nociceptic-like
peptides (orphanins). These four precursors are members of a gene family, the
opioid/orphanin family, and the apparent redundancy of genes in this family in
fact reflects the evolutionary history of the vertebrates. Gene duplication
events at discrete points in vertebrate evolution have allowed for the layering
of neuropeptide networks over time, and have led to a diversification in
function of these peptide products, including roles in analgesia, nociception,
motor control, and feeding. This project combines molecular biology procedures
with a comparative approach to define trends in the evolutionary radiation of
the orphanin/opioid gene family in gnathostomes. The cloning and sequencing of
cDNAs, coupled with the measurement of gene expression by real-time PCR, will
generate a database of sequences for each gene in the family that will be used
to perform cladistic analyses and to identify novel opioid sequences. By
examining selected vertebrate lineages where the evolution of this gene family
has been slower than in mammals or teleost fish, it is possible to make
inferences about the origin and transitions in the sequential evolution of this
gene family. These data will test the 'proenkephalin hypothesis' that the
ancestral gene in the opioid/orphanin gene family was a gene that coded for the
enkephalin-like product. Results will provide a new level of understanding of
the evolutionary mechanisms underlying the functional diversity in this
important family of neuropeptides.&lt;br/&gt; The impact of this project will
extend beyond neuroendocrinology to molecular neurobiology in general, and to
evolutionary biology with respect to the trends that promote species diversity.
Multi-disciplinary undergraduate and graduate training also is an important
component of this project.&lt;br/&gt;