* 0132886
* CAREER: Metallated Polythieno[3,4-b]pyrazines as Ordered Hybrid Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Seth Rasmussen, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 07/31/2007
* USD 495,000.00

The Advanced Materials Program in the Division of Chemistry makes this award to
North Dakota State University Fargo to synthesize and characterize metal-polymer
hybrids prepared from transition metals and polythieno[3,4-b]pyrazine and its
alkylated derivatives. These composite materials are expected to have the
electro- and photochemical properties of transition metal complexes with the
electronic and optical properties of the organic polymer. Since metal centers
will be bound directly to the polymer backbone, undesirable steric interactions
will be eliminated in addition to stronger metal-polymer electronic coupling.
This methodology to prepare composites without the use of copolymeric systems
will have synthetic control for the production of well-ordered metallated
polymers, which in turn will retain the desirable aspects of the conjugated
polymer while allowing the metal centers to serve as electro- or photosensitive
switches to modulate the polymer properties. Ordered heterometallic conjugated
polymers will also be synthesized to determine structure-property relationships
of these hybrid systems, and they will be evaluated for their potential
applications in conducting, photo-conducting, and nonlinear optical materials.
The Career Development Plan will incorporate History of Chemistry into the
chemistry curriculum both at the undergraduate and graduate level courses with
credit including seminars and web-based chemical history displays. These
programs will also be offered to North Dakota high school science teachers as a
way to allow them to include this material in their
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymer-metal composites will be prepared from
conducting polymers and transition metals. Since the metal centers will be bound
directly to the polymer backbone in these materials, these well-ordered and
oriented hybrids are expected to provide enhanced electronic and optical
properties. Long-term goals of the project will be to prepare heterometallic,
multidimensional and conjugated polymer materials for multi-dimensional arrays
for potential applications in supramolecular chips for information storage. A
new curriculum to teach History of Chemistry will be introduced at both graduate
and undergraduate levels. High school science teachers will also be provided
opportunities to take the course in History of Chemistry.