* 0132241
* SBIR Phase II:   Magnetohydrodynamic Formation of Metal Monospheres
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2004
* Robert Dean, Jr., SYNERGY INNOVATIONS INC
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 01/31/2004
* USD 563,999.00

This NSF Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project continues research
and development of a commercial process for the manufacture of mono-size-
dispersed, spherical powder (size 1-10 micron) from metals melting up to 200C. A
unique magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) jet exciter will be designed, fabricated and
developed as a component of the system essential to producing monosphere powder
to high tolerances (e.g., as demanded by the electronics industry of ball grid
arrays for surface-mount components). The electrostatic means, for preventing
coalescence in the drop cloud, will be developed further. Development of cooling
means for solidification will be completed. Specific industry quality control
standards and testing will be applied to qualify the monosphere product.
Finally, a refined analysis of cost of manufacture, and a complete business plan
will be produced. The outcome expected from this project is the technology base
for the commercial, large-scale production of monospheres. This unique process
innovation for large-scale production of monospheres, will provide a major new
source of precise and economical powder for electronic solder balls and paste,
powder metallurgy, composites, magnetorheological fluids, catalyst carriers,
solid/fluid reactions and a multitude of other uses.