* 0132981
* Remediation of Cholinergic Depletion Effects on Cortical Functions with Neurotrophins
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Paul Herron, The University of Tennessee, Memphis - The Health Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 02/29/2004
* USD 69,921.00

Prior studies have show that when the neurotransmitter acetylcholine is reduced
significantly in the cortex of the brain, a cascade of effects is observed in
physiological and molecular systems that underlie learning and memory. These
effects include changes in neural firing rates and in the expression of non-
cholinergic neurotransmitters and synaptic proteins. Thus, two possibilities are
suggested for the neural basis of memory: that acetylcholine alone may be
responsible, or that it acts in concert with non-cholinergic neurotransmitters
and synaptic proteins. The purpose of these studies is to determine whether the
mechanisms of learning and memory can be preserved when the cascade of effects
of non-cholinergic neural systems is prevented after the loss of acetylcholine.
Therefore, acetylcholine in the cortex will be selectively removed and non-
cholinergic neurotransmitters and synaptic proteins will be preserved by the
application of neurotrophins, a class of brain proteins well known for aiding in
the maintenance and survival of cortical neurons challenged by unfavorable
conditions. Then the capacity of cortical neurons to undergo changes like those
that take place in learning and memory will be determined. These studies are
important for understanding the physiological and molecular bases of learning
and memory.