* 0132556
* Research Infrastructure for Nevada's Growth: Targeting Research with Uniqueness and Excellence II (RING-TRUE II)
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Dennis Lindle, Nevada System of Higher Education
* Continuing grant
* James R. Gosz
* 07/31/2006
* USD 9,000,000.00

The Nevada plan for research infrastructure improvements will target three
research focal areas: Integrated Approaches to Abiotic Stress (IAAS),
Nanostructured Materials and Devices (NMD), and Advanced Computing in
Environmental Science (ACES). Nevada's three research institutions, the
University of Nevada at Reno (UNR), the University of Nevada at Las Vega (UNLV),
and the Desert Research Institute (DRI) will collaborate in these research
areas.

The goal of the IAAS program is to build an internationally recognized research
and training program in abiotic stress biology. The IAAS will apply genomics-
based approaches to investigating 1) genetic requirements or variation for
occupancy of extreme environments, 2) the functional significance of such
genetic variation across many scales of biological complexity, 3) the
evolutionary processes that create and/or maintain such variation. The IAAS
research area will include partnerships with the private sector which is
becoming increasingly interested in cellular and molecular mechanisms that allow
organisms to deal with extreme abiotic stress.

In the Nanostructured Materials and Devices area, interdisciplinary,
collaborative research on complex systems will incorporate both organic and
inorganic species. Research emphases include organic light emitting devices,
field controllable materials, novel polymeric/metal composites for chemically
specific sensing, imaging nanomaterials and smart devices. NMD will develop new
facilities for materials fabrication, characterization and device development
and involve collaborations with several private sector companies.

The ACES project will create the Nevada Environmental Computing Grid - a
statewide, distributed computational infrastructure. Multidisciplinary research
will be centered on providing an application-driven environment to stimulate new
information technology research of interest to computer scientists and private
sector partners.

In addition to the research effort, the Nevada project includes focused
activities designed to increase the participation of members of underrepresented
groups in science via a partnership with the state's K-16 education system. The
goal is to improve the successful academic careers of these students and
increase the numbers of students graduating with degress in science-related
fields.