* 0132237
* Regulation of Chromosome Dynamics and Segregation in Drosophila
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2008
* Terry Orr-Weaver, Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research
* Continuing Grant
* Michael K. Reddy
* 04/30/2008
* USD 845,000.00

The goal of this work is to define the regulatory mechanisms that ensure
accurate segregation of the sister chromatids in mitosis and meiosis. Drosophila
is a powerful model organism in which to decipher the control of chromosome
segregation for three reasons: 1) chromosome dynamics can be visualized
directly; 2) genetic tools allow ready detection of mutants defective in
segregation; and 3) it is possible to ablate gene function using RNAi in order
to evaluate the role of genes identified in other species. This research focuses
on proteins that control two crucial aspects of chromosome dynamics: sister-
chromatid cohesion and condensation. In order for sister chromatids to move away
from each other during anaphase they must first be physically attached to each
other. This ensures that each sister chromatid of a pair attaches to
microtubules emanating from opposite spindle poles. Cohesion must be precisely
regulated to release only as the sisters separate at anaphase. The Drosophila
MEI-S332 protein binds to centromeres to maintain cohesion and is essential
during meiosis. The cohesin complex of proteins is essential both for the
establishment of cohesion during DNA replication and its maintenance until
chromatid separation at anaphase. The cohesin complex acts along the length of
the chromosomes in mitosis and meiosis I and maintains cohesion at the
centromere in meiosis II. This research addresses the mechanism by which
MEI-S332 localization to centromeres is regulated and analyzes the relationship
between MEI-S332 and the cohesin protein complex. The condensin complex is
necessary for chromosome condensation, and mutations have been recovered in the
gene encoding one of the subunits. This project will define the interdependency
of the cohesin and condensin complexes. The role of the condensin complex in
meiosis and gene expression also will be investigated. Three collections of
mutants with defects in segregation have been recovered and will be analyzed to
determine the activities of the gene products. The phenotypes indicate that
these genes play critical roles in chromosome segregation, thus their
investigation will provide new insights into chromosome dynamics.

This research investigates the control of chromosome segregation, with the goal
of deciphering two fundamental aspects essential for the proper partitioning of
chromosomes during cell division. Accurate segregation of chromosomes is
essential during the divisions that produce sperm and eggs in order to avoid
birth defects such as Down Syndrome. Inaccurate segregation during cell
proliferation produces aneuploid cells; these cells with an incorrect number of
chromosomes are prone to become transformed cancer cells. The mechanisms that
ensure proper segregation remain to be elucidated. This basic research builds on
the identification of proteins known to participate in chromosome segregation to
unravel the dynamics of chromosome behavior.