* 0132076
* SBIR Phase II:   Next Generation Component Software for Simulation-Based Econometric Estimation
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2002,02/29/2004
* Jiahui Wang, Insightful Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 02/29/2004
* USD 511,604.00

This SBIR Phase II research project proposes to develop user-friendly component
software for classical econometric estimation and inference based on simulation
methods, such as maximum simulated likelihood, method of simulated moments, and
efficient method of moments. In the last decade different simulation-based
methods have been developed to tackle complex economic/statistical models which
cannot be estimated by conventional methods such as Maximum Likelihood
Estimation (MLE) and Generalized Method of Moments (GMM). Although these
simulation-based estimators have desirable theoretical properties, they have
remained as research topics in academia and have not become useful tools for
practitioners because of the lack of user friendly software. Building upon the
Phase I research and development, Insightful (formerly MathSoft) plans to study
two classes of models: mixed logit models for discrete choice analysis which
represent cross sectional and panel data problems, and models for term structure
of interest rates which represent discrete time and continuous time structural
models. Extensive Monte Carlo experiments will be used to explore finite sample
properties of various aspects of simulation, estimation and forecasting, with an
aim of improving and stabilizing the current algorithms. The user-friendly
component software will be developed using both object oriented S-Plus language
and the state-of-art JavaBean technology, and it will provide intuitive
graphical user interface. The S-Plus functions of the technology proffered by
Insightful for econometric estimation and inference will serve the purpose of
quickly gaining a broad user base, while the JavaBeans can be used to develop
custom applications. The software will help economists and practitioners in
other fields such as the financial industry, social sciences, and biotechnology
to conduct flexible and extensible model estimation and inference.