* 0132227
* The Phylogeny of Xantusiidae, and its Placement with Scleroglossa (Reptilia: Squamata)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2008
* Robert Lee Bezy, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Richard M. McCourt
* 05/31/2008
* USD 334,164.00

Relationships among the "night lizards" (Xantusiidae) have been problematic for
over a century. Because of the group's antiquity, knowledge of its most
primitive members is critical for understanding the deep evolutionary history of
the larger group of lizards called scleroglossans. Scleroglossa, which includes
snakes and their ancestors, is unique among amniotes (reptiles, birds, and
mammals) in the repeated evolution of body elongation and limb reduction,
Xantusiidae is a "tree-changing" group in that its alternative placements can
alter hypothesized relationships among most other scleroglossan groups, but too
few data are available to infer the exact placement of Xantusiidae. Thus, this
project will: (1) reconstruct the phylogeny of the Xantusiidae based on the most
extensive taxonomic sampling attempted to date; (2) use this phylogeny as a
framework for a detailed study of the mutational dynamics and evolution of the
mitochondrial cytochrome-b (cyt-b) gene; and (3) use the phylogeny to infer the
exact position of Xantusiidae within Scleroglossa.&lt;br/&gt; This study will
use both molecular and morphological data sets. The molecular sampling of
relevant xantusiid species/populations is virtually complete; approximately 4500
base pairs (bp) of DNA sequence data will be collected for about 80 individuals,
representing regions of several nuclear and mitochondrial genes (including the
entire cyt-b gene). Extensive morphological data will be collected, including
internal cranial characters revealed via high-resolution X-ray CT (HRCT) scans
of all named fossil and extant xantusiids. HRCT will permit nondestructive
collection of novel characters from fossils still embedded in matrix and
critically important type specimens too precious to dissect. All characters will
be combined and subjected to extensive computer analyses run on parallel
clusters to ensure exhaustive searches of tree space. Mitochondrial cyt-b
sequences will be mapped onto the resulting phylogenetic hypothesis for
statistical studies of mutational dynamics across all levels of divergence in
the Xantusiidae. This project will also support a large sequencing effort to
address placement of Xantusiidae within Scleroglossa, including at least 8500 bp
from 6 - 8 nuclear genes and some of the same mtDNA gene regions used for
Xantusiidae. Preliminary data (HRCT scans) will be collected for selected
scleroglossan taxa for preparation of a proposal to support a complimentary
morphological study of the placement of Xantusiidae within Scleroglossa.
&lt;br/&gt; This study will provide extensive morphological and molecular data
sets, and a complete survey of cyt-b mutational dynamics, for an entire group of
lizards (Xantusiidae). The group's small size will permit thorough explorations
of tree search strategies for both data sets, sensitivity analyses to different
character coding schemes and assumptions about character evolution, and
determination of the group's basal members. This will in turn provide an
understanding of character state distributions within Xantusiidae, which is key
to its placement within Scleroglossa and therefore to understanding the
evolution of this larger group. Extensive data sets will be generated including
novel nuclear genes (optimized and made available for studies of other lizard
groups) and novel cranial characters revealed via HRCT (and made available as an
online resource). The study will provide extensive opportunities for
undergraduate student training.&lt;br/&gt;