* 0132463
* Language Change Across the Lifespan
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Gillian Sankoff, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 12/31/2006
* USD 139,224.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Gillian Sankoff will conduct two
years of linguistic research on how language change at the community level
relates to stability at the individual level. This project investigates
linguistic change in a community of French speakers, taking advantage of a
unique series of tape recordings made between 1971 and 1995 by Dr. Sankoff and
her colleagues. The original corpus consists of tapes and transcripts of 120
native French-speaking Montrealers, stratified by age, sex, and social class.
Half of the speakers were re-recorded in 1984, and a subset of those were
followed through 1995. The project will establish trends at the community level
and assess the degree of stability across individual speaker lifespans. Since
the speech has already been collected and transcribed, research activities will
emphasize quantitative analyses of phonetics, grammar, and lexicon across
speakers. Eight different features will be used to track differential
malleability of these linguistic subsystems. For example, people might modify
their grammars more readily than they do their childhood accents.

This sociolinguistic research will refine the concept of a "critical period" for
language learning. This is the maturational period before puberty when children
acquire their native languages. For most people, basic linguistic knowledge
forms a relatively stable system throughout life. Although people learn new
vocabulary across their lifespan, most 50- or 60-year olds prove faithful to the
sound system and grammar of the language they first learned as young children.
And yet, languages are constantly changing. To account for how both situations
can hold, earlier models of language change focused on the transmission of
linguistic information from adults to children. Since recent research has shown
that children model the adult system very closely, it must be possible for
people to remodel their language - to some extent - later in life. This research
on that possibility also addresses how language change affects communication,
even across generations within the same speech community. Understanding language
change as experienced by speakers across their lifespans will help to solve the
puzzle of how and why people alter their speech, when the ensuing changes affect
communication. The project will also address the limits of the possible, in
examining the barriers to linguistic remodeling in later life for people who
encounter new languages or dialects as adults