* 0132811
* PECASE:  Monotone Optimal Policies in Parallel Processing Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Mark Lewis, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Suvrajeet Sen
* 09/30/2005
* USD 225,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: PECASE: Monotone Optimal Policies in Parallel
Processing Networks&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Michigan Ann
Arbor&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This PECASE award will explore the application of
Markov decision processes to three related problems in parallel queueing
systems. In each scenario, as the number of parallel queues increases, the
complexity of the decision-making process increases. Thus, finding the structure
of the optimal policy in order to decrease the size of the search becomes
crucial. The first problem considered is a question of routing in a multi-server
queueing system that appears in several areas of industry. For example, in
demand chain logistics a company receives a request for a particular part. This
part may be manufactured at several different plants in the same general area.
If the company has an integrated information source, a decision-maker can query
the system about how much work is in process at each of the several plants,
estimate the time (and cost) it will take each plant to complete the job at hand
and place the order accordingly. We next take the same routing problem described
above and consider scheduling in a particular manufacturing plant. If there are
several stations capable of performing the same task, the applicability of the
previous model remains. We complicate matters a bit, by noting that some of the
machines may deteriorate. We then seek a joint, maintenance and routing policy.
Finally, we consider an example of load balancing that is useful in parallel
computing. Sup-pose that work orders can be broken up, partially served on any
computer and, upon completion, reassembled. Since the computers are networked,
and a decision-maker would like to utilize these resources wisely, it may be
advantageous to re-route work that has been sitting in queue at a particular
machine to a different machine. That is to say, that the decision-maker would
like to keep the load balanced between machines. The decision where a job will
actually be processed is thus reevaluated so that idleness is
reduced.&lt;br/&gt;The main thrust of the education plan in this proposal is to
try to increase the number of successful Minority graduate students in
industrial engineering and operations research. This will be facilitated by
several activities, not the least of which is to attempt to increase the number
of minority graduate students at the University of Michigan. Close ties to the
undergraduates in the Industrial and Operations Engineering Department (IOE) at
the university will be developed through mentoring and increased financial
support for under-represented minority graduate students will reduce teaching
requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was originally funded
as a CAREER award, and was converted to a Presidential Early Career Award for
Engineers and Scientists (PECASE) award in May
2004.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;