* 0132437
* The Impact of Global Work Distribution on Software Development Project Teams
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2004
* Kuldeep Kumar, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* John L. Naman
* 08/31/2004
* USD 81,052.00

The intent of the project is to examine the impact of global or geographical
distributedness on the coordination, control and reward systems in global
software development project teams. Thus the primary resarch question addressed
in the proposed research is: how does the distribution of project work across
geographically, often globally, distributed work-sites impact the use and
effectiveness of the coordination, control and reward systems in these project
teams. The exploratory nature of the proposed work drives a combination of
intensive qualitative research methods, including onsite observation,
examination of project documentation, and in-depth interviews with project
managers, project leaders, project members and other stakeholders at the various
distributed sites. The PIs will also work with local informants and academics to
help elicit and interpret the findings at each location. A theory of the
management of globally distributed projects and its associated empirical case
data will be immediately useful, and is likely to contain generalizable
knowledge for research and practice in the management of global software
projects, a major undertaking both in the US and in organizations around the
world. With the shift to global software projects, increasing interest in this
area is anticipated, along with increasing need for well-founded theory. It is
expected that the interviews will help to clarify project-specific team dynamics
and dimensions of project management, which will be utilized to help refine and
structure a subsequent theoretical framework and a design for a broader study.
The subsequent work will depend upon the grounded theory developed in the
present exploratory, empirical exploration.