* 0132445
* Dissertation Research: The Syntax and Semantics of Quantification and Relativization in Quechua
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2004
* Molly Diesing, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 01/31/2004
* USD 11,538.00

Under the direction of Dr. Molly Diesing, Dr. Rachel Hastings will collect data
for her (second) doctoral dissertation. She will conduct linguistic research on
the Quechua language through fieldwork in the regions of Cusco, Peru, and Quito,
Ecuador. Quechua speakers will be consulted regarding the meaning and contexts
of use of expressions involving quantification and nominals containing relative
clauses. Evidence from both spontaneous speech and texts (such as folktales
published in Quechua) will also be consulted. The semantics of quantification in
Quechua has received little attention in the past, and thus an initial goal of
this study will be to investigate the semantic scope of quantifiers, and the
syntactic position of the quantifier within a nominal. Some unusual, apparently
clause-escaping properties of certain Quechua quantifiers will then be used to
probe the structure of relative clauses. Quechua permits constructions in which
the "head" of the relative clause (the nominal being modified by the clause)
appears internally to the clause, as well as constructions in which the head is
external. The semantic interactions between quantification and these two types
of relativization will be used to investigate the detailed structure of these
clauses.

The importance of this research lies both within Quechua linguistics and within
cross-linguistic theories of syntax and semantics. First, this research will
contribute to the body of Quechua data that is available to on-going efforts to
document Quechua grammar, promote Quechua literacy, and analyze variation
between dialects. Second, within theoretical linguistics, the results of the
study will contribute to the emerging field of cross-linguistic semantic
studies, and quantification studies in particular. The results of this research
will also inform on-going debates on the structure of relative clauses, in
particular questions regarding relations between internally and externally-
headed relatives.