* 0132855
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar:  Arsenic in Biology and Medicine
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2003
* A Gandolfi, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 06/30/2003
* USD 16,560.00

0128922&lt;br/&gt;Gandolfi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the
participation of American scientists in a U.S.-Japan seminar on arsenic in
biology and medicine to be held in Honolulu, Hawaii from December 15-20, 2002.
The co-organizers are Professor A. Jay Gandolfi at the University of Arizona and
Professor Kazuo Suzuki of Chiba University in Japan. Arsenic is a toxicant of
worldwide concern. Arsenic causes a range of toxic effect and is classed as a
human carcinogen. Arsenic can be present naturally in soil and water or can be
released into our environment by man's activities (e.g.mining). It appears in
various oxidation states as both inorganic and organic forms. Each of these has
distinct toxicological properties. Arsenic exposure can also be by ingestion
(water, food) and inhalation (dust). Being an element, arsenic cannot be
destroyed and must be contained to control its toxic exposures. The goals of the
meeting are to: A) discuss the dose-response relationship for cancer and non-
cancer endpoints for target organs of arsenic toxicity; B) determine the low-
level dose-response effects for arsenic at concentrations relevant to those
expected from arsenic contaminated drinking water; C) evaluate in vitro models
of arsenic-induced molecular toxicity and comparison of these results with those
seen in arsenic-exposed populations; and D) clarify whether there is a linear
dose-response relationship for arsenic or if there is a threshold dose-response
(a non-linear response). Specific topics for discussion are: 1) chronic arsenism
caused by underground water; 2) chemical forms of arsenic and its metabolism; 3)
mechanisms underlying the toxicity of arsenic; 4) mechanisms underlying the
carcinogenicity of arsenic; 5) organ-specific toxicity of arsenic; 6) animal
species-specific metabolism and toxicity of arsenic; 7) interaction of arsenic
with other biological elements; 8) excretion and removal of arsenic (antidote to
arsenism); 9) safety dose for chronic ingestion of arsenic; and 10) genetic
polymorphism and arsenic toxicity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Concerns about the
acceptable levels of arsenic in our environment are sweeping the world. Arsenic
toxicity and carcinogenicity represent one of the big challenges for researchers
in the new millennium. The recent efforts to change the drinking water standards
for arsenic has stimulated numerous research investigations. Since a majority of
the investigations have been performed in the United States and Japan it is very
timely to convene this joint meeting to share these studies. The project
advances international human resources through the participation of a postdoc
and graduate students. Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this
project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international
understanding and cooperation. The researchers plan to publish proceedings of
the seminar in a journal such as "Environmental Health Perspectives."&lt;br/&gt;