* 0132842
* (SGER)  Pilot Expedition for Multi-Taxa Biodiversity Surveys in the Bolivian Andes
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2003
* Eleanor Sterling, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* James Woolley
* 09/30/2003
* USD 45,000.00

Abstract

The tropical Andes are an epicenter of global diversity, containing more plant
and vertebrate species and higher levels of endemism than any other biodiversity
hotspot. Information on the distribution of species within the Bolivian Andes is
critical for conservation priority setting and management, and is of general
interest to the fields of taxonomy, systematics, and biogeography. Yet for most
taxa, the Bolivian portion of this globally important region remains one of the
most poorly surveyed segments of the entire Andean chain. The Center for
Biodiversity and Conservation (CBC) at the American Museum of Natural History
(AMNH), the Coleccion Boliviana de Fauna (CBF), and the Museo de Historia
Natural Noel Kempff Mercado (MHNNKM) have formed a consortium to study this
poorly surveyed region. The consortium has developed plans for a series of
multi-taxa surveys across elevational gradients in two Andean protected areas
that the Bolivian government has identified as critical management challenges:
Parque Nacional and Area de Manejo Integrado Cotapata and Parque Nacional and
Area de Manejo Integrado Amboro. Birds, fish, herpetofauna, and invertebrates
will be sampled simultaneously using standardized collection methods along an
elevational gradient of over 3000 meters. Large biotic survey projects are
increasingly recognized as cost-effective means to making significant progress
in understanding the biogeography and systematics of a variety of taxa. But
surveys of this magnitude require extensive logistical and methodological
considerations. In preparation for this major initiative, a pilot survey at a
single site in Parque Nacional and Area de Manejo Integrado Amboro, Bolivia,
will be conducted to initiate the consortium's field activities and finalize
protocols for future surveys. Goals for the proposed pilot survey are to: 1)
Quantify the amount of time and sampling effort necessary either to reach an
asymptote in species encounter rates or to statistically estimate the true
species richness at a site. 2) Evaluate the feasibility of barcoding and
tracking specimens from the time of their collection at remote field sites,
through the preparation and identification phases, to their accession into
museum collections. 3) Fully standardize invertebrate sampling methods. 4) Send
a small team to visit each of the additional proposed study sites in Amoboro and
Cotapata in order to efficiently coordinate future visits. The development of a
suite of standardized biodiversity survey techniques and quantifying the
sampling effort needed to adequately assess species richness or endemism has the
potential to make biodiversity surveys more efficient and extend their
application to wider areas. The use of microbarcode and databasing technologies
is already leading to enormous efficiencies in biodiversity surveys and
collection management, particularly for invertebrates. By developing and
implementing field-based protocols for using these technologies, this study will
help expand the application of these digital advances to field surveys. The
results of this pilot expedition will help streamline the design and execution
of multi-taxa surveys in Andean regions, and will in particular inform the
design of the proposed series of surveys in Bolivia.