* 0132584
* Reactive Systems at the Onset of Microsolvation
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Kenneth Leopold, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 02/28/2006
* USD 349,635.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Proposal: CHE-0132584&lt;br/&gt;PI: Leopold, Kenneth
R.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effect of solvation on molecular structure and
reactivity is an important problem in chemistry. The investigation of
microsolvated species offers a valuable means of bridging gas phase measurements
with studies of condensed matter. Such work offers the possibility of developing
an increasingly accurate molecular-level description of solvation. In this
project, rotational spectroscopy will be used to examine the effects of
microsolvation on reactive acid-base complexes. Molecular structures and dipole
moments will be determined from rotational constants and Stark effect data,
respectively. Aspects of charge distribution will, in certain cases, also be
revealed by nuclear hyperfine structure. Two classes of systems are targeted:
(i) partially bound Lewis acid-base complexes, whose structure and bonding
change dramatically upon crystallization and (ii) hydrogen bonded systems which
undergo proton transfer in solution or in the crystalline phase. These systems
are chosen because in both cases, aggregation promotes chemical change and the
effects of microsolvation are, therefore, expected to be pronounced. The central
question to be addressed in this work is , "In systems for which aggregation
drives chemical change, how big is the effect of the first near neighbor?".
Several systems with higher degrees of solvation are also considered. This work
will systematically exploit the hypersensitivity of these reactive acid-base
complexes to their near-neighbor interactions for the purpose of investigating
"solvation" effects at the small cluster level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of the
chemistry important to human activity involves substances in solution. For
example, the chemistry of living things, reactions in contaminated ground
waters, and even a host of important industrial processes occur only when
molecules are dissolved in a solvent. When such reactions occur, the solvent
itself is not a direct participant in the chemistry, though it has become
increasingly clear that its presence can play a significant role in mediating
the reactions that take place. Thus, in this project, we are interested in
studying the role of solvent in mediating chemical processes. Our approach is to
gain a basic understanding of the problem by examining the effect of a single
solvent molecule close to a pair of reactive molecules. To accomplish this, we
isolate two reacting molecules, plus one solvent molecule, and use microwaves to
investigate how the solvent affects them. Understanding the influence of a
single solvent molecule is an important step, as it is the fundamental building
block for understanding the influence of the many solvent molecules present in a
real solution. Moreover, the basic knowledge gained from this work may have
direct consequences for modeling difficult problems of societal importance,
e.g., the formation of particles in the earth's atmosphere, whose presence has
wide ranging effects on climate, ozone levels, and human health. In this way, we
envision potential practical applications for the fundamental science addressed
in this project. Graduate students at the University of Minnesota will
participate in this research as part of their training toward the doctoral
degree and will learn numerous technical skills applicable to a wide variety of
problems.&lt;br/&gt;