* 0132514
* CAREER: Homology and Geometry of Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2002,07/31/2002
* Igor Mineyev, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Maria H. Noronha
* 07/31/2002
* USD 320,548.00

Abstract for DMS - 0132514&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the past the investigator
developed techniques to study&lt;br/&gt;Gromov hyperbolic groups. There are
several applications of those&lt;br/&gt;techniques in topology, geometry,
algebra, analysis. In particular,&lt;br/&gt;hyperbolic groups were characterized
by bounded cohomology, extending&lt;br/&gt;results my M. Gromov. This
characterization was used by A. Connes and&lt;br/&gt;H. Moscovici for a proof of
the Novikov conjecture for hyperbolic groups.&lt;br/&gt;S. Gersten provided
several descriptions of hyperbolicity in terms of&lt;br/&gt;various (co)homology
theories, and later the investigator made&lt;br/&gt;contributions in that
direction. Recently, Guoliang Yu and&lt;br/&gt;the investigator were able to
prove the Baum-Connes conjecture&lt;br/&gt;for hyperbolic groups and their
subgroups. The techniques will be further&lt;br/&gt;developed to address these
and other directions. For example,&lt;br/&gt;(co)homological descriptions of
relative hyperbolicity will be studied.&lt;br/&gt;As another application, the
conformal and other geometric structures&lt;br/&gt;on hyperbolic groups will be
constructed. It is the investigator's&lt;br/&gt;hope that this will lead, in
particular, to a better understanding&lt;br/&gt;of open conjectures in
3-dimensional topology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is an important and interesting
task to investigate shapes&lt;br/&gt;of spaces, in particular of the one in
which we live. Geometry studies&lt;br/&gt;spaces of various shapes. Group theory
studies groups, that is,&lt;br/&gt;sets of symmetries of spaces. Geometric group
theory provides&lt;br/&gt;links between spaces and groups. Every group has an
orbit (!) in some &lt;br/&gt;space (!). The orbit is only a part of the space,
but once something&lt;br/&gt;is known about the the group, geometric group
theory provides information&lt;br/&gt;not only about the orbit, but about the
whole space as well. Tools from&lt;br/&gt;several areas of mathematics are used
for that. The research part of this&lt;br/&gt;proposal is to develop and use
those tools. Another part of the proposal&lt;br/&gt;is organizing and supporting
the G^3 = "Geometric group theory on the gulf&lt;br/&gt;coast conference" that
would allow exchange of ideas among mathematicians&lt;br/&gt;of various research
interests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;