* 0132996
* CAREER:  Scanning Tunneling Microscopy as a Synthetic Tool: C-C Coupling of Haloaromatic Reactants on Copper Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2007
* Ludwig Bartels, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 01/31/2007
* USD 501,500.00

This research project, in the laboratory of Professor Ludwig Bartels at the
University of California-Riverside, uses scanning tunneling microscope methods
as a tool in organic synthesis. This early Career award supported by the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, addresses the site directed synthesis
of organic molecules bound to surfaces. Building on recent work that
demonstrated the synthesis of biphenyl from iodobenzene using the STM tip,
Bartels and his coworkers will extend this approach to the synthesis of
individual molecules having multiple elementary units. This approach will allow
the synthesis of molecules of exactly the desired conformation. Application of
this approach to the synthesis of chiral molecules of specific conformation is
planned as well. This basic research program will provide the background and
understanding necessary for the development of molecular electronic devices and
other nanomaterial synthesis strategies. Professor Bartels is also developing a
course focussing on semiconductor processing that will be taught in the
Chemistry Department as a part of this Career award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
detailed understanding of the construction of complex organic molecules will
result from the work carried out in this Career award. Professor Bartels and his
coworkers will use STM to manipulate individual molecules, coupling various
functionalities to make molecules of the desired conformation adsorbed on a
substrate. Coupling reactions will be used for the initial work, followed by
more complex addition reactions. A semiconductor processing course will be
developed as part of this Career award.