* 0132576
* A Proposal for the Measurement and Analysis of Extremely Low Frequency (ELF) Waves at South Pole Station
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2002,02/28/2005
* James LaBelle, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 02/28/2005
* USD 186,278.00

This project will detect and record magnetic field fluctuations in the
Extremely Low Frequency (ELF) range at South Pole Station. The range of
frequencies being measured (1 to 350 Hz) encompasses interesting and important
phenomena related to magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling. The primary objective is
to characterize auroral ion cyclotron waves, which, according to theory,
modulate precipitating electron fluxes, causing the flickering in auroral
luminosity emissions. Substantial evidence now exists in support of this theory,
although the excitation mechanism responsible for the ion cyclotron waves is
somewhat uncertain. Perhaps the most well-developed theory suggests that the
waves result from an electron beam instability. In any case, the frequency of
the flickering or, equivalently, the frequency of the ground-based observations
of ion cyclotron waves can be used to infer the altitude of the excitation
mechanism, since the wave frequency depends on the strength of the known
background magnetic field. As such, the information that will be acquired as
part of this project can be used to test models of auroral acceleration
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt; The second objective of this project is to study
dispersive ELF waves, a type of wave that has been reported in the literature
only a few times, but one that may provide important information regarding
substorm onset or, perhaps, boundaries of open and closed magnetic fields. A
first step in the project is to identify the wave mode and to determine the
location and geomagnetic conditions under which these waves are observed.
Ultimately the most important parameter to be quantified is energy transfer,
which occurs via Poynting fluxes and particle energy. A significant fraction of
the particle energy flux is associated with auroral phenomena, so to a great
extent our knowledge of magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling depends on how well we
understand auroral processes.&lt;br/&gt;