* 0132819
* Genetic Dissection of L1-type Neural Cell Adhesion Molecules in a Developing Nervous System
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Michael Hortsch, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 07/31/2006
* USD 389,997.00

Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cell surface proteins of the L1 family of cell
adhesion molecules are centrally involved in numerous developmental processes,
especially during the formation of the nervous system. They interact with a
large number of different proteins on the outside, as well the inside of cells
that express such molecules. Whereas some functional properties of L1 proteins
are well conserved in a wide range of species, from nematodes to humans, other
functions and binding partners have been developed more recently during
evolution. The proposed research tries to dissect this functional complexity of
L1 proteins by analyzing the structural and functional requirements for L1-type
proteins in specific developmental processes. The research plan will focus on
the formation of the nervous system in the fruitfly Drosophila melanogaster.
Mutant Drosophila embryos that do not express any L1-type proteins die and
exhibit many subtle abnormalities in their developing nervous system and a
number of other tissues. In Drosophila embryos with mutations in their L1-type
gene, several nerves are not appropriately formed and specific neuronal cells
are unable to make the correct cellular connections with their targets. Natural,
as well as artificially altered and mutant L1-type proteins will be reintroduced
into such embryos to test whether they are able to rescue specific neurological
malformations that are caused by the absence of the endogenous Drosophila L1
protein. This analysis will shed light on what molecular functions and
interactions of L1-type proteins are required in which types of cells to support
certain developmental processes. &lt;br/&gt;