* 0132018
* Acquisition of Continuous-Flow Stable Isotope Analytical Equipment at Dartmouth College
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2002,02/29/2004
* Xiahong Feng, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 02/29/2004
* USD 68,954.00

0132018 Feng

This grant provides partial support for the purchase of additional online
peripheral devices as well as necessary ancillary equipment for the stable
isotope laboratory at Dartmouth College. The stable isotope lab currently houses
two stable isotope mass spectrometers, a Finnigan Delta E and a ThermoFinnigan
Delta Plus XL, and three online ThermoFinnigan peripheral devices, an Elemental
Analyzer and a Gas Chromatograph/ Combustion system (GCC) and a TC/EA. The lab
also maintains a wide array of offline equipment for the extraction of oxygen
and hydrogen from minerals, rocks and waters, and oxygen, hydrogen and carbon
from organic matter, soils and soil gas. Isotope extraction procedures currently
done offline, including water analyses and carbonate analyses, will be done more
efficiently and with no compromise to data quality by online and automated
peripheral devices. Specifically equipment to be purchased includes a
ThermoFinnigan H/Device for automated online hydrogen isotope analysis of water
samples, a ThermoFinnigan GasBench II system for automated online hydrogen and
oxygen isotope analysis of water samples, carbon and oxygen isotope analysis of
carbonate minerals, carbon isotopic analysis of dissolved inorganic carbon and
online analysis of soil CO2, and an analytical balance. The upgraded lab will
support research by faculty and students in three departments (Earth Sciences,
Environmental Studies and Biological Sciences) and numerous collaborative
efforts with researchers from other institutions in New Hampshire. ***