* 0132555
* Collaborative Research: Topics in Many-Body Theory
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Dietrich Belitz, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 12/31/2005
* USD 246,000.00

This is a collaborative award that supports theoretical research and education
in the area of condensed matter theory. The collaborator is professor
Kirkpatrick at the University of Maryland (DMR-0132726). The main objective of
the project is to enhance the current understanding of many-electron systems at
very low temperatures, and especially of phase transitions and other collective
phenomena in such systems. The PIs will apply an effective field theory,
developed during previous grant periods, to various collective phenomena of
electrons in solids. The methods employed are general field theoretic techniques
and the renormalization group. Specific systems for which this project is
relevant include, magnets, superconductors, and doped semiconductors. The
successful completion of this project will contribute to the understanding of an
important area of condensed matter physics, and will train technical personnel
with theoretical expertise in this field. %%% This is a collaborative award that
supports theoretical research and education in the area of condensed matter
theory. The collaborator is professor Kirkpatrick at the University of Maryland
(DMR-0132726). The research focuses on fundamental problems of condensed matter
physics involving strong electronic correlations in clean and disordered
systems. Specific topics of study include quantum phase transitions in
ferromagnets and superconductors, the coexistence of superconductivity and
ferromagnetism in UGe2, and how electronic correlations affect the metal-
insulator transition. Quantum phase transitions occur at zero temperature and
are driven by quantum fluctuations in contrast to the more familiar and well-
understood phase transitions that are driven by thermal fluctuations and have
non-zero transition temperatures. Critical fluctuations associated with quantum
phase transitions may influence electronic behavior over a wide temperature
range and may explain unusual electronic properties exhibited by materials with
strong electronic correlations and other condensed matter systems. The award
also supports education in advanced theoretical methods for condensed matter
phenomena. ***