* 0132550
* Nanometer Resolution of Reactive Sites on Heterogeneous Metal Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2002,08/31/2005
* William Smyrl, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 08/31/2005
* USD 295,000.00

This grant explores high-resolution topographic imaging with concurrent optical,
electrochemical, photoelectrochemical, and fluorescence mapping. These
techniques are based on novel modifications of a commercial Near Field Optical
Scanning Microscopic (NSOM Topometrix) to obtain shear force feedback control
with a piezoelectric tuning fork. Optical resolutions of 60 nm and
electrochemical resolutions of 50 nm have been achieved for these functional
microscopies. This research is aimed at extending these resolutions to 10 nm or
below. In addition a study of pitting precursor sites will be made for high
purity titanium, titanium alloys, and aluminum alloys. This should facilitate
in-situ and ex-situ evaluation of surface treatments used to mitigate pitting
corrosion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A primary goal of this work is to develop these
high-resolution capabilities to identify precursor sites for corrosion of
microelectronic and magnetic storage assemblies. As the dimensions of these and
similar devices decrease, corrosion becomes increasingly important and
techniques to explore heterogeneous surfaces are needed. Magnetic storage
surfaces can be covered with diamond-like carbon coatings to provide
tribological protection, and it is important to determine how well these
surfaces protect against corrosion as well. Scanning electrochemical microscopy
with concurrent topographic mapping is the primary technique used for the
studies. A secondary goal is to employ these successful characterization
techniques for fabrication of novel surface structures. &lt;br/&gt;