* 0132006
* Fully Three-Dimensional Stability Analyses and Evolution of Hurricanes and Tornadoes with Secondary Circulations
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Michael Montgomery, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 08/31/2005
* USD 483,040.00

Tornadoes and hurricanes are two of the most destructive natural phenomena that
threaten the U.S. population. A universal characteristic of these storms is a
vertically aligned, intense vortex in the core region. The classical approach of
analyzing the linearized dynamics of small perturbations to vortices has yielded
substantial insight into the behavior of intense atmospheric vortices, helping
to explain such phenomena as multiple vortex formation in tornadoes and rapid
inner-core structure change in hurricanes. The vast majority of these studies,
however, have been applied to essentially two-dimensional perturbations to two-
dimensional vortices. In some studies, three-dimensional perturbations have been
considered, but the basic-state vortices were homogenous in the vertical
direction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will advance the study of intense
atmospheric vortices in two ways. First, the classical methods of vortex
stability analysis will be extended to allow for the study of truly three-
dimensional vortices. The equations of motion will be the three-dimensional
anelastic equations such that neither hydrostatic, quasi-geostrophic, or other
balance approximations are required. Intense atmospheric vortices of all types
are not homogenous along their vertical axis, but often have considerable
variation of their wind and density fields with height. The stability analysis
will allow for eigenfunctions that vary arbitrarily with height, so that the
Principal Investigators can find truly three-dimensional eigenmodes, unstable or
otherwise, in the cores of three-dimensional vortices. This approach will be
applied to axisymmetric basic-state vortices, based on the results of numerical
simulations and existing or future observational data sets of tornadoes and
hurricanes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Secondly, the secondary circulation, which is
known to play a critical role in the development and maintenance of tornadoes
and hurricanes, will be incorporated into the basic state flow. Previous
investigations on the influence of radial inflow and vertical outflow on the
stability of these vortices have been limited to highly idealized vortices.
Whether the secondary circulation, and in particular the shear of the vertical
wind up through the core of the vortex, stabilizes or destabilizes the vortex
remains an open and intriguing question and may be critical in understanding
inner-core dynamics in tornadoes and hurricanes. For stable vortices, such as
developing tropical cyclones or "one-celled" tornadic vortices, a natural
extension of the research will be to determine the linearized evolution and
impact on the basic-state vortex of three-dimensional, asymmetric,
nonhydrostatic perturbations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful completion of this
research will lead to better understanding and, potentially, better forecasts of
destructive atmospheric vortices.