* 0132036
* Science and Planning Workshop for Ross Island Meteorology Experiment - RIME.
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2001,01/31/2003
* David Bromwich, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 01/31/2003
* USD 25,000.00

0132036&lt;br/&gt;Bromwich&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This award will
provide funds for the support of a planning workshop for the Ross Island
Meteorology Experiment, a project to integrate the results of advanced research
techniques into antarctic weather forecasting. The workshop will be held at the
Byrd Polar Research Center of Ohio State University, in September
2001.&lt;br/&gt; The objective of the workshop is to bring together the
atmospheric community with research interests in antarctic synoptic meteorology.
This group, which will include operational forecasters, numerical modelers,
atmospheric scientists, and others, will be expected to define and recommend
realizable goals for the synoptic meteorology program of the U.S. Antarctic
Program, and to define the core requirements of research project in the McMurdo
Sound/Ross Ice Shelf area which will achieve these goals.&lt;br/&gt; Recent
advances in polar numerical weather prediction, resulting from ongoing efforts
at improving the capabilities of numerical weather prediction models for use in
polar regions, and real-time simulations of the antarctic atmosphere using the
Penn State University/National Center for Atmospheric Research fifth generation
mesoscale model have placed the field of antarctic weather prediction at the
brink of a period of rapid improvement. This potential can only be realized
through a directed research program with the goal of providing an observational
database to validate the modeling effort.&lt;br/&gt; The need for this workshop
was recognized and articulated at the Antarctic Weather Forecasting Workshop
held at Ohio State University in May 2000.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;