* 0132528
* Microbial Observatories: Anhydrophilic, Halotolerant Microbial Mats of San Salvador Island, Bahamas
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2002,02/29/2008
* Hans Paerl, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 02/29/2008
* USD 873,079.00

Drs. Hans Paerl and Timothy Steppe (University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill), Alan Decho (University of South Carolina at Columbia), James Pinckney
(Texas A &amp; M University) are examining the community structure and function
of highly-diverse microbial mats located in lakes on San Salvador Island,
Bahamas. Because water evaporation exceeds rain precipitation on San Salvador,
lakewater salinity can reach up to five times that of normal seawater.
Interannual and seasonal variability in rainfall causes lake-levels and
salinities to fluctuate greatly. Consequently, the microbial mats, which cover
extensive portions of the lake bottoms and control the lakes' ecology, are
subjected to prolonged periods of harsh, potentially lethal constraints such as
desiccation, intense solar radiation, and high temperatures. Yet, they manage to
grow and survive under some of the most extreme conditions on the planet. The
objective of this study is to assess the influence water availability has on the
structural diversification, community composition, production, and carbon
sequestration in microbial mats over a five-year period. A particular emphasis
will be placed on culturing and characterizing novel organisms that are adapted
to water-stressed environments. State of the art molecular biological, polymer
chemistry, physiological, and microbiological techniques will be employed to
accomplish the research goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water is indispensable for
life. The proposed work addresses a fundamental mechanism that is essential to
all life, the ability to conserve water and balance ions. Understanding and
characterizing water-stressed microbial communities may provide information
crucial for understanding key controls of life processes on other planets and
moons where water may exist. Anhydrophilic communities exist under 'feast or
famine' conditions with regard to water availability. Rainfall on San Salvador
is episodic and largely confined to major storms, including hurricanes to which
the island is often subjected. Monitoring the physiological responses of
pristine anhydrophilic communities over time and under different hydrologic
conditions will provide information necessary to understanding how long and
short term climatic oscillations (including a predicted 10 to 40 year period of
elevated hurricane activity) impact critical life-sustaining processes.
Culturing individual populations will provide specific information for
understanding the biology of anhydrophilic life forms that may be exploited for
industrial or medical purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;