* 0132433
* Acquisition of an integrated scanning probe, scanning laser, optical microscope
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Steven Lower, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 02/29/2004
* USD 349,859.00

0132433&lt;br/&gt;Lower&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides partial support
for a state-of-the-art instrument that integrates optical micros-copy, confocal
laser scanning microscopy, scanning probe microscopy, and optical tweezers. It
will be housed in the P.I.'s laboratory at the University of Maryland, where it
will be a primary tool for the P.I.'s research programs in geomicrobiology,
biogeochemistry, and nanoscale sci-ence. This instrument will be capable of
collecting force measurements concurrent with optical observations as well as
fluorescence resonance energy transfer. Further, it will allow the simul-taneous
collection of atomic force microscopy (or scanning near-field optical
microscopy) and laser scanning microscopy images. The applications of this
instrument include for example: the study of fundamental intra- and inter-
molecular forces between biomolecules on living cells and material surfaces (or
other cells); identification of cell wall biomolecules which interact specifi-
cally with particular minerals or cells; the study of the properties and
localization of biomolecu-les on microbial surfaces; the study of mineral
dissolution and growth including biomineraliza-tion; investigations of metal (or
organic acid) sorption to mineral surfaces; the development of nanolithography
techniques; and educational outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;