* 0132519
* Collaborative Research: Thermal and Processing Effects on the Properties of Low Cost Thermotropic Copolyesters
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2001,03/31/2005
* Robert Bubeck, Michigan Molecular Institute
* Standard Grant
* Mary Lynn Realff
* 03/31/2005
* USD 120,002.00

This Collaborative Research project is to develop an understanding of the
processing of thermotropic liquid crystalline polymers (TLCPs) so that the
current barriers to widespread applications are lowered. This will be
accomplished through a coordinated study of melt stability, flow behavior, and
structure/properties of TLCPs. An array of sophisticated characterization
methods will be applied to monitor the thermal stability of the melt at high
temperature, and x-ray scattering methods to study the development and fate of
molecular orientation (directly related to mechanical properties of TLCPs) in
both simple flows and complex flows of relevance to processing. These methods
have been productively applied to 'model' TLCPs of purely scientific interest in
recent years, but this project affords the first opportunity for a comprehensive
study of a technologically relevant material using these techniques. To relate
such fundamental information to product properties, channel flow plaques will be
molded under protocols guided by the x-ray results, and their morphologies and
physical properties studied.

These materials are used commercially in applications requiring excellent
processibility, mold-filling precision, physical properties, dimensional
stability, and thermal stability. Despite considerable promise, TLCPs have yet
to be broadly applied in numerous applications where their potential as high
strength/low weight materials might be realized. Contributing factors include
thermal stability limitations at high temperatures in the melt during
processing, systematically weak directions in moldings, and the high cost of
commercially available TLCPs. This work will feature a TLCP material that offers
potential for dramatic price reductions (approximately $3/lb), thereby directly
addressing the central issue of cost. The collaboration between Northwestern
University and MMI provides a venue for graduate and undergraduate students to
gain experience in state-of-the art characterization tools and thermal analysis.