* 0133993
* Functional Dissection of the PTO Resistance Gene Using DNA Shuffling
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2006
* Richard Michelmore, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Michael L. Mishkind
* 01/31/2006
* USD 425,000.00

Understanding the early events in disease resistance has both fundamental and
practical importance. Molecular dissection of disease resistance is currently
one of the most intensively studied areas of plant biology and interesting
parallels are being established with the animal-pathogen interactions. Although
considerable progress has been made over the past ten years, early recognition
events that lead to resistance are only just beginning to be understood. In the
long term, understanding the molecular basis of specificity in plant-pathogen
interactions and the molecular events resulting in resistance will provide new
options for developing disease resistant plants.

Our long-term goals are to determine the molecular basis of recognition and
signaling in plant disease resistance and to engineer new disease resistance
specificities. The specific goal of this proposal is to dissect the functional
regions of the Pto protein that confer the ability to bind different pathogen
products and to initiate physiological pathways (downstream signaling) necessary
for defense against the pathogens in diverse plant species.

DNA shuffling is a powerful and novel approach for dissecting protein function
that makes few a priori assumptions about function yet provides great resolution
to dissect individual regions of the protein. DNA shuffling involves the
generation of chimeric genes (recombinations from two gene sources) in the test-
tube from fragments of naturally occurring versions of a gene. Our proposed
studies will further develop DNA shuffling as an experimental tool and provide
statistical approaches for interpreting the resulting data.

The interaction between the pathogenic bacterium Pseudomonas syringae and
Solanaceous plants has become one of the best-characterized plant-pathogen
interactions at the molecular level and the Pto gene is ideally suited to DNA
shuffling experiments. We have been studying this interaction for several years
and have all the necessary biological materials and methodologies in hand to
make rapid progress. The first round of DNA shuffling the Pto gene has
demonstrated the power and feasibility of the DNA shuffling approach and
revealed several previously unrecognized, potentially important domains for
binding to the pathogen derived avirulence protein, AvrPto.

In this research program we will conduct three parallel lines of investigation
that will provide detailed and complementary data on the domains and amino acid
sequences of Pto which are required for binding pathogen derived proteins and
for downstream signaling: 1) We will conduct a second generation of DNA
shuffling as well as specific amino acid substitutions to test the structure -
function inferences derived from our first DNA shuffling experiment. 2) We will
screen a shuffled library of chimeric genes to identify variants of Pto with new
binding specificities. 3) We will shuffle Pto with genes encoding similar
proteins from Arabidopsis to identify chimeras that confer the ability to
recognize additional avirulence proteins.

The proposed experiments are highly multidisciplinary. They are a combination of
molecular biology and statistics that draws on plant breeding strategies as well
as making and testing structure-function inferences. The postdoc, graduate
student, and undergraduates will receive training in both molecular biology and
statistics. In addition, they will gain experience in plant-pathogen
interactions.

