* 0133899
* CAREER:   Design and Analysis of Photonic Packet-Switched Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Jason Jue, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 07/31/2007
* USD 320,953.00

The growth of the Internet in recent years is resulting in a rapid increase in
the demand for network bandwidth. As this growth continues, the Internet will be
expected to support an increasing number of high-speed real-time applications,
such as Internet telephony, video conferencing, and video distribution, which
not only require significant bandwidth, but also have quality of service
requirements with respect to delay and reliability of transmitted
data.&lt;br/&gt; Recent advances in optical transmission technology and
wavelength division multiplexing (WDM) systems have enabled the development of
advanced communication systems which are capable of providing large amounts of
bandwidth in the core of emerging telecommunications networks. Similar advances
in optical switching technologies will enable the deployment of highly flexible
all-optical networks in the near future. Existing optical switching technology
allows for the creation of networks in which all-optical circuit-switched
connections can be established end-to-end. As optical switch technology evolves,
networks in which packets are switched optically at each node will become
possible, offering an even greater degree of flexibility. Through the
intelligent design of switch architectures and dynamic protocols, these photonic
packet-switched networks have the potential to fulfill the diverse requirements
of emerging broadband applications. This proposal outlines a career development
plan for research and education in the area of photonic packet
switching.&lt;br/&gt; The research plan will investigate the feasibility and
suitability of photonic packet-switched networks for supporting the traffic
requirements of emerging Internet applications. Emphasis will be placed on the
design and evaluation of protocols and architectures for improving photonic
packet network performance, while also addressing the unique physical-layer
properties of optical networks. The specific objectives of the research project
will be to 1) investigate protocols for resolving contention and providing
differentiated levels of service in photonic packet-switched networks, 2)
investigate new techniques for contention resolution in optical burst-switched
networks, 3) investigate static and dynamic approaches for avoiding contention
and for reducing congestion in photonic packet-switched networks, and 4) develop
an integrated framework for evaluating the performance of these networks on both
the physical layer and network&lt;br/&gt;layer in terms of metrics such as
delay, packet loss, and signal quality. This research will provide a foundation
for the deployment of high-speed photonic packet-switched networks, and will
identify key design parameters and trade-offs associated with the implementation
of such networks.&lt;br/&gt; The education plan will focus on 1) developing new
networking and telecommunications curriculum at both the undergraduate and
graduate level, 2) organizing activities such as seminars and workshops to
facilitate the transfer of knowledge from the university to surrounding
industry, 3) developing new methods for providing education over the Internet,
and 4) developing an outreach program to encourage under-represented minorities
to seek careers in science and engineering.