* 0133174
* CAREER: Accurate Quantum Chemical Methods for the Chiroptical Properties of Large Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2008
* Thomas Crawford, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Raima Larter
* 01/31/2008
* USD 435,000.00

T. Daniel Crawford is supported by a CAREER grant from the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry Program to develop and apply accurate quantum chemical
methods to the chiroptical properties of large molecules. He will design
practical computational tools for the determination of the absolute
configurations for newly synthesized chrial molecules and for insight into
optical activity. He will also develop new algorithms to overcome the polynomial
scaling of coupled cluster theory. In his educational activities, he will
develop an integrated computational chemistry program across the undergraduate
chemistry curriculum, involving computational experiments for the lab
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optical properties of large chiral molecules are
of interest to natural product research in order to manipulate and synthesize
stereochemically pure chiral drugs. The ultimate goal of this research program
is to develop a computationally efficient and accuate method for calculating
these properties from first princilpes. The goals of this educational program
are not only to teach students the fundamentals of computational chemistry and
for what chemical problems computational techniques may be the preferred
analytical tool, but also to help them understand why and when such tools might
fail. The lab projects will be collected into a computational chemistry handbook
to be published in print and on the web for use by other chemistry departments.