* 0133411
* CAREER:  Investigating Epithelial Tube-Size Control Mechanisms Using the Drosophila Tracheal System
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2006
* Greg Beitel, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith M. Venuti
* 12/31/2006
* USD 632,613.00

The proposal outlines an integrated plan of teaching and research that will
provide a solid foundation for the awardee's future contributions to education
and science. The first undergraduate educational aims are to develop the
awardee's teaching skills and to improve the current undergraduate cell biology
course using the resources of Northwestern University's Searle Center for
Teaching Excellence. The second undergraduate educational aim is to provide
undergraduate research opportunities by having some of the proposed research
aims performed by summer undergraduate researchers. The graduate education aims
include organizing a new developmental genetics course and a new presentation
series.&lt;br/&gt; The proposed research focuses on understanding the mechanisms
underlying morphogenesis of epithelial and endothelial tubes. Despite the
importance of correct tube diameter and length to the function of organs such as
the vascular system, lung and kidney, there is little understanding of the
complex cytoskeletal and extracellular matrix changes, dynamic rearrangement of
cell-cell junctions, or coordinated cell shape changes that create tubes of
particular sizes. To identify and study the functions of genes required for
tube-size control, the proposed research will use molecular/genetic approaches
to investigate morphogenesis of the Drosophila tracheal system, a ramifying
network of epithelial tubes that functions as a combined pulmonary/vascular
system. Previously, mutations in a group of eight genes that specifically
control tracheal tube size have been identified. It has now been determined that
one of these genes encodes a b-subunit of a Na+ K+ ATPase transporter and that
mutations in the Na+ K+ ATPase a-subunit a-ATPase(93A) cause similar tracheal
tube-size defects. Preliminary data suggests that the Na+ K+ ATPase is required
to organize tracheal cell junctions, a novel role for a Na+ K+ ATPase. To better
understand the mechanisms of epithelial tube-size control and the roles of the
Na+ K+ ATPase, the genetic and cell biological functions of a-ATPase(93A) during
tracheal tube morphogenesis will be investigated. In addition, the tracheal
tube-size control gene varicose that genetic epistasis experiments suggest acts
in parallel to the Na+ K+ ATPase will be cloned and characterized. Together, the
analyses of a-ATPase(93A)and varicose will improve the understanding of the
basic cell biological and molecular mechanisms of epithelial and endothelial
tube-size control.&lt;br/&gt;