* 0133493
* CAREER: Economical and Simple Fabrication of Quantum Dot-Electronics Using Biofunctionalized Protein Nanotubes as Building Blocks
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2008
* Hiroshi Matsui, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Pinaki Mazumder
* 01/31/2008
* USD 360,072.00

EIA-0133493 &lt;br/&gt; Matsui, Hiroshi&lt;br/&gt; CUNY Hunter
College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER: Economical and Simple Fabrication of
Quantum Dot-Electronics Using Biofunctionalized Protein Nanotubes as Building
Blocks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves a blending of molecular
biology, nanotechnology, and materials physics, in an attempt to create a new
class of electronics. A new architecture for nanostructures using biologically
modified metal /semiconductor coated protein ananotube and quantum dots are
being created that will inherently be high speed, light weight, high stability,
and low power consumption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The architecture being used is a
form of molecular self-assembly based on biological models. The protein
nanotubes are formed from tubular peptide templates, which can be coated with
various semiconductors, metals, and quantum dots. By functionalizing the end of
the tubes with specific protein molecules, the nanotubes can use biological
recognition, modeled after the biological antibody-antigen interactions, to
attach the wire end to the appropriate substrate location. This strategy is at
the center of the fabrication method being investigated. Designs of electronics
devices are built into nanostructures by themselves, rather than having to be
imposed afterwards using a patterning process. The functionality of this
biological recognition is one of the major advantages as compared with other
nanotubes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is having a significant educational
benefit for the graduate, undergraduate and high school students in this
interdisciplinary research ranging from spectroscopy to materials
characterization. A summer Nanotechnology laboratory course is being offered to
talented high school students.&lt;br/&gt;