* 0133495
* CAREER:   Dependable Network Communication
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2008
* David Wetherall, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 07/31/2008
* USD 354,998.00

The researcher's agenda over the next decade is to improve the robustness of
network communication services to the point that they are suitable for
applications that depend on assured connectivity. In this proposal, the
researcher focuses on the key goal of containing the effects of router
misconfigurations, implementation bugs in routing protocols, and other insider
faults that, if left unchecked, can cause widespread loss of connectivity.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Dependable communications are of clear importance as
critical applications in the areas of aviation, &lt;br/&gt;medical services,
emergency services, utilities and defense become integrated with the Internet.
Yet the Internet today cannot be depended on because the routing protocols that
provide connectivity are themselves fragile. They take a bimodal approach to
security: well-developed cryptographic techniques are used to authenticate
trusted entities and protect the protocol from untrusted attackers, but no
further checks are placed on the information provided by an entity once it has
been authenticated. The result is that once an inadvertent error or attacker
slips in, the scope of error is potentially unbounded. As one example of a well-
known, spectacular failure, misconfiguration at a Virginia-based ISP caused most
Internet backbone traffic to be misdirected for up to two hours in April 1997.
Data from one study of Internet failures suggests that insider faults account
for roughly five times more trouble tickets than malicious attacks, such as
denial-of-service. &lt;br/&gt;The researcher proposes to work towards the design
of routing protocols that are able to efficiently tolerate the above kind of
insider faults. Detecting and containing these faults is a challenging problem
because traditional security techniques are often ineffective. For example,
authentication can validate what entity sent which message, but not that the
entity is behaving correctly. The key to his approach is to extend routing
protocols with information that can be used by the participants to consistency-
check the behavior of each other. This is a novel strategy that differs from
most of the prior work, which is focused on adding security in the context of
existing routing protocols. The researcher illustrates the approach in this
proposal by describing his research on a robust congestion signaling protocol,
where it was applied to substantial advantage in a related domain. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;To begin this work, the researcher will conduct a measurement study
of configuration errors in BGP, the routing protocol used across the backbone of
the Internet. I have already started this task, and include some preliminary
results in the proposal. Such a study is important because there is little data
to quantify the kind, prevalence or impact of insider faults. Armed with these
results, the researcher will design routing protocols that limit the loss of
connectivity caused by common faults. the researchers philosophy is to first put
aside deployment considerations to focus on what can be achieved as a more
fundamental result with a clean-slate design, and then map the designs into the
context of existing routing protocols. Specifically, he will reason about the
minimal mechanism required to handle different kinds of faults, and evaluate the
costs of that mechanism by using a combination of implementation, simulation,
and comparison to alternatives in the literature. The researcher's approach is
also to tackle the simplest, non-malicious insider faults first and work towards
progressively more complex classes of faults, rather than beginning with the
design of a .Byzantine robust. protocol. This has the advantages of both
breaking a known, hard problem into pieces, and exposing the increased
computational costs of tolerating more complex faults. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;At
all of the above stages, the researcher will cross-fertilize my research and
education activities as described in the proposal. The researcher will bring his
research into the classroom to enliven lectures, and bring students, their
projects, and overlapping infrastructure such as the proposed animations back
into his research. If successful, this work will deepen the understanding of
dependable network communication and how routing protocols can efficiently
contain faults. This in turn will lay a foundation for research and education on
dependable distributed systems that rely on the composition of routing protocols
with other components such as transport protocols and name resolution.