* 0133441
* CAREER: Elucidation of the Biosynthetic and Degradative Pathways for Phycobiliproteins in Cyanobacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2002,08/31/2009
* Wendy Schluchter, University of New Orleans
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2009
* USD 578,127.00

Photosynthetic organisms must balance their metabolism with the growth
conditions. Cyanobacteria synthesize and degrade their light harvesting
proteins, called phycobiliproteins, in response to environmental parameters such
as light intensity, light quality, and nutrient availability. The
phycobiliproteins absorb light in the visible region due to their bilin
chromophores. The long-term goal of this research project is to understand how
cyanobacteria synthesize and degrade phycobiliproteins and their bilin
chromophores. The first objective is to characterize enzymes that are involved
in attaching the bilins to phycobiliproteins. The role of five proteins within
Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 that are believed to be involved in bilin attachment
will be characterized by mutagenesis, by in vitro enzyme assays, and by
heterologous in vivo assays in Escherichia coli. A second objective is to verify
the activity of a novel methyl transferase that is responsible for adding a
methyl group to a conserved asparagine residue within phycobiliprotein beta-
subunits has been identified. A mutant lacking this enzyme will be characterized
to assess the physiological significance of this modification. A third goal
involves the creation and characterization of mutant strain in which the bilin
biosynthetic gene pcyA has been interrupted. Characterization of the synthesis
and regulation of other tetrapyrroles within this mutant strain will be
performed.

This career development plan also includes training of the undergraduate and
graduate students in performing the research and contains innovative efforts for
encouraging junior high, high school, and undergraduate students to contemplate
scientific careers. Additionally, new coursework will be created to train
biology students in modern molecular and biochemical techniques.

This project is funded jointly by the Molecular Biochemistry and Metabolic
Biochemistry Programs.



