* 0133348
* CAREER: Designing Embedded Systems with Domain-Specific Languages
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Stephen Edwards, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 12/31/2006
* USD 292,873.00

Designing Embedded Systems with Domain-Specific Languages&lt;br/&gt;Stephen A.
Edwards&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This goal of this project is to provide tools to
designers of embedded&lt;br/&gt;systems that will allow them to more quickly
create correct systems.&lt;br/&gt;It proposes to do this by providing domain-
specific languages and&lt;br/&gt;compilers. Such succinct, abstract languages
reduce development and&lt;br/&gt;testing time by providing more formal, correct-
by-construction&lt;br/&gt;methodologies and by enabling automatic implementation
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;The result will enable the development of these systems to
proceed&lt;br/&gt;beyond the current ad hoc C-and-assembly
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses three issues in the design
of many embedded&lt;br/&gt;systems: real-time software, software for
communication, and software&lt;br/&gt;for communicating across the
hardware/software boundary.&lt;br/&gt;These issues are addressed through the
following specific investigations:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New Compilation
Techniques for Synchronous Languages&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Synchronous languages
such as Esterel provide very predictable&lt;br/&gt;real-time behavior but are
challenging to compile. This project&lt;br/&gt;includes developing new, more
efficient compilation techniques for&lt;br/&gt;large systems described in the
Esterel language and its variants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New Languages and
Compilers for Communication Protocols&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Network communication
is becoming a crucial part of every embedded&lt;br/&gt;system, but the growing
complexity of the protocols and the need for&lt;br/&gt;bandwidth (e.g., for
video) makes this software difficult to develop.&lt;br/&gt;This project includes
the development of a new language for&lt;br/&gt;describing such protocol
software and a compiler for producing&lt;br/&gt;efficient
implementations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New Languages and Compilers for Device
Drivers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Writing software that communicates directly with
hardware is currently&lt;br/&gt;tedious and error-prone, and unfortunately even
more important in&lt;br/&gt;embedded systems since they tend to have
application-specific&lt;br/&gt;peripherals. This project aims to simplify this
task by creating a&lt;br/&gt;language and compiler for writing device drivers.
The results of this &lt;br/&gt;research will enable more diverse languages for
communicating across &lt;br/&gt;the hardware/software
boundary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is also addressing the recurring
complaint that academia&lt;br/&gt;does not produce students who understand both
hardware and software&lt;br/&gt;well enough to be effective embedded systems
designers by developing&lt;br/&gt;new courses along these lines. At the
undergraduate level, a new&lt;br/&gt;embedded systems project course is being
developed that will give&lt;br/&gt;students the opportunity to learn about and
use some of these new&lt;br/&gt;techniques. At the graduate level, a more
sophisticated course is&lt;br/&gt;being developed that focuses on languages for
describing embedded&lt;br/&gt;systems and isses with their semantics and
implementation. This will&lt;br/&gt;give future designers more tools for
developing embedded systems and&lt;br/&gt;will prepare students for research in
automating embedded system&lt;br/&gt;design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of
this project are being disseminated in three ways:&lt;br/&gt;through conference
and journal papers, through the release of all&lt;br/&gt;developed software to
the public domain, and through the education of&lt;br/&gt;students in the use of
the languages and compilers developed. Just as&lt;br/&gt;computer-aided design
tools have enabled the rapid, correct design of&lt;br/&gt;fantastically complex
integrated circuits, this work is enabling the&lt;br/&gt;quick, correct design
of tomorrow's complex embedded systems.&lt;br/&gt;