* 0133221
* CAREER: Error Correction and Concealment for Wireless Video: An Integrated and Adaptive Approach
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2007
* Yucel Altunbasak, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/2007
* USD 347,820.00

0133221 Altunbasak, Yucel GA Tech Res Corp

As wireless networks become more pervasive, there is a great need for wireless
multimedia with quality and reliability levels that are characteristic of wired
networks. It is clear that wireless communications will include image, video and
data applications. Furthermore, spectral limitations dictate that transmission
resources be used efficiently. To this end, image, video and other mixed media
encoding algorithms need to be designed to overcome the types of channel errors
that are likely to occur. Noting the wireless channel characteristics and the
requirements of real-time video applications, the investigator offers solutions
that are novel in two aspects. First, the investigated methods are adaptive with
respect to variations in bandwidth and channel error statistics. This
flexibility should prove to be critical in heterogeneous wireless environments.
Second, the error correction and concealment methods are not only technology
advances by themselves, but they also function together in innovative ways.

More specifically, the contributions of this research include: (1) a coordinated
multiple description coding and error concealment procedure where the smoothness
of the video signal helps to compensate for the loss of descriptions, (2) a
multiple description coder that adapts to variations in data rate and packet
loss statistics, (3) a new multi-frame boundary matching algorithm that utilizes
the boundary smoothness property not only in the decoded frame but also in the
successive frames, thereby minimizing the error propagation, (4) a new multi-
frame blocking artifact reduction algorithm that uses the spatial correlations
that exist between the successive frames to define constraint sets at multiple
frames and provides a projections onto convex sets based solution, (5) a
transport protocol that is specifically designed for real-time multimedia
communications, and (6) a testbed to integrate all the aforementioned methods
into a system-level wireless video streaming solution. On the educational front,
the investigator plans to develop a comprehensive program in multimedia signal
processing and communications. The investigator will make every attempt to meet
the original scope and level of effort of the project.