* 0133974
* CAREER: Scaling Plant Life History, Ontogeny, Diversity, and Ecology: Elaboration of a General Model
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2002,12/31/2007
* Brian Enquist, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 12/31/2007
* USD 520,000.00

One of the central problems facing biology is to identify the
general&lt;br/&gt;principles that govern the evolution of form, function and
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;Adding to this problem is the complexity of connecting
pattern and process&lt;br/&gt;across several scales of biological organization.
The career development&lt;br/&gt;plan will allow for the development of a
rigorous integrative training&lt;br/&gt;program in biological scaling at the
University of Arizona. The proposed&lt;br/&gt;research program consists of two
parts: 1) Expand a general allometric&lt;br/&gt;framework to account for
patterns of ontogenetic growth across vascular&lt;br/&gt;plants. This focus will
provide theoretical extensions and empirical&lt;br/&gt;assessments of allometric
theory to account for patterns of ontogenetic&lt;br/&gt;growth and allocation
across vascular plants; 2) Extend theoretical&lt;br/&gt;framework to
quantitatively predict how physiological aspects of plants&lt;br/&gt;and
variation in allocation and growth rate ramify to influence
numerous&lt;br/&gt;attributes of large-scale dynamics in ecological communities
and&lt;br/&gt;ecosystems. This line of investigation is geared toward: (i)
documenting&lt;br/&gt;prominent scaling laws associated with the production and
allocation of&lt;br/&gt;biomass across ecological communities; (ii) elucidating
how the&lt;br/&gt;constraints of plant allometry influences the size structuring
and&lt;br/&gt;dynamics of ecological communities; and (iii) highlighting a novel
theory&lt;br/&gt;for the movement of resources and energy through ecosystems.
The&lt;br/&gt;multifaceted research proposed will combine elaboration of
allometric&lt;br/&gt;theory, the compilation of large global datasets, and
experimental&lt;br/&gt;greenhouse manipulations to assess the quantitative
predictions of new&lt;br/&gt;theoretical insights. The proposed research will
contribute to a&lt;br/&gt;significant advancement in our ability to
mechanistically predict the&lt;br/&gt;scaling of pattern and process in
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;