* 0133318
* CAREER: Data-flow Analysis in the Memory Management of Real-Time Multimedia Processing Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Florin Balasa, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 05/31/2007
* USD 374,954.00

This research focuses on devising novel techniques based on data-flow analysis
in the memory management of real-time multidimensional signal processing. Data-
flow analysis is the steering exploration mechanism along this project, allowing
more exploration freedom than the traditional scheduling -based investigation,
since the memory management tasks usually need only relative (rather than exact)
lifetime information. Moreover, data-flow analysis enables the study of memory
management tasks at the desired level of granularity -- between whole array and
the scalar level -- trading-off computational effort and solution
optimality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part of this project investigates non-scalar
methods for computing the memory size in real-time multimedia algorithms. This
research addresses novel memory computation topics: dealing with a large class
of parametric specifications, and dealing with parallelism in high-throughput
applications. This project addresses also the problem of deriving a multilevel
memory architecture optimized for area and/or power, subject to performance
constraints. Another research direction is the optimized mapping of data from an
embedded application code into the on-chip SRAM or the off-chip DRAM for
maximizing the overall memory access performance of the
application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational component of this research
includes (1) the development of a graduate course covering algorithmic aspects
of high-level synthesis and system design methodologies; (2) the development of
a web tool for memory size computation.