* 0133943
* CAREER: Extensions of Stochastic Programming: Models, Algorithms, and Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2009
* Shabbir Ahmed, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Robert L. Smith
* 07/31/2009
* USD 375,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award is to study new models,
algorithms, and applications of stochastic programs with alternative risk-averse
objectives, subjective probabilities, and decision-dependent uncertainties.
Although stochastic programming has now evolved as a viable paradigm for
planning and decision-making under uncertainty, much of the progress in this
area has been made at the expense of some simplifying assumptions. For example,
traditional stochastic programming is concerned with optimizing an expected
objective function. Other common assumptions include precise knowledge of a
static underlying probability distribution. However, these risk ignoring
assumptions can be quite undesirable in many practical applications.
Unfortunately, these generalizations typically lead to non-convex optimization
models. Consequently, traditional decomposition algorithms for (convex)
stochastic programs are inapplicable. The research will investigate the
integration of decomposition principles within non-convex optimization
algorithms in order to attack large-scale instances of these general stochastic
programs. The developed concepts will be applied to planning problems in
important economic sectors such as process industries, engineering design, and
utility industries. The educational component of this career development plan is
aimed at popularizing stochastic programming based planning and decision making
in engineering education and practice. Towards this goal, user-friendly
stochastic programming modeling and solver tools, electronic tutorials, and real
world case studies will be developed.

The operations research community recognizes Stochastic Programming as a
valuable quantitative technique for decision support in the face of uncertainty.
However, this tool has not achieved widespread use in practical planning and
decision-making. Two reasons for this are: traditional stochastic programming
models can often be overly simplistic for real-life applications and the lack of
exposure to practical stochastic programming concepts in engineering education.
The proposed research program will extend stochastic programming paradigm beyond
some of the traditional impractical assumptions. These generalizations will
require the development of entirely new stochastic programming models and
algorithms, and their application to relevant practical problems. On the
education side, user friendly stochastic programming solver, electronic
tutorials, and industrial case-studies will be developed to facilitate the
introduction of applied stochastic programming concepts in undergraduate and
graduate engineering education.