* 0133966
* CAREER: Capturing the Lessons of Internet Services: Recovery Oriented Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Armando Fox, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 06/30/2007
* USD 350,000.00

The dependability of critical systems is an increasing source
of&lt;br/&gt;concern. Modern software systems are routinely composed of millions
of&lt;br/&gt;lines of source, including "legacy" code from previous generations
and&lt;br/&gt;other vendors, yet critical Internet services and financial
systems are&lt;br/&gt;expected to exhibit "four nines" or "five nines" (99.99%
or 99.999%)&lt;br/&gt;availability. Vast prior evidence suggests that despite
our best&lt;br/&gt;efforts at achieving a correct design, complex systems can
and will fail&lt;br/&gt;in unpredictable ways, often resulting from unforeseen
interactions&lt;br/&gt;between well-tested components not designed to be used
together. The&lt;br/&gt;measured effects of such failures in the Internet arena
are staggering,&lt;br/&gt;and in mission-critical systems the costs could be
measured in human&lt;br/&gt;lives, as was nearly the case with bugs in the
Patriot missile guidance&lt;br/&gt;software used in the Gulf
War.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since unexpected failures do in fact occur even in the
most careful&lt;br/&gt;designs, this work proposes a new approach in which
system design&lt;br/&gt;focuses not only on fault avoidance, but on rapid
recovery from&lt;br/&gt;unexpected faults. In many cases, fault detection and
recovery can&lt;br/&gt;exploit relatively simple, well known techniques that
have been proven&lt;br/&gt;to work in keeping Internet systems highly available
---despite their&lt;br/&gt;very large scale, stressful workloads, and
requirements of continuous&lt;br/&gt;uptime in spite of high levels of software
churn and integration of&lt;br/&gt;legacy code. Software watchdogs and timeouts
can catch unexpected&lt;br/&gt;exceptional conditions; reactive or prophylactic
process- or node-level&lt;br/&gt;restarts can recover from or prevent transient
errors resulting from&lt;br/&gt;aging-related state corruption or unreclaimed
resources; virtual machine&lt;br/&gt;technology can effectively contain faults
in complex software systems.&lt;br/&gt;Although these mechanisms are simple, the
challenge lies in determining&lt;br/&gt;how software must be structured so that
the mechanisms can be applied.&lt;br/&gt;Similar techniques are well-known in
the Internet protocol design&lt;br/&gt;community and embedded-systems community,
prior work from which has&lt;br/&gt;inspired this
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Brown and Patterson have proposed the term
"Recovery-Oriented Computing"&lt;br/&gt;(ROC) to broadly describe the above
philosophy. The primary goals of&lt;br/&gt;the proposed work include the
systematic investigation of ROC&lt;br/&gt;engineering techniques to reduce MTTR
(mean time to recovery) in complex&lt;br/&gt;software systems, characterization
of the properties of software systems&lt;br/&gt;that make them amenable to ROC,
and a set of design rules and&lt;br/&gt;(re)structuring techniques for applying
ROC to software systems.&lt;br/&gt;Evaluation will include quantification of the
trade-offs between&lt;br/&gt;improvement in service availability and quality of
service delivered to&lt;br/&gt;users. Testbeds for the work include a ubiquitous
computing environment&lt;br/&gt;co-developed with the Stanford Interactivity
Lab, and a prototype&lt;br/&gt;COTS-based satellite ground station network co-
developed jointly with&lt;br/&gt;the Stanford Space Systems Development
Lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is complemented by new course offerings
and revision of&lt;br/&gt;existing course offerings, at the graduate and
undergraduate levels, to&lt;br/&gt;refocus the software engineering curriculum
on models closer to&lt;br/&gt;industrial practice for building complex critical-
infrastructure&lt;br/&gt;systems. A new joint graduate course being co-taught
with Prof. David&lt;br/&gt;Patterson at UC Berkeley focuses on applying ROC to a
variety of student&lt;br/&gt;research projects across many domains. Proposed
revisions to&lt;br/&gt;advanced-undergraduate courses present Internet software
systems&lt;br/&gt;engineering as it is practiced in the field. In both cases,
recognized&lt;br/&gt;industrial researchers and practitioners are contributing
both their&lt;br/&gt;experience and concrete data that currently is nowhere
published about&lt;br/&gt;how complex systems really fail in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;