* 0133849
* CAREER:  Approximate Algorithms for High-dimensional Geometric Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2002,12/31/2007
* Piotr Indyk, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 12/31/2007
* USD 324,894.00

This Career Development Plan involves an integrated collection of research and
&lt;br/&gt;educational activities focused on algorithms for high-dimensional
&lt;br/&gt;geometric problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geometric computing with
high-dimensional data is of crucial importance to &lt;br/&gt;many areas of
computer science, including machine learning, data mining, &lt;br/&gt;databases
and information retrieval, computer vision and computational
biology.&lt;br/&gt;Example problems in this area are: nearest neighbor search,
many variants of &lt;br/&gt;data clustering, and discovering linear structure of
the data (e.g. via &lt;br/&gt;Principal Component Analysis (PCA)).
&lt;br/&gt;Unfortunately, the classical geometric algorithms for many of these
problems &lt;br/&gt;do not scale well with the dimension. For example, the
running times of the &lt;br/&gt;classical algorithms for the nearest neighbor
search depend exponentially &lt;br/&gt;on the dimension, which makes them
inefficient for dimension higher than, &lt;br/&gt;say, 20. This is unfortunate,
since many applications involve number of &lt;br/&gt;dimensions anywhere from a
few hundred to a few million.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, new,
powerful techniques for solving these&lt;br/&gt;problems have been discovered,
most notably dimensionality reduction and &lt;br/&gt;random sampling in
geometric spaces. The algorithms obtained using those &lt;br/&gt;techniques
enjoy very low (at most linear) dependence on the dimension, &lt;br/&gt;at the
cost of providing approximate answers. The problems amenable to &lt;br/&gt;these
techniques include nearest neighbor search, clustering and
PCA.&lt;br/&gt;However, the algorithmic solutions to these problems still
possess &lt;br/&gt;(sometimes quite severe) limitations. Our goal is to identify
methods for &lt;br/&gt;circumventing these limitations and making the algorithms
efficient, both &lt;br/&gt;in theory and in
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The techniques which led to the
development of the aforementioned &lt;br/&gt;algorithms are new and still not
widely known. &lt;br/&gt;They include many tools which have been developed
during 70s and 80s &lt;br/&gt;in the field of mathematics called functional
analysis. &lt;br/&gt;However, computer scientists became aware of those methods
only very recently,&lt;br/&gt;and many of the fundamental results are still not
widely known or used.&lt;br/&gt;Therefore, it is important to make these results
accessible to large computer &lt;br/&gt;science audience so that they can be
successfully used, investigated and &lt;br/&gt;developed. In the Education Plan
section we outline a plan on how to make &lt;br/&gt;them more accessible to
students as well as computer scientists.&lt;br/&gt;