* 0133923
* CAREER: Product Platform Modeling and Customization
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2007
* Timothy Simpson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Judy M. Vance
* 12/31/2007
* USD 381,000.00

The research objectives of this CAREER Award are to establish a foundation for a
decision-based approach to product family design and develop metamodeling
strategies for web-based product platform customization. The first objective
will investigate methods for generating product platform alternatives and
modeling the associated costs, demand, and uncertainties of the products within
the corresponding product family derived from each platform alternative. The
second research objective will enable rapid customization of platform variants
via the Internet. The educational objectives in this CAREER Award will engage
students in problem-based learning through industry-focused projects in product
family design and customization and assess the effectiveness of the proposed
educational activities at enhancing student learning and student's attitudes
toward lifelong learning. These educational objectives will be integrated within
&lt;br/&gt;three undergraduate courses and one graduate course. Product
dissection activities to expose freshmen and women and minority students in
grades K-12 to design and product families will also be developed. Three
industrial partners -- Durametal, Flowserve, and Ivalo Lighting -- will
collaborate in the proposed research and educational
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research
will help companies reduce development costs and time-to-market while increasing
product variety and customization. Strategies for web-based platform
customization will also enhance customer interaction and improve customer
satisfaction. The proposed research will foster the development of design
methods and tools that can be used to design families of products that meet a
wide range of rapidly changing customer requirements. The educational activities
will help prepare students to succeed in today's highly competitive digital and
global marketplace in which companies are constantly striving to shorten time-
to-market and increase product variety while reducing costs. The research and
educational activities will also establish a foundation for a long-term career
in engineering design research and education.