* 0133605
* CAREER:  Priority Users and Applications on the Internet
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2002,02/29/2008
* Cory Beard, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 02/29/2008
* USD 376,893.00

This work seeks to build a foundation for an academic career that is
distinctive, has an impact on the lives of students, and makes a lasting and
valuable contribution to society. It seeks to accomplish these objectives using
the following approach.&lt;br/&gt; -This project proposes the development and
performance evaluation of mechanisms for the support of high&lt;br/&gt;priority
users over public broadband TCP/IP networks (i.e., "the Internet"). Support for
these types of users will enhance Internet service provider (ISP) revenue
opportunities as well as support activities of importance to society, such as
military, national security, and emergency response operations. -Impacts will be
made on the lives of students through the development of innovative internship
and&lt;br/&gt;entrepreneurial training opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students. New courses and curricula will also be developed to teach
principles and new knowledge gained from this project's research work. Students
will actively participate in this research, including undergraduates and those
from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt; - This academic career will only be
successful if it passionately pursues research which goes beyond technology
development to make a difference in the lives of people. This work provides the
PI a vehicle and opportunity to build an academic career that pursues such a
passion.&lt;br/&gt; It is important to note that the research focus of this
project will be on priority users, more than on the traffic they generate or the
services they are seeking to use. Priority users may or may not expect high
quality of service (e.g.,low delay, high data rates) or applications that place
high demands on the network (e.g., interactive video). Without fail, however,
all priority users will expect network services to be available to them and to
perform reliably, regardless of the state of the network or the context in which
it is operating (e.g., after a natural disaster). National security/emergency
preparedness users are of particular interest because they frequently need to
perform their activities when it is most difficult for networks to support them
due to failures and overloaded traffic.&lt;br/&gt;The primary requirements for
priority users are as follows.&lt;br/&gt; - Availability - Immediate access to
network resources whenever needed.&lt;br/&gt; -Dependability - Ability to carry
out and complete a communication session, no matter what is happening in the
network or social context.&lt;br/&gt; -Stability - Priority users must be able
to trust the technologies they use, even as those technologies
evolve.&lt;br/&gt; In addition, packet-level quality of service and preferential
treatment may be important to some priority users, but all priority users expect
the above three primary requirements to be met.&lt;br/&gt; This work proposes
four project tasks that are staged over five years. The first three tasks will
develop mechanisms for supporting high priority users in best effort,
connection-oriented, and connectionless (i.e., Differentiated Services)
environments. Task 4 will assess performance expectations across multiple types
of networks on a full end-to-end path. These four tasks are as
follows.&lt;br/&gt; -Task 1 - Endpoint Traffic Control for Best Effort
Environments - Mechanisms will be developed for end users to control the
performance they receive in best effort networks. This is accomplished using
forwarding hosts which serve as intermediate destinations for traffic. The
presence of multiple forwarding hosts gives end users choices of paths over
which to test and send traffic.&lt;br/&gt; -Task 2 - Integrated Routing and
Connection Admission Control - Connection admission control (CAC) is very useful
in connection-oriented environments to limit the amount of traffic from low
priority users. New CAC functions will be developed through simulation
experiments that integrate efficiently with dynamic routing.&lt;br/&gt; -Task 3
- Priority Treatment in Diff-Serv Domains - In Differentiated Services domains,
traffic is handled in an aggregated, connectionless manner. New traffic
identification techniques, per domain behaviors, traffic engineering guidelines,
and service level agreement templates will be developed to specifically address
the requirements of high priority users in such environments.&lt;br/&gt; -Task 4
- End-to-end Priority Treatment - The ultimate research mission of this project
is finally accomplished in Task 4, where priority users will be able to have
their network activities supported end-to-end through new mechanisms to
understand and influence performance in the different types of networks along a
data path.