* 0133514
* CAREER: Next Generation Micromachined THz Circuits for Communication, Radio Astronomy and Biological Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2002,12/31/2007
* Ioannis Papapolymerou, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 12/31/2007
* USD 375,000.00

0133514&lt;br/&gt;Papapolymerou&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The electromagnetic
spectrum between 0.5 THz to 10 THz is scientifically rich and possesses a number
of advantages: strong molecular absorption, wide bandwidth, very small sized
circuitry, improved spatial resolution, faster switching speed and compactness.
Applications in this frequency range include radio astronomy and atmospheric
observations, detection of DNA mutations, detection of viral/chemical agents,
high-resolution imaging, ultra-wideband and covert satellite communications,
electronic countermeasures, signature acquisition radars and electronic/optical
links in high-density integrated circuits. However, this region of the spectrum
is relatively technologically poor due mainly to the unavailability of low loss
and low cost transmission lines and other circuits such as antennas, filters and
local oscillator sources. Traditionally, the vast majority of THz components
utilize waveguide structures. Unfortunately, at frequencies above 1 THz
waveguides become so small that fabrication utilizing conventional machining and
electroforming techniques becomes extremely difficult, expensive and/or
impossible. As a result, the PI is currently technologically limited from the
production of low cost, low loss and reliable THz components above 1 THz that
can be integrated within semiconductor-based circuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this project, the PI proposes to further advance the state-of-the-art by
designing and studying (both theoretically and experimentally) novel low loss,
low cost and reliable Silicon micromachined THz circuits for communication,
radio astronomy and biological/chemical applications above 1 THz. This will be
achieved by utilizing a unique laser micromachining technique capable of
producing three-dimensional structures of any shape with an accuracy of 1-3 um,
as well as state-of-the art active devices (e.g. monolithic membrane diodes).
The investigation will include the development and characterization of the
following structures: (1) micromachined conical and corrugated horns, as well as
arrays of those radiating elements at 600 GHz, 1.2 THz, 2.4 THz and 4.8 THz; (2)
micromachined cavity based band-pass and band-stop filters with coupling irises
or slots at 600 GHz, 1.2 THz, 2.4 THz and 4.8 THz; (3) micromachined balanced
doublers at 1.2 THz and 2.4 THz with membrane diodes and corrugated horns at the
input/output; (4) the first ever doubler at 4.8 THz and (5) micromachined
doublers at 1.2 THz coherently combined with a magic-Tee for increased output
power. All of the above structures will be implemented in a "split-block"
configuration where the circuit is split along a center/symmetry line into two
components that are fabricated and then bonded together to form the entire
structure. Bonding and self-alignment issues and their implications on circuit
performance will be explored extensively in order to produce guidelines for
micromachined THz circuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Along with the proposed
research program, the PI is firmly committed to pursuing several related
educational goals. These will include: (1) the revitalization of the existing
microwave engineering curriculum at Georgia Tech; (2) the active involvement of
senior undergraduate students in the proposed research, as well as in the
creation of a website database for published papers on micromachined microwave
and THz circuits; (3) community outreach and mentoring activities to involve
students traditionally underrepresented in engineering and to attract high-
school students into engineering; (4) summer internship with the major
microwave/THz companies in the country and with national labs and (5) the
organization of seminars with related topics, presented by invited speakers from
academia and industry. The PI believes that the above educational activities
will benefit his research efforts in microwave/THz circuits; expose students to
a new world of circuits, interdisciplinary problems and opportunities; provide a
strong linkage between them and the industrial/research community; and attract
more underrepresented groups into engineering.&lt;br/&gt;