* 0133983
* CAREER: Fast, Predictive Modeling and Simulation in Computer Graphics: Theoretical and Computational Foundations
* CSE,CCF
* 01/15/2002,05/31/2005
* Mathieu Desbrun, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Rosenblum
* 05/31/2005
* USD 201,088.00

0133983&lt;br/&gt;Desbrun, Mathieu&lt;br/&gt;U of Southern
California&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary research objective in this project
is to develop new mathematical and computational tools for irregular sampling in
Computer Graphics. Digital geometry is rapidly emerging as a new ubiquitous
medium, complementing the previous electronic datatypes for sound, images and
movies. However, geometry requires to deal with irregular, non-uniform sampling
living on curved manifolds, a radically different problematic that calls for
novel, fundamental tools. Thus, this work is targeted towards a better
understanding and handling of irregular sampling. Building on our theoretical
results, we will develop new practical algorithms for fast and predictive
modeling and/or simulation. We will establish a unified foundation for
discrete/differential geometry, defining mimetic discretizations of the
continuous case.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide both theoretical
foundations in the nascent field of Computational Differential Geometry, and
robust, reliable tools that will advance the field of Computer Graphics. These
foundations and computational tools will facilitate and accelerate the expansion
of 3D models in our everyday life, be it in software products (ranging from
games to computer-aided segmentation of MRI data), on the web for downloads, or
even on small PDAs with 3D scanning abilities. The large number of immediate
applications demonstrates the significance of this
research:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Compression of 3D objects for optimal storage
and transmission;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Modeling of 3D objects, including
texturing, editing, smoothing;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Haptic rendering and
sculpting of virtual objects;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Realtime virtual surgery
training and planning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational aspect of the
project includes initiatives designed to incorporate the project advancements in
the graduate and undergraduate curriculum. The long-term impact of this work
will likely be seen in fields that have significant geometric and computational
components, such as biology, medicine, and geology.