* 0133538
* CAREER: Neurogenetic Analyses of the Corazonin Gene in Drosophila
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2008
* Jae Park, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing grant
* Aixa Alfonso
* 06/30/2008
* USD 637,066.00

Neuropeptides are compounds that are essential for regulating a wide array of
cellular physiological functions. Many have been isolated from insect species,
and the fruitfly, Drosophila, offers an exceptional model system in which to
study the functions of neuropeptides at the level of molecular genetics.
Corazonin (CRZ) is a neuropeptide that regulates cardiac function in some
insects but not others, and its gene (Crz) also has a potential but not yet
clear role in the biological clock of Drosophila. During development, a portion
of corazonin-producing neurons appears to undergo programmed cell death
(apoptosis). This project uses molecular biological and physiological approaches
to examine the gene expression patterns of the corazonin gene, to manipulate its
activities, to identify regulatory elements in the genetic promoter of Crz, and
to determine the molecular mechanisms underlying the cell death of neurons
expressing the corazonin gene. The experiments address the important question of
how these peptidergic neurons are regulated by genetic and external factors such
as hormones and photoperiod during development. Results will be extremely
important to understanding the little-studied genetic mechanisms of neuropeptide
function. The impact will extend to the fields of biological rhythms,
developmental neuroscience, and neuroendocrinology. As a CAREER grant, the
project will promote the career of an excellent young investigator, and will
have a substantial impact on undergraduate biology by training undergraduates in
modern techniques of molecular genetics and by developing new curricular
offerings in the rapidly growing field of molecular neuroscience.

