* 0133133
* CAREER: Characterization of Hybrid Resin Systems Based on Epoxy and Acrylate Functionalities
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2008
* Julie Jessop, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2008
* USD 374,995.00

Photopolymerization has experienced tremendous growth within the film, coating
and ink industries and is leading to new applications in the biomedical,
communications, automotive, and aerospace fields as well. The advantages of
using light to initiate polymerization rather than heat&lt;br/&gt;include
significant savings in energy costs and processing space and time, solvent-free
systems, and increased control over the production of initiating species. Of the
possible propagation mechanisms, those that are driven by free radical active
centers are the most prevalent; however, these polymerizations are plagued by
oxygen inhibition. This has increased interest in using cationic
photpolymerization schemes, although these suffer from inhibition by moisture
and slower cure rates. In order to address the limitations of these
polymerization mechanisms, hybrid&lt;br/&gt;resin systems have been designed
within the past few years to cure using a combination of cationic and free-
radical mechanisms under ultraviolet light. These systems exhibit lower
sensitivity to oxygen and moisture and offer advantages such as increased cure
speed and improved film-forming properties. To date, most studies have focused
on the development of&lt;br/&gt;these systems; thus, there is a definite need
for in-depth studies in order to create a fundamental base of knowledge that
allows the impact and utility of these systems to be
optimized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will investigate hybrid resin
systems based on formulations that contain both an epoxide moiety, which
undergoes cationic ring-opening photopolymerization, and an acrylate moiety,
which undergoes free radical photopolymerization. The goal of this research
is&lt;br/&gt;to characterize the fundamental kinetics of these hybrid resin
systems and to correlate the chemical distribution of the species with the
resulting physical properties. This goal will be accomplished
by:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Investigating the photopolymerization kinetics of
the hybrid &lt;br/&gt; resin systems.&lt;br/&gt;2. Determining the microscopic
composition of the hybrid polymers.&lt;br/&gt;3. Evaluating the mechanical
properties of the hybrid polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conversion and rate
data for these hybrid systems will be obtained using in-situ Raman experiments
and corroborated with photo-differential scanning calorimetry experiments. Raman
spectroscopy provides a highly sensitive means of following both cationic and
free-&lt;br/&gt;radical reactions in real time by monitoring the depletion of
the epoxide rings and the acrylate double bonds as they are consumed during the
polymerization. The physical nature and properties of the resulting polymers
will be investigated with Raman microscopy and dynamic&lt;br/&gt;mechanical
analysis. Results from this research will address important issues on the
interactions between the two polymerization systems and will provide guidance
that will aid in the design of these reaction systems for established radiation
cure industries, as well as provide opportunities for growth in new
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program will also have a direct impact
on the educational experience of students at various levels, including those in
junior and senior high school. The Engineering Awareness for Students and
Teachers program will be developed to introduce secondary students&lt;br/&gt;and
teachers from an urban school district to engineering concepts and college
preparation strategies through a summer program and classroom activities.
Economically disadvantaged students and female and minority students will be
recruited in order to increase the opportunities&lt;br/&gt;of these
underrepresented groups in engineering. This two-pronged approach seeks to
increase the impact of the program beyond the students who attend the summer
program by supporting their teachers, who will return to their classrooms with
materials to introduce all their students to&lt;br/&gt;the excitement and
challenges of engineering.&lt;br/&gt;