* 0133942
* PECASE:  A Unified Methodology for Variation Management and Reduction in Multistage Manufacturing Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2002,10/31/2005
* Jionghua (Judy) Jin, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 10/31/2005
* USD 387,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: PECASE: A Unified Methodology for Variation
Management and Reduction in Multistage Manufacturing
Processes&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Arizona&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
PECASE grant sponsors research and teaching efforts in developing a unified
methodology for variation management and reduction in Multistage Manufacturing
Processes (MMPs). A MMP generally involves multiple operations to produce a
product, which can be found in many industrial processes such as automotive body
assembly, machining lines, progressive stamping, and semiconductor
manufacturing. In a MMP, each operation adds inherent design variation when no
fault occurs, and special assignable variation when a fault occurs, to the
workpiece variation. The output workpiece of one operation is the input of the
next operation. The final product variation is an accumulation of variation from
all operations. Therefore, the characteristics of variation propagation is very
complex in MMPs, depending on both product and process design. The research
efforts in the project will develop methodologies to achieve on-target
production with minimum variance by addressing both design and manufacturing
concurrently. The research focus is to develop: (a) a math-based model to
describe the variation propagation in a MMP; (b) an integrated methodology for
variation management through design synthesis and optimization; and (c)
statistical methods driven by engineering models for quick root cause
identification and product defect prevention. In addition to research, new
curriculums and courses will be developed. Various collaborative efforts with
industry, international universities, and K-12 schools will be conducted in
research and education in the project.&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the project
results will enrich the science base and technologies in variation reduction and
process control methodologies for MMPs, which include: (a) analytical (rather
than empirical) modeling of MMP variation and its propagation; (b) synthesis
(rather than analysis) of product/process tolerance for optimal management of
inherent design variation to minimize their impact on final products; (c) real-
time root-cause identification (rather than change detection) for manufacturing
process control and continuous improvement; and (d) prognostics (rather than
defect inspection) for defect prevention throughout the manufacturing lifetime.
The developed unified methodology will generate significant economic impacts in
industrial sectors where MMPs are used.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was
originally funded as a CAREER award, and was converted to a Presidential Early
Career Award for Engineers and Scientists (PECASE) award in May 2004.&lt;br/&gt;