* 0133621
* PECASE: Research on Students' Mental Models, Learning and Transfer as a Guide to Application-Based Curriculum Development and Instruction in Physics
* EDU,DRL
* 03/15/2002,02/29/2008
* N. Sanjay Rebello, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 02/29/2008
* USD 436,796.00

&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: PECASE: Research on Students' Mental Models, Learning
and Transfer as a Guide to Application-Based Curriculum Development and
Instruction in Physics&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Kansas State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of student's mental models has
not been studied extensively in Physics education research. Initial evidence
indicating that mental models and their application are strongly context
dependent is particularly relevant to application-based curriculum. In this
PECASE project, I investigate students' mental models of real-world devices, how
these models evolve through instruction, and whether they transfer across
contexts. Next, I utilize my research results to develop application-based
curriculum, organized into versatile weeklong instructional modules that are
pilot-tested in introductory classes that I teach. I assess the impact of the
model development on the students, as well as issues of transfer of learning
from one context to another. As a spin-off from this investigation, I develop
instruments that are transferable to other research on student mental model
development. This research is also integrated into a graduate level course that
I team-teach. The course focuses on current Trends and issues in physics
education research. Students in this course are involved in my research through
a capstone project in this course. Two experienced faculty members facilitate my
professional development through the project. A pioneer in physics education and
head of the department mentors my growth as a researcher and teacher in the
graduate course. An award-winning teacher at the introductory undergraduate
level mentors my pilot testing of the application-based curricula in the
introductory courses that I teach. Overall this project builds a strong
foundation for a lifetime of contributions to research and education in physics
pedagogy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was originally funded as a CAREER
award, and was converted to a Presidential Early Career Award for Engineers and
Scientists (PECASE) award in May 2004.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;