* 0133826
* PECASE: Mechanistic Studies on Cyclopropane Fatty Acid Synthase
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2002,02/29/2008
* Squire Booker, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 02/29/2008
* USD 557,295.00

&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: PECASE: Mechanistic Studies on Cyclopropane Fatty
Acid Synthase&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Pennsylvania State Univ University
Park&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;S-adenosyl-L-methionine (AdoMet) is one of the most
versatile cellular metabolites used in enzymatic catalysis. Until relatively
recently, it has been appreciated primarily as a cellular methylating agent,
since it is the primary source of methyl groups for a broad spectrum of
biological compounds, including DNA, RNA, proteins, lipids, carbohydrates, and a
diverse array of small molecules. AdoMet is also involved in a variety of other
interesting transformations. In one class of enzymes, it functions in concert
with iron-sulfur clusters to generate enzyme-bound radicals that are
intermediates in certain enzymatic reactions. In the project described herein,
it functions as a donor of a methylene group rather than a methyl group, in a
fascinating reaction catalyzed by the enzyme cyclopropane fatty acid synthase
from Escherichia coli. The second substrate is an isolated and unactivated cis
olefin present in the unsaturated fatty acid acyl chains of phospholipids. In
contrast to methyl transfer, there is very little precedent in the biochemical
literature for methylene transfer from AdoMet. All polar mechanisms for the
reaction would be expected to involve intermediates that are very high in
energy. In addition, since most cellular phospholipids are constituents of
phospholipid bilayers, wherein their fatty acid chains are sequestered from the
aqueous milieu, it is unclear how this enzyme catalyzes a reaction between two
substrates of opposing solubilities. The goal of this project is to address
these intriguing questions using a variety of kinetic, mechanistic, and physical
techniques, which if successful, will contribute significantly to the general
understanding of enzyme reaction mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
was originally funded as a CAREER award, and was converted to a Presidential
Early Career Award for Engineers and Scientists (PECASE) award in May
2004.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;