* 0133233
* CAREER: Museum-based Approaches to Ecology and Evolution of Aquatic Systems: An Integrated Research and Educational Program
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2008
* Thomas Turner, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 04/30/2008
* USD 530,798.00

Abstract

This project will create a research, education, and training program in the
Museum of Southwestern Biology (MSB) at the University of New Mexico.
Participating graduate and undergraduate students will gain a fundamental
understanding of how natural history collections acquire, document, and database
specimens, to provide an historical record of our rich natural heritage.
Students will then use this knowledge and a collection of museum specimens held
in the Division of Fishes that spans a 65-year history in two research
objectives aimed at identifying the underlying causes of ecological change in
the fish fauna of the imperiled Rio Grande aquatic ecosystem. First, stable
isotope methodology will be used to compare present-day and museum-preserved
fish specimens, to determine whether the fish community functioned differently
in the past (prior to human population growth and large-scale water diversion)
than at present. This research is designed to identify ecosystem-wide events
that may have altered fish community dynamics in the Rio Grande. Second,
abundance patterns of certain fish species will be evaluated using the
collection and compared to current estimates of genetic diversity to ascertain
whether reduced abundance has changed genetic diversity in ways that hamper
species recovery. Both research efforts are focused on important issues for
conservation and restoration of the Rio Grande.

Natural history collections are becoming increasingly important for documenting
and understanding the changes in biodiversity on the planet because they
preserve an historical record of organismal diversity. Moreover, natural history
collections have been used to address important issues in human health such as
the origins and emergence of Hantavirus in the desert southwest. There exists,
however, a fundamental gap between undergraduate and graduate training and the
enormous resources that natural history collections can offer for solving
important problems. The goal of this project is to close that gap by
familiarizing graduate and undergraduate students with the kinds of information
available in natural history museums, and to show them how this information can
be brought to bear on critical environmental problems using a multidisciplinary
research approach. The intended result is to produce scientists that can
capitalize on the vast resources offered by natural history museums in novel
ways to solve environmental problems facing us in the 21st century.

