* 0133399
* Transcriptional Repression by Histone Amino Termini in Yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Randall Morse, Health Research Incorporated/New York State Department of Health
* Continuing Grant
* Ming Lei
* 02/28/2006
* USD 439,025.00

The long term goals of this project are to understand the extent to which the
histone amino termini, especially that of histone H3, contribute to
transcriptional repression in vivo, and to determine the mechanisms by which
they do so. Eukaryotic DNA is packaged into chromatin, and the fundamental unit
of chromatin, the nucleosome, consists of about 146 base pairs of DNA wrapped
around a core of histone proteins. Somewhat surprisingly, modification of the
unstructured amino termini of the histones, which are not an essential
structural component of the nucleosome, has turned out to be a widely used means
of gene regulation. Numerous studies have implicated transcriptional regulation
via modifications of the histone amino termini in diverse cellular processes,
including cell cycle control, hormone response, and development. In spite of
this progress, little is known of the mechanisms by which the histone amino
termini influence transcriptional regulation. The principal investigator has
discovered two examples in which the histone H3 amino terminus is critical for
transcriptional repression in yeast. In the first example, the H3 amino terminus
prevents activation by the CHA4 activator at the CHA1 promoter in the absence of
inducer. In the second example, the INO1 gene is strongly derepressed in the
absence of the H3 amino terminus, although little is known about the mechanism
at present. The principal investigator has also found, using micorarray
technology, that the H3 amino terminus exerts a broad, genome-wide repressive
effect on gene expression. These findings serve as a basis to determine specific
mechanisms for repression by the H3 amino terminus. In addition, experiments
will be done to examine the contribution of the amino termini of histones H3 and
H4 as targets in repression mediated by the histone deacetylase
RPD3.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DNA is the master controller and information
reservoir for all of life. In non-bacterial cells, DNA is bound to histone
proteins in chromatin. These proteins help the DNA fit inside the cell and
participate in regulation of many processes that use DNA, including the
transcription of DNA into RNA-the "readout" of the information in DNA. Studies
by the principal investigator, using baker's yeast, are aimed at understanding
how specific parts of the histone proteins prevent particular genes from being
transcribed when they are not supposed to be. Because the basic mechanisms of
transcription and components of chromatin are very similar in yeast and higher
organisms, these findings will shed new light on transcriptional regulation in
all non-bacterial organisms.