* 0133806
* CAREER: Exposure-Resilient Cryptography
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2008
* Yevgeniy Dodis, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 12/31/2008
* USD 330,000.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Exposure-Resilient Cryptography concerns the important
problem of key&lt;br/&gt;exposure and general information leakage. Exposure of
such&lt;br/&gt;information poses one of the most serious and common threats
to&lt;br/&gt;employing cryptography in real life. For example,
cryptographic&lt;br/&gt;computations (decryption, signature generation, etc.)
are often&lt;br/&gt;performed on a relatively insecure device (e.g., a mobile
device or an&lt;br/&gt;Internet-connected host) which cannot be trusted to
maintain secrecy&lt;br/&gt;of the private key. Thus, the goal of Exposure-
Resilient Cryptography&lt;br/&gt;is to design solutions that will limit (or even
completely eliminate)&lt;br/&gt;the negative consequences of such an exposure in
various cryptographic&lt;br/&gt;scenarios. In particular, this research
concentrates on the design of&lt;br/&gt;various key evolving schemes and the
problem of partial key exposure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The paradigm of secret key
evolution over time invloves updating one's&lt;br/&gt;secret key such that key
leakage at given period(s) compromises the&lt;br/&gt;security of other periods
to the minimal extent possible. The&lt;br/&gt;investigators examine two such
models. Forward-secure schemes update&lt;br/&gt;secret key locally, and seek to
protect the security of all the past&lt;br/&gt;periods when the current key is
exposed. In contrast,&lt;br/&gt;bidirectionally-secure schemes use secure key
updates, but protect&lt;br/&gt;all non-exposed periods: both in the past and in
the future. In&lt;br/&gt;either model, the public information (e.g., public
keys) are not&lt;br/&gt;affected by the secret key evolution. The problem of
partial key&lt;br/&gt;exposure concerns the scenario where most but not all
secret&lt;br/&gt;information has been leaked. The main question studied in this
setting&lt;br/&gt;is how can valuable secret information be stored or
represented in&lt;br/&gt;such a way that almost complete exposure of its
representation still&lt;br/&gt;guarantees the secrecy of the actual, embedded
secret?&lt;br/&gt;