* 0133991
* CAREER: Automatic Generation of Software Configuration Management Repositories
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Emmet Whitehead, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2007
* USD 300,000.00

CCR-0133991&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: Automatic Generation of Software Configuration
Management Repositories&lt;br/&gt;Emmet James
Whitehead&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Twenty-five years of research and development on
Configuration Management&lt;br/&gt;(CM) systems has bequeathed a rich legacy of
data models, system&lt;br/&gt;architectures, and implementation approaches. This
existing knowledge about&lt;br/&gt;CM systems is analyzed to distill out the key
lessons, and then leveraged&lt;br/&gt;for advanced research on CM. The research
advances the maturity of CM&lt;br/&gt;knowledge by performing a comprehensive
domain analysis of CM systems, and&lt;br/&gt;by developing specification
languages and technology to permit automatic&lt;br/&gt;generation of CM
repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A domain model permits the characterization
of an existing CM system as a&lt;br/&gt;point in a multidimensional design
tradeoff space. This research describes&lt;br/&gt;key design spaces in
sufficient detail to permit the specification of a&lt;br/&gt;single point in
design tradeoff space. This specification can be fed to a&lt;br/&gt;generator
that automatically generates a matching CM system. Research&lt;br/&gt;challenges
include the creation of a repository specification language;
a&lt;br/&gt;language for creating detailed CM system specifications that
identify&lt;br/&gt;specific design choices, and resolve design tradeoffs; and
the development&lt;br/&gt;of generator technology that automatically creates
source code to implement&lt;br/&gt;a given repository specification. This auto-
generation technology provides a&lt;br/&gt;valuable tool for exploring advanced
data models for CM systems.