* 0133791
* CAREER: Algorithmic Methods for Large Scale Genome Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2003
* S. Cenk Sahinalp, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 12/31/2003
* USD 138,142.00

Abstract: With the virtual completion of the human DNA sequence research
attention has shifted to issues including the resolution of the genetic
composition, evolutionary history, and health impact of portions of the human
genome which have proven difficult to sequence due to their duplicative and
dynamic nature. The proposed research aims to address these problems through the
development of algorithms and software tools for discovery, resolution and
evolutionary analysis of genomic duplications and other genome-wide segmental
rearrangements. The ultimate goal is to help understand mechanisms for and the
sources of genetic disposition to genome-wide structural rearrangements. Some of
these structural rearrangements are known to cause dosage imbalance of
developmentally important genes during recombination events; as a result,
genomic diseases, including several birth defects as well as a number of adult
diseases occur at a rate of $\~1$ in every $1000$ births. The premise of this
research is that understanding the mechanisms under such segmental
rearrangements may help improve methods for diagnosis, treatment and prevention
of these genetic disorders.

The basic research components of the proposal are (1) identification of all
chromosomal segments that are duplicated along the genome, (2) understanding the
complex evolutionary relationships between these interesting segments through
novel phylogenetic analysis algorithms for a single genome sequence, and (3)
identification of the duplication order via known or derived properties of
duplication mechanisms, and (4) development of similarity measures between
genome sequences that involve not only point mutations but structural
rearrangements, particularly duplications. The short-term education goal of the
proposal is to establish the algorithmic and the fundamental software
development component of an interdisciplinary bioinformatics program at CWRU,
that will provide means of awarding M.S. and Ph.D. degrees within existing
departmental degree-granting programs. The long-term goal is to establish a
free-standing graduate program in computational genomics, offering a wide-range
of introductory and advanced level courses in bioinformatics. To this end the
investigator has developed and taught a new introductory graduate course on
algorithmic issues in bioinformatics, with the involvement of students from both
the Computer Science program and the School of Medicine at CWRU. Funds from this
proposal will be used to enhance this activity through the development of a new
advanced level graduate course in computational genomics for in-depth training
on individualized research topics, as well as an intensive summer research and
training program for graduate and undergraduate students.