* 0133184
* Physiological Determinants of Vertical Zonation in Congeneric Marine Invertebrates:  Comparative Analysis of Species Replacement Along the Subtidal to Intertidal Gradient
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2007
* George Somero, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 02/28/2007
* USD 581,000.00

A question of great interest to ecologists and evolutionary biologists is, "Why
do species occur in certain habitats and not in others?" One basis for governing
the distributions of species is their tolerance of physical factors in the
environment, notably ambient temperature. This fact is illustrated especially
clearly in rocky intertidal habitats: In the gradient from the subtidal region
to the intertidal zone, thermal conditions vary sharply, as does the set of
species found along this transect. It is common for one species of a genus to be
replaced by a closely related species of the same genus (a congener). The
studies supported by this proposal examine the physiological, biochemical and
molecular differences among congeners from different vertical sites in an effort
to identify adaptive differences that help to explain variation in distribution
patterns. The systems to be studied include: (i) the heat-shock response, a
rescue system for repairing heat-damaged proteins; (ii) heart function, which is
markedly sensitive to temperature; (iii) membrane integrity, which is essential
for many physiological processes, and (iv) nerve function, which may be of
importance in setting thermal tolerance limits. Techniques to be used include a
wide variety of molecular methods (sequencing of genes and analysis of gene
expression patterns), biochemical approaches (measurement of levels of heat-
damaged proteins) and physiological analyses (rates of heart function and
generation of nerve signals). Study species include snails of the genus Tegula
and porcelain crabs (genus Petrolisthes). Both sets of congeners occur over wide
vertical and latitudinal ranges and thus are excellent study systems for
elucidating mechanisms of adaptation to temperature. The study of congeners
adapted to different temperatures allows a particularly clear picture to be
developed of the role of adaptive change in establishing environmental optima
and tolerance limits. By identifying the underlying mechanisms that establish
thermal optima and limits, the effects of predicted global warming could be
understood in a more definitive manner.