* 0133921
* Purchasing Power Parity
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* David Papell, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 05/31/2006
* USD 247,415.00

Purchasing Power Parity &lt;br/&gt;Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) is one of the
most enduring topics in international economics, and the question of whether PPP
holds both over long horizons and during the post-Bretton-Woods system of
&lt;br/&gt;flexible nominal exchange rates has been extensively analyzed. All
variants of PPP postulate that the real 1 exchange rate reverts to a constant
mean. Evidence ofPPP can be provided by tests of a unit root in the ! real
exchange rate. If the unit root null hypothesis can be rejected in favor of a
level stationary &lt;br/&gt;alternative, then there is mean reversion and,
therefore, PPP. Most of the existent work on purchasing power parity focuses on
the narrow question of whether or not unit roots in real exchange rates can be
&lt;br/&gt;rejected. The purpose of this proposal is to go beyond the narrow
statistical focus to consider what can be learned about the behavior of real
exchange rates from the results of unit root tests. &lt;br/&gt;Recent work has
begun to appear which reports strong rejections of unit roots in real exchange
&lt;br/&gt;rates for panels with quarterly data. The first part of the proposal
investigates whether these results really &lt;br/&gt;provide evidence of
purchasing power parity. Using panel methods, unit roots in post-1973 real
exchange rates with the U.S. dollar as the numeraire currency can only be
consistently rejected if the sample &lt;br/&gt;extends to 1997 or beyond. This
leads to the question of what, if any, data generating processes for real
exchange rates are consistent with both the recent rejections of unit roots with
data extending through 1997 and the earlier failures to reject unit roots with
shorter spans of data. Preliminary work indicates &lt;br/&gt;that the evidence
is not consistent with real exchange rates being a stationary autoregressive
process with high persistence, a combination of a stationary and a unit root
process, or a nonlinear mean reverting &lt;br/&gt;process. The evidence is more
consistent with a process of reversion to PPP restricted structural change.
&lt;br/&gt;The second part of the proposal focuses on the speed of mean
reversion. The half-lives ofPPP deviations, the expected number of years for a
disturbance to the real exchange rate to decay by 50 &lt;br/&gt;percent, are
generally calculated to be between three and five years with univariate methods.
The use of median unbiased estimation methods with long-horizon and post-1973
data, however, shows that these estimates are biased downwards. More strikingly,
the confidence intervals of the half-lives, especially with the post-l 973 data,
are so wide as to make the point estimates virtually uninformative. This work
will be extended in two directions. First, applying median unbiased estimation
techniques to panel &lt;br/&gt;methods, the half-lives ofPPP deviations from
panel unit root tests can be investigated. Preliminary &lt;br/&gt;results
indicate that, while (as with the univariate tests) the point estimates are
biased downwards, the &lt;br/&gt;confidence intervals from the median unbiased
estimates (in contrast with the univariate case) are tight enough to be
informative. Second, median unbiased estimation techniques can be applied to a
recently developed univariate unit root test that has more power than the
conventional tests. This creates the potential for tighter confidence intervals
of the estimated half-lives. &lt;br/&gt;The third part of the proposal focuses
on the behavior of long-horizon and post- World War II real exchange rates.
Using long spans of data and sufficiently powerful techniques, unit roots can be
rejected &lt;br/&gt;in favor of level stationarity (PPP) for most real exchange
rates. An obvious econometric point, however, is that rejection of a null
hypothesis in favor of a particular alternative hypothesis does not necessarily
&lt;br/&gt;mean that the alternative is correct. In this case, there are other
alternative hypotheses, including regime- wise level stationarity and regime-
wise trend stationarity (both with and without PPP restrictions), that
&lt;br/&gt;may provide better characterizations of real exchange rates. For
long-horizon data, multiple level changes appear to be the most promising
hypothesis. For post-World War II data, a combination of level changes (to
account for the devaluations and revaluations at the end of the Bretton Woods
period) plus slope &lt;br/&gt;changes (to account for the appreciation and
depreciation of the dollar in the 1980s) appears to be most promising. The
proposed research first involves conducting unit root tests with different
alternative &lt;br/&gt;hypotheses. Depending on the results of these tests,
simulation evidence can help uncover which data generating processes are most
congruent with the results. &lt;br/&gt;