* 0133997
* CAREER:The Evaluation and Design of a Scalable, High Performance and Energy Efficient Microprocessor Architecture
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2007
* Glenn Reinman, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Chitaranjan Das
* 12/31/2007
* USD 361,544.00

Speculative execution has been widely used in computer architecture research in
the pursuit of higher levels of instruction level parallelism. However, recent
studies have shown that this technique can significantly impact the scalability
of the processor pipeline. This research will investigate a number of
speculative techniques with respect to performance, scalability, energy
efficiency, area costs, and complexity; eventually leading to a novel, scalable
architecture to provide high performance at future technology sizes. Such an
architecture will minimize the amount of logic on the critical timing path of
the processor, relying on small speculative structures to reduce the cycle time
of the processor. Off the critical path, a variety of larger speculative
structures provide a backing store to the critical path.

Some of the techniques to be examined in this research include branch
prediction, value and address prediction, data prefetching, early register
release and late register allocation, and multiple clustered functional units.
Many of these techniques require large and often complex predictors that can
impact the cycle time and power density of a processor. This research
investigates some techniques to reduce the access time and size of these
structures, while still providing the accuracy to avoid costly speculative
recovery procedures.