* 0133484
* CAREER:  Lateral Phase Separation of Rafts and Liquid Domains in Lipid Systems
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2002,02/29/2008
* Sarah Keller, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/29/2008
* USD 657,000.00

This CAREER award supports research in the characterization of "raft" domains in
lipid monolayers and bilayers. Rafts are regions in cell membranes in which
particular lipids and proteins are concentrated, and can play an important role
in biological functions such as signaling. This research will test a central
hypothesis that the phase behavior of raft domains in lipid vesicles can be
predicted from the phase behavior of the same lipids in monolayers. Specific
goals of this research include using fluorescence microscopy and 2-photon
microscopy to identify raft domains in giant unilamellar vesicles using lipids
known to form liquid ordered domains in monolayers. In addition, the research
will test whether changing symmetry from a monolayer to a bilayer alters domain
formation. This will be evaluated by searching for raft domains in monolayers
deposited on a surface patterned with silanes or alkane-thiols. Long-term goals
include assessing whether the presence of rafts alters the activity of membrane
proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education efforts are focussed primarily on
improving mathematical literacy of chemistry and biochemistry students. The
importance of mathematics will be advertised to these students early in their
college careers. A mathematics self-tutorial will be developed to clarify areas
in which students need help. Resultant data will be used to guide curriculum
changes. Study groups and e-mail threads will be instituted to help students
learn from each other. Effort will also be directed to increasing departmental
involvement of graduate students through a student-run colloquium series, and
training students in the laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;