* 0133635
* CAREER: Linear Precoding Methods for High Bit Rate Wireless Transmission
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2002,12/31/2008
* Anna Scaglione, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 12/31/2008
* USD 355,968.00

Scaglione, Anna&lt;br/&gt;Cornell
U&lt;br/&gt;0133635&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Linear precoding methods for high bit
rate wireless&lt;br/&gt;transmission&lt;br/&gt; over time-varying broadband
channels"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is predictable that in the near future
computing and multimedia applications will be supported by unique mobile devices
that will be capable of transmitting and receiving various type of information
(images, audio, data). These devices will use a unique interface based on the
Internet, a common transfer protocol based&lt;br/&gt;on IP and will be supported
by ubiquitous wireless coverage. However, the communication technology used
today is inadequate to support this progress without generating a spiraling
demand for bandwidth. As bandwidth becomes a low-margin commodity, certain
technological barriers need to be surpassed starting from the physical layer.
Using the modulation paradigm that we refer to as "linear precoding" this
project researches designs that allow high bit rate packet transmission over
broadband frequency selective&lt;br/&gt;time-varying channels. The block
transmission model in the linear precoding framework provides a very general
setting to determine the optimal or most cost-effective multiple access
technique for packet transmission. The outreach of this project is the
development of physical layer solutions for packet transmission that: 1)
minimize the overhead bandwidth dedicated to training, error correction coding
and precoding jointly; 2) adapt to time-varying channels ; 3) can incorporate an
arbitrary number of&lt;br/&gt;transmit and receive antennas; 4) can support
multiple access packet transmission, allowing different quality of service
requirements in terms of rate, decoding delay and complexity. The mathematical
framework of linear precoding is not only an useful tool for research but also
for teaching, since it allows a unified description of the principles of
wideband and high bit rate transmission, including schemes such as antenna
diversity, spread spectrum and multicarrier transmissions as special
cases.&lt;br/&gt;