* 0133985
* CAREER: Highly-Optimized Provably-Secure Cryptography
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2002,08/31/2002
* John Black, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* carl landwehr
* 08/31/2002
* USD 194,992.00

While some researchers have aimed at efficiency, they have often developed
algorithms without proving them secure. Conversely, researchers focussed on
provable security have often produced impractical algorithms. Providing both
performance and provable security entails great effort in each domain, often
entailing a strange marriage of mathematics with implementation considerations.
It is not unusual for researchers to be seeking a generator of a random cyclic
group while at the same time worrying about whether finding one will cost too
many machine cycles. This research effort aims to address these problems by
developing cryptographic algorithms that are vigorously optimized, yet retain
proven security. Moreover, for each algorithm a carefully-tested implementation
will be provided, along with a specification for porting to other platforms.
Finally, the most promising algorithms will be forwarded to standards activities
in order to make them widely available. The planned results are to provide the
user community with fast, secure algorithms with freely-available reference
code; to encourage other researchers to expend efforts in these directions when
publishing new protocols, and to introduce students to the cross-disciplinary
nature of this research, which blends pure mathematics with architectural
considerations.