* 0133926
* CAREER:  Exploring Particle Size Dependent Surface Chemistry on Supported Metal Nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2008
* Donna Chen, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 04/30/2008
* USD 454,825.00

This Career Award, provided by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program,
supports the research and educational program of Professor Donna Chen of the
University of South Carolina at Columbia. Her research addresses the chemistry
of metal on oxide surfaces at the atomic level. Using thermal desorption
spectroscopy in combination with X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and scanning
tunneling microscopy, the growth and surface chemistry of Ag and Pt
nanoparticles deposited on titanium dioxide single crystal surfaces are being
examined. The oxidation of ethylene to ethylene oxide, and the reduction of NO
with CO will be used as probe reactions to examine the detailed surface
chemistry of these metal on oxide systems. This approach will be extended to
bimetallic nanoparticles as well. The integration of undergraduate and graduate
research participants in this research program forms the focus of the
educational plan in this Career Award. Interactive learning using web based
tutorials and peer study groups are being implemented in the undergraduate
curriculum, and the integration of research problem solving approaches in the
courses of the P.I. is being implemented. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The application
of modern ultra-high vacuum surface science tools to the microscopic
understanding of the surface chemistry of metallic nanoparticles on oxide
surfaces forms the focus of this Career Award. The Analytical and Surface
Chemistry Program supports the research and educational activities of Professor
Donna Chen at the University of South Carolina. Scanning tunneling microscopy
and electron spectroscopy are the major tools applied to the interactions of Ag
and Pt particles with oxide surfaces. Integrating undergraduate and graduate
student research with the curriculum, and the use of interactive learning
methods form the focus of the educational aspects of this Career Award.