* 0133554
* CAREER: Signal Processing Tools for Dynamic Geometry
* CSE,CCF
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2007
* Igor Guskov, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Robert B Grafton
* 12/31/2007
* USD 315,714.00

0133554&lt;br/&gt;Guskov, Igor&lt;br/&gt;U of MIchigan-Ann
Arbor&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Medical imaging systems and computational modeling of
physical processes produce vast amounts of surface data for analysis and
visualization purposes. Often such data are time-dependent and describe surfaces
that evolve in time, for example, a developing interface between two fluids or
moving walls of the heart ventricles. This project will develop processing tools
for such dynamic surface data. In particular, massively redundant and noisy raw
data coming from applications will be converted into compact form useful for
extensive interactive manipulation, especially within remote collaboration
environments. The developed technology will also be useful for applications in
tele-presence and animation. This research effort will be integrated with
educational initiatives via student involvement in research projects,
development of new curriculum in Digital Geometry Processing, and collaboration
with external researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this project will
be on converting raw application data into hierarchical surface representations
that are temporally coherent and spatially (semi-)regular, and further
processing and compression of the constructed data representations.
Specifically, a sequence of irregular meshes produced by a frame-by-frame
marching cubes extraction of isosurfaces from a time-dependent volumetric field
is an example of geometric data that cannot be efficiently processed without
first establishing temporal coherence and spatial regularity of the surface
sampling. The development of a fully automated compression system for dynamic
geometry in this scenario will include the following components: constrained
parameterization method for establishing temporal coherence of surface sampling,
patch layout generation and maintenance routine to deal with possible topology
changes, efficient topological event detection procedure, predictive coding of
dynamic geometry streams, geometric and topological denoising of raw application
data, and possible integration of the regular mesh extraction into the
simulation (or shape acquisition) environment. The developed technology will
also be useful in the areas of scientific visualization and computer aided
geometric design.&lt;br/&gt;