* 0133795
* Toward a Unifying Theory of Social Evolution:  Testing Competing Models of Reproductive Skew in an Avian Cooperative Breeder
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2006
* Stephen Emlen, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing grant
* Michael D. Beecher
* 01/31/2006
* USD 409,609.00



TOWARD A UNIFYING THEORY OF SOCIAL EVOLUTION: TESTING COMPETING MODELS OF
REPRODUCTIVE SKEW IN AN AVIAN COOPERATIVE BREEDER.

STEPHEN T. EMLEN

PROJECT SUMMARY (IN LAY TERMS)

The family (defined as a multi-generation assemblage of genetic relatives) is
among the least understood of all forms of social organization. Yet, because it
is the basic social organization of our own species, it is arguably the most
important for us to understand. Only about 3% of birds and mammals live in
family-based societies, and only a few of these have been studied in detail.

Families come in various sizes and forms. The most common form in both birds and
mammals is the nuclear family, formed when grown young remain with their
parents, but only the parents reproduce. Most so-called 'cooperative breeders'
fit this category, with grown sons and daughters remaining as helpers at the
nest or den of their parents. Less common, but of greater interest, is the
extended family, formed when reproduction is shared among many family members.
When multiple pairs within a single family breed, the result is a mixture not
only of parents and offspring, but also of grandparents, uncles and aunts,
nieces and nephews, and cousins as well as unrelated in-laws. Until very
recently, we humans lived predominantly in groups comprised of such extended
family units.

The difference between extended and nuclear families is one of shared versus
monopolized breeding. A rapidly growing number of evolutionary models, known
collectively as reproductive skew theory, attempt to explain the variability of
reproductive suppression found in nature. Skew models incorporate a small number
of factors (two ecological, one genetic, and one social) to predict 1) when
stable family groups will form, 2) what their stable size will be, and 3) how
reproduction will be shared among family members.

Reproductive skew they is generating considerable interest among behavioral
ecologists and evolutionary biologists because it links many major features of
animal societies to their ecological, genetic, and social underpinnings. Because
of this breadth, some workers believe that skew theory may provide a unifying
framework for viewing much of social evolution. However, the development of the
theory has far outpaced the testing of its assumptions and predictions with real
animals in the field. There is an urgent need for detailed observational and
experimental studies of skew theory on birds and mammals that live in family-
based societies.

The proposed research will provide such a test. The study species is the Grey
capped social weaver (Pseudonigrita arnaudi), a common inhabitant of the
whistling thorn savanna of East Africa. This species was chosen because it lives
in both extended and nuclear family units, background knowledge of its behavior
and ecology is already well-known, and it possesses many features that make it
logistically easy to collect data and perform experiments. A study population of
over 50 family units has been captured and the birds individually marked.
Molecular markers (microsatellite loci) have been developed that will allow
genetic determination of family structures (e.g. who is the father, or aunt, of
whom). The research program will help to train numerous Kenyan professionals in
modern methods of behavioral research. It will also combine the talents of
several senior investigators whose expertise ranges from field studies of
behavior, to molecular studies of social organization, to theoretical modeling
of social evolution. As such, it constitutes one of the first integrated tests
of the applicability of recent skew models to a complex vertebrate society.

The results should enhance our understanding of 1) the factors that favor the
evolution of family groups, 2) the reasons why extended families develop when
they do, and 3) the behaviors that family members use in their cooperative and
competitive interactions with one another (so-called 'family dynamics'). This,
in turn, should provide insights into the conditions that favored the evolution
and maintenance of extended family groupings in our own species as well.

