* 0133265
* Analysis of Microbial Communities Using a DNA Array Approach
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2006
* S. James Press, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Manfred D. Zorn
* 02/28/2006
* USD 590,757.00

Microorganisms are crucial components of ecosystems and human civilization. They
play prominent roles in processes such as the formation and maintenance of soil,
and the detoxification of environmental pollutants. Microorganisms also possess
an immeasurable store of useful items ranging from enzymes for food processing
to pharmaceuticals. Until recently, our understanding of this group of organisms
has been limited by the small percentage of microorganisms that can be
identified through traditional methods. Such methods involve growing the
organisms in the laboratory. In the 1980s, new approaches were developed that
allow organisms to be identified without the need to grow them in the lab. Such
approaches identify microorganisms through the analysis of specific genes
(ribosomal RNA genes). This development was a major breakthrough, which has led
to the identification of thousands of novel organisms. Yet, despite this
advance, current strategies to analyze these genes are either cost prohibitive
or unable to generate more than superficial depictions of the microorganisms
inhabiting most environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal presents three
objectives that address this technological deficit. First, the development of an
experimental approach that allows thorough analysis of the microorganisms
inhabiting any environment is planned. This will be accomplished through the use
of new array-based technologies. Second, a public database that allows
investigators to utilize the tools that will be created from this project will
be developed. And finally, the project provides training for undergraduate,
graduate and postgraduate students in microbial community analysis and
bioinformatics. Overall, this proposal addresses the goals of the NSF Biological
Databases and Informatics program by developing a public database that will
facilitate thorough analysis of microbial communities and by disseminating the
gained knowledge through interactive tutorials and a workshop. This work will
fundamentally transform investigations into microbial community composition by
making thorough examinations possible for the first time. This will lead to a
greater understanding of how microorganisms function, which, in turn, will lead
to more effective strategies to manage agriculture, maintain a clean
environment, and advance biotechnology. The training component of this project
will foster collaborations between computer scientists, statisticians, and
biologists, which will produce the multidisciplinary researchers needed for this
new era. &lt;br/&gt;