* 0133559
* CAREER: Study of the Mechanical Properties of Thin Metal Films and Shape Memory Alloy Coatings
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Joost Vlassak, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 12/31/2006
* USD 397,557.00

This project aims at greater understanding of deformation and fracture
mechanisms of thin films. It has been known that these mechanisms interact with
microstructural features such as grain size, grain orientation, interfaces and
surfaces, and dislocation substructure albeit the nature of these interactions
is not well established. The project investigates the stress-strain behavior of
freestanding films using bulge test technique while films on substrates will be
studied using the substrate curvature method. Another goal of the project is to
investigate the precipitation hardening and the shape memory effects in Ni-Ti
thin films. Third objective of the project is to develop micromechanical
techniques for measuring thin film fracture toughness. These techniques are used
to investigate sub-critical crack growth under cyclical loading conditions and
to determine how factors like film thickness, chemical environment, and process
conditions affect the fracture toughness of thin metal and alloy films. A new
undergraduate Introductory Materials Science course along with a special topics
course will serve as the main vehicles for some of the educational
activities.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This research develops new and improved
understanding of the deformation mechanisms that operate in thin films,
resulting in better models for thin film mechanical behavior that will have an
impact on many engineering applications where thin films are used, such as
integrated circuits, MEMS devices, and wear resistant coatings. The fracture
toughness and fatigue resistance of thin films are applicable from reliability
concerns for MEMS devices in non-hermetic packaging that is more cost-effective
than traditional hermetic packaging.&lt;br/&gt;