* 0133666
* CAREER: Integrated Stratigraphic and Hydrogeologic Aquifer Analysis:  Toward Improved Multi-scale Characterization of Alluvial Aquifer Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Gary Weissmann, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 04/30/2006
* USD 362,603.00

0133666&lt;br/&gt;Weissmann&lt;br/&gt;Accurate modeling and prediction of
contaminant transport and fate in groundwater systems requires that we produce
detailed aquifer characterizations. Recently, the PI and colleagues developed a
novel sequence stratigraphic approach to characterizing hydrofacies
distributions for use in groundwater models on a stream-dominated alluvial fan
system, thus integrating geological and hydrological assessment. Several
questions resulted from this work that guides this proposed research project,
including: 1) do sequences and systems tracts exist in other alluvial fan
systems; 2) do sequences, bounded by clay-rich mature paleosols,
compartmentalize groundwater flow into hydrostratigraphic units; and 3) can
sequence stratigraphy provide a framework for improved groundwater modeling on
other alluvial fan systems. &lt;br/&gt;Through sedimentologic, paleopedologic,
and hydrogeologic analysis at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL),
a site with extensive core, geophysical well log, and 3D hydrologic test data,
we intend to test hypotheses formed from these questions. Preliminary work at
the LLNL site indicates that mature paleosols may bound hydrostratigraphic
units, thus indicating that paleosol bounded sequences exist and that sequence
geometry may strongly influence aquifer hydrodynamics. Through this work, we
will (1) describe about 6000 meters of previously collected core, (2) assess
paleosol morphology and chemistry, (3) model the stratigraphy, multi-scale
facies distributions, groundwater flow, and contaminant transport within this
complex aquifer system, and (4) assess data value to evaluate minimum data
requirements for future work in similar geologic settings. These models will be
tested against aquifer test and contaminant concentration data. A major
objective of this work is to involve many student researchers in this project,
thus several students will be directly involved in daily research activities.
Additionally, aspects of this research will be incorporated into classroom
activities, where students in an aquifer and petroleum reservoir assessment
course will analyze core, construct the 3-D stratigraphic framework at a small
site, and model the heterogeneity at the site. This will not only expose
students to the research project, but will provide multiple 'realizations' of
the stratigraphic character for uncertainty assessment of the modeling results.
&lt;br/&gt;