* 0133975
* CAREER:   Network Samaritans (NETSAM):  Network-Assisted Service for the Internet
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2002,03/31/2008
* Christos Papadopoulos, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 03/31/2008
* USD 363,163.00

The end-to-end argument is a fundamental principle of the Internet
architecture. The commercialization&lt;br/&gt;of the Internet, however, has
brought new requirements like trust, QoS, ISP differentiation, third
party&lt;br/&gt;involvement and less sophisticated users. These requirements
have prompted the rethinking of the end-to-end&lt;br/&gt;principle in a quest
for a new Internet architecture. Past experience indicates that the development
of a&lt;br/&gt;new architecture will likely be a long process, rich with debate
and will draw from a vast and often uncharted&lt;br/&gt;solution
space.&lt;br/&gt; This research will investigate part of the solution space,
namely the viability and suitability of Network&lt;br/&gt;Assisted Services as a
possible component of the future Internet architecture. A network-assistance
archi-tecture called Network Samaritans (NetSam) is defined to map the framework
for such services. NetSam is motivated by the observation that many new
requirements seemingly require new mechanisms in the net-work. Unlike Active
Networks, NetSam is a moderate, yet careful step towards an enhanced network
that provides a set of services beyond basic forwarding, but spiritually very
distant from the malleable network of AN. NetSam preserves the architectural
spirit of the Internet by seeking to determine the minimum func-tionality that
is both necessary and appropriate in the network. NetSam is not an Internet
architecture, but merely a framework for new services pivoting on network
assistance, which may become part of the future
architecture.&lt;br/&gt;Approach&lt;br/&gt; The study will be carried out in the
context of three important applications: Reliable Multicast, Distributed Denial
of Service, and Network Management. The investigation will follow a disciplined,
minimalist approach, assuming that a service is not needed unless proven
otherwise. Selected services will be decom-posed and their components
distributed between the network and the application. Network components willbe
simple and general so they can be easily implemented in the routers with minimal
security risks.&lt;br/&gt; The NetSam architecture defines a new architectural
division of services, namely filter and surrogate&lt;br/&gt;services. Filter
services are very simple and typically implemented in the routers, while
surrogate services&lt;br/&gt;are more complex and typically implemented at the
edges (but use some help from forwarding filters).&lt;br/&gt;Together, filters
and surrogates provide flexibility and support a large spectrum of
services.&lt;br/&gt; The study will follow a top-down approach by isolating the
applications of network assistance. Simple&lt;br/&gt;and general services will
be defined, with candidates including packet marking, steering and sampling
and&lt;br/&gt;then appropriate filters will be designed. The resulting system
will be evaluated through implementation
and&lt;br/&gt;simulation.&lt;br/&gt;Impact on Advancing Knowledge&lt;br/&gt;
This research proposes a new paradigm for application/network interaction.
Unlike current paradigms&lt;br/&gt;that follow either complete separation or
union of the two, this research proposes informed interaction&lt;br/&gt;between
the network and application. The major contribution of this research to science
will be the architecturethat governs this interaction.&lt;br/&gt;Impact on
Education&lt;br/&gt; This research will expose students to both theoretical and
practical issues on application/network interaction. Students will be challenged
to think deeper about the distinction between the application and the network,
with emphasis on understanding concepts like the end-to-end argument and active
networking.&lt;br/&gt;Students will learn to analyze application requirements
and consider the merits and demerits of router-assisted services. Students will
learn how to define a new architecture. Project work will task students with the
definition of new services and the decomposition and implementation of their
constituent primitives.