* 0133519
* CAREER: Synthesis-assistance and Compilation Software for Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2002,10/31/2008
* Rajeev Barua, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 10/31/2008
* USD 400,000.00

SUMMARY: Synthesis-assistance and Compilation Software for Embedded Systems&lt;b
r/&gt;--------------------------------------------------------------------------
-&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Embedded systems promise to revolutionize our day-to-day
lives with ever-increasing intelligence and connectivity at decreasing cost.
Yet, many of the software technologies for embedded systems remain antiquated,
from compilers that produce code whose performance and power consumption is
substantially inferior to assembly language programs, to synthesis software that
provides little guidance to the designer on what decisions to make. These
shortcomings decrease system performance and increase time-to-market and
software and hardware development cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
developing fundamental technologies to propel the software for embedded systems
to the next level of automation. Opportunities along two directions are being
explored: increased automation of the synthesis of embedded soft cores, and new
compiler strategies for the management of heterogeneous memories&lt;br/&gt;in
embedded systems. When deployed, these innovations can be expected to lead to
vast improvements in the time-to-market, cost and performance of embedded
designs. Both directions rely on improved compiler&lt;br/&gt;analysis of
application domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the first and major research
direction, tools that assist the synthesis of embedded soft cores are being
developed. Soft cores are general-purpose processors having parameterizable
components instead of a fixed design. The project is designing software that
recommends to the user the best choice of an expanded space of hardware
parameters for the given soft core, in an automated manner, taking into account
the target application domain. The design goal is reduced runtime and power
consumption within a given silicon-area budget. For the first time ever, the
software uses compiler analysis of the applications to guide its decisions,
rather than an exhaustive design space explorations proposed before, resulting
in a rapid and scalable&lt;br/&gt;methodology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second
direction explored is the efficient compiler allocation of software-exposed
heterogeneous memory. In many lower-end embedded chips, often used in micro-
controllers and DSP processors, no caches are provided. Instead heterogeneous
memory units such as scratch-pad SRAM, internal DRAM, external DRAM
and&lt;br/&gt;ROM are memory-mapped to different parts of the address space.
Prior to this work, it was left to the user to partition the data among the
different memory units. This project is developing a compiler strategy that
automatically partitions the data among the memory units.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER research also includes a strong educational
component that serves college students, industry and local high schools. To this
end, several initiatives are pursued. First, a new graduate course on compilers
for embedded systems has been designed. It continues to evolve with the
integration of new research results. Second, undergraduates are recruited for
summer internships to participate in the research. Third, a new laboratory
course focuses on the design of embedded soft cores and uses software developed
in the research, when complete, as an educational tool. Fourth, a research
seminar series is conducted for high school juniors and seniors, using short
examples of futuristic applications to excite students&lt;br/&gt;about research
in computer engineering. &lt;br/&gt;