* 0133401
* CAREER: Improving Technology-EDA Integration Through Interconnect Design Tools for Nanometer Design
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2008
* Dennis Sylvester, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 12/31/2008
* USD 375,000.00

The goal of this research program is to explore tools, models, and design
practices that shed light on the relationship between silicon technology and the
direction of future EDA tools. The current education, research, and commercial
semiconductor and EDA communities are set up in a way that virtually guarantees
a knowledge gap between the cutting edge of CMOS technology and state-of-the-art
design automation. The best current example of this knowledge gap is on-chip
inductance. A large part of this project focuses on developing models, metrics,
and design approaches to assess and ameliorate the impact of inductance on
circuit performance. This includes a range of RLC-based models varying in
accuracy and complexity that target different stages of the design flow ranging
from standard cell characterization to late-mode full-chip timing. Other
impending knowledge gaps being studied in this research program include: 1)
standard cell interconnect libraries to leverage predictability and maintain
performance, and 2) scalable global signaling alternatives to CMOS repeaters for
nanometer design (feature sizes &lt; 100 nm). The education component of this
CAREER program has two broad aims: 1) introduce students to the role of on-chip
interconnect on circuit performance early and often, and 2) transfer a diverse
population of students to industry with relevant design experience via group
design projects.&lt;br/&gt;