* 0133773
* CAREER: Experimental Research on the Runaway Breakdown of Air During Thunderstorms
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2008
* Joseph Dwyer, Florida Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 05/31/2008
* USD 462,616.00

This CAREER project consists of observing x-rays, gamma rays, and energetic
electrons from thunderstorms and in laboratory experiments to study the runaway
breakdown of air in thunderstorm conditions. Runaway breakdown is a process in
which an avalanche of high-energy electrons develops in a strong electric field,
producing x-rays, gamma rays, and secondary ionization, and transporting large
quantities of charge great distances. This process can occur when the energy
gained by an electron accelerating in a strong electric field exceeds the energy
lost by collisions. It may play a part in lightning initiation and large-scale
charge transport in thunderstorms, as well as in explaining x-ray emissions from
storms and transient luminous events (sprites and jets) in the high atmosphere
above thunderstorms. The goals of the project are to demonstrate whether runaway
breakdown occurs in the atmosphere, to test current models of the mechanism, to
understand the importance of runaway breakdown in thunderstorm phenomena, and to
make experimental scientific research part of every student's normal curriculum.
To achieve the goals, the project includes the following
work:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Design and construction of sensitive detectors for
x-ray and gamma ray emissions, as part of a senior physics laboratory course.
&lt;br/&gt;2. Observing x-rays, gamma rays, and energetic electrons associated
with triggered lightning in collaboration with the Lightning Research Laboratory
of the University of Florida, Gainesville.&lt;br/&gt;3. Conducting laboratory
experiments with accelerating electrons in strong electric fields to investigate
runaway avalanche; integrating the work into undergraduate physics
labs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide the first direct evidence of
the importance of the runaway electron process in air, contribute to the
understanding of thunderstorms, and provide students with opportunities for
instrument development and research in atmospheric physics.