* 0133096
* CAREER: A Unified Theory of Pseudorandomness
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Salil Vadhan, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 05/31/2007
* USD 356,002.00

CAREER: A Unified Theory of Pseudorandomness&lt;br/&gt;Salil P.
Vadhan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the past few decades, randomization has
become one of the most&lt;br/&gt;pervasive paradigms in computer science. The
best known solutions to&lt;br/&gt;many problems in algorithms, cryptography,
reliable communication,&lt;br/&gt;network design, combinatorics, and distributed
computing surprisingly&lt;br/&gt;involve making random choices. Thus randomness
appears to be very&lt;br/&gt;useful, but it is still not known to what extent it
is truly&lt;br/&gt;necessary. Thus, this research asks: is it possible to reduce
or even&lt;br/&gt;eliminate the need for randomness in the above settings?
The&lt;br/&gt;investigators address this question via the paradigm
of&lt;br/&gt;Pseudorandomness, which is the theory of efficiently
generating&lt;br/&gt;objects that "look random" despite being constructed using
little or&lt;br/&gt;no randomness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this
research builds upon deep connections recently&lt;br/&gt;discovered between four
pseudorandom objects, namely pseudorandom&lt;br/&gt;generators, expander graphs,
error-correcting codes, and extractors.&lt;br/&gt;The investigators seek to
strengthen these connections and use them to&lt;br/&gt;attack some of the open
problems in the area, such as the construction&lt;br/&gt;of expander graphs with
optimal expansion, the derandomization of&lt;br/&gt;space-bounded computation,
and a complete understanding of the&lt;br/&gt;relationship between
derandomization and circuit lower bounds.&lt;br/&gt;Students at all levels are
involved in the research, including&lt;br/&gt;undergraduates who explore
conjectures about expander graphs through&lt;br/&gt;computer experiments. The
research is tightly integrated into new&lt;br/&gt;courses being developed by the
investigators, including a graduate&lt;br/&gt;course on Pseudorandomness, which
focuses on the unified theory that&lt;br/&gt;is emerging; and an undergraduate
course on Cryptography, which&lt;br/&gt;emphasizes the role of pseudorandomness
in modern cryptography.&lt;br/&gt;