* 0133386
* CAREER: Harnessing the Power of Computational Intelligence for Infrastructure Systems Management and Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2002,02/29/2008
* Adel Sadek, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 02/29/2008
* USD 375,000.00

Computational Intelligence (CI) is an emerging field of fundamental and applied
research that utilizes a number of powerful computational paradigms, either
separately or synergistically, to solve problems that defy solutions using
traditional techniques. The main paradigms of CI encompass Fuzzy Set Theory and
Fuzzy Logic (FL), Neural Networks (NN), Reinforcement Learning (RL), and Genetic
Algorithms (GAs). In this research, the PI will probe how CI paradigms can be
utilized to address a number of critical research problems that are at the very
heart of the infrastructure engineering profession at the present time. This
will include the use of CI for: (1) the on-line management and control of
transportation networks in the context of Intelligent Transportation Systems
(ITS); (2) determining "optimal" budget allocation in the context of integrated
infrastructure management systems; and (3) deriving land use limits from
infrastructure capacity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The different research activities
of the study will complement a corresponding education plan that has the
following objectives: (1) strengthen the Information Technology (IT) content of
Civil Engineering (CE) curricula; (2) experiment with learning strategies that
promote active learning; and (3) undertake high school outreach. To achieve
these goals, the study will develop a new course on CI applications in CE, as
well as develop educational modules on ITS to be incorporated in undergraduate
transportation classes. The study will also experiment with the "Just-in-Time
Teaching" (JiTT) strategy, a pedagogical strategy that works through a fusion of
high-tech and low-tech teaching elements. In addition, the study will establish
an outreach program to local high schools that will provide the opportunity to
select junior and senior students to work with faculty mentors on independent
research projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;