* 0133568
* CAREER: Detecting Interchangeability Relations in Constraint Satisfaction Problems and Exploiting them in Problem Solving and Interactions with Users
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2008
* Berthe Choueiry, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Douglas H. Fisher
* 05/31/2008
* USD 600,000.00

This is a Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award. This project will
improve our ability to solve problems in constraint satisfaction, which is a
central paradigm for modeling and solving various problems in computer science,
engineering, and management. It will do so by designing and evaluating
algorithms that discover and exploit the structure embedded in the model of a
decision problem formulated as a Constraint Satisfaction Problem (CSP). In
particular, the work will investigate how symmetry relations, specified as
interchangeability, can be used to build compact and faithful abstractions of
CSPs. The goal of these investigations is not only to enhance the performance of
solving CSPs, but also to support interactions with human users by allowing them
to build and navigate over landscapes of solution spaces. Such techniques will
institute a new paradigm in problem solving by making a computer perform as an
active, informed assistant rather than as a passive black box. The project's
education plan combines curriculum development, course teaching, and individual
mentoring of students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award recognizes and
supports the early career-development activities of a teacher-scholar who is
likely to become an academic leader of the twenty-first century. Constraint
satisfaction is most commonly used in scheduling and resource allocation
applications, as well as in artificial intelligence planning and collaborative
problem-solving. Therefore, this research will improve the techniques available
to solve very difficult practical problems in a variety of fields.&lt;br/&gt;