* 0133999
* PECASE:  Creating Novel Quantum Fluids
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Dan Stamper-Kurn, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Charles W. S. Conover
* 08/31/2007
* USD 740,000.00

Proposal Title: PECASE: Creating Novel Quantum Fluids Institution: University
of California-Berkeley

This PECASE project encompasses a broad research program to examine the
condensed-matter aspects of a novel quantum fluid: spinor Bose-Einstein
condensates of Rb-87. The initial experimental background and the consequent
theoretical investigation of this intriguing fluid suggest a range of intriguing
phenomena waiting to be explored. A dedicated experimental apparatus is being
constructed which incorporates magnetic shielding and small scale magnetic
traps, large-volume optical traps, a new type of polarization-contrast imaging,
and stable laser beams for Raman coupling. Four experimental goals are
identified: (1) the first observation of ferromagnetic F=1 spinor condensates,
(2) the exploration of dynamic behavior using a novel in-situ imaging technique,
(3) accessing the thermodynamic behavior of spinor condensates, and (4) the
first observation of F=2 spinor condensates. In addition, it is expected that
other deliberately engineered macroscopic quantum systems will be explored to
complement this research program. One such system, which was recently identified
by this research group, is a novel superfluid with an anisotropic and variable
critical velocity. These research goals are being pursued alongside a program of
educational activities. In particular, the establishment of a resource for
teaching innovations in upper-division physics courses is being undertaken.
While teaching innovations have been successfully implemented and tested in
introductory physics courses, the development of resources to support such
innovations in upper-division courses is sorely lacking, in spite of their great
need. Particularly needed is a bank of tested qualitative questions appropriate
for in-class and web-based inquiry. Such collections will be created and tested
in three areas of upper-division modern physics, disseminated for use at other
institutions, and supported further by contributions from other educators.
Further educational activities include the exploration of web-based course
delivery systems, and the training of future scientists through undergraduate,
graduate and postdoctoral research positions.

This project was originally funded as a CAREER award, and was converted to a
Presidential Early Career Award for Engineers and Scientists (PECASE) award in
May 2004.

