* 0133664
* CAREER: Algorithms for Efficient Bandwidth Utilization in the Internet
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2007
* Micah Adler, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Richard Beigel
* 01/31/2007
* USD 328,750.00

There is a growing scientific community working to provide solid theoretical and
algorithmic foundations for the study of communication networks. This project
furthers this goal through a combination of research and education. In
particular, it addresses theoretical and algorithmic issues that arise in a
central area of networking: the efficient utilization of communication
bandwidth. The research component of this project addresses several different
approaches for the succinct representation of information in communication
networks. This includes the investigation of (a) the efficient use of
communication bits to provide accountability in the Internet (which is a means
of combating cyber-terrorism), (b) new approaches to compression that arise in
new communication technologies, and (c) minimizing the amount of control
information required to make communication robust with respect to network
faults. The integrated educational objectives of this project include both
graduate student collaboration and curriculum development. The former consists
of student involvement with the research component of the project, as well as
organization of summer schools and workshops. The later includes the
incorporation of networking topics into a graduate level algorithms course, as
well as the development of a new advanced graduate course addressing the
algorithmic and theoretical challenges and achievements in the area of
networking.

For the research question of providing accountability in the Internet, this
project studies the IP Traceback problem: given a stream of packets arriving at
a node of the Internet, determine the source of those packets. This is an
important tool for dealing with denial of service attacks, since accountability
discourages such attacks and provides an automated mechanism for halting attacks
in progress. This project studies probabilistic packet marking schemes for this
problem, with the goal of determining the optimal tradeoffs between the number
of marking bits used per packet, the number of packets required to reconstruct
the source information, and the number of simultaneous sources of attack that
can be dealt with. A number of new technologies also present us with entirely
new approaches to compression. The resulting compression problems are
fundamental, but since the motivating technologies have a short history, these
problems have not been considered previously. In this project, we consider
compression problems that arise from three such technologies: asymmetric
communication channels, networks that are able to multicast information
efficiently, and the compression of the World Wide Web. Finally, we also
consider reducing bandwidth utilization by minimizing the amount of control
information required to make communication robust against faults.