* 0133506
* Studies of the Internal Structure and Dynamics of Convective Weather Systems
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2006
* Paul Markowski, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 04/30/2006
* USD 482,978.00

The Principal Investigator will investigate the internal structure and dynamics
of the convective region of mesoscale convective systems. The main goal is to
determine why moist convection appears as discrete thunderstorms in some
situations and as solid mesoscale swaths (slabs) of overturning in others.
Specific objectives include 1) constructing characteristic inflow environments
for discrete-thunderstorm events and for slab events, 2) determining the local
(within the convective region) differences in the dynamic and thermodynamic
conditions that accompany cellular vs. slab convection, and 3) determining how
differences in the convection (slab vs. cellular) affect the mesoscale dynamics
and structural properties of the convective system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research methodology is composed of three parts: 1) construction of a composite
environment for observed cases of predominantly cellular convective systems and
for systems exhibiting solid-slab overturning, 2) numerical experiments on the
composite environments to determine whether or not the model is able to generate
the two types of organizational modes, and 3) numerical sensitivity experiments
on idealized (analytically specified) initial conditions using the results of
items (1) and (2) as a guide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is expected
that the knowledge gained from these investigations will a) help to identify the
factors that establish the organizational mode of the convection and the depth
and strength of moist absolutely unstable layers, and b) elucidate how those
factors affect the overall structure and evolution of mesoscale convective
systems. The results may also provide practical benefits, such as improvements
in the ability to discriminate among the types of severe weather that will occur
for various types of large-scale environments. Differentiating among the
possible modes of convective organization is extremely important from a
forecasting perspective since it is these differences that often determine
whether or not severe weather will occur and, if so, whether it will be
characterized by individual, possibly rotating, storms or by strong straight
line winds associated with slab convection.