* 0133956
* CAREER: A Two-Tier Approach for the Analysis and Evolution of High-Integrity Software Product Lines
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2002,09/30/2008
* Gerald Gannod, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2008
* USD 295,228.00

Proposal Number: CCR-0133956&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: A Two-Tier Approach
for the Analysis and Evolution of High-Integrity &lt;br/&gt;Software Product
Lines&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Gerald C. Gannod&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of the research component of this project is to develop software
&lt;br/&gt;architecture analysis and software reverse engineering techniques
that support &lt;br/&gt;the evolution of existing software into software product
lines with an emphasis &lt;br/&gt;on high-integrity systems. To this end, this
research will first involve the &lt;br/&gt;development of an approach for
analyzing software from both the architecture and &lt;br/&gt;component views in
order to support assessment along different quality attribute
&lt;br/&gt;dimensions. The approach will consist of models for static and
dynamic analysis &lt;br/&gt;as well as simulation to determine level of
compliance with quality attribute &lt;br/&gt;constraints. Second, this research
will involve the development of a methodology &lt;br/&gt;for modifying and
evolving software at both the architecture and component levels &lt;br/&gt;in
order to ensure compliance with different quality attribute constraints and
&lt;br/&gt;goals. For the software architecture community, this research will
address a &lt;br/&gt;need for analysis approaches that allow software architects
to assess the extent &lt;br/&gt;to which a software architecture meets various
quality concerns. In addition, &lt;br/&gt;the results of this research will
facilitate the long-term evolution of a software &lt;br/&gt;architecture based
on long-term product-line goals. For the software reverse &lt;br/&gt;engineering
and maintenance community, this research addresses the need for
&lt;br/&gt;approaches that allow a software maintainer to determine the extent
of the &lt;br/&gt;support for various quality attributes by individual
components and provides &lt;br/&gt;a technique that facilitates component
modification in order to ensure compliance &lt;br/&gt;to quality constraints.