* 0133188
* CAREER: Soft Instruction Set Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2007
* Mark Oskin, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 01/31/2007
* USD 442,933.00

With each successive generation of microprocessors designers push the envelopes
of technology and complexity. But these factors are conspiring to make the
accepted practice of custom ASICs, and generational processors obsolete.
Overhead costs such as design, validation, mask-generation, and test are growing
and will make it prohibitive to continue with the current strategies. Concurrent
with this trend is the growing realization that we are well past the point of
diminishing returns for enhancing single-threaded computational performance. The
future will migrate us towards ubiquitous parallel models of execution. Finally,
users are starting to demand not just performance but reliability and security
from their computing infrastructure. While the obvious substrates are sea-of-
gates FPGAs, they are highly inefficient and do not take advantage of the wealth
of processor research conducted over the last 50 years. Instead, we propose
SISC, or Soft-Instruction-Set-Computing. A SISC processor is a universal
processor, with no fixed legacy instruction set architecture, and no fixed
interface to the surrounding system envi-ronment. However, it does exploit the
best features of both fixed-logic superscalar processors and fine-grained FPGAs
to provide an efficient, generic, computing substrate on which to experiment and
build the secure, robust and distributed systems of the future. We will
demonstrate the capabilities of configurable substrates by showing that SISC
processors provide efficient emulation of existing legacy instruction set
architectures, a platform to provide peek performance on streaming data-flow
applications, a unification of single, multi-threaded and multi-processor
architectures, a computing device on which to provide application-specific
architecture security, integrated hardware support for high-level languages and
a flexible substrate for enhanced undergraduate and graduate level computer
architecture research. These application goals will drive our research in the
design of a truly universal computing substrate. We expect the following
products from this career plan:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. A configurable processor
design capable of emulating most modern instruction sets and a platform on which
to construct new secure application architectures.&lt;br/&gt;2. An
infrastructure of simulation tools, emulation techniques, and hardware
prototypes to demonstrate the benefits of reconfigurable processing
substrates.&lt;br/&gt;3. Automated compilation algorithms and tools for runtime
customization of the SISC architecture.&lt;br/&gt;4. A set of secure application
compilation targets and operating system techniques to dynamically apply them as
a response to network attacks.&lt;br/&gt;5. Students trained in efficient system
design and rigorous evaluation methodologies through research, student workshops
and new courses.&lt;br/&gt;