* 0133629
* CAREER: Adaptive Intrusion Detection Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2008
* Wenke Lee, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 07/31/2008
* USD 349,987.00

Intrusion detection is a critical component of the defense-in-depth network
security mechanisms. Current intrusion detection systems (IDSs) are ineffective
against new and sophisticated attacks.

The key objective of this research project is to develop the algorithms, tools,
and system architecture for adaptive IDSs. An adaptive IDS needs to detect new
attacks and adjust to changes in normal operations. Towards this end, an
information-theoretic based anomaly detection framework is investigated. The
approach is to first compute the regularity of normal data using information-
theoretic measures, then select features and construct a detection model
according to the regularity measures. An adaptive IDS needs to also self-monitor
its run-time workload and performance, and dynamically reconfigure its
components to provide the best detection capability given the limited resources.
Towards this end, performance monitoring, load-shedding, attack scenario
analysis, and cost-benefit analysis techniques are investigated.

Through the publications and algorithms and tools from this research,
researchers and practitioners can learn the benefits and techniques of adaptive
IDSs. This research also makes important contributions to related fields, e.g.,
survivable network systems and smart auditing. Ultimately, the society will
benefit from the more effective and robust security mechanisms.