* 0133533
* CAREER: Representational Tools to Support Understanding of Complex Biological Systems
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2009
* Cindy Hmelo-Silver, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 04/30/2009
* USD 677,164.00

&lt;br/&gt;Life science is often about understanding complex systems- from
human body systems to ecosystems to evolution. These are hard to understand
because it requires understanding how structures relate to functions and what
the behaviors of the system are. Some interactions between parts are invisible
and have a time sequence that makes them difficult to perceive. Even adults
struggle to learn about complex systems. Yet such understanding is often
critical to scientific analysis. These difficulties may be aggravated by the
static depictions found in typical textbooks that focus on structures without
considering the dynamic behaviors and function. One possible approach to
teaching about complex systems involves the use of a conceptual representation
drawn from Structure-Behavior-Function (SBF) theory but we need to first
investigate how people come to understand complex biological systems. Much of
life science instruction tends to focus on structural aspects of complex
systems. I will use this framework to develop both static (hypermedia) and
dynamic approaches (a simulation construction kit, the virtual construction kit
- the VCK) to help middle-school students learn an SBF schema, and in
particular, support their understanding of system behaviors and functions. This
research addresses three main questions: 1) What does it mean to understand a
complex system?; 2) How can providing an explicit conceptual representation
(i.e., SBF) support learning about complex systems?; and 3) How can dynamic
representational tools (i.e., hypermedia and the VCK) support learning about
this conceptual representation?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The teaching plan has three
main components. First, there will be an opportunity for a research mentorship
for graduate and undergraduate students as they become involved in research and
instructional design. Second, I will contribute to masters and doctoral course
development through developing and enhancing existing graduate course offerings
in Cognition and Technology and Model Development and Reasoning in Science.
Third, there will be an impact on preservice teacher training. Because the VCK
models can be used as windows into children's thinking, this work will provide
contexts that will be integrated into preservice teacher
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;