* 0133662
* CAREER: Shared Scientific Sense-Making and Bilingual Student Advancement in Science: Linking Family and School Learning Through Informal Learning Research
* EDU,DRL
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2009
* Doris Ash, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 02/28/2009
* USD 663,877.00

&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER grant interweaves research and teaching focused on
understanding how social groups construct meaning during scientific
conversations across different learning contexts, such as classrooms, museums
and the home. This work will be translated into formal educational settings and
used to inform teaching practices within pre-service University and in-service
school district settings. The research and educational emphasis will be on
creating conceptual links between social learning in diverse settings and the
creation of corridors of opportunity between formal and informal learning
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date there has been little research with
families from cultural and linguistic minority populations, such as Latino
families, at informal learning settings and virtually none that integrates
formal and informal learning, or impacts teaching. The five-year project
will:&lt;br/&gt;1. Conduct Study 1, aimed at making fundamental cross-cultural
comparisons of family conversational meaning making at the Monterey Bay Aquarium
and linking this work with family interviews, reflective conversations and
visits to family homes;&lt;br/&gt;2. Review the theoretical framework and
conduct Study 2, which will incorporate lessons learned from Study 1, and
linking this research to formal classrooms; and &lt;br/&gt;3. Use the findings
(at each stage) to inform teaching practice with UCSC undergraduate (Science
majors) and graduate (Science credential, MA and Ph.D.) students, and, in
collaboration with teacher research groups for new and experienced teacher in
schools that serve predominantly Latino students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research plan provides an opportunity for viewing several inter-connected
mechanisms, including family interactions and conversations, compelling science
content, naturalistic learning in museum settings, and, finally, analyzing these
factors in order to inform teaching practices that promote bilingual minority
students to the rank of scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&
lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;