* 0133075
* CAREER: Theoretical Studies of the Non-Linear Transport Properties of Molecular Wires
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Massimiliano Di Ventra, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 05/31/2004
* USD 180,000.00

This is a CAREER award which combines research and educational activities. The
goal of the research component is to use newly developed atomic-scale first-
principles approaches to address some of the most fundamental issues in
transport in molecular wires that can have impact on the development of
molecular electronics. Issues that will be studied include: (1) current-induced
forces; (2) local heating and heating dissipation; (3) shot noise; and, (4)
interference effects at the molecule-leads contact. The work will proceed in
concert with experimental studies of leading groups in the field. The goal of
the educational component is to integrate the research activities into
undergraduate and graduate education with the development of a new course:
"Career Development for Physicists." This course will give undergraduates and
graduate students an appreciation of the new career possibilities other than the
academic one. Also, it will create the tools and specific problem-solving
stategies to make the transition from student life to professional employment.
Career options in nanotechnology will be the leading theme, but the scope of the
course will be wider in range. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This is a CAREER award
which combines research and educational activities. The goal of the research
component is to use newly developed atomic-scale first-principles approaches to
address some of the most fundamental issues in transport in molecular wires that
can have impact on the development of molecular electronics. Issues that will be
studied include: (1) current-induced forces; (2) local heating and heating
dissipation; (3) shot noise; and, (4) interference effects at the molecule-leads
contact. The work will proceed in concert with experimental studies of leading
groups in the field. The goal of the educational component is to integrate the
research activities into undergraduate and graduate education with the
development of a new course: "Career Development for Physicists." This course
will give undergraduates and graduate students an appreciation of the new career
possibilities other than the academic one. Also, it will create the tools and
specific problem-solving stategies to make the transition from student life to
professional employment. Career options in nanotechnology will be the leading
theme, but the scope of the course will be wider in range. &lt;br/&gt;