* 0133065
* Linking Ecology and Horticulture To Prevent Plant Invasions: A Workshop, St. Louis, MO, Dec 1-4, 2001
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2002
* John Randall, Missouri Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 08/31/2002
* USD 20,026.00

0133065&lt;br/&gt;Raven &lt;br/&gt;Invasive plants are a major economic problem
and are a serious threat to the protection of biodiversity in natural areas.
Efforts to reduce the number of invaders must focus not only on controlling
existing species but also on identifying pathways of introduction to reduce
establishment. Many of these non-native species were introduced accidentally,
but the majority were introduced for horticultural use. Introductions for
horticulture use continue at a high rate, and species already here that
demonstrate invasive ability are rarely removed from use. The workshop will
bring together government, private, and academic interests in ecology and
horticulture to address several relevant issues. The invited participants will:
1) develop specific codes of conduct for interest areas within horticulture,
including nurseries, botanical gardens, landscape architects, and the gardening
public; 2) assess and refine explicit easy-to-use methods and guidelines for
evaluating plant species for potential to become invasive pests; and 3) develop
and assess methods to determine acceptable alternatives to many invasive species
currently used in the United States for horticulture. It is intended that the
discussions will search for concrete solutions acceptable to all parties and
that, from the discussions, research and action agendas will be identified. The
results of the workshop will be presented to the commercial horticulture and
botanical garden communities, as well as to the Weed Science Society of America,
for discussion, refinement and adoption.