* 0133760
* PECASE: Genetical Theory of Population Subdivision and Divergence
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2008
* John Wakeley, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Pamela K. Diggle
* 03/31/2008
* USD 675,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: PECASE: Genetical Theory of Population Subdivision
and Divergence&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Harvard
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will enhance our ability to use DNA or
other genetic data to make inferences about population structure and population
history. It will allow us, for instance, to answer questions like "How much
migration has occurred between these populations?" or "When did these
populations diverge from each other?" In order to do this, a body of
mathematical models that are used to describe patterns of genetic variation
within and between populations will be extended. Thus, a secondary impact of the
project will be an advance in the fields applied mathematics and probability
theory. Further, two books and an interactive web site will be produced. The aim
of these is to promote the teaching of the branch of population genetics used by
most workers but rarely taught, called coalescent theory.&lt;br/&gt;The
theoretical aspects of the work will focus on the analysis of population models
in which different events happen at vastly different rates. For example, if
migration rates are high, then migration events will happen much more often than
mutation events, which tend to be very rare. When such differences in time scale
occur, the analyses are simpler and the mathematical models have properties that
make them interesting in their own right. These simplifications will be used to
produce a battery of methods and tests, which empirical population geneticists
can employ to study the history of natural populations. The books will bring the
teaching of population genetics up to date with current research methods and
ideas. Specifically, they will use and advocate the modern genealogical, or
coalescent, approach to the subject. The coalescent approach considers the
genealogical history of a sample of genetic data, and thus can be better suited
to empirical work than classical population genetic approaches which model
entire populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was originally funded as a
CAREER award, and was converted to a Presidential Early Career Award for
Engineers and Scientists (PECASE) award in May
2004.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;