* 0133925
* Computational Simulation of Complex Turbulent Diffusion Flames
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* James Riley, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Westmoreland
* 08/31/2007
* USD 360,000.00

Although the principles and fundamental equations that describe turbulent
combustion are known, their direct numerical solution (DNS) remains impossible
for practical problems. The usual approximations are to either time average or
to spatially filter the fundamental equations. The first approach involves full
time averaging (Reynolds averaged Navier-Stokes equations, or RANS), while the
second filters only for the smaller scales, allowing the larger scales to be
resolved in space and time (Large Eddy Simulation, or LES). In either case, the
semi-empirical modeling assumptions associated with the averaging process are
critical, and have been the focus of much debate. These approaches have had
substantial successes in the modeling of many flames, principally those
dominated by boundary-layer-like flows such as free jets and shear layers, and
combustion that is uninterrupted by local extinction. Most practical flames are,
however, stabilized by recirculation or swirl, and exhibit extinction events,
e.g., standoff from the burner. These phenomena are not well captured by the
present models. To improve the modeling one must consider issues such as
strongly curved streamlines, buoyancy, strongly varying density, dilatation due
to heat release and its influence on the overall dynamics of the flow, and local
extinction and reignition of the flame chemistry in regions of high shear rates.
In this study, the bluff-body laboratory flames of the University of Sydney are
used as a prototype for the study of the modeling of these phenomena. A bluff
body at the base establishes a recirculation zone that stabilizes the flame.
This experimental work has covered a wide range of conditions between fast
chemistry and close-to-blowout behavior. These experiments therefore exhibit
many of the challenging phenomena occurring in more complex, practical flames.
They are, however, of a simple axisymmetric configuration and have been
experimentally well characterized. Thus, these flames are excellent targets for
fundamental investigations into the modeling of complex flame behavior. The
following research activities are proposed: (a) DNS and theoretical work towards
better understanding of (1) the mechanisms of extinction/reignition in
recirculation-stabilized jet flames, and (2) the physics and stability of flames
dominated by large density differences, dilatation, curved streamlines, and
buoyancy; (b) investigation/evaluation of LES subgrid-scale models that
incorporate the new information gained on extinction/ reignition and on fluid-
mechanics issues specific to recirculating flames; and (c) comparison of LES
computations with laboratory data on bluff-body stabilized jet flames to test
the performance of the subgrid-scale models developed in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;