* 0133395
* CAREER:  A User Modeling Method for Individuals with Disabilities
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Richard Simpson, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2007
* USD 311,796.00

This is a Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award. Computer access by
means of augmentative and alternative communication can be an extremely valuable
assistive technology for the disabled. This project seeks to improve its
efficiency and to develop accurate models of the performance of individuals with
disabilities when using computer access. As an educational tool, an accurate
modeling method would provide clinicians with insight into how specific
disabilities affect an individual's ability to operate different kinds of
devices. As an assessment tool, an accurate model would allow a clinician to
identify potential devices and device configurations that are most likely to be
successful for a particular client. The modeling technique will be used in a
theoretical and empirical study to determine the most efficient method for
representing language within an augmentative and alternative communication
device. A software tool will also be developed that allows clinicians to
incorporate the user modeling technique into their existing clinical
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award recognizes and supports the
early career-development activities of a teacher-scholar who is likely to become
an academic leader of the twenty-first century. The research project will
develop science and technology needed to maximize the benefit of computers for
disabled people, thereby allowing them to lead more productive and fulfilling
lives. The educational component will give graduate and undergraduate students
the opportunity to become involved in both fundamental research and clinical
application in the areas of human-machine interfaces and assistive technology
for the disabled.&lt;br/&gt;