* 0133996
* CAREER: Optimal Information Extraction in Intelligent Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2009
* Virginia de Sa, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas H. Fisher
* 06/30/2009
* USD 474,797.00

This is a Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award. The research will
explore how an organism extracts information from its environment for learning
and perception, both to understand human learning and to create better machine
learning algorithms. The first objective is to develop and apply new algorithms
to better understand the mapping in the sensory pathways. An important goal is
to understand how the visual pathway computes the invariant responses observed
in inferotemporal cortex. The second objective is to study the extraction of
information from cross-sensory interaction and its role in the development of
perceptual invariance. This work will involve integrated computer simulations,
mathematical modeling, and psychological experiments. As part of this goal, the
researcher will study input feature selection, output feature selection, and the
general problem of how dimensions should best interact in machine learning
algorithms. The final research goal is to bring together the new knowledge in
constructing a better autonomous learning machine that can learn to recognize
objects. The algorithm will be more modular than current algorithms and will
collect its own training data autonomously through a camera, microphone, and
other sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational goal is to train students in
the lab as well as in the classes to think about problems from a variety of
approaches. They will be educated in the advantages and limitations of
computational modeling, computational analysis, psychophysics and
electrophysiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award recognizes and
supports the early career-development activities of a teacher-scholar who is
likely to become an academic leader of the twenty-first century. The research
will improve our understanding of optimal integration between sensory
modalities. This will lead to improvement in computer sensing algorithms,
including computer vision, speech recognition, and any other application where
other sources of information may be available. The work is also expected to give
insight to the general problem of how to optimally combine different sources of
information for machine learning. The educational aspects of this project are
designed to give students a multidisciplinary perspective along with specific
skills allowing them to use and appreciate a variety of approaches and
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;