* 0133704
* CAREER: Signal Processing Approaches for Multimedia Security and Information Protection
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2002,08/31/2008
* Min Wu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2008
* USD 355,999.00

Min Wu&lt;br/&gt;U of MD College
Park&lt;br/&gt;0133704&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Having recognized that the
advantages offered by the information technology era cannot be fully deployed
without the guarantee on the security and protection of multimedia data, this
project focuses on the investigation of multimedia security and information
protection through two types of complementary signal processing techniques,
namely, multimedia encryption and data embedding. The main function of
multimedia encryption is to protect the confidentiality and thus performs access
control, while data embedding or digital watermarking concerns how to associate
a set of imperceptible data with the host media in a seamless way. The embedded
data can be used to accomplish ownership verification or authentication
even&lt;br/&gt;after decryption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research component of
this project involves three parts. The investigator first explores the
protection of content confidentiality under three different levels of threats by
designing and analyzing signal processing based encryption algorithms that are
computationally efficient and easily compatible with lossy communications. In
addition, new challenging problems of multimedia data hiding are studied based
on a&lt;br/&gt;layered algorithmatic architecture, and a software testbed is
developed. Finally, the project investigates the joint use of encryption and
data hiding as well as their interplay for providing comprehensive
protection.&lt;br/&gt;The educational component of this project focuses on two
themes, namely, using multimedia as a powerful tool to enhance the productivity
of multimedia education, and using carefully designed projects to
provide&lt;br/&gt;students with hands-on experience that will well prepare them
for joining the future technical force of information technology. In addition to
the curriculum development, the investigator makes special effort to nurture the
under-represented students especially young women and to attract them to step
into the EE/CS disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;