* 0133841
* CAREER: A Unifying Signal Processing Framework for Estimating Statistical Channel Quality Measures In Wireless Communications
* CSE,CCF
* 01/15/2002,02/29/2008
* cihan tepedelenlioglu, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 02/29/2008
* USD 355,997.00

0133841&lt;br/&gt;Tepedelenlioglu, Cihan&lt;br/&gt;Arizona State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In wireless broadband communications, the
distortion that the communication medium (`the channel') causes on the
transmitted signal, warrants accurate channel models in order to characterize
and mitigate the distortion. These models need to take into account the mobility
of the transmitter and receiver, the possible presence of a line-of-sight
between the communicators, and the presence of noise and interference, all of
which are parameters that quantify the channel quality, and affect the
performance of the communication &lt;br/&gt;system. It is, therefore, of
interest to construct such models, and use these models to estimate these
statistical channel quality measures. It is the goal of this research to
construct and utilize a signal processing framework to estimate these channel
quality measures, which is expected to aid in the design of broadband systems
with improved performance. &lt;br/&gt;More specifically, in the course of this
research, the PI will construct optimal (maximum likelihood and minimum
variance) as well as moment-based estimators for channel quality indicators such
as the maximum Doppler spread, signal to interference plus noise ratio, and the
Ricean factor for broadband systems such as OFDM. After characterizing the
deleterious effects of the time-selective and frequency-selective channel on
&lt;br/&gt;general block transmission systems, for which OFDM is a special case,
the PI will devise generalized OFDM transceivers that reduce the adverse effects
of the inter-carrier interference. Hence, the research will &lt;br/&gt;focus on
the adverse effects of the randomly time-varying channel on broadband systems
and propose novel, low-complexity remedies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;