* 0133564
* CAREER:  Correlating Metalloenzyme Structure with Reactivity By Tunneling Electrons in Crystals
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2007
* Brian Crane, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/28/2007
* USD 605,805.00

Ultimately, the essence of life is the controlled movement of charge. The vast
number of conformational and chemical states available to the polypeptide chain
allows nature to tune the reactivity of metal centers and direct electron flow
within and between proteins. The goal of Dr. Crane's research is to develop and
apply new photochemical methods for studying the structural basis of redox
chemistry and long-range electron transfer (ET) in biology. Photosensitizers
will be used to initiate long-range ET in single protein crystals, where
structure can be precisely defined by X-ray crystallography. Designed crystal
systems that fix donor and acceptor orientations allow effects of intervening
protein and water structure on electron tunneling to be probed by mutagenesis
and isotopic substitution. ET rates will be determined directly in crystals of
metal-modified azurins and crystals of complexes between cytochrome c and
cytochrome c peroxidase. Redox reactions at protein metal centers will be driven
in crystals by photoinduced ET so that structures of activated states important
for catalysis can be determined by cryo-crystallography or time-resolved
diffraction techniques. Structures will be determined for peroxidase peroxo-iron
and oxo-iron species, important intermediates in biological oxygen activation,
and for tryptophan and tyrosine radicals, emerging players in a wide variety of
high-potential, biological redox chemistries. Atomic structure will be
correlated with electronic structure probed with magnetic and optical
spectroscopies to understand the reciprocal tuning of reactivity between
metallocofactors and the polypeptide chain. The results of this research will
provide sets of long-range ET rates for structural states defined in detail, new
structures of hitherto unobserved metalloprotein catalytic species, and new
techniques for studying protein dynamics by X-ray
diffraction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational activities connected with this
research aim to relate fundamental concepts in structure, kinetics,
thermodynamics and chemical reactivity to complex biological processes such as
energy transduction, signal transduction, environmental sensitivity and
response. Effort falls into two general categories: 1) mentoring high-school,
undergraduate, and graduate students in research; and 2) the development and
teaching of new undergraduate and graduate courses at Cornell University.
Discovery-based learning at the K-12 level will also be promoted. The research
described above is designed to provide projects appropriate for students of all
levels. A new graduate course, " the physical chemistry of proteins" is now
being taught and a second "Bio-inorganic chemistry" will be presented in 2003.
Other course activities include development of an introductory course for
freshman chemistry majors in chemical structure and bonding, and an
interdepartmental short course in enzyme kinetics. A playful approach to
addressing problems will be emphasized in all activities.&lt;br/&gt;