* 0133068
* CAREER:  Isostructural Doping and Device Construction from Molecular Semiconductors
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2002,06/30/2007
* Thomas Vaid, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Joseph L. Templeton
* 06/30/2007
* USD 512,891.00

The Advanced Materials Program in the Division of Chemistry makes this Career
award to Washington University. With this award, Professor Thomas Vaid will
systematically study controlled doping of organic hydrocarbons using
isostructural n- and p-dopants. Dopants will be synthesized and characterized
for electrical charge transport behavior in solid state and electrochemical
properties in solution. Doped crystals will be grown by a number of methods
including vapor sublimation, melt crystallization and solution-phase
crystallization. Junctions will be formed between doped semiconductors by vapor
deposition or alloy junction growth to study current rectification behavior and
photovoltaic responses. Organic light emitting diodes and organic field effect
transistors are potential devices to be expected from these doped organic
semiconducting crystals. The proposed educational program includes introduction
of materials chemistry courses and laboratory experiments with special emphasis
on acquisition and analysis of physical data on molecules and materials
synthesized by students. Research training provided by the program will prepare
graduate and undergraduate students for advanced studies and research

New organic semiconducting crystal will be synthesized from hydrocarbons using
isostructural doping using newly synthesized n- and p-dopants. Educational
programs in materials chemistry will prepare students for advanced studies and
research in electrooptic and conjugated materials.