* 0133854
* CAREER: A Keystone Species Approach to Determining Post-fire Successional Influence on Cavity user Communities in the Black Hills, South Dakota
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Kerri Vierling, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Charles H. Nilon
* 09/30/2005
* USD 706,000.00

PI Name: Vierling, Kerri&lt;br/&gt;PI Institution: South Dakota School of Mines
and Technology&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: DEB-0133854&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title:
CAREER: A keystone species approach to determining post-fire successional
influence on cavity user communities in the Black Hills, South
Dakota&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A keystone species is a species whose effects on a
community are much larger than would be predicted from their abundance.
Identification of keystone species within a system is critical to understanding
how communities presently function and how they might respond to future
environmental changes. Fire is a natural process in western Ponderosa pine
(Pinus ponderosa) forests, but human activities (i.e. logging and fire
suppression) have altered fire frequencies and intensities. This project will
address the influence of fire on the relative importance and possible keystone
function of different woodpecker species on the secondary cavity user (SCU)
community in pine forests in the Black Hills of South Dakota. Secondary cavity
users do not excavate the cavities that they occupy for nesting and roosting. I
will examine woodpecker and SCU communities in three types of treatments:
unburned (i.e. control), prescribed fire, and old burn treatments. The
prescribed fire treatments will undergo two years of pre-burn analysis before
application of a prescribed burn. The focus of forests in different stages of
post-fire succession will allow for an examination of the dynamic influence of
fire on the woodpeckers and the SCU communities. The relative importance of
individual woodpecker species to the SCU community will be determined by
monitoring the use of woodpecker cavities during both the breeding season and
non-breeding season. Wind Cave National Park will be the primary site for field
research and for a field ecology curriculum to be taught to American Indian
students. This study provides a unique opportunity to integrate research and
ecological educational activities with American Indian students by combining a
culturally relevant field site (Wind Cave) with culturally relevant animals
(woodpeckers). The field ecology experiences will be the result of collaboration
between the South Dakota School of Mines and Technology (SDSM&amp;T), Oglala
Lakota College (OLC), and the SDSM&amp;T Scientific Knowledge for Indian
Learning and Leadership (SKILL) program. The combination of research activities
and educational activities at Wind Cave will provide excellent opportunities to
integrate research and education to a group that has traditionally been
underrepresented in the sciences. &lt;br/&gt;