* 0133714
* Stimulus-Synthesis/Secretion Coupling: The Tilapia Prolactin Cell as a Model Osmoreceptor
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2006
* Milton Stetson, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Ione Hunt Von Herbing
* 01/31/2006
* USD 307,398.00

&lt;br/&gt;Prolactin (PRL) is a highly versatile hormone of the pituitary gland
of all vertebrates. It has essential actions in the regulation of salt and water
balance (osmoregulation) in fish, including the tilapia, Oreochromis
mossambicus, a species which can move freely between fresh water and seawater
(it is euryhaline). In the diluting freshwater environment, blood ion levels
tend to fall and PRL acts to counter this by increasing blood osmolality and
reducing the water and ion permeability of skin and other osmoregulatory
surfaces. Consistent with these actions, PRL cells show greater activity in
tilapia held in fresh water than in those held in seawater. Blood PRL also rises
and remains elevated as blood osmolality declines when tilapia move from
seawater to freshwater. The tilapia PRL cell appears to be directly responsive
to changes in extracellular osmolality inasmuch as PRL release increases as
medium osmolality is reduced when tilapia pituitary glands are incubated in
vitro. &lt;br/&gt;The term "osmoreceptor" refers to cells that respond to
osmotic signals with an appropriate physiological response that is evoked
through mechanisms called signal transduction pathways. Calcium (Ca+2) is widely
used in these pathways as a second messenger that mediates the induction of
cellular responses to specific external signals. The osmoreceptive properties of
the tilapia PRL cells offer an excellent and possibly unique model system for
investigating the pathways through which an osmotic signal is transduced into an
osmoregulatory response (i.e., PRL secretion). In teleosts, unlike in other
vertebrates, PRL cells are segregated into the anterior portion of the pituitary
as a nearly homogeneous mass, which is easily separated for organ and dispersed-
cell culture. This anatomical arrangement greatly facilitates the
characterization of secretory mechanisms, and provides a highly useful model
that can augment our general understanding of the regulation of other less-
accessible osmosensitive (and osmoregulatory) endocrine and neuroendocrine
systems (e.g. the hypothalamo-neurohypophysial magnocellular systems involved in
vasopressin and oxytocin release in mammals).&lt;br/&gt;The long-term objective
of this research is to identify the mechanisms involved in the regulation of the
production and release of PRL by changes in the osmotic environment of the
tilapia PRL cell. The present studies build on previous work in this laboratory,
and are designed to construct a more detailed picture of signal transduction in
osmoreceptive cells. The specific aim is to determine whether the rise in PRL
release in response to reduced extracellular osmolality is triggered by an
increase in cell size that leads to an increase in intracellular free Ca+2
([Ca2+]i). The hypothesis is that a fall in extracellular osmolality leads to
the passive influx of water into the PRL cell that increases cell volume; this
initiates an influx of extracellular Ca2+ and a rise in [Ca2+]i, which triggers
the increase in PRL release. In order to address this question, experiments will
be conducted to determine: 1) whether an increase in cell size leads to an
increase in [Ca2+]i; 2) whether an increase in cell size initiates a rise in
[Ca2+]i and/or an increase in PRL release; and 3) whether an increase in cell
size and PRL release following exposure to hyposmotic medium is dependent on the
entry of extracellular Ca2+.&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these aims, in vitro
perifusion-incubation techniques will be used which allow measurements of
individual cell size, PRL release, and intracellular calcium concentration
([Ca2+]i) through video-captured images, homologous radioimmunoassays, and
microspectrofluorometry, respectively. The general approach for testing the
proposed hypotheses consists of utilizing endogenous regulators of PRL release
and pharmacological agents to manipulate the various steps putatively involved
in the transduction of the osmotic signal. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
provide a better understanding of the signal transduction processes involved in
osmoreception, a sensory modality whose full understanding has been hampered by
the lack of a suitable model system. The use of the tilapia PRL cell as a model
offers distinct investigative advantages unavailable to researchers addressing
similar questions in other vertebrate osmoregulatory systems. &lt;br/&gt;