* 0133202
* Attention and Memory
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Gordon Logan, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher T. Kello
* 02/28/2006
* USD 324,996.00

Executive control is a fundamental issue in basic research in cognitive science
and cognitive neuroscience and in several areas of applied research, including
human factors and ergonomics. Executive control is the process by which the mind
controls itself, programming itself to perform specific tasks, monitoring
performance for speed and accuracy, adjusting strategies, and switching between
tasks. This research will extend Logan's theory of executive control to address
a broad range of phenomena in the burgeoning literature on switching between
tasks. Like many theories of executive control, Logan's theory posits an
executive process that programs a subordinate task to do specific tasks. It
interprets task switching as re-programming: The executive process develops a
new program for the upcoming task and transmits it to the subordinate, much like
a programmer installs new software in a computer. Logan's theory goes beyond
previous theories of executive control in specifying the subordinate process
explicitly and specifically. It adopts a powerful theory of attention and
categorization as the theory of the subordinate process, and it describes
executive control in terms of programming the subordinate theory to perform
tasks. This allows precise, quantitative predictions of performance in a broad
range of situations, including those in which people switch from one task to
another. The research will consist of three projects. The first will develop
quantitative measures of the time required to switch between tasks. In Logan's
theory, this switching time represents the time required for the executive to
formulate a new program and install it in the subordinate process. The second
project will investigate the role of short-term working memory in executive
control. It will focus on a new experimental procedure in which subjects are
given names of tasks to be performed and then a list of stimuli to perform them
on, much like a person remembers a list of errands to be run on the way home
from work or a list of chores to be done on a Saturday afternoon. The third
project will examine the role of long-term memory in task switching. It will
focus on competition and interference produced by recent experience with other
tasks performed on the same stimuli, much like switching from workplace roles to
social roles in having lunch with the boss. This research will have direct
implications for basic research on executive control. It will also have
implications for human factors research and job design. With increased advances
in technology, people in the workplace are often required to switch between
tasks in the same environment; many of us have several windows open at once on
our computer screens. Understanding the costs of switching between tasks and
learning what can be done to reduce them will allow better design of software,
tasks, and jobs.