* 0133583
* CAREER:  Model-Based Design and Verification of Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2010
* Radu Grosu, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 05/31/2010
* USD 300,000.00

CAREER: Model-Based Design and Verification of Embedded Systems&lt;br/&gt;Radu
Grosu&lt;br/&gt;State University of New York at Stony
Brook&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computer aided verification (CAV) and embedded
software design automation (ESDA) emerge from&lt;br/&gt;academia and industry
respectively as two promising approaches to developing the high-
confidence&lt;br/&gt;software demanded by embedded-system applications,
including those found in the telecommunications,&lt;br/&gt;aerospace/military,
medical-device, and automotive industries. CAV and ESDA advocate the
same&lt;br/&gt;methodology for system design: (1) define the requirements, (2)
construct a model and (3) analyze&lt;br/&gt;the model with respect to the
requirements. The difference is essentially that: (1) CAV uses
more&lt;br/&gt;sophisticated requirements, (2) ESDA uses more sophisticated
models and (3) CAV performs a more&lt;br/&gt;sophisticated analysis. While ESDA
analysis reduces to manual, pointwise simulation of the model,&lt;br/&gt;CAV
analysis is automatic and exhaustive. This is made possible by a mathematical
formulation of&lt;br/&gt;the requirements, models and analysis problem that is
far beyond the precision currently supported&lt;br/&gt;by ESDA. The goal of this
research is to: (1) push the limits of CAV to capture and analyze&lt;br/&gt;ESDA
models; (2) increase the confidence in ESDA by applying CAV techniques. This
goal is pursued&lt;br/&gt;with following research and education
objectives:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Support the design methodology for discrete,
time-triggered and event-triggered embedded&lt;br/&gt;systems
with:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; - Hierarchic reactive modules (HRM), a state-based
modeling language that supports&lt;br/&gt; architectural and behavioral
hierarchy together with powerful time and space abstraction.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; - Concurrent class machines (CCM), an action-based modeling language
that directly&lt;br/&gt; incorporates object-oriented features like classes and
inheritance, objects and object creation,&lt;br/&gt; methods, method invocation
and exceptions, threads and thread creation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; - Shared
variables interaction diagrams, a scenario-based language that
adequately&lt;br/&gt; captures requirements of embedded systems communicating
via shared variables.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; - Hermes}, a modeling, simulation
and model checking tool for HRM that efficiently&lt;br/&gt; exploits the
hierarchical structure to prune the state space. We also consider a variety
of&lt;br/&gt; other CAV techniques and support for CCM.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;2.
Support the design methodology for embedded systems with tightly coupled
discrete and analog&lt;br/&gt; behavior with:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; - Hierarchic
hybrid machines (HHM)}, a hierarchic, state-based modeling language
that&lt;br/&gt; allows to capture both discrete and analog behavior.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; - Charon, a modeling and simulation tool for HHM that exploits
hierarchic structure for&lt;br/&gt; efficient multi-rate integration.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; - Different approaches to simulation, reachability analysis and
modular reasoning.&lt;br/&gt; Application of hybrid systems to modeling cell
behavior.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;3. Publish a textbook providing a comprehensive,
formal treatment of the unified modeling&lt;br/&gt; language UML for Real Time
to reduce the gap between ESDA and CAV.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;4. Integrate
formal concepts in the undergraduate education at Stony-Brook by proposing
changes&lt;br/&gt; for the courses in software engineering, theory of
computation and operating systems.