* 0133295
* CAREER: Evolution and Constraint of the RNA Polymerase II C-terminal Domain
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2002,12/31/2008
* John Stiller, East Carolina University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael K. Reddy
* 12/31/2008
* USD 668,978.00

The strongly conserved C-terminal domain (CTD) of the largest subunit of DNA-
dependent RNA polymerase II (RPB1) is essential for mRNA synthesis and is
present in all animals, plants and fungi that have been examined. In many groups
of organisms, however, the RPB1 C-terminus displays no evidence of sequence
elements known to be necessary for CTD function. The implication of these
differences for RNA pol II transcription is unclear. This research is aimed at
examining the significance of evolutionary changes in RPB1 C-terminal sequences
from a functional perspective. Specifically, questions to be investigated are,
1) when in the course of eukaryotic evolution did the CTD become fully
integrated into the RNA pol II transcription machine, and 2) which components of
that integrated machine enhanced control over mRNA synthesis sufficiently to
allow for the emergence of developmentally complex organisms? Special focus will
be placed on investigating the molecular biology of red algae, both because they
are intermediate in developmental complexity between unicellular protistan
groups and more complex multicellular model organisms, and because of their
inferred evolutionary history based on RNA polymerase gene sequences. In
conjunction with this investigation, a new research-based course for upper
division undergraduate and graduate students will be developed, permitting
direct participation in the exploration of the molecular biology of diverse
eukaryotic organisms. This course also will serve as a springboard for
attracting students toward more intensive undergraduate projects relating to the
research goals outlined. In addition, it will provide the infrastructure for a
summer outreach program that will afford area high school students and teachers
a hands-on introduction to basic molecular and evolutionary research.