* 0133504
* CAREER:  Bridging "In Vitro" and "In Vivo" Protein Folding: An Integrated Interdisciplinary Research and Teaching Plan
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2007
* Joan-Emma Shea, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 03/31/2007
* USD 605,000.00

The current understanding of the mechanism by which a protein folds and adopts
its biologically active three dimensional structure stems from experimental and
theoretical investigations in idealized dilute environments. Under biologically
relevant conditions, however, proteins fold in the much more complex cellular
environment, where folding is plagued by a number of obstacles. For example, the
crowded cytoplasmic environment, sequence mutations and changes in pH or
temperature, can all lead to the formation of misfolded or intermediate
structures. While recent experimental advances are permitting an exploration of
folding in the cell, a theoretical framework and understanding of protein
folding in the cellular environment is lacking. This project seeks to bridge the
gap in our theoretical knowledge between in vitro and in vivo protein folding.
Methods of statistical physics will be used to develop new methods and models to
further our understanding of protein folding and to develop a microscopic
picture of the kinetics and thermodynamics of protein aggregation. New
algorithms based on parallel tempering Molecular Dynamics, Stationary Phase
Monte Carlo and Field Theoretic methods will be developed to efficiently sample
relevant aggregate conformations. The effect of crowding on folding and the
competition between folding, misfolding and aggregation will be addressed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational goals of this project relate to the
interdisciplinary nature of this research. A reform of the chemistry curriculum,
to reflect the growing interdisciplinary nature of biochemical research and the
impact of computers in modern research, will be achieved through the development
of a new computational biophysics and chemistry course as well as through the
creation of an interdisciplinary undergraduate research program. Outreach
activities will be pursued through introductory computer classes aimed at middle
school girls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;