* 0133742
* CAREER: Long-Term Changes in Synaptic Function Induced by Selective Suppression of Activity in Single Neurons
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2007
* Venkatesh Murthy, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 04/30/2007
* USD 666,827.00

Lay abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: Long-term changes in synaptic function
induced by selective&lt;br/&gt;suppression of activity in single
neurons&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The adaptation of the brain to environmental
changes is achieved in part&lt;br/&gt;through modifications in the strength of
synapses, which are specialized&lt;br/&gt;connections between neurons. The
precise rules governing synapse&lt;br/&gt;formation, maturation and subsequent
modification in the central nervous&lt;br/&gt;system are not fully understood.
Using electrophysiology, fluorescence&lt;br/&gt;microscopy and molecular
biological tools, Dr. Murthy will investigate&lt;br/&gt;long-term modification
of identified synapses in a simple neural network&lt;br/&gt;in vitro. The
overall research objectives of the proposal are (i) to&lt;br/&gt;determine the
consequences of selective, long-term reduction of activity&lt;br/&gt;in a single
neuron within an active network, and (ii) to understand the&lt;br/&gt;locus and
mechanisms in synaptic modification resulting from
this&lt;br/&gt;manipulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two general classes of results
might be anticipated - homeostatic&lt;br/&gt;modifications that allow neuron-
wide increase in synaptic strength that&lt;br/&gt;will restore the overall
activity of the 'quiet' cell to normal levels,&lt;br/&gt;and competitive
modifications that reduce or eliminate synaptic input and&lt;br/&gt;output of
the 'quiet' cell. This experimental system will offer&lt;br/&gt;unparalleled
access to detailed cell biological investigations of
synaptic&lt;br/&gt;modification - from the level of gene expression to
physiological analysis&lt;br/&gt;at single synapse resolution. The investigator
will also integrate&lt;br/&gt;education with his research program by developing
up-to-date instructional&lt;br/&gt;material for an advanced course in neuronal
cell biology. Since optical&lt;br/&gt;microscopy has become an indispensable
tool in cellular-level research,&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Murthy will organize short
departmental workshops on advanced imaging&lt;br/&gt;techniques. In addition to
these instructional elements, the investigator&lt;br/&gt;will also mentor
undergraduate and graduate students, including those
from&lt;br/&gt;underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;