* 0133252
* CAREER:   Streaming Prerecorded Continuous Media in Wireless Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2008
* Martin Reisslein, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 06/30/2008
* USD 359,477.00

Two key developments in networking are that the Internet is (1) increasingly
used for the streaming of continuous media, a large portion of which is
prerecorded, and (2) increasingly accessed by wireless (and possibly mobile)
clients. The stringent Quality of Service requirements of continuous media, such
as video, combined with the unreliability of wireless links make the real-time
streaming over wireless links a very challenging problem. To address the trend
towards wireless streaming, the researcher proposes to develop a comprehensive
theory and a framework of practical protocols and mechanisms for the real-time
streaming of prerecorded continuous media to wireless clients. To overcome the
challenges of real-time streaming of continuous media over wireless links the
proposed protocols and mechanisms will rely on the following key
insights:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. For prerecorded continuous media (i) the exact
traffic characteristics are known before the streaming commences, and (ii) while
the stream is being played out, segments of the stream can be prefetched into a
prefetch buffer in the client.&lt;br/&gt;2. Channel probing techniques can
identify the wireless links with good transmission conditions in the face of
location-dependent, time-varying, and bursty wireless link errors.&lt;br/&gt;3.
Rate adaptation techniques of modern wireless systems (e.g., third and fourth
generation wireless systems) allow to dynamically allocate transmission
capacities to the individual ongoing flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novel idea
of the streaming protocols is to overcome the variability of the wireless links
by prefetching segments of the continuous media stream into the client buffer.
The prefetching is done by dynamically allocating transmission capacities to the
ongoing streams according to (1) the prefetch buffer contents in the clients,
and (2) the wireless link conditions (determined through channel probing).
Through prefetching (i.e.,work-ahead) prefetched reserves are built up in the
clients that allow the clients to continue playback during adverse transmission
conditions on the wireless links. The preliminary simulation results for
prefetching using a Join-the-Shortest-Queue (JSQ) policy in conjunction with a
simple channel probing scheme indicate that prefetching brings dramatic
performance improvements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher proposes to
develop a comprehensive framework for the real-time streaming of continuous
media to wireless clients. The specific objectives of the proposed project are
to develop:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. optimal prefetching mechanisms for a single
wireless cell, e.g., mechanisms that for given client buffers minimize the
client starvation probability while maximizing the number of supported streams.
The researcher will analyze the fundamental trade-offs in prefetching over
wireless links and develop call admission rules.&lt;br/&gt;2. prefetching
mechanisms for scalable encoded media that enable heterogeneous multimedia
streaming services.&lt;br/&gt;3. seamless end-to-end streaming mechanism, for
the real-time delivery of continuous media over networks consisting of wired and
wireless links to mobile clients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the preliminary work
for the proposed project, the researcher has developed a prefetching protocol
for the real-time streaming of continuous media between the base station and
multiple wireless clients in a wireless cell.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research is closely integrated with two educational initiatives. These are (1)
outreach and extended education, and (2) the development of a wireless
multimedia streaming testbed based on a 802.11 wireless LAN. The goals of the
outreach and extended education initiative are to attract traditionally
underrepresented minorities to engineering, and to provide high-quality
networking instruction to underrepresented students, e.g., working adults. This
will be achieved by (i) developing on-line networking labs for K-12 students and
teachers in the Arizona MESA and the NSF funded WISE programs, (ii) enhancing
the networking courses in ASU's Extended Education program with web-based
teaching aids, and (iii) integrating networking courses into the exclusively
web-based tri-university Master of Engineering program in Arizona. The streaming
testbed will serve as a platform for integrating research, industrial
collaborations, and students' education. Protocols for wireless QoS, such as the
proposed prefetch protocol will be implemented in undergraduate (senior) design
projects to complement and deepen the classroom
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;