* 0133845
* CAREER:  Decision Making and Learning in Dynamic Multiagent Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Junling Hu, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/29/2004
* USD 119,850.00

This project investigates two important elements in intelligent multiagent
systems: decision making and learning. Based on a theoretical model of dynamic
games, the PI will investigate a new optimality criterion for decision making.
Second, the PI will define a non-stationary strategy within a dynamic game
framework, providing a language to describe the policy choices. Third, the PI
will provide a framework to describe the interaction between learning and action
choice, and redefine the concept of online learning. Fourth, the PI will search
for efficient online learning algorithms to reach an optimal non-stationary
strategy. Fifth, this research on non-stationary strategy learning will be
linked to research on models for dynamic single-agent systems. Finally, the
proposed methodology and algorithms will be implemented in agent applications
for E-commerce domains and computer games. Potential applications include
bidding agents for online auctions, pricebots for online retailers and computer
characters for strategic games. The proposed research is integrated with the
PI's education plan, which focuses on promoting the concept of intelligence for
multiagent systems. The PI will teach decision making and learning in dynamic
games in her Ph.D. seminar class, and construct a graduate course on agent
design for multiagent systems and their applications in electronic commerce.