* 0133690
* CAREER:  Software Thread Integration for Low-End through High-End Embedded Processors
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2009
* Alexander Dean, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 01/31/2009
* USD 340,000.00

This CAREER project investigates embedded systems architectures through the
application of compiler and architectural techniques which use an existing
processor more efficiently. Rather than automatically adopt existing personal
computer paradigms for embedded systems, the main theme of this research is to
rethink architectures and compilers in the context of embedded systems and how
they are designed.

Software thread integration (STI) is a novel compiler technique for
automatically interleaving multiple procedures (which implement multiple threads
of control) into one non-speculative implicitly multithreaded procedure. The
threads are integrated at the assembly language level; the compiler applies
transformations to resolve conflicts in control-flow and resource sharing.

This research project uses STI in two ways. The first builds on the extraction
of more fine-grain concurrency from a generic processor. STI enables switching
from one thread to another with negligible (if any) performance penalty or
delay. This means that some of the hardware resources added to compensate for
the processor's poor fine-grain concurrency are eliminated and the functions
move to software. The research is developing efficient methods to perform this
hardware to software migration efficiently and precisely enough to implement
network protocol interfaces completely in software, reducing size, weight, cost
and development time for low-end embedded systems.

The second uses integration's augmentation of a thread's instruction-level
parallelism, leading to faster execution on processors which are able to execute
multiple instructions simultaneously. Modern digital signal processors used in
high-end embedded systems are able to do so, yet they are poorly utilized
because single threads do not contain enough independent instructions. STI helps
by increasing the number of independent instructions in a thread to keep more
functional units busy and finish the computation faster. This enables the more
efficient use of lower-performance processors, reducing system costs and
development time. When coupled with power management techniques, it also reduces
power consumption and increases battery life.

The PI is creating a new embedded systems track within the computer engineering
curriculum at NC State University. Two new hands-on courses on processor-based
embedded systems are being added to supplement the PI's existing embedded system
design course. The first is a junior-level course that introduces students to
microcontrollers, interfacing them to the physical environment, and using a
real-time operating system with modern development tools. The second is a
graduate course that covers high-performance embedded systems for media
processing. Students learn to program and optimize media applications (e.g audio
or video compression and decompression) on various architectures (superscalar,
VLIW, chip multi-processor). The PI is also involved in outreach activities at
the NC School of Science and Mathematics to promote interest in embedded systems
design and programming.