* 0133038
* CAREER:  Modeling, Analysis, and Control of Hybrid Systems with Applications to Nanoprocesses
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2002,09/30/2005
* VijaySekhar Chellaboina, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2005
* USD 225,000.00

Modeling, Analysis, and Control of Hybrid&lt;br/&gt;Systems with Applications to
Nanoprocesses&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the light of the increasingly complex
nature of dynamical systems requiring controls, the predominant considerations
in control law design for modern engineering systems have focused on general
hierarchical nonlinear switching control architectures that minimize control law
complexity subject to the achievement of overall system stability and
performance. These systems, classified as hybrid dynamical systems, include
dynamical switching systems, nonsmooth impact mechanical systems, biological
systems, sampled-data systems, discrete-event systems, intelligent
vehicle/highway systems, constrained mechanical systems, and flight control
systems, to cite but a few examples. The proposed research program focuses on
stability and control of general hybrid dynamical systems. In this research,
first, we will focus on the development of a unified dynamical systems approach
for solving the problems of stability analysis, disspativity theory, optimal
control, robust stability and performance of hybrid/impulsive dynamical systems.
Next, a general modeling framework for mechanical impact systems described by
impulsive differential equations will be developed. Furthermore, based on an
ongoing research effort, we will develop a passivity-based control framework for
stabilization of mechanical impact systems, more generally, Euler-Lagrange
systems involving impacts. Finally, to transition the proposed theoretical
developments to cutting-edge engineering technology, we propose to validate our
results on a very important engineering problem; namely, active control of
nanoprocesses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of his educational activities, we
propose to introduce a novel web-based numerical experimental component in the
undergraduate control education. Specifically, using the new enabling multimedia
technology, we propose to develop several numerical experiments to train
students in applying the analytical skills on computer generated models.
Finally, inspired by an optimal control approach for biological processes, we
propose a teaching philosophy/model to study and hopefully maximize freshmen
retention.&lt;br/&gt;