* 0133526
* CAREER: The Limits of Mendelian Genetics: Sperm Influences Female Meiotic Segregation
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2007
* Fernando Pardo Manuel de Villena, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 01/31/2007
* USD 535,078.00

Males from several laboratory inbred strains produce a sperm factor that is able
to interact with the female meiotic spindle apparatus at the second meiotic
division, disrupting the random segregation of chromatids between the zygote and
the second polar body. On the other hand, the male sperm from other inbred
strains do not interfere with the expected random segregation of chromatids. In
hybrid males generated by crossing animals from these two types of inbred
strains, the phenotype appears to segregate as a single locus that is expressed
at the haploid stage of spermatogenesis. The objective of the project is to
characterize this unusual effect of the sperm in nonrandom segregation of
maternal alleles during female meiosis. This research project has two aims: i)
characterize the mode of inheritance of the sperm factor and ii) identify the
molecular nature of the gene, or genes, responsible for this phenotype using a
combination of positional cloning, comparative genomics methods and functional
assays. &lt;br/&gt;The characterization of true exceptions to Mendel's laws of
inheritance has been a highly successful approach in uncovering general
principles in genetics. The phenotype to be studied in this project, nonrandom
segregation of chromatids during female meiosis that is driven by the genotype
of the fertilizing sperm, represents a true violation to Mendel's law of
segregation. In addition, it also violates the basic assumption of Mendelian
genetics that the segregation of alleles during meiosis in one sex is
independent from the segregation of alleles in the other sex, i. e., the
inheritance of genetic information from one parent is independent of the
inheritance of genetic information from the other parent. The information
gathered in this research has great potential to provide new insights in the
mechanisms of control of chromosome segregation during meiosis and to refine the
standard models commonly used in the fields of genetics and evolutionary
biology. &lt;br/&gt;In the past decade a trend has become apparent in the
curricula of genetics at graduate and undergraduate levels. An increasing
emphasis has been placed in the molecular aspects of gene action and gene
regulation, while basic aspects of transmission genetics are briefly summarized
and often presented as a complete body of knowledge. Although one may argue that
this approach has been exceedingly successful in the characterization of the
molecular basis of disease, it is also clear that some observations violate the
most basic assumptions of Mendelian Genetics. These observations reject the
commonly held opinion that transmission genetics was essentially solved in the
past century and exemplifies the open-ended nature of the quest to fully
understand the principles and mechanisms governing the transmission of genetics
information. The underlying rationale of this research project (i. e., testing
the validity of basic assumptions of genetic models) and the results generated
have a great educational significance that will be integrated within course
design, teaching and supervision at the high school, undergraduate, graduate and
postdoctoral levels. &lt;br/&gt;