* 0133209
* CAREER: Rational Design in Chemical Engineering, From Polymerization Catalysis to Product Engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2007
* Christopher Jones, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
*  John R Regalbuto
* 01/31/2007
* USD 374,992.00

The objective of this project is to design porous silica catalysts with isolated
organometallic surface species and to assess their efficacy as olefin
polymerization catalysts. These metallocene catalysts have been successfully
used as homogeneous catalysts. The aim of this project is to prepare
corresponding heterogeneous catalysts that will overcome the difficulties (e.g.,
reactor fouling) associated with the homogeneous form. The distribution of sites
in heterogeneous industrial catalysts causes the selectivity of these materials
to be lower than for their homogeneous counterparts, but the proposed synthesis
of a heterogeneous form is expected to overhome this problem. The approach
involves functionalization porous silica followed by a novel technique for
binding the catalyst to the surface to produce only one type of site. The
resulting catalytic material will be characterized with a number of surface
techniques followed by characterization of the polymer formed in model
reactions. The educational plan includes the development of a course to
intorduce the rational synthesis of materials and the introduction of this topic
into an existing catalysis course. Participation in a program to help middle
school and high school teachers become involved in research during the summer
will be part of an outreach effort. This work could lead to a novel technique
for heterogeneous polymerication and may have broader applications in creating
well defined, spatially isolated, organometallic species on support surfaces for
a variety of novel catalytic process.