* 0133761
* CAREER:   Energy Efficient Mobile Wireless Networking
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2008
* Rajarathnam Chandramouli, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 07/31/2008
* USD 306,795.00

Mobile wireless networking is experiencing a tremendous rate of growth. Many
traditional wireline based applications are going wireless. Among other issues,
one core issue that needs to be addressed for the success of future mobile
wireless communications is energy-efficient wireless networking. Currently, the
re-chargeable battery energy capacity of most mobile devices is limited due to a
variety of reasons. It is also known that the rate at which battery technology
is&lt;br/&gt;progressing is rather slow compared to the advances in wireless
technology and applications. Therefore, it is important to optimize the
networking algorithms, protocols and parameters for energy efficiency.
Especially, this may be essential to support next generation high speed wireless
networking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Energy minimization is of two types:
communication and computation energy minimization. There has been significant
progress in designing energy-efficient physical layer algorithms and hardware
architectures. But, the goal of this project is to investigate energy
optimization and control policies at higher layers of the network protocol
stack. Towards this objective a new layer called Control Layer is proposed. A
rich set of mathematical tools and stochastic control algorithms are
incorporated in this layer to predict, estimate, and control the time-varying
parameters such as battery capacity, rate of transmission, error control,
routing, transport protocols, and application requirements. This layer enables
the other protocol layers to be energy-aware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In summary,
the proposed plan for this inter-disciplinary research project and the
educational initiatives to integrate research with teaching at both
undergraduate and graduate levels are as follows:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1)
Energy-efficient link and MAC layer protocols for time-varying wireless links.
Stochastic control of the tradeoff between communication versus computation
energy. New probability based MAC protocols that attempt to schedule users such
that energy is minimized.&lt;br/&gt;2) Theoretical analysis of stochastic
control algorithms that react to the bursty nature of traffic and link errors.
Experiments to validate and test these control algorithms for real-life
channels.&lt;br/&gt;3) Stochastic minimum energy routing algorithms that account
for the current battery state of a mobile node and also the network
state.&lt;br/&gt;4) Energy-aware transport control protocols that distinguish
between the good and bad states of a wireless link and act
accordingly.&lt;br/&gt;5) Stochastic dynamic programming based rate control
techniques at the application layer to save energy.&lt;br/&gt;6) Implementation
of project based learning and active learning techniques in the class room.
Motivate undergraduate and graduate student research through this NSF CAREER
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A matching grant of $100,000 from Stevens
Institute and $100,000 from New Jersey state have been committed to this
project. Supporting documents have been attached as supplements.