* 0133597
* CAREER: Algorithmic Semi-Algebraic Geometry and Its Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2007
* Saugata Basu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Robert B Grafton
* 05/31/2007
* USD 366,023.00

0133597 Saugata Basu Georgia Tech

CAREER: Algorithmic Semi-algebraic Geometry and its Applications

Algorithmic semi-algebraic geometry lies at the heart of of many problems in
several different areas of computer science and mathematics including discrete
and computational geometry, robot motion planning, geometric modeling, computer-
aided design, geometric theorem proving, mathematical investigations of real
algebraic varieties, molecular chemistry, constraint databases etc. A closely
related subject area is quantitative real algebraic geometry. Results from
quantitative real algebraic geometry are the basic ingredients of better
algorithms in semi-algebraic geometry and play an increasingly important role in
several other areas of computer science: for instance, in bounding the geometric
complexity of arrangements in computational geometry, computational learning
theory, proving lower bounds in computational complexity theory, convex
optimization problems etc.

The first goal of this project is to design optimal algorithms for several
important problems of semi-algebraic geometry including the problems of
computing the homology groups and stratifications of semi-algebraic sets.
Secondly, the methods and techniques of algorithmic real algebraic geometry will
be applied to investigate several open problems in discrete and computational
geometry and to explore new connections, especially in the area of computational
topology. At the same time, several emerging applications of algorithmic semi-
algebraic geometry will be investigated, especially in the area of constraint
databases. Additionally, practical implementations will be undertaken, in order
to build a system able to compute topological invariants (such as the number of
connected components, the Euler characteristic, the Betti numbers, the full
homology groups) of given semi-algebraic sets. This will aim at bridging the
current gap between the theoretically best algorithms, and the best practical
implementations available.

The educational component of the project consists of developing an integrated
cross-disciplinary curriculum suitable for advanced under-graduate and beginning
graduate students in mathematics and computer science. This would require no
pre-requisite beyond college-level calculus and linear algebra, so that that the
students can quickly absorb the mathematical background necessary for this line
of research, and at the same time be in a position to make efficient
implementations, which would make them attractive to both industry and academia.

