* 0133874
* Sensory Exploitation of Prey Escape Circuits
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2006
* Piotr Jablonski, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Byers
* 02/28/2006
* USD 380,248.00

Sensory exploitation of prey escape circuits&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the
mechanisms of natural selection that evolutionary biologists study is the "arms
race" between predators and prey. Predators evolve various adaptations to
capture the prey, and the prey species evolve more and more sophisticated ways
to avoid being killed. Who wins this arms race? This proposal focuses on
predator-prey relationship in which the predator, the Painted Redstart
(Myioborus pictus), exploits properties of a simple pathway in the nervous
system of its insect prey to win the race. &lt;br/&gt;Flies possess a specific
cluster of neurons, the Giant Descending Neuron Cluster, which triggers an
escape reflex when a conspicuous image of an approaching predator is expanding
on the fly's retina. Such neural pathways and their properties have evolved
millions of years ago, and undoubtedly before the evolution of fly-eating birds.
This escape reaction is believed to be a general antipredatory adaptation
against all sorts of predators. This research project will test the idea that
the Painted Redstart is now exploiting the properties of this simple neural
pathway in flies. Birdwatchers are well acquainted with the very conspicuous
tail fanning and wing spreading employed by foraging redstarts to show off their
white and black plumage pattern. The idea is that redstarts use these displays
to activate the escape reflexes of flies and other insects making them easier
for the birds to detect. Redstarts have specialized in capturing such escaping
insects in mid-air. &lt;br/&gt;This research will consist of three components.
First, a comparison of Painted Redstart's diet with the diets of several other
insectivorous birds will show whether flies with well-developed Giant Descending
Neuron Clusters are more common in the diet of redstarts than in the diet of
other insect-eating birds that do not use this exploitative hunting technique.
Second, electrophysiological studies of the neurons in the Giant Descending
Neuron Cluster will be used to test whether these neurons are especially
sensitive to the redstart's displays. Third, a field study of the foraging
performance of redstarts with experimentally enlarged and reduced white patches
will show whether the arrangement naturally present in redstarts is optimal for
flushing their insect prey. &lt;br/&gt;