* 0133838
* CAREER: Supporting Evolution in Distributed Object Computing Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2008
* Michael Lewis, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 01/31/2008
* USD 395,712.00

Programming for distributed object computing systems is complicated by the fact
that objects persist and interact with a number of other objects in the system.
When programmers change and evolve their objects, the ramifications are felt by
clients in other parts of the system, not just within the application that is
being programmed. Therefore, distributed object programmers require mechanisms
to manage this evolution and make it known to other objects in the system. The
dynamically configurable distributed object (DCDO) model is a first step toward
managing evolution in distributed object systems. The DCDO model, implemented
within the Legion grid computing system, helps enable object evolution and
facilitate the development of distributed objects from multiple independent
implementation components. Using DCDOs, programmers can evolve existing active
objects to accept new member functions, to change the interface and behavior of
their member functions, and to remove member functions from their external
(public) or internal (private) interface. Programmers can make these changes on
the fly, without deactivating any part of the system, without replacing binary
exe-cutables, without interrupting the clients of evolving objects, and without
having to know what the changes will be at the time the objects are initially
compiled and run. The model supports evolution management strategies that define
when and how object types evolve from one version to the next, and determine
when a type change is propagated to existing instances. The evolution management
strategies built into the DCDO model are a good start toward managing change,
but they are not sufficient. Programmers require a more general purpose
mechanism for defining how objects can change, and for restricting how
evolutions can take place. The research described in this proposal will address
this problem. In particular, we will make the evolution characteristics of an
object a first class entity in the distributed system, so that it can be read by
other objects, which can then behave appropriately based on how their peers have
evolved and may evolve in the future. Clients will be able to read the evolution
histories of servers, and will be able to determine the restrictions, if any,
that are placed on future server evolution. Further, clients will be able to
register call-back functions with servers in order to be informed when changes
take place. When they do, the clients can be given some control over when and
how the changes can be carried out. In some cases, a client may be able to veto
an evolution operation, or delay it until the client has finished its current
application. This functionality is implemented in terms of a protocol that is
initiated by the call back functions among the clients who have registered
interest in the evolution operation. This begins to address the problem of
implementations changing out from under clients that are built to support a
different interface. In another important part of the research, we will study
how real applications change over time, in order to effectively design evolution
management strategies and constraints. We will include a wide range of different
applications in the study, including the core Legion objects themselves, high
performance scientific applications, and distributed collaborative environments.
In the educational component of the proposed program, we will implement the
Student Centered Applied Learning through Industry Projects (SCALIP) program. In
this program, students work with local industries to define class projects for
other students in future instantiations of core graduate courses.