* 0133092
* CAREER:  Active System Management
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2008
* William Arbaugh, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2008
* USD 488,188.00

A fundamental fact in computer and network security is that there never can be
a one hundred percent assurance that a computer system is trusted. The term
trusted is used heavily in Computer Security. Unfortunately, the term has
several definitions depending on who uses it and how the term is used.
Throughout this proposal, a definition which is a slight modifications of Peter
Neumann's, is used. Based on this definition, an object is defined as trusted
when the object always operates as expected according to design and policy. A
stronger trust statement is when an object is trustworthy. A trustworthy object
is one that has been shown in some convincing manner, e.g. a formal code-review
or formal mathematical analysis, to operate as expected.&lt;br/&gt; Ken Thompson
described very clearly one of the many issues involved in determining if a
system is trusted in his Turing Award speech in 1984. For over twenty-five
years, the security community has focused on technology, and yet information
systems remain as vulnerable as ever (perhaps more so). However, a significant
improvements in security lie in another area-the secure management of
technologies and the systems that implement them. In this proposal, the PI
demonstrates the need for intensive research on the secure management of
distributed heterogeneous networks and systems, and describes a novel research
plan using active system management to address this area.&lt;br/&gt; The
tremendous growth of the use of information technology has exacerbated the
problem of effectively managing and securing the resultant information
infrastructure. This coupled with the fact that the current state of the art in
security is essentially "penetrate and patch" has created a situation where
information technology is more vulnerable than ever. The vulnerability of
information technology is demonstrated by the large number of news stories
relating to wide-spread computer intrusions and network scanning that are
published each week. The big question is "how do we improve the
situation?"&lt;br/&gt; While studies, anecdotal evidence, and press reports have
demonstrated the increasing vulnerability of information technology, information
security research is currently primarily focused on the underlying security
technology rather than the secure management of the information technology. Yet,
the tremendous growth in the use of information technology and its rate of
change creates a configuration and system management nightmare that amplifies
existing security problems. Unfortunately, current approaches for solving this
complex problem are ad hoc, do not scale, and have not focused on
security.&lt;br/&gt; In this research, the PI proposes a broad examination of
distributed heterogeneous configuration and security management of network
elements and hosts from both a theoretical and a systems approach. The proposed
research provides the formalism, mechanisms, and protocols so that enterprises
can implement and utilize a very small, or quick, management loop, i.e. the
tools to allow the defenders to react faster than the attackers. Doing so
eliminates one of the principle advantages of attackers, and dramatically
increases the work factor of successful attacks- providing one of the first real
improvements in computer and network security.&lt;br/&gt;