* 0133220
* CAREER: Genetic and Proteomic Analyses of MAP Kinase Pathways in Plant Disease Resistance
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2002,02/29/2008
* Shuqun Zhang, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 02/29/2008
* USD 506,000.00

This CAREER program is designed to integrate research into teaching and to
promote the incorporation of biochemical/proteomic methods into
molecular/genetic research among students and post-docs. Increasing evidence
from biochemical and molecular studies implicated SIPK and WIPK, two tobacco
mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) in plant disease resistance signaling.
However, genetic evidence is lacking. Activation of endogenous SIPK and WIPK by
expressing the active mutant of their upstream kinase, NtMEK2DD leads to the
induction of defense genes and hypersensitive response (HR)-like cell death. The
identification of the homologous pathway in Arabidopsis,
AtMEK4/AtMEK5-AtMPK6/AtMPK3 permitted genetic screens for modifiers and
downstream components of this MAPK pathway, which is one of the major goals of
this project. Activation tagging, T-DNA, and EMS mutant populations have been
generated in steroid-inducible transgenic Arabidopsis. Mutants that lose cell
death phenotype after steroid treatment, MAPK-activation-no-death (mand) will be
isolated from T1, T2, or M2 population. Genes responsible for the phenotypic
alterations will be cloned, which could be: 1) AtMPK6 and AtMPK3 themselves; 2)
the substrate(s) of AtMPK6 and/or AtMPK3; 3) extragenic suppressors and negative
regulators of AtMPK6/AtMPK3 pathway such as MAPK phosphatases and scaffold
proteins; and 4) other components involved in the regulation and execution of HR
cell death. In addition, proteomic approaches will be employed to identify the
in vivo substrates of these two MAPKs. The other major goal of this project is
to integrate research into classroom teaching and to promote the use of multi-
dimensional approach to study a physiological/morphological phenotype, which is
critical for the advance of post-genome biology. Undergraduate students,
especially those from under represented groups will be actively recruited by
participating in institutional programs that reach out to minorities. The
concept and techniques of proteomics will be incorporated into the Advanced
Biochemistry Laboratory course during the tenure of this program. In an era of
significant technological advances, it is important for classroom teaching to
absorb these advances and to prepare students with the most updated information.
The identification of MAPK substrates and the regulators/executioners of HR
would be a significant contribution to the study of plant programmed cell death.
One practical extension of this work is that the identification of important
regulatory components in plant defense signaling pathway may allow the
generation of crops with enhanced disease resistance, which is important for
sustaining agricultural production and improving our environment.