* 0133736
* CAREER: Unifying Segmentation and Other Image Processing Problems via Variational PDE's
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2008
* Anthony Yezzi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 05/31/2008
* USD 350,000.00

0133736 Yezzi, Anthony GA Tech Res Corp

This research is centered around problems of segmentation in image processing.
Segmentation, which may be described as the problem of locating meaningful
regions within an image, is a crucial problem in medical imaging, military
imaging, and a variety of other image based applications. The two goals of this
research are to (1) advance the state of the art in image segmentation and (2)
develop frameworks to solve segmentation jointly with other image processing
problems. A key an example of (2) will focus around the problem of image
registration (aligning common objects seen within two or more images).
Tradiditionally, the problems of segmentation (locating the objects in each
image) and registration (lining them up) are solved separately. This research
explores methods for solving such problems simultaneously, with the important
benefit that one of the problems need not be fully solved before starting the
solution of the other problem. The Principal Investigator's approach to problems
(1) and (2) will draw strongly from the mathematical theories of differential
geometry, curve and surface evolution, the calculus of variations, and partial
differential equations (PDE's). PDE's comprise very natural and powerful
mathematical tools due to their flexibility, ease of implementation, and
mathematical rigor. Their current and previous applications to problems in image
processing (including segmentation) have demonstrated their strong potential in
this field.

Under the recommended level of support, the PI will make every attempt to meet
the original scope and level of effort of this project.

