* 0133346
* CAREER: The Role of Self-Regulated Learning in Students' Understanding of Science with Hypermedia
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Roger Azevedo, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 06/30/2007
* USD 615,663.00

This project focuses on the role of self-regulated&lt;br/&gt;learning (SRL) in
students' understanding of science with hypermedia. SRL is&lt;br/&gt;emerging as
a significant issue in educational and psychological research. SRL is an active,
constructive process&lt;br/&gt;whereby learners set goals for their learning and
then attempt to monitor,&lt;br/&gt;regulate, and control their cognition,
motivation, and behavior in the service&lt;br/&gt;of those goals. SRL is guided
and constrained by both personal characteristics&lt;br/&gt;and the contextual
features of the environment (Pintrich, 2000). The focus of&lt;br/&gt;SRL
research over the last three decades has been on learners' academic
learning&lt;br/&gt;and achievement and has progressively included emphases on
cognitive strategies,&lt;br/&gt;metacognition, motivation, and task engagement
(for a recent review see Paris &amp;&lt;br/&gt;Paris, 2001). The broad scope of
SRL appeals to educational researchers who seek&lt;br/&gt;to understand how
students become adept and independent in their educational&lt;br/&gt;pursuits.
Whether SRL is viewed as a set of skills that can be taught
explicitly&lt;br/&gt;or as developmental processes of self-regulation that
emerge with experience&lt;br/&gt;(within a domain, topic, or task), teachers can
provide information and&lt;br/&gt;opportunities to students of all ages that
will help them become strategic,&lt;br/&gt;motivated, and independent learners.
There are, however, several theoretical and&lt;br/&gt;empirical issues that need
further research before practical classroom&lt;br/&gt;implications can be put
forth. How do students' regulate their own learning when&lt;br/&gt;using a
hypermedia environment to learn about complex science topics?
Which&lt;br/&gt;processes related to self- and co-regulation do student pairs
and teachers use&lt;br/&gt;during collaborative learning of complex science
topics with hypermedia? What&lt;br/&gt;kinds of instructional conditions are
more effective in fostering SRL? How can&lt;br/&gt;science teachers provide
information and opportunities to students of all ages&lt;br/&gt;that can help
them become more strategic, motivated, and independent learners?&lt;br/&gt;Can
SRL be taught explicitly as a set of skills or is it a developmental
process&lt;br/&gt;that emerges from experience (within a task, topic, or
domain).This NSF Career project will explore these&lt;br/&gt;questions through
research that forges new directions in the area of students'&lt;br/&gt;self-
regulated learning of two complex science topics (the circulatory
system&lt;br/&gt;and ecological systems) with hypermedia environments
(CircSysWeb and RiverWeb).&lt;br/&gt;In doing so, the research goals will be:
(1) To scale-up research on&lt;br/&gt;self-regulated learning across
developmental levels and contexts; (2) To examine&lt;br/&gt;the role of self-
and co-regulation during individual and collaborative learning&lt;br/&gt;with
hypermedia environments; (3) To examine the effectiveness of&lt;br/&gt;co-
construction of goals (between teacher and students) during learning
of&lt;br/&gt;science with hypermedia environments; (4) To examine the
effectiveness of&lt;br/&gt;strategy instruction training in fostering students'
self- and co-regulated&lt;br/&gt;learning with hypermedia; and, (5) To examine
the effectiveness of adaptive&lt;br/&gt;web-based hypermedia environments in
detecting, modeling, and fostering&lt;br/&gt;students' self- and co-regulated
learning of science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;