* 0133115
* CAREER:  Efficient Audio Compression with Perceptually Embedded Scalability
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2008
* Charles Creusere, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 05/31/2008
* USD 356,000.00

0133115&lt;br/&gt;Charles D. Creusere&lt;br/&gt;New Mexico State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Efficient Audio Compression with Perceptually
Embedded Scalability&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this project is to
develop compression formats for audio data that are better suited to the
integrated wireless/landline communications networks currently being developed
and fielded. The heterogeneous nature of such networks demands a compressed
storage format from which fine layers of audio fidelity can be extracted; thus,
each listener on the communications network receives as many layers of audio
fidelity (i.e., the best quality audio reproduction) that his or her
communications channel can support, all extracted from this single compressed
representation. An obvious application of such technology is music-on-demand
over forthcoming wireless services like 3G cellular and Bluetooth. A finely
layered or 'scalable' bit stream can also be used to improve the streaming of
real-time audio over the Internet or a broadcast wireless channel by simplifying
rate buffer control and error protection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research here
concentrates on developing a high-performance compression algorithm whose
scalability is optimized for perceptual performance over the entire range of
output fidelities. Most of the audio compression algorithms in wide use today--
MP3 (MPEG audio layer 3), MPEG AAC, Dolby Digital, etc.-- do not support
bitstream scalability. Within the frameworks of MPEG 2 and MPEG 4, fine-grained
scalability is supported using a technique called bit slice arithmetic coding
(BSAC). Unfortunately, subjective testing has shown that BSAC's scalability is
not optimized for perceived sound quality at lower bitrates. To more closely tie
the bit allocation process to the perceived quality, a non-uniform multirate
filter bank is used here whose frequency resolution approximates that of the
critical bands of human hearing. Quantization within each critical band is then
performed in an optimal, multistage manner using both vector and scalar
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;