* 0133335
* CAREER: Genetic Dissection of Mitochondrial Morphogenesis During Drosophila Spermatogenesis
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2008
* Karen Hales, Davidson College
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 04/30/2008
* USD 500,000.00

Mitochondria are the organelles in which the energy from food is harnessed into
ATP. In many cell types, mitochondria undergo dynamic shape changes and
regulated movement, events which are thought to coordinate delivery of ATP to
subcellular regions with highest energy demand. Mechanisms by which mitochondria
are moved and shaped have been partially characterized in single-celled
eukaryotes, but not all of these mechanisms are conserved in more complex
organisms. The scientific goal of this project is to elucidate molecular
mechanisms of mitochondrial dynamics during spermatogenesis in Drosophila
melanogaster. An undergraduate research program will be established, and
students will identify and characterize genes associated with mitochondrial
morphogenesis. The educational goal is to incorporate experimental questions
from the research into a genetics laboratory course taught annually at Davidson
College. &lt;br/&gt;Spermatogenesis in Drosophila is an ideal metazoan model
system for genetic analysis of mitochondrial morphogenesis, since 1)
mitochondria normally aggregate, fuse, and elongate beside the flagellar axoneme
in spermatids, and 2) genetic defects in mitochondrial morphogenesis can lead to
sterility, a phenotype for which many genetic screens have been performed.
Students will take both forward and reverse genetic approaches to characterize
gene products that are required for mitochondrial movement and shaping in
Drosophila spermatids. These approaches interweave many classical and molecular
genetic techniques, such as recombination mapping, transposon mobilization,
complementation, polymerase chain reaction, DNA subcloning, blotting and
hybridization, and immunolocalization. Sequence analysis using online tools and
computer databases will be an essential component of the research. Students will
benefit from the connections they observe between classroom learning and
laboratory discoveries, especially as they see the integration of classical and
molecular genetics. Undergraduates in independent projects and in the genetics
laboratory course will be particularly motivated by the prospect of contributing
original findings to the scientific literature. &lt;br/&gt;Sperm cells require a
great deal of energy; the structures within each cell that generate and provide
usable "fuel" are mitochondria. During sperm cell formation, mitochondria
undergo shape changes essential for sperm cell motility. In this project,
undergraduates will perform studies of sterile mutant fruit fly strains that
show mitochondrial defects. Students will identify and characterize genes which
control the movement and shaping of mitochondria. This project will expand
knowledge of mechanisms of mitochondrial dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;