* 0133521
* CAREER: Practical Data Synchronization: Minimizing Communication
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/2002,08/31/2008
* Ari Trachtenberg, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* William H Tranter
* 08/31/2008
* USD 364,268.00

The problem of data synchronization is inherent to systems that require
consistency among distributed information. In light ofthe vision of pervasive
computing, in which any two mo- bile or fixed computing devices would be able
tointeract, data synchronization is increasingly becoming an essential
technology. To date, most research on data synchronization has focused on
database issues related to con ict resolution. However, we feelthat current
trends towards pervasive computing point to communication becoming the primary
bottleneck for synchronization. For example, the Palm Pilot IIIxe, a popular and
representative Personal Digital Assistant, can take even 20 minutes to
synchronize with a desktop PC in certain practical scenarios. There are many
other diverse examples of the need for communication-aware data synchronization,
including synchronization of mobile data, resource discovery, and even
reconciliation of nucleotide sequences in DNA. We intend to investigate
practical data synchronization techniques that minimize com- munication
complexity, building upon a foundation of recent research connecting such tech-
niques to graph coloring problems and the design of error-control codes. These
connections allow for application of the latest results in these fields, such as
the capacity-approaching Low Density Parity-Check codes, to important
synchronization issues. The synchronized schemes we propose to research promise
to be much faster and more general than those currently in use, offering
applications to fault-tolerance, file synchronization, and image comparison. At
the same time, we outline an ambitious, but attainable, educational plan based
on years of experience with a diverse body of students. Our goals include: 1)
strengthening ties with high schools through mentoring involvement in prize-
based research programs; 2) expanding involvement of undergraduates in the
proposed research through targeted projects and collaboration with graduate
students; 3) enhancing graduate education through the use of real-life projects
and raw, unfinished research. We have already begun to work towards these goals
and describe some of our successes.