* 0133750
* CAREER:  Connectivity and Dynamics in the Transcriptional Networks
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2002,02/29/2008
* Saeed Tavazoie, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael K. Reddy
* 02/29/2008
* USD 1,008,903.00

Our present understanding of intracellular regulatory networks is derived from
comprehensive analysis of only a small number of well-studied genetic circuits.
This deficit is more than just quantitative in nature, as we know very little
about the large-scale organization of these sub-networks into the overall
architecture of regulatory systems. This is akin to studying the workings of a
television set by thoroughly characterizing a handful of operational amplifiers.
In fact, new principles of sensory integration and processing are likely to
emerge from studies that focus on the entire regulatory network of a cell. At
this point, technological challenges are paramount. The biological community
desperately needs methods to rapidly elucidate network connectivity (wiring) and
dynamics on a global scale. This CAREER project seeks to develop experimental
and computational infrastructure for mapping, monitoring, and modeling
transcriptional regulatory networks in bacterial organisms. The project will:
(1) develop a global, in vivo method for monitoring the occupancy of sites of
DNA-protein interactions within a bacterial genome; (2) develop a high
throughput, in vitro technology to identify transcription factors that bind
computationally predicted and/or experimentally determined DNA regulatory
sequences; (3) develop a mathematical framework for abstraction, representation,
and modeling of transcriptional network dynamics. The project's long-term goal
is to better understand the relationship between the structural connectivity
(wiring) of transcriptional networks and their dynamics. As part of the
education component of this CAREER project, a new multidisciplinary curriculum
has been developed to educate graduate and advanced undergraduate students (from
molecular biology, computer science, engineering, physics and chemistry) in the
genomic and computational analysis of biological systems. The students will be
introduced to challenging new biological questions that computational analysis,
whole-genome sequencing, and other related technologies have recently made
accessible. The students are expected to form inter-disciplinary teams and to
carry out projects at the interface of genomics and computational
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of our knowledge about the organization of
cells is derived from studies of individual genes and their protein products.
However, as we are getting closer to having complete parts lists for these
components, we are faced with the enormous challenge of how these parts fit
together to orchestrate cellular behavior at a systems level. Characterization
of interactions (wiring) between molecular components is a necessary foundation
for such an understanding. The class of interactions between proteins and their
cognate DNA sequences (protein-DNA interactions) determine when and where genes
are expressed. This CAREER project seeks to develop technologies for monitoring
DNA-protein interactions on a whole-genome scale, and to relate these
interactions to gene expression dynamics-laying the technological foundations
for a predictive dynamical understanding of transcriptional networks.