* 0133055
* CAREER: Advances in Peer-to-Peer Networking
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2009
* Brian Levine, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 02/28/2009
* USD 477,890.00

Metcalfe's law states that the "value" of a network increases with the square
of the number of users. However, for most applications, as the number of
participants increases, performance degrades, and so too does the value of
application to the user. Centralized service and application architectures are
most at risk for not maintaining performance with an increasing user base.
Centralized sites can represent a processing bottleneck, a single point of
failure, or single point ofattack. Furthermore, a single server cannot mitigate
for client's poor network conditions in third-party domains. Repli- cating and
distributing servers is one solution for solving the problems of centralized
architectures. Peer-to-peer services take distribution even further by using
collaborative clients who are pre- pared and expected to perform some or all the
functions of servers. As new clients bring new load to the systems, they also
bring new resources. Thus, peer-to-peer, collaborative services can be a
powerful paradigm: if on average clients bring enough or more than enough
resources to balance the load and cost they incur, then peer-to-peer services
can increase in value and performance with the number of participants. The
primary purpose of this proposal is to make fundamental advances in the
understanding and design of applications and services that make use of
replication and collaboration in a peer-to-peer environment. Opportunities for
the application of peer-to-peer techniques in new disciplines seem limitless. I
propose to examine several applications that are only possible, or achieve their
best performance, using peer-to-peer architectures and not centralized
architectures. These include the novel peer-to-peer applications of anonymity,
secure ad-hoc routing, mobility-based transport for wearable computers, cheat-
proof serverless gaming, and distributed information retrieval. There are
commonalities to all the numerous peer-to-peer applications we will study: the
ex- istence of heterogeneous peer resources, redundancy of offered services at
peers, and replication of application data and content. By addressing these
issues, the researcher will make important advances in discovery and
understanding of peer-to-peer networking and by applying those results to a
diverse set of problem areas, the researcher's work will make a broader impact
in in fields as diverse as security (privacy, availability, and secure routing),
mobile computing, wearable computing, multimedia and gaming, and distributed
information retrieval. The major theme of the researcher's proposed educational
activities is the involvement of undergraduates in original research. The goal
of the educational proposal is to prepare undergraduate students for graduate
school by providing them with an early opportunity toperform research. It
consists of an integrated plan of publishable undergraduate research projects,
new course curriculum, the development of practical lab exercises in networking
and network security, distance learning, and minority outreach. By focusing the
research of undergraduates on the themes of this proposal, the researcher is
ensuring a number of benefits. First, that the impact of this educational
component is tightly integrated with my research objectives. Second, by
coordinating efforts with the director of the Northeast Alliance for Graduate
Education and the Professoriate (NEAGEP), the researcher will improve minority
outreach in the department by preparing and encouraging under-represented
minority students to continue on for doctoral programs at UMass and other
universities. Third, the researcher will advance the department's teaching
mission by providing a new three-course curriculum of networking and security.
Fourth, the researcher will produce a standard set of practical laboratory
exercises in networking and network security to be used at any university.
Finally, the availability ofmy curriculum and practical exercises, as well as
UMass's existing Video Instruction Program and MANIC distance learning programs,
will increase the external impact of the curriculum.