* 0133511
* CAREER:  Partial Differential Equation-based Image Processing with Applications to Radiation Oncology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,08/31/2008
* Doron Levy, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2008
* USD 400,000.00

In the past decade, new nonlinear partial differential&lt;br/&gt;equations
(PDEs) have been developed for various image processing&lt;br/&gt;applications,
such as noise reduction, edge detection, image&lt;br/&gt;segmentation and
restoration. While the attention of the&lt;br/&gt;scientific community in this
area predominantly focused on&lt;br/&gt;creating the new PDEs, very little
attention was paid to&lt;br/&gt;developing numerical algorithms that approximate
their solutions.&lt;br/&gt;The few numerical algorithms that are currently used
suffer from&lt;br/&gt;a variety of problems: they are not accurate enough, too
slow,&lt;br/&gt;and not fault-free. In this project, the investigator
develops&lt;br/&gt;accurate, efficient, and robust numerical algorithms
for&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear PDEs in image processing. The research activities
are&lt;br/&gt;based on the investigator's extensive work in the field
of&lt;br/&gt;hyperbolic conservation laws, and include numerical methods
for&lt;br/&gt;the Hamilton-Jacobi equations, fast algorithms for high-
order&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear PDEs, algorithms for computing steady-state
solutions,&lt;br/&gt;numerical homogenization of Hamilton-Jacobi equations
and&lt;br/&gt;multi-resolution analysis, analysis of nonlinear
diffusion&lt;br/&gt;equations, constrained morphing active contours and
geodesic&lt;br/&gt;flows, and "non-blind" algorithms for image processing.
A&lt;br/&gt;portion of the research activities focuses on improving
existing&lt;br/&gt;algorithms in order to solve a specific imaging problem
in&lt;br/&gt;radiation oncology treatment planning.&lt;br/&gt; The investigator
develops novel mathematical techniques for&lt;br/&gt;image processing and uses
these techniques for solving problems&lt;br/&gt;in the field of radiation
oncology imaging. Radiation oncology&lt;br/&gt;treats cancer by delivering
relatively small doses of radiation&lt;br/&gt;to tumors in order to eliminate
cancer without destroying or&lt;br/&gt;chronically damaging healthy tissues in
and around the growth.&lt;br/&gt;CT and MRI scans are used as three-dimensional
anatomical models&lt;br/&gt;to ensure that the treatments conform geometrically
to the tumor&lt;br/&gt;target. This process depends critically upon identifying
the&lt;br/&gt;location of the tumor as well as the healthy organs (in order
to&lt;br/&gt;minimize the dose of radiation in these areas). Despite
extended&lt;br/&gt;research, the existing mathematical tools for image
processing&lt;br/&gt;are unsuitable for clinical medical applications.
The&lt;br/&gt;segmentation of the CT and MRI scans is still carried out
by&lt;br/&gt;manual tools, and consumes about one-half of the time required
to&lt;br/&gt;plan the treatments. The investigator designs accurate
and&lt;br/&gt;reliable automated algorithms that would significantly
shorten&lt;br/&gt;this time and have a big impact on radiation oncology.
He&lt;br/&gt;integrates into his work educational activities that
demonstrate&lt;br/&gt;the importance of applied mathematics in a broad spectrum
of&lt;br/&gt;sciences. Special emphasis is given to applications
of&lt;br/&gt;computational mathematics in biology and cutting-
edge&lt;br/&gt;technologies. The planned educational activities
include&lt;br/&gt;programs for junior-high, high-school, undergraduate,
and&lt;br/&gt;graduate students. The investigator works to increase the
gender&lt;br/&gt;and ethnic diversity in the mathematical sciences by
encouraging&lt;br/&gt;under-represented groups to study applied mathematics and
choose&lt;br/&gt;it as a future career.&lt;br/&gt;