* 0133891
* CAREER:Using Multigene Phylogenies to Solve Early Euascomycete Relationships and Reconstruct the Origin and Losses of the Lichen Symbiosis
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2007
* Francois Lutzoni, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* William Carl Taylor
* 01/31/2007
* USD 680,002.00

0133891&lt;br/&gt;Lutzoni&lt;br/&gt;Symbiotic associations among distantly
related organisms with complementary functions provided key innovations for two
major biological radiations - the mitochondrial eukaryotes and plants
(chloroplasts). Despite the indisputable significance of symbiosis as a major
evolutionary force, very little is known about mutualism and its evolutionary
consequences. One of the main reasons for this is the lack of studies that
include both mutualists and non-mutualists, and that are designed specifically
to address evolutionary issues associated with coevolutionary processes. The
need of analytical tools for such comparative phylogenetic studies and a general
lack of knowledge about the limitations of newly developed statistical methods
compound this deficiency. This project by Dr. Francois Lutzoni at Duke
University aims to address these issues by greatly extending previous taxon and
gene sampling of earlier phylogenetic studies of lichenized and non-lichenized
ascomycete fungi, developing new analytical tools and assessing their
statistical properties through computer simulation studies, and training the
next generation of biologists to take full advantage of new bioinformatic and
genomic tools while grounded in a solid training in organismal biology and
systematics. In recent work by the investigator and his colleagues, it was
reported that the diversity of lichenized and non-lichenized fungi can be best
explained by few evolutionary gains followed by many losses of the lichen
symbiosis, and that major lineages of strictly non-lichenized species (including
the form genera Penicillium and Aspergillus) unexpectedly turn out to be derived
from lichen-forming ancestors. The ultimate goal of this study is to better
understand the mechanisms leading up to the origin and losses of major symbiotic
associations (ranging from mutualism to parasitism) using the lichen-forming and
allied derived ascomycetes as a model system. This research will be integrated
with teaching activities by establishing two new courses ("Symbiosis" and
"Phylogenetics") and by reshaping one current course ("Systematic Biology") at
Duke University.&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance our understanding of early
Euascomycete relationships and will contribute toward reestablishing a
supraordinal classification of this phylum - an effort that was neglected by
mycologists for the last 20 years due to the difficulty in resolving broad
relationships based on morphological characters alone. This phylogenetic
framework is essential to reconstruct the evolution of the lichen-symbiosis and
to assess its impact on the diversification and evolution of the Euascomycetes,
including the switch to new substrates (including vascular plants, animals and
humans), changes in biosynthetic pathways leading to the production of novel
secondary compounds, and transitions to new types of interactions to obtain
carbohydrates (including parasitism). The Ascomycetes contain the most species
that affect the everyday lives of humans by infesting crops, degrading textiles,
causing human and animal diseases; but the group also includes model organisms
such as Aspergillus, Neurospora, Saccharomyces, and Schizosaccharomyces, and
other species indispensable in the production of foods and medicines. Computer
simulations, part of this project, will provide new insights in choosing and
developing statistical tests for phylogenetic studies. Interdisciplinary
training across traditional organismal evolutionary biology and systematics,
with new fields of phylogenetics, bioinformatics, and genomics is essential to
the development of the next generation of systematists and evolutionary
biologists and will facilitate innovative research on symbiotic
systems.&lt;br/&gt;