* 0133673
* CAREER: Optimal Control of Quantum Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2008
* Navin Khaneja, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Pinaki Mazumder
* 06/30/2008
* USD 375,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;0133673&lt;br/&gt;Khaneja&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past fifty
years, there has been a steady increase in man's ability to manipulate and
control quantum mechanical phenomena. Today we are surrounded with technology
that owes its existence directly or indirectly to quantum mechanical effects.
From transistors, lasers, compact disc players, optical fibre communications,
magnetic resonance imaging to scanning tunneling microscopes, the quantum
technology has effected every aspect of our life. These days the quantum
technologists can trap and experiment with individual atoms, bounce atoms up and
down on carefully sculpted electromagnetic fields, and image the structure of a
crystal, atom by atom. Emergence of the science of quantum information in the
last decade has added a new dimension to the applications of control of quantum
mechanical phenomena. There is now an increasing emphasis on harnessing quantum
dynamics for the purposes of computing, communication, and information storage.
All these technologies involve exercising control over quantum mechanical
phenomena. A central challenge in the control of quantum dynamics is the loss of
coherence (decoherence) in system dynamics, due to unwanted couplings to the
environment. This issue of decoherence arises in almost all potential
implementations of quantum information devices and control of quantum systems in
general.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this project the PI will develop methods
inspired by geometric control theory for optimal control of quantum systems. He
will compute fundamental bounds on the minimum time it takes to produce a
desired evolution in a quantum system and design time optimal control laws which
achieve these bounds. These geometric control ideas will be applied to design of
time optimal pulse sequences for coherence transfer experiments in high
resolution liquid state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, with
applications to structural biology and NMR quantum computing. Minimization of
time is important as it reduces the effects of decoherence and increases the
sensitivity of experiments in NMR spectroscopy. There is a great need for such
work in the growing field of structural biology, because time optimal pulse
sequences will significantly reduce the spectrometer time (by days in some
experiments) leading the way to high-throughput determination of protein
structures. Time optimal pulses will also help to scale NMR methods for
processing of larger proteins by minimizing decoherence effects. This effort is
broad in its scope and applicable to a wide variety of applications involving
control of quantum systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;