* 0133468
* CAREER: Structural Basis of Specificity for Gramicidin A Synthetase
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Amy Anderson, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2006
* USD 710,463.00

The objective of this project is to determine the structural basis of amino acid
specificity for the non-ribosomal peptide synthesis (NRPS) enzyme, gramicidin A
synthetase (GrsA). Different NRPS enzymes incorporate amino acid substrates to
produce a variety of peptides; the long-term goal of this research is to alter
the specificity of a particular NRPS enzyme to incorporate new functional groups
into novel peptides. In order to accomplish this goal, the following issues will
be addressed: 1) The physical arrangement and interactions between the three
domains (with three concomitant enzymatic functions) of GrsA synthetase. In
preliminary studies, crystals of the entire GrsA synthetase, bound to its
substrates, have been grown and they show diffraction amplitudes to beyond 3 A
resolution; 2) Whether the substrate is transferred between domains via a
covalently bound cofactor at the second domain. Crystal structures of the
cofactor-bound and substrate-bound GrsA synthetase will be determined; 3) The
rules of recognition for acceptance of the substrate amino acid, since the
initial aminoacyl adenylation domain is the primary determinant for specificity.
The crystal structures of three adenylation domains that bind distinctly
different amino acids, D-alanine, L-proline, and a-aminoadipine will be solved
and compared with the structure of the previously determined L-phenylalanine
adenylation domain. Novel computational algorithms will be used to search
mutation space and conformation space to propose possible mutants that will
reprogram the L-Phe adenylation domain to accept a new substrate amino acid.
Biochemical assays, along with crystal structure determination of the modified A
domain, will be part of an iterative cycle to incorporate a non-native amino
acid in an NRPS peptide product.

Reflecting a strong movement toward multi-disciplinary research, today's
chemistry education should also be multi-disciplinary, incorporating fields such
as biology, physics and computer science. An integral interdisciplinary approach
will be applied to newly developed courses in biophysical chemistry bringing
structural biology to the forefront of the biophysical chemistry curriculum at
Dartmouth College. It is also important to attract younger children to science.
Through a partnership with a K-12 outreach program at a neighboring science
museum, young children are learning the relationship of basic science principles
to current research. Using interactive demonstrations of the properties of light
with matter, children learn that the three-dimensional structures of proteins
can be determined.