* 0133946
* CAREER:Life Science Databases: Integration and Beyond
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2007
* Zina Miled, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 01/31/2007
* USD 595,144.00

One central information technology problem of the next decade will be the
creation of a means through which to query a heterogeneous set of life science
databases, generally via the Internet. Life science web databases hold
information that is critical to researchers. Even though, in the above
databases, data have been collected and automated procedures for data
manipulation have been provided, user accessibility to such databases is very
often still inadequate due to the lack of a comparable data representation, a
unified interface for data exchange among the databases, and a customizable
infrastructure (i.e. support for views) that addresses the individual needs of
scientists. The research objective of this career plan is to address these
issues by developing an information integration system for life science
databases that supports views (BACIIS+ Biological and Chemical Information
Integration System Plus -- views). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BACIIS+ will allow for
better communication between life science databases, will provide for continuous
and rapid expansion and adaptation to the evolving biological field, and will
provide better and more customizable approaches for data access and data
analysis through dynamic views. The open research issues involved in the
development of BACIIS+ include : 1) the management of large data sets, 2) the
interoperability of geographically distributed autonomous databases, 3) the
seamless semantic-based integration of these databases with total transparency
to the user, and 4) the support for distributed multi-database views. Semantic
integration aims at integrating data in a meaningful way while syntactic
integration consists of just collecting and pasting together data from different
databases. Static views consist of a limited set of views predefined in scope.
Whereas dynamic views are created on-demand and their scope is completely
defined by the user. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two new graduate courses are planned:
Life science information systems, and Computational biology algorithms. The
first course will cover the complexity of information extraction and management
in the context of life science data. The second course will cover the foundation
of sequential and parallel algorithms for sequence similarity analysis.
Collaborators from Eli Lilly &amp; Company and Dow AgroSciences are involved in
the courses, providing industry perspectives. The proposed courses build on a
current course by the PI that covers advanced molecular biology and includes
three major sections: bioinformatics, computational modeling, and molecular
machinery. The plan actively seeks the participation of undergraduate and
minority students through senior design projects. A campus-wide bioinformatics
initiative includes a newly established School of Informatics and the Indiana
Genomics Center. An international workshop on the interoperability of life
science databases is in development.&lt;br/&gt;