* 0133297
* CAREER: New Directions for Cryptographic Hardware
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2008
* Berk Sunar, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 07/31/2008
* USD 330,000.00

The research described here addresses information security issues for
distributed networks and embedded environments. Embedded applications are found
in a vast array of existing and emerging technologies, including mobile phones,
personal digital assistants, smart cards, and remote-controlled utility network
devices and are distinguished from typical (but far less prevalent) PC-level
microprocessors in their relatively low power consumption and inherent
limitations on memory and speed. It is predicted that the number of applications
with embedded microprocessors which will be connected to our telephone and
computer networks will increase dramatically over the next few years. For
instance, it is anticipated that within the next few years, 50% of all Internet
end-devices will have to operate in constrained environments. At the same time,
these networks are enabling remote access to, and manipulation of, sensitive
resources of all sorts, including bank records, medical information, alarm
system, and industrial machinery. The need is clear for long-term planning and
directed research in the area of cryptographic security for these devices.
However, cryptography has only recently evolved from a discipline confined to
the special interest of a small, closed community to become a practical and
vital tool to enable a secure communications and information infrastructure. As
a consequence, the acceptance of cryptography as an engineering discipline is
still in its early stages. The US industry is already experiencing a shortage of
"crypto engineers". This negative trend is expected to continue, unless serious
actions are taken for the education of crypto engineers. The researchers propose
an integrated solution for the research and education problems in perspective.
To contribute solutions to the security problems in distributed networks, the
research will focus on the hardware implementations of public and secret key
algorithms with challenging new requirements. The long-term ambition of this
research is to bring cryptographic security solutions to the market which are
flexible, low-cost, highly scalable, and power efficient. The researchers
believe that this research will provide graduate and undergraduate students the
perfect educational setting to explore solid engineering practices of
cryptography. A rigorous cryptography curriculum introduced at the undergraduate
level, enriched with international collaborations, and cutting edge research
will create skilled crypto engineers, that will be essential in the future
development of secured infrastructures.