* 0133659
* CAREER: The Biomechanics of Chromosome Movement
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2008
* Alan Hunt, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth S. Sztul
* 04/30/2008
* USD 504,996.00

The scientific goal of this project is to understand, model, and manipulate the
biomechanics of chromosomal separation during cell division. Eukaryotic mitosis
depends on molecular machines that move chromosomes along a network of long
cylindrical microtubules. This process must be precisely performed and tightly
regulated; lack of precision, leading to unequal distribution of genetic
material between daughter cells, can result in cell death or other
abnormalities. This project approaches this problem from two fronts: 1)
computational modeling to predict the character, speed, and dynamics of
interactions between chromosomes and microtubules; and 2) biophysical
experimentation to test and refine the models. The former approach starts with a
simple stochastic, thermodynamic model that describes the origin and
coordination of the forces that move chromosomes. Guided by the model, the
latter activities focus on the origin and physical properties of chromosome
movements. Using an advanced optical gradient trap (optical tweezers) to
manipulate microtubules interacting with chromosomes in vitro, forces and
mechanical properties will be measured. Complementary experiments will examine
chromosome movement in vivo by applying technology in which an ultra-short laser
pulse creates targeted, localized disruptions within the mitotic apparatus. The
changes that result from severing chromosome-bound microtubules and fragments of
chromosome will be compared with modeling predictions to elucidate mechanical
properties. These experiments will quantify mechanical and force generating
properties that allow chromosomes to: 1) bear and respond to tensile loads to
maintain connections with microtubules; 2) move along microtubules; 3) move to
appropriate location during the different phases of mitosis; and 4) form and
maintain connections with the mitotic spindle. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational
goals include integrating research and teaching to encourage students with
strong quantitative skills to pursue cell biology problems, and to provide them
with a rigorous interdisciplinary background so they excel at this pursuit.
Principal aims are the continued development of classes in Quantitative Cell
Biology and Cellular and Molecular Biomechanics, developing a laboratory segment
to accompany Quantitative Cell Biology, and developing new teaching resources.
This includes continued development of an extensive set of Internet resources,
which will evolve into the framework for a new undergraduate text in
Quantitative Cell Biology, which will be constructed with input from other
investigators. This educational plan will have a significant impact on
universities' efforts to expand undergraduate training in Biomedical
Engineering. A major long-term benefit will be improved transfer and application
of engineering and physics approaches to cell biology and biotechnology
research.&lt;br/&gt;