* 0133804
* CAREER:  Probabilistic Models for Integrating Biochemical and Morphological Markers for Cancer
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Paul Sajda, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 05/31/2007
* USD 367,257.00

0133804&lt;br/&gt;Sajda&lt;br/&gt;Under this CAREER Award, a new set of
computer-assisted analysis techniques will be developed to improve the
noninvasive diagnosis of brain cancer by integrating biochemical and
morphological markers from MRSI (magnetic resonance spectroscopy imaging) and
MRI (magnetic resonance imaging). MRSI, which allows for characterization and
quantification of biochemical metabolites and the construction of metabolite
intensity images, combined with MRI provides a biochemical and morphological
view of the disease. Using short MRSI echo time techniques, 10-20 dimensional
multi-variant feature space will be studied to uncover specific signatures for
characterizing cancer. Specific aims include: develop "semi-blind" source
separation using a maximum a posteriori framework for recovery of metabolite
intensity images in MRSI; characterize the correlations and dependencies between
metabolite intensity images and morphological information derived from MRI;
develop a hierarchical probabilistic model for integrating metabolite intensity
images with MRI for the joint biochemical/morphological characterization of
brain tumors; and assess the performance of the models within the context of
computer-assisted diagnosis, making comparisons to traditional methods that have
relied on fairly elementary relationships, such as the ratio of two metabolite
concentrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational component of the proposal
focuses on a program in machine learning for biomedical engineering, including a
new course and computer laboratories and efforts that would serve as a basis of
an industrial internship program. The course will introduce students to the
mathematical theory behind machine learning and probabilistic models, their
application to the biomedical sciences, and techniques for evaluating and
validating their performance.&lt;br/&gt;