* 0133483
* RUI: Racial Inequality and Residential Segregation
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2007
* Rajiv Sethi, Barnard College
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 02/28/2007
* USD 137,769.00

Several decades have elapsed since the landmark Civil Rights Act of 1964
outlawed discrimination in employment and public education, and the 1968 Fair
Housing Act extended these protections to the sale and rent of housing. Over
this period racial disparities in educational attainment and household income
have narrowed, racial attitudes have changed considerably, and a significant
population of middle class African Americans has emerged. Despite this, a high
degree of racial segregation in residential patterns remains a striking feature
of the urban landscape. This research deals with the causes, consequences and
measurement of residential segregation in the United States. The research has
three distinct components. The first is a theoretical exploration of the manner
in which racial disparities in the distribution of income interact with
preferences over neighborhood racial composition to determine patterns of
segregation and stratification in metropolitan areas. This complex relationship
is being investigated through the development and analysis of models of
decentralized neighborhood sorting. The second component is an investigation of
the implications of segregation for the intergenerational transmission of racial
inequality. Earlier findings suggest that black households experience poorer
neighborhood quality in comparison with white households belonging to the same
income class. The project explores the manner in which current racial
disparities in neighborhood quality influence future disparities in educational
attainment and labor market success. These effects are being examined in the
context of models of neighborhood sorting which take into account the
acquisition of knowledge and skills within families, schools, and communities.
The third and final component of the research deals with the measurement of
segregation. This involves the use of a method for the decomposition of
segregation measures into two components. One of these can be interpreted as the
component of segregation that can be attributed to the effect of racial income
disparities alone, while the other captures the combined effect of neighborhood
preferences and discrimination. Using this method, disaggregated data on income
distributions by race at the neighborhood level is being used to examine
variations across cities and over time in the two components of measured
segregation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The research findings will allow us to
account for the persistence of segregation in certain cities, assess the
prospects for integration in the future, and evaluate the implications and
potential effectiveness of integrationist policies. The persistence of
segregation in the face of narrowing racial income disparities has led some
researchers to argue that racial attitudes are still quite intolerant, or that
discrimination in real estate and mortgage lending markets is still widespread.
This research will demonstrate, in contrast, that persistently high levels of
segregation are consistent with narrowing income disparities even when
preferences are pro-integrationist and discrimination is not widespread. This is
possible because the relationship between neighborhood racial preferences and
segregation depends in subtle ways on both intraracial and interracial
disparities in income. As racial income disparities narrow, segregated cities
become less stratified by income and hence the economic incentives for
integration are diminished. The research also sheds light on the reasons why
black households experience lower neighborhood quality than white households of
comparable incomes, and why the incomes of black households underpredict the
future economic success of their children relative to white households. This has
implications for the extent to which racial disparities in income and education
can be diminished by the adoption of race-blind social policies. Finally, the
empirical component of the research will shed light on the extent to which the
modest and uneven declines in segregation over the period 1970 to 2000 can be
attributed primarily to changes in racial inequality or to changes in other
factors, such as an increased desire on the part of Americans of all groups to
live in more integrated communities.&lt;br/&gt;