* 0133599
* Generic Software Foundations for Geometric Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2008
* Herve Bronnimann, Polytechnic University of New York
* Continuing Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 05/31/2008
* USD 338,620.00

0133599 Bronnimann, Herve Polytechnic Univ of NY

Geometric computing, as applied in computer graphics, robotics, architecture,
geographic information system, spatial databases, solid modeling, has penetrated
every domain of science and engineering, from astrophysics to molecular biology
to physical simulations and fluid dynamics. Recent years have witnessed a
growing demand for two- and mostly three-dimensional computations. For the past
two decades, computational geometers have investigated the mathematical
foundations of this nascent field and have solved the asympotic complexity of
basic geomteric problems. But theoretical solutions, while bringing valubable
insight into the problem, hardly answerthe whole prob lem, and some research is
needed on how to engineer these solutions to bring the benefits of these
insights into practical solutions. Specifically, we propose to study the
geometric primitives and underlying the field of computional geometry and its
many applications, and to develop geometric concepts for basic geometric objects
and predicates as well as for 3D general subdivisions in various geometric
concepts. The methodology of separating the development of concepts from ther
implementation is inspried by the generic programming paradigm. This is an
approach that has met with success in other fields of algorithm engineering
(most notably the C++ Standard Template Library -STL). We also propose to
continue our investigaion of non-robustness problems in geometric algorithms.
One approach to solving the problem, which is more efficient than exact
computation, is the exact predicate paradigm in which only the primitives
leading to critical decisions are guaranteed to make the correct decisions, even
if quantities are not computed exactly. We propose to study the efficient
implementation and implications of the exact predicate paradigm. The educational
part of this proposal strengthens the research program by proposing to write a
textbook devoted to implementation issues in geometric computing, designed to
provide a foundation to and complement the existing classical computaitonal
geometry textbooks.