* 0133811
* PECASE:   Associative Overlay Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2007
* Ion Stoica, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 02/28/2007
* USD 497,869.00

&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: PECASE: Associative Overlay
Networks&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of California-
Berkeley&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Indirection plays a fundamental role in today's
Internet. Existing solutions to provide mobility, anycast and multicast at the
IP layer, and to provide web caching and server load balancing at the
application layer, are based on indirection. In particular, these solutions
assume a physical or logical indirection point that redirects the traffic to the
destination(s). For instance, mobile IP assumes a home agent that hides the end-
host mobility, while IP multicast assumes a logical indirection point (address)
that hides the number of receivers and their locations. Unfortunately, the fact
that IP does not provide efficient support for indirection makes it difficult
and complex to deploy these solutions.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research addresses
this problem by developing a novel network architecture around the in-direction
principle. In particular, the researcher proposes to replace the point-to-point
communication abstraction used in today's networks with a rendezvous-based
communication abstraction: instead of explicitly sending a packet to a
destination, each packet is associated with an identifier, which is then used by
the receiver to get the packet. This level of indirection decouples the sender
and the receiver behaviors. The fact that the receiver is moving or that there
are multiple receivers getting the same packet is transparent to the sender.
Similarly, the fact that the sender is moving or that there are multiple senders
sending packets with the same identifier is transparent to the receiver. This
decoupling allows rendezvous-based networks to provide natural support for
mobility, anycast and multicast. To demonstrate the feasibility of this
approach, the researcher proposes to build and deploy an overlay network, called
Associative Overlay Network (AON), that implements the rendezvous-based
communication abstraction.&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this research is twofold.
First, the researcher aims to demonstrate the power and the flexibility of AON
by showing that it can support the basic communication abstractions (e.g.,
multicast, anycast), and that it can greatly simplify the deployment of
distributed applications such as service composition and reliable multicast.
Second, the researcher plans to demonstrate that AON allows a scalable and
efficient implementation, while offering performance similar to the overlay
network systems designed around the traditional point-to-point communication
abstraction. The researcher's solution leverages the previous work on the Chord
lookup system [40], which is used as a building block to implement AON. This
proposal discusses several possible approaches to achieve the goals of
scalability, efficiency, and robustness, and formulates the main open problems.
Among these problems are providing load balancing across AON nodes, supporting
large scale multicast groups, and protecting against distributed denial of
service attacks.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will make significant
contributions to network architectures. The rendezvous-based communication is a
fundamental departure from the point-to-point communication abstraction
implemented by today's Internet. The researcher hopes that this change will
trigger new and exciting research in computer networks similar to the way that
tuple space abstraction did in distributed systems. We plan to deploy AON
locally on the Millenium testbed and on the Internet-2 testbed, making it
possible for other research groups to experiment with AON and implement
applications on top of it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was originally
funded as a CAREER award, and was converted to a Presidential Early Career Award
for Engineers and Scientists (PECASE) award in May
2004.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;