* 0133638
* Workshop proposal:  Antarctic research vessel - anticipated needs for marine geology and geophysics
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2003
* Amy Leventer, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 08/31/2003
* USD 50,478.00

This award, provided by the Office of Polar Programs (OPP) of the National
Science Foundation (NSF), provides support for a workshop designed to initiate
discussion about future scientific objectives and technical needs of the
Antarctic marine geology and geophysics community. It has been about a decade
since the community last took a focused look at the long-range science goals and
needs for Antarctic marine geology and so a new perspective is needed. The
present need for such a dialogue is also based on the timing of the lease
schedule for the current ship support to the US Antarctic Research Program.
Although ship support for Antarctic science is contracted for several more
years, the process of developing scientific requirements as planning input for
ship support beyond this period takes a considerable amount of time and so must
begin soon. Consequently, within the next year, a document outlining the
anticipated future scientific goals and objectives, in a broad fashion, and
describing the specific technical needs for marine geologic and geophysical work
in the Southern Ocean must be available for proper planning. The report produced
from this workshop will serve as this planning document and will be available as
a hard copy and on the Internet. The workshop will be held during Spring of
2002, in Washington, D.C. The meeting will be advertised via e-mail and through
EOS, so that all interested individuals will have the opportunity to
attend.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;