* 0133520
* RNA Degradation and Antibiotic Synthesis in Streptomyces
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2006
* George Jones, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 02/28/2006
* USD 440,000.00

Streptomyces, Gram-positive soil bacteria, are notable for their ability to form
dormant cells called spores (sporulation) and production of most of the
antibiotics used worldwide in clinical and veterinary medicine. Members of the
genus Streptomyces produce common antibiotics such as streptomycin, ampicillin
and tetracycline as natural products. A considerable amount of information has
been obtained in recent years regarding the mechanisms that regulate the
production of antibiotics by Streptomyces. One possible level of regulation that
has not been studied in detail concerns the stability of the genetic message. In
other organisms, it is known that modulating the stability of the genetic
message can control the function of genes. It is proposed to examine the role of
genetic message stability in the regulation of antibiotic production by
Streptomyces coelicolor. S. coelicolor produces four antibiotics, two of which,
actinorhodin (act) and undecylprodigiosin (red) will be examined in this study.
Specific aims of the research are as follows. (1) The genes for two enzymes
known to be involved in determining the stability of the genetic message in
bacterial systems will be cloned. (2) The effects of the expression of those
cloned genes (i.e., the production of the gene products) on the stability of the
genetic message for two proteins known to be required for act and red production
will be studied. (3) The effects of the expression of the genes that determine
message stability on the production of the act and red antibiotics will be
determined. If such effects are detected, the relationship of those effects to
the stability of genetic messages required for antibiotic production will be
assessed. (4) Using genetic engineering techniques, attempts will be made to
artificially increase the stability of the genetic messages for the regulators
of act and red production. It is possible that increasing the stability of the
genetic messages in question will lead to increased production of the
antibiotics whose synthesis is regulated by the proteins encoded by those
messages. It may thus be possible to increase antibiotic yields by stabilizing
the genetic messages for key genes required for antibiotic production. Thus, the
proposed studies may well have significant implications for the production of
antibiotics. (5) In previous studies, a gene designated absB has been identified
that controls production of all four of the antibiotics normally produced by S.
coelicolor. That gene encodes a protein that affects the stability of the
genetic message in bacteria. Attempts will be made to identify the genes that
are in turn affected by absB and to assess further the molecular mechanism by
which message stability affects antibiotic production.