* 0133833
* CAREER: Studying Cell-to-Cell Signaling in Microbial Biofilms
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Matthew Parsek, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth E. Hood
* 06/30/2004
* USD 220,000.00

The goal of the research plan is to further our understanding of the
relationship between two aspects of community behavior in Pseudomonas
aeruginosa-the formation of complex, surface-attached communities called
biofilms and a cell-to-cell signaling regulatory mechanism called quorum
sensing. It is known that quorum sensing is required for normal P. aeruginosa
biofilm communities to form, but what quorum sensing regulates during the
development of a biofilm is unknown. How quorum sensing functions in biofilm
community is also unknown. Here is a summary of the project: 1) Identify the
gene or set of genes regulated by quorum sensing that play a role in the
development of biofilm communities; 2) Study signaling patterns in biofilms-
what constitutes a quorum in a biofilm?; and 3) Examine signal diffusion in a
biofilm- concentrating both on the roles of mass transport and the chemistry of
the extracellular matrix of the biofilm. Here is a list of the goals of the
project:&lt;br/&gt;Develop a detailed understanding of quorum sensing in a model
microbial biofilm system&lt;br/&gt;Develop interdisciplinary collaborations to
address interdisciplinary questions&lt;br/&gt;Cultivate an appreciation for the
multidisciplinary approach to science needed to ask questions about
environmental microbiology&lt;br/&gt;The educational plan mirrors the research
plan in the need to incorporate a multidisciplinary approach to the complex
environmental systems where microbes are found. There are three specific goals
for the educational plan:&lt;br/&gt;Design and implement a basic microbiology
course for undergraduate engineers.&lt;br/&gt;Design and implement a microbial
ecology course for graduate level engineering students.&lt;br/&gt;Provide
research experiences for high school, undergraduate, and graduate students in
environmental microbiology, emphasizing the need to approach scientific
questions in a multidisciplinary fashion&lt;br/&gt;The first goal is designed to
give undergraduate engineers a foundation in biology. The need for engineers and
scientists to interact with people outside their own discipline is clear- this
course is intended to give the biological background needed to facilitate these
interactions. The second goal is to develop a microbial ecology graduate course
with the theme of biofilms, where the focus will be on systems and the need to
bring different tools from different fields to bear on the system in order to
understand it. The last goal is to provide a positive research environment where
students can be trained in and exposed to cutting-edge
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;