* 0133989
* CAREER:  Exploring Representations of Structure:  The Impact of Visualization on Conceptual Understanding in Chemistry
* EDU,DRL
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2009
* Barbara Gonzalez, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 01/31/2009
* USD 531,093.00

The broad aim of this project is to conduct research over a five-year period
that investigates the link between visual representations and conceptual
understanding of atoms and molecules in simple inorganic and organic molecules.
Specific goals of the project are to investigate learners' understanding of
simple inorganic and organic structures at the atomic and molecular levels,
explore how visual spatial-ability relates to the formation of representations
of atomic and molecular structure, and develop an Internet-deliverable,
multimedia package that has instructional and assessment functions in promoting
conceptual understanding of atomic/molecular structure through visualization.
Specific objectives of the study are to survey student understanding of the
difference between atoms and molecules at the microscopic level in relation to
their understanding of elements and compounds at the macroscopic level,
determine the conditions under which learners invoke the particle nature of
matter when explaining chemical phenomena such as phase changes or chemical
reactions, describe the nature of students' two-dimensional and three-
dimensional understanding of atomic and molecular structure in simple molecules,
determine the nature of the relationship between visual-spatial ability and the
formation of representations of atomic and molecular structure, investigate the
efficacy of visual-spatial training in the development of the particle nature of
matter using handheld models and molecular modeling applications, and examine
the effect of visual-spatial training using handheld models or molecular
modeling software on the ability of students to alternate between two- and
three-dimensional representations of molecules. Research methods include semi-
structured interviews, paper-pencil and on-line tasks, and video recording of
student performance. Subjects will be enrolled in chemistry courses for majors,
non-majors, and for future elementary teachers. Results from the research will
lead to a better understanding of the relationship between cognitive skills and
conceptual development leading to improved curricular design and pedagogy in the
chemistry classroom.