* 0133675
* Culture in the Balance: The Emergence of a New Model of Equilibrium within Medieval Thought, 1225-1375
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2005
* Joel Kaye, Barnard College
* Fixed Amount Award
* Frederick Kronz
* 01/31/2005
* USD 87,614.00

Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt;SES Proposal 0137158&lt;br/&gt;Culture in the
Balance: The Emergence of a New Model of Equilibrium within Medieval Thought,
1225-1375&lt;br/&gt;Joel Kaye, Barnard College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the
central place ideals of equality and equilibrium occupied in virtually every
discipline within medieval thought, the model of equilibrium employed was never
brought to the fore as a subject of discussion in itself. For this reason,
modern historians, too, have so far failed to recognize and treat equilibrium as
a primary subject of investigation. This project brings the history of
equilibrium from the periphery to the&lt;br/&gt;center of
inquiry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the same words (equitas, equalitas,
aequatio, adaequatio, equilibrare, etc.) continued to be used across disciplines
throughout the medieval period, the definitions and processes denoted by these
words changed dramatically over the period of high scholasticism, ca. 1250-1375.
The emergence of a new model of equilibrium in this period had profound
implications, underlying and making possible a
thoroughgoing&lt;br/&gt;reconceptualization of the form and functioning
principles of the cosmos. The historical importance of this creation, little
recognized up to this point, extends far beyond the medieval centuries. The new
model remained influential and active for centuries to come, providing the
foundation for much of what we now consider to be "modern" speculation in a wide
variety of humanistic and scientific disciplines, from ethical
and&lt;br/&gt;political thought, to astronomy, geology, physics, and
medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research and writing undertaken during the
Fellowship year forms part of a larger book project, already well underway. The
book will trace the emergence of a new conceptual model of equilibrium and
examine its implications within four intellectual areas: scholastic economic
thought, political thought, natural philosophy, and medicine. Research during
the Fellowship year is focused upon primary sources in the area of medieval
medicine. Here the language of equality and balance is ever present, as
definitions of health and sickness, models of the activity and circulation of
the elements and humours, speculation on the action of plants and medicines, and
the rich theoretical models of the temperaments and complexions, all center on
notions of equilibrium. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sources can be divided into
six groups. 1. The early theoretical writings (through the mid-thirteenth
century) on equilibrium and health found in various works from the School of
Salerno provide a base line against which to view later developments. 2.
Avicenna's great medical textbook, the Canon (particularly the opening chapters
of book 1) provides a sophisticated discussion of the philosophical principles
underlying medical thought and practice. Here the concept of equilibrium is
thoroughly intertwined with the theory of elements, humours, temperaments, and
complexions, in a manner that remains influential for centuries. 3. Thirteenth
and Fourteenth-century commentaries on Book I of the Canon, particularly those
of Gentile da Foligno (c.1340) and Jacopo da Forli (c.1385), provide an
excellent means of tracing the development of the model over time. 4. The
writings of Arnald of Villanova. 5. Commentaries on the Tegni of Galen. 6.
Numerous shorter treatises focusing on the question of equilibrium within bodily
systems (De complexionibus) and the question of medical dosage as a problem in
equalization (De gradibus medicinarum). &lt;br/&gt;