* 0133818
* PECASE: Multi-antenna Communications: Information Theory, Codes and Signal Processing
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Babak Hassibi, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2006
* USD 309,838.00

&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: PECASE: Multi-antenna communications: Information
theory, codes and signal processing&lt;br/&gt;Institution: California Institute
of Technology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is now widely recognized that multiple
antennas will figure prominently in future wireless communications systems,
since they can significantly boost the channel capacity, as well as lower the
probability of error, of a wireless communications link. However, before the
above promise can be realized in a practical communications system, there are
several key research challenges that must be addressed. This research studies
several of the information-theoretic, coding-theoretic, and signal processing
challenges encountered, as well as the impact of integrating their solutions
into a multi-user wireless network. A common thread encountered throughout is
that the tools developed, as well as the results obtained, have implications
well beyond multi-antenna communications--both in terms of the introduction of
new mathematical methods, as well as in terms of their applicability to more
general communication problems.&lt;br/&gt;The first research challenge addressed
is information-theoretic: the actual channel capacity of a multi-antenna
wireless link is known only under certain idealized conditions. For most
realistic conditions, the channel capacity is unknown and it is not clear how it
depends on the speed of the fading, the number of antennas, and the SNR. Nor is
it clear what the optimal transmission strategies should be and what the
performance of training-based schemes are. This research will focus on these
problems for continuously- and block-fading channels, where the analysis appears
to be tractable and where the theory of random matrices plays a major role. The
second challenge is that of designing space-time codes that deliver on the high
data rates promised by theory, have good error performance, and that lend
themselves to efficient encoding and decoding. Compared to conventional codes,
the added spatial dimension adds a whole new twist to the code design problem,
and a variety of information-theoretic, linear-algebraic, and group-theoretic
ideas play a prominent role. The signal processing research challenge is to
devise algorithms that are efficient, so that all the processing can be done in
real time. Recent work by the researcher has analytically demonstrated that, for
a wide range of rates and SNRs, polynomial-time maximum-likelihood decoding of
several classes of space-time codes is possible. This research will fully pursue
the implications of this result, both in terms of the design of new algorithms
and codes, as well as in terms of understanding the tradeoffs between maximum-
likelihood performance and computational complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project was originally funded as a CAREER award, and was converted to a
Presidential Early Career Award for Engineers and Scientists (PECASE) award in
May 2004.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;