* 0133278
* CAREER: Traffic congestion on freeways: using probe vehicle data to understand bottlenecks and mitigate the resulting problems
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2008
* Benjamin Coifman, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 09/30/2008
* USD 387,000.00

Freeway traffic congestion impacts the movement of most people and goods in the
United States. This congestion is due to a small number of points on the network
where demand peaks or capacity drops. Although these bottlenecks typically
occupy a short distance of roadway, the resulting queues can extend for several
miles. Most freeway queues are characterized by slow and stop waves propagating
upstream from a bottleneck. The changing speeds give rise to an increased
probability of accidents and the frequent accelerations increase vehicle
emissions. Although the propagation of these waves can be predicted once they
form, it is not known how they originate and debate continues as to whether they
impact capacity. To date, these issues have been studied with point detectors,
which are capable of monitoring traffic at fixed locations.

The proposed work will equip two probe vehicles with GPS receivers and distance
sensors to monitor adjacent vehicles. The probe vehicles will collect data
throughout bottleneck regions and observe important signals that may not
propagate all the way to point detectors. These probes will be used to identify
which factors influence bottleneck capacity, and identify how the signals and
waves form in freeway queues. These efforts should lead to additional benefits
including improved car following and traffic flow models. The work is
interdisciplinary, drawing on electrical engineering for sensor technologies,
and civil engineering for traffic flow theory. This proposal forms the
cornerstone for a new course, cross-listed between the two academic departments
and taught with a teamwork environment that is found rarely in coursework. In
this integrated environment, the students will push the boundaries of knowledge
by the end of each quarter.