* 0133366
* CAREER:  A Split Operating System Architecture for Servers with Memory-to-Memory Communication
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Liviu Iftode, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* David Du
* 06/30/2007
* USD 329,002.00

This proposal aims to investigate the impact of the new
I/O&lt;br/&gt;technologies on the operating system architecture of the network
servers. &lt;br/&gt;The key ingredient of the proposed approach is the memory-
to-memory &lt;br/&gt;intra-server interconnect which allows non-intrusive
communication &lt;br/&gt;between hosts and intelligent devices. Memory-to-memory
communication &lt;br/&gt;eliminates or significantly reduces the overhead
typically associated with &lt;br/&gt;conventional communication protocols. This
benefit has been extensively &lt;br/&gt;studied to improve the performance of
distributed applications but has not &lt;br/&gt;been yet explored in support of
the operating system performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will focus
on how to split the operating system functionality&lt;br/&gt;across a cluster of
computing nodes and intelligent devices. Two novel &lt;br/&gt;operating
mechanisms based on memory-to-memory communication will be &lt;br/&gt;explored:
(i) direct application-to-device communication to offload the &lt;br/&gt;TCP/IP
protocol processing to TCP servers executed on intelligent network
&lt;br/&gt;interfaces or dedicated nodes, and (ii) direct communication between
&lt;br/&gt;memory-mapped file servers and TCP servers. The research will also
&lt;br/&gt;investigate how to use memory-to-memory communication to support
cooperative &lt;br/&gt;file and network servers for availability and load-
balancing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has been considerably motivated by
the increasing interest&lt;br/&gt;in VIA, InfiniBand, and programmable device
controllers. Its ultimate goal is &lt;br/&gt;to contribute to the understanding
of how systems software should be designed&lt;br/&gt;to exploit and combine
these new technologies.