* 0133613
* Craniofacial Muscle Fiber Specializations: A Comparative Approach
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2007
* Peter Reiser, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* mary chamberlin
* 12/31/2007
* USD 462,567.00

Craniofacial muscles collectively serve an extremely diverse set of functions.
This set of muscles includes extraocular muscles which are responsible for
highly precise eye movements during visual tracking of a moving object,
laryngeal muscles that serve vocalizations and airway protection, and mandibular
muscles that drive mastication. These muscles are highly complex with respect to
structure, biochemical properties and physiological properties and, as such, are
markedly different from limb muscles that serve locomotion. The overall goal of
this project is to acquire a more comprehensive understanding of the molecular
and cellular properties of craniofacial muscles that allow these muscles to
serve such a vast array of functions and to do so with an extraordinary level of
precision. Myosin is a large protein, being composed of two heavy chain and four
light chain subunits, and is a key regulator of contractile properties of
muscles. Whole craniofacial muscles which express "superfast" and
"extraocular/laryngeal" myosin isoforms are well recognized as having distinct
contractile properties. However, the specific functional significance of
superfast myosin and of extraocular/laryngeal myosin remains unknown, in
contrast to a large body of literature describing the roles of limb muscle
myosins in the regulation of physiologic properties. The project aims are
designed to test whether mammalian skeletal muscle fibers that are identified as
expressing either "superfast" myosin, found in carnivore jaw-closing muscles, or
"extraocular/laryngeal" myosin, expressed in extraocular and intrinsic laryngeal
muscles, have distinct contractile properties. The contractile properties to be
measured in single muscle fibers include the maximal velocity of shortening, the
rate of tension redevelopment following a rapid slackening and re-stretch,
tension-generating ability, stiffness and myofibrillar ATPase activity. The
myosin heavy chain and light chain isoform composition of each fiber will
subsequently be determined using an ultrasensitive gel electrophoresis protocol.
The results will be utilized to calculate the rate constants for crossbridge
attachment and detachment in fibers that are identified on the basis of their
myosin isoform composition. The primary objective is to test whether crossbridge
kinetics differ significantly between superfast, extraocular/laryngeal and limb
muscle myosins. The results are expected to provide a mechanistic understanding
of differences in crossbridge properties in fibers that express different myosin
isoforms through the determination of fundamental crossbridge rate constants.
This project will be based, in part, on a comparative approach. Single muscle
fibers from jaw-closing muscles of carninvores (dogs, cats) will be compared to
those from an omnivore (pig) that is known to not express superfast myosin.
Differences in contractile properties between these two sources of muscle fibers
will illustrate the unique properties imparted by superfast myosin to
accommodate the feeding behavior of carnivores. This project will result in a
more comprehensive understanding of a highly specialized group of muscles that
has thus far received relatively little attention. In particular, the results
are expected to provide valuable cellular and molecular insights into the
function of muscles that serve the aggressive feeding style characteristic of
carnivores and underlie the extremely precise motor functions associated with
eye movements, vocalization and airway protection. Understanding the cellular
and molecular bases of contraction in these highly specialized muscles will
greatly expand our understanding of the complexity of muscle fibers among
vertebrates and broaden the known repertoire of their contractile properties.