* 0133856
* CAREER: A Database for Modeling Protein Spatial Geometry -Discovering Protein Functions
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Jie Liang, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2007
* USD 661,826.00

Many genes in bacteria, plants, fungi, worm, fruit fly, and human have no
sequence matches, their three-dimensional structures are unsolved, and their
functional roles are unknown. Three-dimensional spatial surface motifs of key
residues can provide critical links connecting gene sequence, protein structure,
and protein functions. Surface motifs with complicated geometry are difficult to
compute, and the key residues are often from distant parts of the primary
sequences. The proposed project aims to develop tools using computational
geometry for discovery of similar protein surface patterns, as well as server
databases of libraries of similar protein surfaces for biological querying and
understanding. The search tools will be developed using a comprehensive
informatics approach for discovery of statistically significant similarity
relationship of protein surfaces, combining sequence, physicochemical, and shape
information. The database of libraries of spatial surface motifs will provide
organized information &lt;br/&gt;enriched with functional
annotation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By providing quantitative, organized, and
understandable information of protein surface motifs, the tools and database
proposed will help to uncover new patterns of key residues in surface motifs
important for understanding protein functions. It will facilitate the
understanding of the cellular roles of newly sequenced genes from genomic
sequencing and newly solved structures from structural genomics. It will also
help to establish previously unrecognized functional and evolutionary
relationship of protein spatial surfaces, and uncover deep evolutionary origins
of functionally constrained structural elements before the emergence of protein
domains and folds. Knowledge and insight gained from protein surface motifs will
also help to design and engineer novel proteins for new biological functions and
for novel industrial applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational
component of this proposal will be centered on (1) course and curriculum
development, (2) student mentoring, and (3) outreach. In addition to curriculum
development for the newly approved MS/PHD programs in bioinformatics, a new
course named "Geometric Computing for Bioinformatics" will be developed, which
will be tightly linked to the research through classroom teaching and class
projects designed based on the research activities. The involvement of graduate
and undergraduate students, as well as postdoctoral researchers provide
mentoring opportunities, with the goal to pass the knowledge, the computational
skill, and the ability of critical and creative thinking to the students. It
will also allow the students to present their research in national and
international conferences. The outreach activities to Chicago high school and
junior colleges will be focused on high school summer camp activities of
bioinformatics research, local visits, hosting interns in the PI's lab, school
teacher preparation, and developing career as well as educational material on
bioinformatics (CD-ROM and website) to attract students not traditionally
represented in this field.&lt;br/&gt;