* 0133580
* CAREER: Automatically Generating Specifications to Improve Program Correctness and Maintainability
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2007
* Michael Ernst, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 01/31/2007
* USD 300,000.00

CCR-0133580&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: Automatically Generating Specifications to Improve
Program Correctness and Maintainability&lt;br/&gt;Michael D.
Ernst&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ensuring software correctness, modifying software,
and many other software&lt;br/&gt;engineering tasks are greatly eased by the
presence of specifications that&lt;br/&gt;document program behavior.
Unfortunately, specifications are usually&lt;br/&gt;absent, leading to problems
with program understanding and maintenance.&lt;br/&gt;This research extends work
in automatically generating (inferring) partial&lt;br/&gt;program specifications
from program executions. The research goals are to&lt;br/&gt;detect conditional
invariants (implications) that are true only sometimes,&lt;br/&gt;to scale the
technology, to enable online processing, to investigate new&lt;br/&gt;inference
strategies, to improve usability, to evaluate via experiments and&lt;br/&gt;case
studies, to integrate the techniques and tools into education, and
to&lt;br/&gt;transfer technology to industry. The research has three broad
impacts: (1)&lt;br/&gt;it explains, advances, and evaluates the theory and
practice of automatic&lt;br/&gt;generation of program specifications; (2) it
enables easier, more&lt;br/&gt;effective, and broader use of specifications, by
automating generation of&lt;br/&gt;partial specifications and by extending their
scope to likely (as opposed&lt;br/&gt;to guaranteed) properties; and (3) it
applies specifications to specific&lt;br/&gt;program tasks via new techniques
and tools for program modification,&lt;br/&gt;testing, reuse, and documentation.
Evaluation includes theoretical&lt;br/&gt;evaluations of the accuracy of the
underlying techniques, case studies of&lt;br/&gt;substantial software projects,
and controlled experiments to determine the&lt;br/&gt;efficacy of the resulting
tools.&lt;br/&gt;