* 0133123
* CAREER: Automatic Knowledge Acquisition for Natural Language Interfaces to Educational Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2008
* Barbara DiEugenio, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 05/31/2008
* USD 329,813.00

This is a Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award. The project is
designed to develop fundamental principles for natural language interfaces for
the next generation of intelligent tutoring systems. Natural language interfaces
to instructional and educational applications need both knowledge about how to
act in a domain and communication knowledge about how to talk about acting in
the domain. This project seeks to overcome the domain dependence of natural
language interfaces that prevents them from being portable to other domains. It
will accomplish this in two ways. First, the research will elucidate the
difference between domain dependent and domain independent communication
strategies. Second, it will develop a methodology, algorithms and tools to semi-
automatically derive domain and communication knowledge from text and dialogues.
An innovative aspect of this work is the role played by the lexical semantics of
action verbs to acquire domain knowledge represented as action schemas. Among
the instructional domains addressed by this research is computer science. The
fact that the work concerns tutoring systems integrates the research and
education components of the work, through class evaluation and undergraduate
participation in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award recognizes and
supports the early career-development activities of a teacher-scholar who is
likely to become an academic leader of the twenty-first century. Success in this
research will enable the construction of improved computerized tutors, as well
as advancing the general field of natural language processing. A specific
educational focus is mentoring women at the undergraduate and graduate level,
and supporting girls in choosing science and engineering as a career.&lt;br/&gt;