* 0133829
* CAREER:   Flexible, Large-Scale Best-Effort Quality of Service in the Internet
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2007
* Dan Rubenstein, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 12/31/2007
* USD 511,999.00

For the majority of its users, the Internet remains a best-effort network and
provides no direct means for meeting specific network Quality of Service (QoS)
requirements of applications, such as fixed bandwidth rates or bounds on
propagation delay and loss rates. Most previous work that addressed improving
QoS capabilities of networks focused on mechanisms and techniques that require a
combination of resource reservation, admission control, and wide-scale
modifications to the network and transport layers of the protocol stack. These
mechanisms and techniques are difficult to deploy in practice because a) they
require changes and new standards within already operational lower layers of the
protocol stack and b) they restrict competing sessions' access to basic network
resources. Recently, as an alternative, researchers and network practitioners
have utilized distributed mechanisms implemented within the network's
application layer to compensate for the QoS limitations of the underly-ing best-
effort network infrastructure. These mechanisms provide services such as
alternate path routing, network-internal transcoding of data, content
replication and caching that improve session quality. Communication of both data
and state information between the network points that implement these
distributed mechanisms is performed upon network overlays: virtual networks that
directly connect these points to one another by tunneling transmissions across
the underlying network. The research described in this proposal develops and
analyzes a Best-Effort QoS service for the wide-area Internet. This service
automates the procedure used by applications to draw upon these distributed
application layer mechanisms to improve the perceived quality and capabilities
of the network. An application initiates the service by placing a specific QoS
request at a network endpoint. A best effort is then made by the service to
locate and instantiate the necessary distributed mechanisms to meet the QoS
requirement. The service is best effort in that there is no reservation or
admission control phase that restricts or denies other sessions' access to
network resources. Hence, there is no guarantee that the QoS requirement will be
met, nor is there a guarantee that once met, the requirement will be satisfied
for the remainder of the session. The only guarantee is that as long as
application layer resources can be located and effectively applied to meet the
requirement, then the service will do so. The work in this proposal will
evaluate this service in three broad areas: (i) techniques for locating
available application layer resources, (ii) coordinated selection of these
resources, and (iii) controlling how competing applications share these
resources. Our evaluation is performed mainly via mathematical analysis and
simulation upon a generic service. However, we also demonstrate the practicality
of the service by extending the analysis to two specific applications as well as
developing and using a testbed for experimental purposes. The researcher's
teaching efforts focus on the intertwining of analytical and experimental
aspects of networking research. To this end, he proposes to develop courses in
networking that (i) teach fundamental approaches to modeling and performance
evaluation of networking systems, (ii) develop a wide-area classroom laboratory
atop the Internet2 that can be used by students across the world to implement
wide-area experiments, and (iii) teach students how to integrate experimental
and theoretical approaches to networking issues.