* 0133449
* CAREER: Perception of Asymmetry and its Role in Evolutionary Behavioral Ecology
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2002,05/31/2009
* John Swaddle, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* daniel wiegmann
* 05/31/2009
* USD 527,478.00

CAREER: Perception of asymmetry and its role in evolutionary behavioral
ecology&lt;br/&gt;John P. Swaddle&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This career development
plan integrates research and education activities to address a question of broad
relevance to evolutionary biology while also giving undergraduate students
opportunities to develop their own independent research skills. The plan adopts
a multidisciplinary, novel approach to address whether birds can use asymmetries
(i.e. small differences between the left and right sides of the body) as visual
cues of fitness (e.g. when assessing each other as potential mates). These small
asymmetries arise due to accidents in development and are believed to reflect
how well an individual is adapted to the environment in which it grows. As
larger asymmetries indicate more accidents, researchers have studied whether
females preferentially choose to mate with symmetric males and avoid asymmetric
males. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If birds use asymmetry as a cue in nature, their
key perceptual task is to discriminate asymmetry from symmetry. If they cannot
do this, asymmetry cannot be a direct cue. Hence, this research addresses
whether birds are capable of detecting symmetry across a range of different
perceptual tasks that are relevant to the birds' natural ecology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Symmetry detection will be studied in two common bird
species - European starlings Sturnus vulgaris and zebra finches Taeniopygia
guttata. The experiments are designed to assess what forms of asymmetry are
relevant to the birds, what magnitudes of asymmetry can be discriminated from
perfect symmetry, and also explore whether a symmetry preference can arise as a
by-product of other perceptual mechanisms for object recognition (i.e.
independent of any association between asymmetry and fitness). Hence, this
research will contribute greatly to assessing the importance of asymmetry to
evolutionary processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate students will be
involved with all aspects of the work. My educational objectives are to grow a
strong, productive community of undergraduate scientists through close
mentorship and opportunities for independent research projects. My educational
plans include several new initiatives to integrate research activities into my
undergraduate classes - including problem-solving activities, debates,
workshops, high-profile guest instructors, and several research visits to
national museums and academic institutions. Students will also present their
research with me at national and international conferences, and join me on
several international research trips. These activities are designed not only to
arm students with a greater array of research and cognitive skills, but also to
increase retention in the sciences and help students to pursue future scientific
careers. The efficacy of my educational plans will be assessed through rigorous
qualitative and quantitative techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;