* 0133774
* CAREER: Biochemical Analysis of the DNA Damage Checkpoint
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2007
* W. Matthew Michael, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 04/30/2007
* USD 499,992.00

Transitions between different phases of the cell division cycle are controlled
by cell cycle checkpoints. Checkpoints are regulatory systems that monitor
cellular processes and ensure that a given process has been satisfactorily
completed before transition into the next phase of the cell cycle is allowed.
When chromosomal DNA suffers damage, through exposure to mutagens, the DNA
damage checkpoint arrests the cell cycle so that damage repair systems have an
opportunity to repair the damage prior to transition into the next phase of the
cell cycle. This activity is especially important when damage is incurred during
S phase of the cell cycle, as lesions on chromosomes must be repaired before the
damaged DNA is used as a template during DNA replication. The long-term goal of
this research program is to use Xenopus egg extracts to biochemically address
the problem of how damaged DNA is detected by the damage checkpoint. Our
knowledge of how damage is sensed is currently quite limited. To correct this, a
series of experiments will be performed that aim to answer basic mechanistic
questions about how DNA damage is sensed. The Xenopus extract system is ideally
suited for this type of analysis, and recent advances in the preparation of
these extracts will be incorporated into these studies. The problems to be
addressed will include the role that DNA replication forks play in sensing
damage, the role that DNA repair pathways play in activating the checkpoint, and
the effect that the checkpoint has on DNA replication. Once these questions have
been answered, then the identity of the individual proteins that function to
sense damage can be addressed.&lt;br/&gt;Because this problem has obvious
connections to cancer, interest in the subject is high amongst undergraduates
who are preparing for careers in medicine or laboratory research. To accommodate
and encourage this interest, a lecture course has been developed, to be taught
chiefly to undergraduates, that focuses on cell cycle control. This lecture
course and the Research Plan described in this proposal are tightly connected in
that, over the five-year funding period for the proposal, students taking the
course will annually receive a copy of the Research Plan, they will be updated
on the progress that has been made, and they will participate directly in the
work by performing some of the experiments as part of a laboratory section that
is attached to the class. This exercise not only teaches students about the cell
cycle, but will also enable students to observe how science is practiced, from
the conception of an idea (as outlined in the proposal), to the performance of
an experiment to the interpretation of data. &lt;br/&gt;