* 0133019
* CAREER: Expanding the Applicability, Utility and Popularity of Item Response Theory Models for Unfolding
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2002,08/31/2005
* James Roberts, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2005
* USD 274,216.00

This research program will develop and apply new measurement methodology in the
domain of item response theory (IRT) models for unfolding. An unfolding IRT
model is a probabilistic model that simultaneously estimates each respondent's
latent trait along with the characteristics of each item using the responses to
a test or questionnaire. In contrast to traditional IRT models that implement
cumulative item response functions to measure traits like ability and
proficiency, unfolding IRT models incorporate single-peaked, nonmonotonic item
response functions to measure constructs like attitudes, preferences and
individual locations within certain developmental processes that occur in
stages. This research program will expand the applicability, utility and
popularity of a particular unfolding IRT model for polytomous responses known as
the generalized graded unfolding model (GGUM). These goals will be achieved
through an integrated sequence of educational and research projects. Research
projects will include:&lt;br/&gt;1) An investigation of alternative indices of
model, item and person fit that can be utilized with the GGUM - the results will
enable practitioners to better identify when the GGUM is and is not appropriate
for a given set of item responses. &lt;br/&gt;2) An exploration of Bayesian
estimates of GGUM parameters derived from a Markov chain Monte Carlo method -
this technique will potentially improve the accuracy of GGUM parameter estimates
in situations with sparse data and will better represent the uncertainty
inherent in those parameter estimates.&lt;br/&gt;3) The development of a new
multidimensional extension of the GGUM - this model will allow for the
measurement of multidimensional latent traits that are of interest to social
scientists in many substantive areas like psychology, marketing, political
science, etc. &lt;br/&gt;4) The development of a new mixture model that is based
on the GGUM response function - this mixture model will estimate latent traits
of conscientious respondents while probabilistically culling unconscientious
respondents from the measurement portion of the
algorithm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational component of this program
includes a series of both introductory and intensive workshops on the
application and benefits of the GGUM family of models. Workshops will be
developed and presented to applied measurement practitioners across the U.S. and
Europe. The refinement and subsequent distribution of free, user-friendly
computer software that estimates GGUM parameters will complement these
educational activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent psychometric research
suggests that responses to typical attitude and preference questionnaires are
more appropriately described by unfolding models rather than cumulative models.
Indeed, the use of cumulative models in these situations can lead to invalid
measures. Unfolding IRT models will promote more valid measurement in these
situations while also providing other benefits commonly associated with
cumulative IRT models. These include the ability to build item banks that
maintain a common scale of measurement, the ability to estimate the precision of
each respondent's latent trait estimate, and the ability to measure attitudes,
preferences and other constructs in the social sciences using computerized
adaptive testing methods. Consequently, the results from this research can
improve the quality of measurements that are developed in many social science
disciplines while simultaneously expanding applied measurement practices in ways
that are both technically sound and practical. The educational component of this
program will provide measurement practitioners with the requisite knowledge and
tools to effectively use this growing methodology. &lt;br/&gt;