* 0133258
* Building a Genetic Platform for S. meliloti, a Nitrogen-Fixing Symbiont of Alfalfa
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Sharon Long, Washington State University
* Continuing grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 05/31/2006
* USD 1,448,774.00

Nitrogen-fixing symbioses are ecologically and agronomically important and
provide the major nitrogen input for many systems of sustainable agriculture.
For scientific and historical reasons, the interaction between Sinorhizobium
meliloti and a diploid alfalfa, Medicago truncatula, has become a model for this
kind of nitrogen-fixing symbiosis. The DNA sequence of the S. meliloti genome
has been determined and was predicted to encode about 6200 proteins. To
investigate the genome further, an integrated genetic strategy is being
developed that will provide a platform for many different types of genetic,
biochemical, physiological and taxonomic analysis. The strategy uses high-
throughput, genomic scale PCR and integrase technology to clone sequences that
encode every predicted gene in the S. meliloti genome. These clones can be used
immediately in creating DNA arrays for expression analysis and cross species
comparisons and, using the clones, it should be possible to move smoothly to the
construction of S. meliloti strains with reporter genes fused to each predicted
promoter, to the isolation of mutant strains lacking precisely defined regions
of the S. meliloti genome, and to the production of proteins for biochemical
characterization. The strategy also provides built-in flexibility for
incorporating technical advances in the future. Characterization of gene
expression and symbiotic phenotypes of the resulting bacterial strains will
allow investigators to investigate various bacterial traits important to a
productive symbiosis, such as resistance to acid soils and heavy metals, cold
tolerance, desiccation tolerance, competitiveness for nodulation and efficiency
of nitrogen fixation.

The information obtained by studying S. meliloti and its symbiosis with alfalfa
will be relevant to understanding other symbioses and plant-microbe interactions
in general. Resources will be developed for sharing this genetic material and
information. Through both their immediate utility and their features designed to
accommodate changes necessitated by future research needs, these constructs
should provide a basis for many years of fruitful work. The strategy should be
applicable to many other organisms important to society in areas ranging from
agriculture and the environment to bioengineering.