* 0133164
* CAREER: Development of Novel Organic/Inorganic Hybrid Oligomer Architectures
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2008
* Stuart Rowan, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 05/31/2008
* USD 600,500.00

The objective of the research component of this work is the preparation of a
number of C2-symmetric aromatic heterocycles and porphyrins and the assembly of
these components into oligocatenanes (molecular chains) and other types of
interwoven oligomers. The monomers used for chain assembly are predominantly
bis-(pyridyl)pyridines, bis-(benzimidazolyl)pyridines and
bis-(benzimidazolyl)propane units. These ligands contain benzyl halide or
benzaldehyde functional groups which allow for future chain growth. After the
ligands are synthesized, two are complexed to Zn(II) or Cu(I) to provide a
"kink" in the molecular chain and then chain growth is initiated off the
functional groups in the ligands. A variety of catenates and hetero-metallic
oligocatenates will be prepared using this approach. Column oligomers and two
dimensional grids and networks will also be prepared using a similar strategy
but starting with formyl functionalized porphyrin monomers. There are two major
educational components to this project. In educational outreach, this group is
working with the Cleveland Museum of Natural History and the Great Lakes Science
Center to establish Polymer Science Days and Polymer Funhouse exhibits. An
additional educational component of this work is the development of two polymer
chemistry lecture courses at CWRU, one aimed primarily at undergraduate
chemistry, engineering and materials science majors and a second aimed primarily
at graduate students.

With this CAREER award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is
supporting the research and educational goals of Dr. Stuart J. Rowan of the
Department of Chemistry at Case Western Reserve University. Dr. Rowan will
explore the synthesis of heterocyclic monomers which can be assembled into
molecular chains and interwoven grids and networks. Such materials may have
practical applications in the development of high temperature polymers, sensors,
and separation membranes as well as exhibiting conducting and light harvesting
properties which may prove useful in display devices. Students trained as a
result of working on this project will gain experience in materials research as
well as supramolecular organic and inorganic chemistry, hence they will have
skills needed by both the specialty chemicals and the computer/materials
industries. In educational outreach, this group is working with the Cleveland
Museum of Natural History and the Great Lakes Science Center to establish
Polymer Science Days and Polymer Funhouse exhibits. An additional educational
component of this work is the development of two polymer chemistry lecture
courses at CWRU, one aimed primarily at undergraduate chemistry, engineering and
materials science majors and a second aimed primarily at graduate students.