* 0133488
* CAREER: Scalable, High Performance Network Simulations Using Reverse Computation
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2009
* Christopher Carothers, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 05/31/2009
* USD 374,999.00

Internet data traffic is doubling each year. If this rate
continues,&lt;br/&gt;data traffic will surpass voice traffic around the year
2002. However,&lt;br/&gt;not included in the Internet traffic growth rate
estimates are the&lt;br/&gt;potential data generated by web phones and mobile
web-enabled PDAs,&lt;br/&gt;nor are the effects of future, unforeseen ``killer
apps'' that may&lt;br/&gt;great increase the current demand for bandwidth. Thus,
the data growth&lt;br/&gt;rate could be significantly higher in the aggregate
and at the very&lt;br/&gt;least, some ``hot sites'' may experience a quadrupling
of traffic each&lt;br/&gt;year. Unfortunately, due to technological barriers,
bandwidth growth&lt;br/&gt;rates per fiber will be limited to only doubling
per&lt;br/&gt;year. Consequently, short falls in available bandwidth may
result,&lt;br/&gt;thus placing the burden to effectively manage bandwidth on
overworked,&lt;br/&gt;network management teams. Network managers will require
techniques and&lt;br/&gt;tools that enable them to "nowcast" not only their
local network, but&lt;br/&gt;surrounding networks as well in order to ensure,
stable, effective&lt;br/&gt;bandwidth allocation in the face of dynamic, high-
bandwidth, next&lt;br/&gt;generation ``killer web
apps''.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address this "nowcasting" problem, we propose
the use of a new&lt;br/&gt;parallel simulation modeling technique called
"reverse&lt;br/&gt;computation". Here, network models designed for parallel
execution are&lt;br/&gt;able to execute both forwards and backwards in simulated
time. For&lt;br/&gt;simplistic network models, reverse computation has been
shown to&lt;br/&gt;reduce the state memory requirements of parallel
optimistic&lt;br/&gt;simulations by a factor of 100 and increase the overall
speedup by a&lt;br/&gt;factor of 6 when compared to classic state-saving
techniques used to&lt;br/&gt;support rollback processing in optimistic
simulations. We also believe&lt;br/&gt;reverse computation will allow large-
scale network models to scale to&lt;br/&gt;much larger processor configurations
as well as enable a more&lt;br/&gt;efficient design of simulation
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
understand the fundamental&lt;br/&gt;functional and performance limits of
reverse computation when applied&lt;br/&gt;to the modeling of large-scale
systems. Because of its importance and&lt;br/&gt;impact, we have selected
network models as our driving application.&lt;br/&gt;To achieve this goal, we
propose to investigate reverse computation in&lt;br/&gt;the following five major
research thrust areas:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. the design and implementation of
perfectly reversible computation&lt;br/&gt;algorithms for event-list management,
and time management to enable&lt;br/&gt;scalable, efficient optimistic event
processing,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. the development of processes and techniques
to effectively model a&lt;br/&gt;large-scale, multi-protocol network scenario in
a parallel simulation,&lt;br/&gt;reverse computation
framework,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. the comparison and contrast of reverse
computation performance to&lt;br/&gt;state-of-the-art conservative
synchronization techniques,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4. the creation of new methods
and techniques for the design of&lt;br/&gt;simulation experiments that take
advantage of reverse computation,&lt;br/&gt;and&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;5. the
exploration of the linkages between reverse computation,&lt;br/&gt;quantum
computing and classic parallel/distributed computing that&lt;br/&gt;could lead
to a more unified view of these disparate classes of&lt;br/&gt;computation.