* 0133231
* Comparative Arbitration Procedures:  The Role of Expectations in Dispute Rates
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2003
* David Dickinson, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 01/31/2003
* USD 56,239.00

Bargaining disagreements are often quite costly, and so a thorough understanding
of the determinants of bargaining failure and the effectiveness of different
procedures to resolve disputes is needed. This research will study arbitration
procedures, and one key objective of this research is to examine dispute
resolution under different forms of arbitration. That is, how do different
arbitration rules affect bargaining outcomes? This research will examine an
innovative arbitration procedure as well as currently used procedures. It is
important to investigate dispute resolution with this innovative procedure
because it theoretically promises to resolve disputes more effectively than
procedures currently used in practice. This research will also investigate the
role that bargainer expectations play in disputes. If bargainers view
information about likely arbitration settlements in an optimistic way (i.e.,
each bargainer's perceptions of likely settlements are biased in his/her favor),
then these optimistic expectations may significantly contribute to the
likelihood that the bargainers will arbitration rather than negotiate their own
settlement. Specifically, one can show theoretically that optimistic
expectations will likely reverse the ordering of least to most effective
arbitration procedure from among those studied in this project. &lt;br/&gt; This
research will examine the aforementioned issues using a controlled laboratory
bargaining environment that allows for manipulation of bargainer expectations
and arbitration rules used at bargaining impasse. Paid laboratory subjects will
negotiate over the value of a generic variable (i.e., the item of value created
for the lab environment), which generates higher payoffs to one bargainer for
lower negotiated values but higher payoffs to the other bargainer for higher
negotiated values of the variable. As such, the lab creates a conflict of
interest (i.e., a dispute) in terms of payoff potential in the negotiations.
Bargaining rounds of fixed length will utilize different sets of arbitrations
rules in different rounds to resolve disputes that remain at the end of the
round. The experimental environment will also manipulate subject expectations by
providing a more distilled (and objective) form of information about likely
arbitrated settlements for bargaining pairs in half of the experiments.
Statistical analysis of the results from this research will reveal which
arbitration procedure is most effective at limiting disputes and will also
identify the separate contribution of bargainer
expectations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;