* 0134640
* CAREER: Improvement and Integration of Laser-based Sensors for Advanced Situational Awareness: A Combined Research and Education Program for Students in Lasers and Optics
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2007
* Audra Bullock, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 02/28/2007
* USD 375,000.00

The University of Hawaii system is an educational institution unlike any other,
due to its remote location, culturally rich history, and locally populated
student body. It is unique among our nation's universities and requires an
equally unique approach to research and education. Cultural and geographic
issues that do not exist at other institutions filter into nearly every facet of
our function as a university. These can create a sense of unity among the
administration, faculty, and students, or a sense of division; therefore, it is
essential to consider the local cultural dynamics in any research and
educational plan. This 5-year career development plan addresses the uniqueness
of the University of Hawai'i and seeks to increase undergraduate and graduate
enrollment, student research participation, and diversity within the College of
Engineering. A key aspect of this plan is working with the local cultural
dynamics to foster a positive image for the College of Engineering within the
state of Hawai'i, as well as the Mainland. The proposed plan is an integrated
research/education/outreach program. intended to encourage students to pursue
graduate degrees, while providing them the experience of open-ended
collaborative research projects in the areas of lasers and optics.&lt;br/&gt;The
research proposed here involves fundamental investigation and development of
optical sensors; particularly low-cost, high-efficiency, laser diode and LED-
based sensors. Various innovative optical sensors will be developed with
applications ranging from biomedical monitoring to target tracking. I will build
upon previous work in gas sensing to optimize sensitivity, while miniaturizing
the sensor. Innovative modulation techniques will be explored for increased
accuracy to measured parameters. Central to this is the wavelength modulation
technique employing higher harmonic detection. The focus of this research will
not only be on the development of novel sensors, but also on the integration of
such sensors in a sensor network. The motivation for concentrating on
integration of optical sensors is to address the escalating need for situational
awareness over multidimensional environments with a cost-effective robust system
in environmental, military, and commercial analysis.&lt;br/&gt;Theoretical,
experimental, and practical issues of all levels will arise in this research
project, making it ideally suited for teams of students, composed of individuals
at various academic levels ranging from sophomore to Ph.D., to participate. The
rationale for including undergraduate students in what is traditionally graduate
work, is threefold: (1) hands-on research projects give them the opportunity to
apply the knowledge learned in their course work; (2) exposing them to open-
ended research problems gives them a feel for what is involved in graduate
school and can encourage them to pursue graduate degrees; and (3) undergraduate
students are typically an untapped resource in academia: given the right
opportunity, students are often highly motivated and extremely creative. I
intend to use this team-oriented approach to propose and implement an
accelerated Masters of Science Option to the College of Engineering at the
University of Hawai'i Manoa campus. This program would allow top performing
students to get a Masters of Science with a thesis within one year of their
Bachelors degree. This plan would be the first of its kind in the College of
Engineering and would contribute significantly to the College's current
initiative to boost enrollment. Furthermore, this interactive program would have
a positive impact on the local community for two reasons. First, high-tech
research draws attention from the mainland, as well as Japan, which can play an
essential part in helping to balance the tourism-based economy. Second,
engineers with graduate degrees and having a solid education and good practical
experience are in high demand in the current job market, an asset highly revered
in this tight-knit community. Creating a positive image within the local
community is the most effective form of outreach here in Hawaii.&lt;br/&gt;