* 0134002
* CAREER: Time-Varying Signal Processing For Wideband Wireless Communications
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2007
* Antonia Papandreou-Suppappola, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 12/31/2007
* USD 349,999.00

0134002&lt;br/&gt;Papandreou-Suppappola, Antonia&lt;br/&gt;Arixozona State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: Time-Varying Signal Processing For
Wideband &lt;br/&gt; Wireless Communications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New and novel
signal processing and communication algorithms are required to improve the
performance of wireless communications systems, and to meet major challenges
that arise from the escalating demand for new higher data rate wireless
technologies. These challenges include methodologies to reduce channel
impairments, higher data rate and higher bandwidth requirements to provide
ubiquitous access, and schemes to improve multiple access transmission. As the
nature of the wireless channel is time-varying, these challenges lead to many
problems such as multiple access interference and fading due to time and
frequency selectivity. Thus, the channel requires two-dimensional time-frequency
processing methodologies especially designed to characterize spectral changes
with time. Recently, the importance of time-frequency techniques in wireless
communications has successfully been demonstrated for interference suppression
and channel diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research involves the
development of novel time-frequency methods to address problems that surface due
to the time-varying nature of the wireless channel. Specifically, these
methodologies develop time-varying modulation schemes for code division and
orthogonal frequency division multiple access systems, and investigate the
effect of the schemes on fading distortions and multiple access interference. In
addition, they design time-frequency transforms to enhance detection performance
for multiple access systems and detection techniques for the new modulation
schemes. They also utilize time-lag and frequency-lag techniques to jointly
estimate multipath and Doppler fading parameters needed to improve detection
performance at the receiver. Furthermore, they characterize wideband channels
and employ the model to reduce fading and multiple access interference for
broadband systems such as underwater or satellite wireless communications and
third generation wideband systems. These research contributions impact the role
and significance of time-varying signal processing in advancing knowledge to
meet the high demands for wireless technological advances.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;