* 0134767
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Textual Appropriation and Co-membership in Immigration Gatekeeping Interviews
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2002
* Ronald Scollon, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Cecile Mckee
* 12/31/2002
* USD 6,770.00

Under the direction of Dr. Ron Scollon, Ms. Alexandra Johnston will collect data
for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct linguistic research on the face-
to-face interviews between U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS)
officers and prospective immigrants who are applying for permanent residency
visas (green cards). INS officers use information from these interviews to
approve or deny green cards - decisions with great consequence for individual
applicants as well as for the U.S. labor force and society. Ms. Johnston will
investigate how various communicative behaviors during these interviews
influences these decisions. For example, she will study how people ask and
answer questions and how they construct explanatory narratives. She will also
study nonverbal cues such as eye gaze and hand gestures. Because such behaviors
differ across cultures, they may not be interpreted as they are intended. Data
for the project include video- and audio-tapes of permanent residency interviews
conducted in an INS District Office, ethnographic research on site, exit
interviews with applicants, and playback interviews in which officers and
applicants view and comment on their videotapes in separate, interviews off
site. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is significant for both the INS and
its immigrant clients. For the INS, the results may affect officer training
materials or become a seminar series on strategies for inter-cultural
communication. For immigrant clients of the INS, the results may make the
interview process more transparent - perhaps through informational pamphlets or
workshops for prospective immigrants about how to navigate these interviews.
Finally, the research will illuminate the nature of interaction between
individuals and institutional representatives as well as aspects of face-to-face
communication across cultural borders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;