* 0134953
* CAREER:  Research and Education to Further Knowledge and Literacy in the Postgenomic Sciences
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Neil Kelleher, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 12/31/2006
* USD 540,000.00

This CAREER award to Professor Neil Kelleher of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign is supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program in
the Chemistry Division. The overall research goal is to analyze entire proteins
by mass spectrometry as efficiently as small peptides are processed today. The
main research goal involves development of a unique measurement platform
centering around Fourier-Transform Mass Spectrometry (FTMS) and automating the
fractionation and fragmentation of wild-type proteins above 10 kDa. Realization
of this goal will detect biological events in the extremophilic organism,
Methanoccoccus janaschii, that unexpectedly generate a protein of different
molecular weight than that predicted from the sequenced and annotated genome.
This career plan also reflects a determination to positively influence large
numbers of young students. Specific plans include direct visitation to six high
schools in Illinois with follow up field trips to the University for students to
peek at research, and a teaching conference for regional educators of 14-18 year
old students.

Our society's expectations for postgenomic biomedicine and bioengineering
demands a better understanding of proteins and their structural modifications.
The unique analytical platform described above will contribute to the national
research infrastructure and analyze genome-predicted proteins with
unprecendented detail in the least-studied domain of life. The thermophilic
enzymes encountered could be engineered into industrial catalysts with less
negative impact on the environment. Execution of this plan will also recruit,
train and educate people at many levels for an improved understanding of modern
biotechnology.