* 0134519
* CAREER:  Microstructural Characterization and Modeling of Geomaterials
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2002,05/31/2003
* Eyad Masad, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard J. Fragaszy
* 05/31/2003
* USD 375,000.00



Microstructure characterization and modeling are essential for the understanding
of the macroscopic behavior of engineering materials. It is often used to design
new materials with tailored microstructures, obtain parameters for multiscale
continuum models, and simulate engineering processes at the material
microstructure level. Microstructure characterization techniques have
significantly advanced the understanding of many engineering materials such as
metals, ceramics, and composites.

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) research and education project
offers a novel approach for linking the geomaterials microstructure to their
macroscopic properties. It focuses on developing an approach to quantify the
three-dimensional geomaterial microstructure and its influence on fluid flow
characteristics and directional permeability. These properties have significant
impact on several phenomena in geomaterials such as the stability of saturated
soils, contaminant transport in soils, oil transport in rocks, and the
performance of pavements. The proposed research is well balanced between
experimental methods for characterizing the 3-D microstructure of geomaterials,
numerical modeling, and computer simulation. X-ray computed tomography (CT) will
be used to capture the three-dimensional microstructure of geomaterials.
Computational fluid dynamics will be used to develop a numerical solution to the
fluid flow equations within the boundary conditions of the material
microstructure as defined by the X-ray CT images. Experimental measurements will
be used to verify the developed models and computer simulations. The outcome of
this research will provide unique insight into the influence of the
microstructure on the macroscopic properties of geomaterials. It will offer a
fundamental approach for predicting material permeability and fluid flow
characteristics that will ultimately lead to effective design of geosystems.

These research activities will be integrated in an educational program that
incorporates recent advances in experimental non-destructive techniques, image
analysis, numerical modeling, and computer simulation into the academic
curriculum through team-oriented projects conducted by undergraduate students,
and graduate course development. A summer educational program will also be
established that focuses on the participation of high school students, and those
recruited from other universities with emphasis on underrepresented groups in
engineering. Students will be able to link the microstructure properties to the
macroscopic response, and visualize the influence of the microstructure on the
material behavior through computer simulations.

The project includes a management plan to ensure achieving the research,
educational and outreach objectives. It involves an advisory committee
consisting of multidisciplinary individuals from academia, research
institutions, and government agencies. The role of this committee will be to
offer technical advice, facilitate dissemination of the results and ensure
exposure of the findings to educational and professional organizations. An
additional role of this committee will be to facilitate the involvement of
underrepresented student groups.