* 0134130
* CAREER:   Intelligent Based Performance Enhancement Control of Micropower Energy Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2002,07/31/2008
* Marcelo Simoes, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Dagmar Niebur
* 07/31/2008
* USD 380,997.00



An advanced renewable based distributed power generation system is required for
the next age of the alternative energy market. Improved and dependable systems
for energy conversion, energy storage requires power quality demands and
compatibility with distributed energy systems, also called by microgrid or
micropower energy systems. An intelligent-based control methodology must be
developed to optimize the microgrid system requirements, aiming convergence of
adaptive, parameter insensitive and on-line learning capabilities. This research
project is concerned with three main issues (1) small distributed generation
prototype development of a high frequency ac link (HFAC) microgrid system, (2)
analysis and modeling of behavior interactions and architecture management and
(3) intelligent control applications.

Power electronic systems will be designed to connect distributed sources to the
HFAC. Intelligent control techniques will be developed to implement capabilities
of learning by sensing the environment in order to reach its objective of
optimum power operation, automatic functioning, self-monitoring and self-
checking of failures and detection/recovery for efficient user interface. A
behavior based hierarchic control capable to generate set-points for optimal
neural network controllers based on Adaptive Critic Design will be developed. An
educational plan is focused to leverage the interdisciplinary mission of the
Engineering Division at Colorado School of Mines. It is proposed the development
of educational material will be developed to allow students to have experience
in studying theoretical foundations of intelligent control systems,
understanding their functional operation through the use of computer for
simulation in promising research directions. The five-year, integrated
development plan encompasses research, education and outreach activities in
order to incorporate intelligent control techniques for performance improvement
of distributed energy systems used in residential and small business
applications.