* 0134908
* CAREER:  Glycolipid Interactions In Myelin
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Amit Basu, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 12/31/2006
* USD 464,000.00

Professor Amit Basu, of the Department of Chemistry at Brown University, is
supported by the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program for his studies of
glycolipid interactions in myelin. In the research portion of the career plan,
carbohydrate-carbohydrate interactions between glycolipids are identified as the
object of exploration. Interactions between the carbohydrate portions of
membrane glycolipids mediate the compaction of the myelin sheath, adhesion of a
variety of cancer cells, and also initiate signal transduction pathways in
certain instances. This proposal outlines a new approach for detailed
characterization of carbohydrate-carbohydrate recognition using the interaction
present in myelin as a model system. Professor Basu will prepare carbohydrate
containing liposomes as well as self-assembled monolayers as cell surface mimics
of glycolipids. The monolayers will be used to obtain information about how
carbohydrate structure affects monolayer morphology and its recognition
properties. The second stage of the project will use chemical mutagenesis to
identify individual binding interactions in the associated carbohydrates. Each
type of mutation provides a unique probe of the nature of the native binding
interaction. These mutants will be incorporated into monolayers and their effect
on monolayer architecture and recognition will be examined. Finally, detailed
experiments are designed to correlate glycolipid structure with membrane
morphology and recognition.

The teaching portion of this proposal focuses on methods for introducing
research into the undergraduate curriculum. The class will be introduced to
research through the exclusive use of the primary literature for course
readings. Students will develop the skills necessary to interpret and critically
evaluate information that is presented in research articles. In the course of
doing so, they will begin to identify key features and limitations in
experimental methods and design. This will lead them to consider new experiments
that might be performed. Therefore, with the support of the Organic and
Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor Amit Basu, of the Department of
Chemistry at the Brown University will use an integrated approach to teaching
and research, that is, the methodology of research will be incorporated into the
undergraduate curriculum.