* 0134175
* CAREER: Coordination of Production, Inventory and Transportation Across the Supply Chain
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2008
* Ana Muriel, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 05/31/2008
* USD 375,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award provides funding for the
development of optimization-based decision support systems that model the
interaction between various levels of the logistics network and utilize improved
network communications to increase logistics efficiencies. The major focus is to
design and analyze algorithms which integrate production plans, inventory
control and transportation strategies across the supply chain to reduce system-
wide costs and enhance service. Analysis of the theoretical properties of
different problem formulations and optimal policies will be used to develop
efficient and robust solution techniques. Building upon our previous research in
distribution planning problems, a series of increasingly complex models will be
considered to account for large-scale production-distribution networks,
nonlinear production and transportation costs, multi-modal transportation,
capacity constraints, and uncertainty in demand. This research will be fully
integrated with the educational program through the incorporation of case
studies, industry projects and software tools in Logistics and Supply Chain
Management courses. The most salient aspect of the educational component is the
preparation of case studies that provide sufficient technical information to
allow rigorous engineering analysis, while presenting students with real,
unstructured situations that require sound business assessment. Finally, the
educational program also includes curriculum design, mentoring and outreach
activities with particular focus on women and
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this career program will lead to
improved coordination in large-scale logistics networks and significant
contributions to the theory of combinatorial optimization, networks and
algorithms, as well as to education. The impact of our research is clear: lower
system-wide costs, more reliable delivery times and enhaced service in supply
chains. On the educational front, we expect that the introduction of appropriate
case studies to engineering education will be widely accepted to stimulate
critical thinking and bring hands-on experience to the classroom.