* 0134132
* CAREER: Model Free Fault Detection for Nonlinear Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2002,08/31/2008
* Tyrone Vincent, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2008
* USD 375,000.00

This proposal will deal with concerns of the development and application of
methods for fault detection of nonlinear dynamical systems. Fault detection of
linear systems is by now well established, but application of these techniques
to nonlinear systems can lead to a loss of performance. The market for fault
detection is growing, as more and more manufacturing and industrial centers are
interested in improving their productivity by reducing unplanned maintenance and
limiting losses to product due to equipment failure. In addition, many
manufactures have installed sophisticated sensor and data collection networks in
order to closely monitor their processes, which would enable the application of
very sophisticated fault detection schemes.

Fault detection can be as simple as placing limits on the allowable range of
sensor measurements, but when the systems that are monitored are dynamic
systems, more sophisticated methods can and should be applied. This is because
dynamic systems, by the their very nature, have temporal relationships between
the system variables that characterize both normal and faulted operating
conditions. The challenge is to codify these temporal relationships. One method
is to develop analytical models from first principles. In most model based fault
detection schemes, output observers are designed which generate residual signals
that measure the disagreement between the model and the measured data. However,
these models are sometimes difficult to come by. The systems described above are
nonlinear thermo-fluid systems that are difficult to model accurately and the
resulting models would have many unknown parameters. In this case, system
identification methods can be employed.

This proposal is aimed at developing a theory of the interactions between the
system identification and fault detection processes. The focus is on a general,
practical method of nonlinear fault detection which is easily implemented on
input/output models that are generated by modern nonlinear system identification
methods. The basic question that is addressed is to determine how the choices
made during the system identification process, such as the model structure. The
objective function, the choice of regularization, and the validation procedure
influence or interact with the fault detection process.