* 0134613
* CAREER: New Materials in Condensed Matter Physics - The Case of Quasicrystals
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2007
* Ian Fisher, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 01/31/2007
* USD 454,792.00

The search for, and synthesis of, new materials plays a crucial role in
Condensed Matter Physics. Quasicrystals are a specific case of interest because
they possess long-range atomic order but without the translational symmetry of
conventional crystals. It is therefore possible to explore the consequences of
an ordered but non-periodic structure on physical, magnetic and electronic
properties of a material. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award
will fund a project that will address outstanding questions in the field of
quasicrystals via the synthesis and measurement of high-quality, single-grain
samples. In particular, this work will explore and clarify the complex roles of
order, periodicity and structural perfection on electronic transport, and
magnetic ground states and phase transitions in quasicrystals. The materials are
for the most part incongruently melting, and the self-flux technique is a well-
suited synthesis route. Experimental techniques used to probe the thermodynamic
and transport properties include susceptibility, heat capacity, resistivity and
Hall effect measurements. The students involved with this research will learn
synthesis, characterization, and analysis skills that will enable them to find
future employment in academe, industry, or government laboratories. In addition
the PI's research efforts will be integrated into a new lecture course that
introduces contemporary challenges in the field of condensed matter physics via
the detailed discussion of canonical materials. Specific examples and
experimental techniques from the PI's own laboratory will be used to motivate
and illustrate various aspects of this course. The PI will also continue his
interest in scientific publication for children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances
in the field of Condensed Matter Physics often go hand-in-hand with the
development of new materials. These advances may herald new theoretical
challenges, a clearer understanding of well-known phenomena or advanced
applications. In all cases, the search for, and synthesis of, new materials
plays a crucial role, and this is the focus of the PI's laboratory at Stanford
University. Quasicrystals are a specific case in point. These exotic materials
possess long-range atomic order but without the translational symmetry of
conventional crystals. It is therefore possible to explore the consequences of
an ordered but non-periodic structure on physical, magnetic and electronic
properties of a material. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award
will fund a project that will address outstanding questions in the field of
quasicrystals via the synthesis and measurement of high-quality, single-grain
samples. In particular, this work will explore and clarify the complex roles of
order, periodicity and structural perfection on electronic transport, and
magnetic ground states and phase transitions in quasicrystals. The students
involved with this research will learn synthesis, characterization, and analysis
skills that will enable them to find future employment in academe, industry, or
government laboratories. In addition the PI's research efforts will be
integrated into a new lecture course that introduces contemporary challenges in
the field of condensed matter physics via the detailed discussion of canonical
materials. Specific examples and experimental techniques from the PI's own
laboratory will be used to motivate and illustrate various aspects of this
course. The PI will also continue his interest in scientific publication for
children.