* 0134571
*  CAREER: The Dependence of Friction on Vibrations at the Atomic Scale: A Fundamental Study Using Isotopic Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2006
* Robert Carpick, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 12/31/2006
* USD 380,000.00

CAREER: The Dependence of Friction on Vibrations at the Atomic Scale:
&lt;br/&gt;A Fundamental Study Using Isotopic Engineering
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Robert W. Carpick &lt;br/&gt;University of Wisconsin -
Madison &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much progress has
been made in the long-standing engineering discipline of tribology - the study
of friction, adhesion, lubrication, and wear - yet many key questions remain.
Recently, tribology has emerged as critically important to the field of
nanotechnology, since the increased surface-to-volume ratio at small scales
ensures that surface or interface effects dominate the interactions between
micro- or nano-scale components. Therefore, progress toward the implementation
of nano-scale materials technologies will not occur without a fundamental
atomic-scale understanding of the tribological properties of interfaces. The
proposed research will address this knowledge gap by studying a fundamental
aspect of tribology: the relationship between frictional energy dissipation and
the vibrational properties of materials. Specifically, the PI will perform
atomic force microscope (AFM) measurements of friction at the atomic scale as a
function of isotopic composition of the sliding materials. The substitution of
heavier stable isotopes is a method to tailor specific vibrational properties by
changing the mass, but not the chemical identity, of atoms in a material. The
impact of this research will be: (1) to provide a quantitative experimental
basis that will critically enhance the theoretical understanding of frictional
energy dissipation in terms of vibrational energy; and (2) to enable the design
of nanostructured materials and devices with optimized tribological (and other)
properties via isotopic engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education and
Outreach &lt;br/&gt; To be prepared for new opportunities in nanotechnology,
engineering programs must incorporate previously non-traditional physical and
experimental concepts into the curriculum. The PI will make a major contribution
to this by: (1) expanding an engineering mechanics undergraduate laboratory
course to include a battery of nano-scale experiments including AFM experiments;
and (2) co-developing an advanced seminar course in nanotechnology directed at
engineers. The intention is not simply to provide new course materials locally,
but to have these materials serve as models for enhancing engineering curricula
everywhere through evaluation and wide dissemination on the web, education
publications, and in public meetings. In addition, outreach efforts aimed at the
general public and K-12 students will be pursued. The PI will contribute to the
design of an upcoming international science museum exhibit on materials science
by developing modules (visualization, models, hands-on materials) on the topics
of microscopy, friction, and isotopes. The PI will also develop a classroom-
compatible macro-scale AFM made of simple and affordable components which can
demonstrate concepts behind high resolution imaging and friction force
measurements. Local impact of this work will be felt through the PI's active
involvement in a successful minority university recruiting program at UW-
Madison. Finally, building on the established practice in the PI's lab, the
laboratory efforts will also include substantial involvement of undergraduates
including members of underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;