* 0134455
* CAREER:  Nonlinear Mechanics and Aeroelastic Stability of High-Speed Rotating Disks and Translating Webs
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Arvind Raman, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 05/31/2007
* USD 375,000.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The nonlinear vibrations and aeroelastic stability of two-
dimensional gyroscopic systems such as high-speed rotating disks and translating
webs are investigated using computational, analytical, and experimental
techniques together with state-of-the-art models of nonlinear flexible rotating
disks and thin translating webs interacting with three-dimensional shear flows.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research aims to identify regions in parameter space
where aeroelastic flutter occurs, and investigate the complex post-flutter
nonlinear modal interactions of this category of two-dimensional gyroscopic
systems. The results will lead directly to a fundamental understanding of the
factors (i) limiting rotation or transport speeds and (ii) causing flutter
instabilities and will be critical for the future design of information storage
and synthetic material processing technologies such as magnetic hard disk
drives, optical drives, data storage tapes, printing, and paper, textile,
plastics, and metal foil processing systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education
plan focuses on the PI's current activities in five key areas for integrating
research, education, and industrial outreach, including, amongst others (i)
leveraging the PI's research in collaboration with Purdue's Minority in
Engineering and Women in Engineering Programs for the recruitment and retention
of underrepresented groups and women in engineering, and (ii) enhancing the
undergraduate curriculum through the creation of a novel, hands-on "Mechanics
Laboratory".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;