* 0134725
* CAREER: Microstructure-Property Relationships in Carbon-Based Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Pawel Keblinski, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2007
* USD 300,000.00

This CAREER award supports theoretical research to elucidate the role of
microstructure in determining the properties of interfacial materials and
supports education activities that involve introducing various materials
modeling components to the materials science and engineering curriculum,
development of multimedia and visual teaching tools, and outreach to K-12
educational activities. Research will focus on mechanical properties of brittle
interfacial materials through the study of diamond interfaces and
nanocrystalline diamond model systems. Studies of mechanical properties of
interfacial brittle materials will focus on analyzing the role of microstructure
and environmental effects in brittle fracture with particular emphasis on
relating atomistic simulations to the large body of knowledge on fracture
mechanics. Its purely brittle nature and its potential for various applications
such those needed for developing micro- and nano-electromechanical systems
motivate the choice of nanocrystalline diamond, a model brittle material. The PI
will use atomistic simulations to address the questions: (i) Is brittle crack
propagation governed mainly by equilibrium thermodynamics or is it dominated by
kinetics? (ii) What are the effects of microstructure on crack propagation,
deflection and arrest? (iii) What are effects of temperature and environment on
fracture? In order to explore a wide range of microstructures and provide a
highly reliable description of carbon-hydrogen systems, atomistic simulations
will be combined with tight-binding simulations. Simulation results will be
compared with those from continuum finite element modeling approaches to the
mechanics of interfacial materials. Educational activities will focus on
developing courses on materials theory and modeling, and on restructuring
lecture-based coursework into an interactive format at both the undergraduate
and graduate levels. A key aspect of educational activities will be to expose
students to the complementary nature of modeling and experiment by developing
coursework in collaboration with experimentalists. A variety of multimedia tools
and web resources will be integrated into teaching to assist in achieving this
objective. Cross-university web-assisted teaching will be explored in order to
broaden the repertoire of the engineering curriculum. Platform independent, open
source and interactive software for visualization of molecular and other
physical processes will also be developed. This courseware and educational
software will ultimately be shared with the materials science community. The
educational component also includes an outreach program to expose K-12 students
to materials science and materials science career options.

This CAREER award supports theoretical research and education. The proposed
research focuses on using simulation to elucidate the role of the
microsctructure of materials in determining their mechanical properties. A
simulation approach that couples two different simulation methods that are
accurate on different length scales will be used to provide an atomistic
description of brittle fracture in brittle interfacial materials through the
study of diamond interfaces and nanocrystalline diamond model systems. The
educational component of the proposal involves introducing materials modeling
and simulation into the materials science and engineering curriculum through
course development and restructuring, and involves developing new simulation and
visualization software tools for teaching which will be shared with the
materials science community. The educational component also includes an outreach
program to expose K-12 students to materials science and materials science
career options.

















