* 0134591
* CAREER: Integrating Time-Variant Source Directivity into Architectural Acoustic Auralizations
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2008
* Lily Wang, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 07/31/2008
* USD 406,376.00

This project will escalate and integrate architectural acoustics research and
education in the United States. The research focus is on fundamental advances in
understanding and modeling of auralization, or the process in which the
listening experience in a space is audibly simulated from a physical or
computational model. The computational procedure is already being used in the
prediction and design of the acoustics in built spaces, but its accuracy and
realism are limited by geometrical considerations, knowledge of material
properties, and the use of time-invariant sound source directivity. This project
plans to implement changing source directivity in real time to improve the
accuracy of auralizations. Psychoacoustic subjective tests will also be run, so
that perceptual differences may be quantified between (a) traditional
auralizations using omnidirectional time-invariant sources, (b) auralizations
with time-variant source directivity, and (c) measured results from actual
sources in real spaces. With improvements, auralization will advance the study
of acoustics in the built environment and potentially impact many other fields.
Realistic sound fields can be recreated and tested on humans in controlled
laboratory environments for psychoacoustic studies; auralized sound fields may
be used to train people who are vision-impaired; and assessments may be made of
noise quality in work environments and how that impacts productivity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The United States currently lacks a technical center for
architectural acoustics research and education, as is found overseas. The PI
plans to promote such a hub within the University of Nebraska - Lincoln
Architectural Engineering program. The significance and excitement about
building acoustics will be conveyed by making the auralization research
accessible to all levels: in required undergraduate and graduate acoustics
classes; in opportunities for undergraduates to complete segments of the
research, mentored by graduate students; and through outreach to local high
schools so younger students may participate as test subjects or aid with
measurements of real spaces, such as their own classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;