* 0134932
* CAREER:  Small Molecule-Nucleic Acid Interactions:  A Multidisciplinary Approach to Biopolymer Research and Education
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2009
* Dev Arya, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 03/31/2009
* USD 550,113.00

With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program (OMC) in
the Chemistry Division and the Molecular Biochemistry Program in the Molecular
and Cellular Biosciences Division (MCB), Professor Dev Arya, of the Department
of Chemistry at Clemson University, will pursue an interdisciplinary approach to
the discovery of new ligands for nucleic acid stabilization and will perform
natural product based synthesis of novel ligands. He will also pursue studies on
a variety of natural product-nucleic acid interactions and their subsequent
development as useful tools in stabilizing higher order nucleic acid structures.
A major portion of the research builds on the recent discovery in his laboratory
of the stabilization of DNA and RNA triple helices by aminoglycoside
antibiotics. Professor Arya proposes to develop an integrated research and
education plan in nucleic acid chemistry with the long term goal of creating a
recognized nucleic acid chemistry research and education curriculum in the
Department of Chemistry, and to establish Clemson University as a globally
competitive center of excellence in biopolymer education and research.

Professor Dev Arya, of the Department of Chemistry at Clemson University, with
the support of the Organic Dynamics Program and the Molecular Biochemistry
Program, will develop an interdisciplinary approach to research and education.
He will develop a new course in biopolymers as well as transfer modeling and
experimentation to the classroom to show students the synergism between
education and research and its applicability to real life problems. Outreach
activities planned by Professor Arya include working with K-12 students,
inviting underrepresented and under-privileged students to spend a summer in his
laboratory, and working with high school teachers in 23 high schools in 9
counties in western South Carolina.