* 0134637
* PECASE: A Framework for Driver Assistance in 2D Collision Avoidance Based on Lagrangian Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Joseph Gerdes, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 06/30/2007
* USD 375,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: PECASE: A Framework for Driver Assistance in 2D
Collision Avoidance Based on Lagrangian Systems&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Stanford
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances such as automotive steer-by-wire
systems, radar ranging sensors and differential corrections that increase the
accuracy of the Global Positioning System to 20 centimeters, pave the way for
active collision avoidance systems. Unlike passive restraints that seek to
minimize the severity of an accident, active systems seek to move the vehicle
out of harm's way, preventing an accident from occurring in the first place. Yet
while the necessary components for active collision avoidance will be available
in a few years, it is not clear how to integrate these into a system that
smoothly assists the driver while offering guaranteed performance.
&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a framework for collision avoidance systems
that assist the driver with lanekeeping and evading obstacles in two dimensions.
The approach assigns a level of hazard to objects in the environment and applies
a virtual force on the vehicle proportional to the gradient of this hazard
through coordinated braking and steering. Using an energy analogy and Lagrangian
dynamics, the assisted vehicle can be guaranteed to move away from obstacles
while leaving the driver in control. Development of these theoretical guarantees
is coupled with experimental validation of the concept on a full-scale test
vehicle. The experimental equipment is also integrated into a laboratory
experience in vehicle dynamics and control so that undergraduate and graduate
students can literally feel the theoretical concepts of dynamics in practice.
The ultimate objective of the project is to demonstrate a theoretically
rigorous, yet commercially viable, system that can help reduce the approximately
37,000 traffic fatalities that occur each year, particularly the 40% due to
collisions with fixed obstacles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was
originally funded as a CAREER award, and was converted to a Presidential Early
Career Award for Engineers and Scientists (PECASE) award in May 2004.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt
;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br
/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;