* 0134287
* CAREER: Helical Electroactive Macromolecules
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2006
* Dhandapani Venkataraman, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 12/31/2006
* USD 385,000.00

The objective of the research component of this work is to prepare novel
electroactive C2-symmetric or pseudo C2-symmetric molecules and assemble them
into helical electroactive macromolecules. The building blocks are bridged
triarylamine derivatives. These molecules exist as atropisomers which can be
resolved and studied prior to polymerization. The resolved atropisomers are then
functionalized with vinyl groups or boronic esters and polymerized using ADMET
chemistry or Suzuki couplings. The helical electroactive polymers produced will
be characterized by a variety of physical and spectroscopic methods. Minority
students in the SPUR program of the Northeast Alliance for Graduate Education
will participate in these investigations. An additional educational component of
this work is the development of a web based library for the exploration of
structures of minerals as well as inorganic and molecular based materials. The
site will contain information which should prove useful to students, teachers,
and researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; With this CAREER award, the Organic and
Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research and educational
goals of Dr. Dhandapani Venkataraman of the Department of Chemistry at the
University of Massachusetts at Amherst. Dr. Venkataraman will explore the
synthesis of electroactive materials. These materials are expected to exhibit
circularly polarized luminesence. This means they are expected to emit light
when they are excited by other wavelengths of radiation. Such materials may be
useful for backlighting in liquid crystal displays (LCDs, i.e. computer
screens). Students trained as a result of working on this project will gain
experience in materials research as well as supramolecular organic chemistry,
hence they will have skills needed by both the specialty chemicals and the
computer/materials industries. An additional educational component of this work
is the development of a web based library for the exploration of structures of
minerals as well as inorganic and molecular based materials. The site will
contain information which should prove useful to students, teachers, and
researchers.