* 0134021
* CAREER:  Power Quality Research and Education:  A New Power Engineer for Today's Energy Challenges
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2008
* Efrain O'Neill-Carrillo, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Dagmar Niebur
* 04/30/2008
* USD 375,000.00

The proposed project aims at establishing power quality as catalyst for the
development and renovation of power engineering research and education at the
University of Puerto Rico-Mayaguez (UPRM). The proposed power quality research
and education activities will prepare a new kind of power engineer, able to meet
the energy challenges of the 21st century. Power quality at UPRM will link power
systems, power electronics and contemporary energy issues in order to create an
integrated perspective of today's electric energy systems. The multidisciplinary
nature of power quality problems presents a unique opportunity to renovate
power-engineering curriculum and inspire students to engage in energy systems
research.

Research tasks are centered on the power quality impact of power electronics in
the electric system, with application to alternate energy sources. Photovoltaic
(PV) systems will be chosen as a representative alternate source. Research
activities include nonlinear device modeling for power quality studies;
improvement and development of tools to quantify power quality events;
implementation and testing of scaled PV systems including various grid-interface
options; validation of models/indices using the scaled systems; consideration of
interconnection issues such as the power quality impact of different grid-
interface options and the interaction with other loads in the system. The
establishment of a PV testing facility will support research in distributed
generation and policy issues such as deregulation.