* 0134228
* CAREER:  Stability and Polarization Control of Single Mode Vertical-Cavity Surface-Emitting Lasers Exposed to Optical Feedback
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2008
* Janice Hudgings, Mount Holyoke College
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 05/31/2008
* USD 375,000.00

The proposed integrated research and education program focusses
on&lt;br/&gt;investigation of the notorious polarization instability and
sensitivity&lt;br/&gt;to optical feedback of single transverse mode vertical
cavity surface&lt;br/&gt;emitting lasers (VCSELs). These intertwined
difficulties plague ongoing&lt;br/&gt;efforts to develop the use of single mode
VCSELs for applications such&lt;br/&gt;as wavelength division multiplexed
communications networks and optical&lt;br/&gt;disk readout. Furthermore, we
expect that our work will be relevant to&lt;br/&gt;future investigations of
other low-dimensional semiconductor nano-lasers&lt;br/&gt;with a large degree of
symmetry. The experimental investigations of&lt;br/&gt;polarization stability
will be analyzed using a novel model that we have&lt;br/&gt;developed to
describe VCSELs with two polarization eigenstates in the&lt;br/&gt;presence of
optical feedback. This CW work will then be extended to
an&lt;br/&gt;investigation of the small-signal modulation response of VCSELs
with&lt;br/&gt;optical feedback. Finally, the results of these investigations
will be&lt;br/&gt;used to explore practical strategies for improving the
stability and&lt;br/&gt;polarization control of single mode VCSELs exposed to
optical feedback.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will be integrated
into the education of our&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate physics and engineering
majors, both in the classroom and&lt;br/&gt;via direct participation of
undergraduates in my research program. In&lt;br/&gt;order to enable our students
to acquire the necessary research skills,&lt;br/&gt;we are developing a new
investigative, inquiry-driven, sophomore-level&lt;br/&gt;instructional
optoelectronics lab. In addition, we are introducing into&lt;br/&gt;our
introductory sequence pedagogical reforms aimed at
encouraging&lt;br/&gt;students to engage in the processes of critical analysis
that are&lt;br/&gt;essential to successful, creative research. Ultimately,
this&lt;br/&gt;integration of research and teaching will contribute to the
resolution&lt;br/&gt;of a critical problem in VCSEL development while preparing
our&lt;br/&gt;undergraduates to join the ranks of the next generation of
women&lt;br/&gt;scientists and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br
/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;