* 0134748
* Mycorrhizal Regulation of Ecosystem Response to Chronic Nitrogen Deposition
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2008
* Hormoz BassiriRad, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Russell
* 01/31/2008
* USD 556,750.00

Readily usable forms of nitrogen are being deposited from the atmosphere in
much greater quantities than plants can use. This is mainly nitrate nitrogen
produced by the combustion of fossil fuels in urban areas, but some agricultural
areas are subject to high deposition of ammonium nitrogen. Effects of
atmospheric nitrogen deposition were first noticed in Scandinavia, the
Netherlands, and, in the U.S., in the industrial Northeast where it is
associated with the death of trees, particularly conifers. These trees showed
characteristic responses which included high nitrogen in their needles and loss
of fine roots. Currently high levels of atmospheric nitrogen deposition are
spreading to other parts of the U.S. including the Los Angeles Basin and the
Colorado Front Range. After many years of nitrogen additions many forests show
evidence of reaching a point where no further nitrogen can be taken up, tree
mortality increases, and nitrate nitrogen leaches into the water table.
&lt;br/&gt; Initially, plants were thought to take up and store most
depositional nitrogen in forests. But studies using nitrogen isotopes as tracers
suggested that the nitrogen was stored in the forest floor. This focused
attention on two groups of beneficial fungi that occupy forest floors: ecto- and
endomycorrhizal fungi. Both groups function as supplementary root systems for
plants, and ectomycorrhizal fungi may store depositional nitrogen in sheaths of
fungal tissue covering root tips of conifers and oaks.&lt;br/&gt; This project
asks three kinds of questions in order to learn the role of ectomycorrhizal
fungi in nitrogen storage and tree mortality. First, are species numbers and
relative abundance of ecto- and endomycorrhizal fungi affected by chronic
atmospheric nitrogen deposition? Second, is the metabolic activity of ecto- and
endomycorrhizal fungi affected by atmospheric N deposition? Is the ability of
ectomycorrhizal fungi to store N decreased when numbers of fine roots decline?
Third, does atmospheric nitrogen deposition have the same effect on growth and
mortality of ectomycorrhizal as endomycorrhizal trees?&lt;br/&gt; To answer
these questions the investigators will quantify mycorrhizal and plant responses
across the nitrogen deposition gradient in the Chicago metropolitan area in a
five-year study. The Chicago metropolitan area is suitable for asking these
questions because chronic nitrogen deposition increases 24% along a west to east
gradient on similar soils and vegetation. At each site the investigators will
use red oak (Quercus rubra, ectomycorrhizal) and sugar maple (Acer saccharum,
endomycorrhizal) to test whether nitrogen alters (a) the species and abundance
of ecto- and endomycorrhizal fungi, (b) the metabolic activity and nitrogen
storage ability of ecto- and endomycorrhizal fungi, (c) the specific rates of
ammonium and nitrate uptake by ecto- and endomycorrhizal roots, (d)
survivorship, growth, and N leaching from soil under red oak and sugar maple
seedlings at ambient and twice-ambient nitrogen deposition rates ranging from 17
to 42 kg ha-1 year-1.&lt;br/&gt;