* 0134150
* CEDAR Postdoc: Investigations of Gravity Wave Propagation and Dissipation in the Mesosphere and Lower Thermosphere Region and Associated OH/O2 Temperature Signatures
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2002,12/31/2005
* Michael Taylor, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert B. Kerr
* 12/31/2005
* USD 130,000.00

The union of TIMED (Thermosphere Ionosphere Mesosphere Energetics and Dynamics)
satellite measurements with CEDAR (Coupling Energetics and Dynamics of
Atmospheric Regions) ground-base measurements offers an unparalleled opportunity
to explore the energetics and dynamics of the mesosphere and lower thermosphere
(MLT) region (80-100 km). In particular, measurements will be made using the
CEDAR Mesospheric Temperature Mapper (MTM) that is capable of quantitative
investigations of intensity and temperature perturbations induced by a range of
long and short-period gravity waves and tides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of
this CEDAR Post Doctoral application it is proposed that Dr. Alok Taori (a
recent Ph.D. from the Physical Research Laboratories, India), will join the PI's
group and will develop a leading role in the operation, analysis and
interpretation of the MTM data obtained during the CEDAR-TIMED coordination
program. Alok Taori has an excellent research record that is highly
complementary to the PI's current research program and his experience in
building, testing and operating airglow instrumentation will be most beneficial
to the sustained success of this research program. He is already familiar with
the methods of analysis of OH temperature data and has good computer skills
necessary for further development of the existing software including new tools
for near-simultaneous OH/O2 data reduction, analysis and presentation.
Furthermore, his Ph.D. research experience with day-time OH instrumentation and
measurements will be applied to the possible development of a new day-time OH
capability at USU to complement the existing MTM measurements to provide novel
and frequent 24-hr measurements of the MLT region.