* 0134102
* CAREER: Dynamics and Control of Integrated Microchemical Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2002,09/30/2008
* Mayuresh Kothare, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 09/30/2008
* USD 375,000.00

ABSTRACT

PI: Msayuresh V. Kothare Institution: Lehigh University Proposal Number:
0134102

Micromechanical systems are a new genergation of minature chemical systems that
carry out chemical reactions and separations in precisely fabricated three
dimensional microreactor configurations in the size range of a few microns to a
few hundred microns. Typical microchemical systems combine fluid handling and
reaction capabilities with electronic sensing and actuation, are fabricated
using integrated circuit (IC) manufacturing techniques and use silicon and
related IC industry materials, polymers, ceramics, glass or quartz as their
material of construction. The goal of this integrated research and education
program is to study the unique dynamic properties of such integrated
microchemical systems and develop a framework for designing implementable
feedback control techniques for this class of microsystems. The research program
will evolve around the following four central themes (1) dynamic modeling,
simulation and dynamical analysis of microchemical systems; (2) model-based
feedback controller design using fundamental, reduced order and empirical input-
output models; (3) impact of dynamical considerations on microsystem design; and
(4) experimental verification of controller design on a prototype microchemical
system. The fundamental distributed parameter modles will be used to analyze the
nonlinear steady-state and dynamic properties of the microsystem. The reduced
order models as well as the empirical models will be used to synthesize low-
order model-based controllers suitble for implementation on the experimental
microchemical test system. Concepts from distributed and boundary control theory
will be employed to study the model-based feedback control formulation of
microchemical systems and to develop a technical framework for microsystem
controller design. Efficient implementation of these controller algorithms will
be investigated by using the experimental prototype microchemical system.
Complementary to this research program will be a signicant educational eort to
translate the research results to the chemical engineering core curriculum. At
the graduate level, (a) lecture modules on microchemical systems uid- ow
modeling and microreactor phase-plane analysis will be developed for
incorporation in the core graduate level courses in uid mechanics and reactor
design; and (b) lecture modules on distributed and boundary control will be
developed for incorporation in a graduate level cross-listed elective course on
multivariable and nonlinear control. At the undergraduate level, team-based
independent research projects will be dened through three avenues: (a) the
Opportunities for Student Innovation (OSI) undergraduate research program at
Lehigh; (b) summer research and semester research credit at Lehigh; and (c)
summer internships at Sandia National Laboratories. In addition, to incorporate
microreactor concepts as \core" concepts in the undergraduate curriculum,
lecture modules will be developed for the following courses: (a) reactor design,
to introduce a microreactor as yet another standard reactor; (b) process
control, to demonstrate the dynamics and conventional control of microreactors;
and (c) process design, to demonstrate the issues of micro owsheet design,
integration, synthesis and control for integrated microplants.

Collaboration with industry will be facilitated through the Pittsburgh Digital
Greenhouse, a consortiumof microelectronics companies located in Pennsylvania,
and a national laboratory through a collaborative agreement with the Sandia
National Laboratories.



