* 0134881
* CAREER: Dynamics of Model Biological Membranes and Glass Formation in Liquid Metals
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2007
* J. Daniel Gezelter, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* raima larter
* 01/31/2007
* USD 452,042.00

In this CAREER project funded by the Division of Chemistry and the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, J. Daniel Gezelter will use theoretical and
computational methods to investigate phase transitions, structural features, and
dynamics in complex condensed phases. Of particular interest are biological
membranes, glass-forming materials, and bimetallic alloys. The goals of this
research are to elucidate the fundamental molecular interactions that give rise
to these phases, to gain an insight into the dynamics of diffusion in these
systems, and to develop both analytical theory and computational methodology to
study these phase transitions in a computationally tractable manner. Three
complementary areas of research will be examined: (1) simple models for
biological (phospholipid) membranes, (2) efficient computational methods for
observing rare events in membranes and glass-forming materials, and (3)
analytical models for the vibrational spectra of amorphous materials. In the
educational portion of this project a course will be developed that brings the
most important intellectual material from theoretical and physical chemistry to
students who are not majoring in the physical sciences.

Computer simulations can answer a number of interesting questions and can
explain, for example, the mechanism of diffusion and transport or the
differences between alloys and mixtures. The theoretical methods developed in
this project represent a promising strategy for investigating mesoscopic-scale
phenomena and should be applicable to membranes and liquid crystals as well as
more complex systems. The chemical systems studied should be of interest to
biological and materials scientists and may even have potential biomedical
application, for example, to drug delivery. Chemistry courses for nonscience
majors, particularly those students taking science classes out of intellectual
curiosity, are often taught at a low level of rigor. Dr. Gezelter proposes to
elevate the intellectual level without making the course content more
quantitative. Communicating the importance of science to non-scientists is one
of the chief problems with the current state of the scientific enterprise. Such
a course should help improve this communication and make the course a more
valuable and rewarding experience.