* 0134704
* CAREER:  Asymmetric Catalytic Coupling of Chiral Organic Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2008
* Timothy Jamison, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 03/31/2008
* USD 357,400.00

The research focus of this work is to develop asymmetric catalytic fragment
coupling reactions for the synthesis of complex molecules. The central theme of
the approach is "triple diastereoselection", in which a chiral catalyst is used
to overcome the poor diastereoselectivity obtained in stereochemically
mismatched coupling reactions. Nickel-catalyzed intermolecular reductive
coupling of alkynes and aldehydes (or imines) forms the basis of the coupling
strategy. The focus of the educational effort will be the development of lecture
and laboratory courses in organic chemistry. Dr. Jamison along with graduate and
undergraduate collaborators will participate in the project. Further, high
school outreach will be carried out by the graduate student participants.

With this CAREER award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is
supporting the research and educational efforts of Dr. Timothy F. Jamison of the
Department of Chemistry at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Professor
Jamison will focus his research on the development of new asymmetric catalytic
reactions for the synthesis of diverse and complex organic molecules. Further,
the methodology allows the preparation of complex molecules from common, simple
starting materials. This approach could have important ramifications for the
pharmaceutical and agricultural industries. The educational activities of the
award will center around the MIT Chemistry Outreach Program and course
development.