* 0134431
* CAREER: Semiparametric Regression Models for Censored Data
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2008
* Zhezhen Jin, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2008
* USD 300,000.00

Semiparametric regression methods for censored data currently used by empirical
researchers rarely extend beyond the well-known Cox proportional hazards
regression model. The Cox model assumes that covariate-specific hazard functions
are proportional, an assumption often not satisfied in practice. The proposed
research investigates the accelerated failure time regression and the family of
semiparametric linear transformation models, of which the Cox model is a member.
Existing methods for these models are complicated by their numerical
difficulties and stringent assumptions. To circumvent these complications, the
investigator proposes a number of new approaches, including modified least
squares method, the M-estimation and a minimization-based rank-type estimation
for the accelerated failure time model and a general counting process-based
score equations for the transformation models. An important feature of the new
approaches is that their inference procedures can be readily implemented with
numerically stable algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from the proposed
project will be relevant and directly applicable to many scientific disciplines.
They will provide methodologic tools for analysis of data across many important
fields, including economics, business administration, industrial engineering,
medicine, biology and public health. Examples of the scientific research
problems that the methods can deal with are as diverse as identification of
factors associated with the duration of unemployment, determination of major
risk factors for cancer, testing of new drugs to combat AIDS, examination of
factors associated with the lifespan of system components, evaluation of
potential confounding factors in crime prevention and drug abuse. The research
touches many important areas in statistical science: linear regression, survival
analysis, semiparametrics, robust statistics, nonparametric statistics and
statistical computing. In this connection, it will generate excellent
opportunities for graduate students to have exposures to a broad spectrum of
modern statistics as well as to learn vital skills in conducting independent
researches. A research topic/reading course and a journal club will be developed
to facilitate these exposures and enhance the educational experience.&lt;br/&gt;