* 0134611
* CAREER:  NLApack:  Software for Numerical Algebraic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2002,02/29/2008
* Jan Verschelde, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 02/29/2008
* USD 400,000.00

In this Career project, the investigator creates a software&lt;br/&gt;platform
(called NLApack) for Numerical Algebraic Geometry,&lt;br/&gt;trains students in
the development and application of&lt;br/&gt;mathematical software, and broadens
the graduate education of&lt;br/&gt;students in the areas of mathematics,
computational science, and&lt;br/&gt;engineering. In a first stage, the
algorithms for the numerical&lt;br/&gt;irreducible decomposition of the solution
set of a polynomial&lt;br/&gt;system are refined and combined into a blackbox
program. Besides&lt;br/&gt;software, another outcome of this stage is the
development of a&lt;br/&gt;textbook for a course introducing students to
symbolic and&lt;br/&gt;scientific computing. The second stage of the project
focuses on&lt;br/&gt;three specific topics: pole placement, overconstrained
linkages,&lt;br/&gt;and multi-body dynamics. A result of this stage is a
collection&lt;br/&gt;of software tools specialized for those application fields,
case&lt;br/&gt;studies, and benchmarks. Throughout, students are trained
in&lt;br/&gt;mathematics and computing and in important applications
areas.&lt;br/&gt; The principal investigator, his collaborators, and
his&lt;br/&gt;graduate students are working in the areas of numerical
analysis&lt;br/&gt;and computer algebra. While computer algebra solves
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;problems in an exact symbolic fashion, as one would by
hand,&lt;br/&gt;numerical analysis calculates with limited precision on
input&lt;br/&gt;data often only approximately known. The software developed
in&lt;br/&gt;this project combines the symbolic and numeric approach.
Most&lt;br/&gt;scientists seek insight (not just numbers) in the form
of&lt;br/&gt;equations to reveal new relations between the
important&lt;br/&gt;parameters in their models. But these models contain
approximate&lt;br/&gt;data that cannot be handled directly by current symbolic
methods.&lt;br/&gt;The investigator develops symbolic-numeric methods that
will&lt;br/&gt;make computer algebra more relevant to scientific computing,
and&lt;br/&gt;trains students who will adept at both numeric and
symbolic&lt;br/&gt;computation, with significant payoffs for disciplines that
depend&lt;br/&gt;on large-scale scientific computing.&lt;br/&gt;