* 0134939
* CAREER:  Studies of Mantle Convection at Multiple Scales and Integration of Geophysical Fluid Dynamics in Geoscience Education
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2007
* Shijie Zhong, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 01/31/2007
* USD 310,000.00

The PI proposes to investigate the dynamics of multi-scale thermal convection in
the mantle. Important surface tectonic features can be attributed to mantle
convection at two distinct scales: The plate-scale associated with the motion of
surface plates and the small-scale associated with hot spot volcanism, mantle
thermal plumes, and lithospheric instabilities. By studying the dynamic
interaction between convection at different scales, the proposed research will
improve our understanding of the following fundamental geodynamic questions: 1)
formation and heat transfer of thermal plumes in the presence of plate-scale
convection, 2) the cause of relatively small hot spot motion, 3) topographic
anomalies produced by thermal plumes and their implications for layered mantle
convection, 4) vertical motion of Hawaiian islands in the last 400 thousand
years and its relation to plume-plate interaction. Another important component
of this project is on education, specifically on more efficient integration of
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics (GFD) into geoscience education. The PI proposes to
develop a set of simulators that use the GFD approaches and computer modeling to
help students understand a variety of geophysical and geological processes
ranging from thermal convection, viscoelastic stress relaxation, surface loading
and crustal compensation, fluid flow in porous media, and convection for icy
materials. These simulators use simple computer modeling and animations to offer
students direct experience about how to simplify complex processes into physical
models and to understand the processes with GFD.