* 0134161
* CAREER:   An Integrated Transportation Network Reliability Analysis Framework
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2008
* Anthony Chen, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 08/31/2008
* USD 375,000.00

Experience with earthquakes has provided compelling evidence of transportation
infrastructure's critical role in restoring normalcy as well as the need for
reliable transportation systems under natural or man-made disasters.
Nonetheless, reliability analysis has received very little attention in
transportation research. Moreover, increased economic activity and improved
quality of life have placed a higher value on reducing congestion. Road
travelers in the 21st century would prefer a more reliable transportation system
with a higher level of confidence of arriving at their destination on schedule.
Transportation network reliability analysis will play an important role in the
planning, design and management of transportation facilities and networks
particularly in developed countries and/or mega-cities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research plan entails developing an integrated transportation network
reliability analysis framework. This integrated analysis framework involves
modeling, evaluation, design, algorithm development, and implementation. The
modeling includes estimating the maximum capacity of a transportation network
and developing stochastic route choice models that account for both the traveler
perception error as well as the uncertainty of network travel times. The
evaluation component involves the assessment of transportation reliability
measures: travel time reliability is concerned with the probability that a trip
between a given origin-destination pair can be made within a given time interval
and a specified level-of-service, and capacity reliability is concerned with the
probability that the network capacity can accommodate a certain volume of
traffic demand at a required service level. The design component addresses
roadway network designed reliability and cost-effectiveness and includes
investigating the role of information and learning in travel decisions. Finally,
algorithms will be developed and implemented that will render the framework
operational and successful. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education plan focuses on
two important tasks: (1) enhancing the undergraduate program to better prepare
our students for engineering/technology careers in the 21st century, and (2)
developing a graduation transportation curriculum and teaching program with
emphasis in systems modeling. These objectives will be achieved by (a) providing
hands-on, team experience through computer lab exercises to our students to
promote active and collaborative learning, (b) exposing promising students at
the undergraduate level to research opportunities in transportation, (c)
building a graduate curriculum and teaching program that emphasizes systems
modeling, and (d) developing a transportation research seminar to provide an
informal forum for students to discuss a wide range of topics related to
transportation issues that do not necessarily fit into the course curriculum. In
addition to the above educational activities, the PI will integrate research
into teaching by bringing in new insights and results generated by this CAREER
project into both undergraduate and graduate courses, to broaden the students'
educational experience based on the research plan, and to recruit and retain
traditionally under-represented students to the transportation
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;