* 0134539
* GDNF Family Ligands in Parasympathetic Neuron Development
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2002,06/30/2003
* Eri Hashino, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Marc D. Servetnick
* 06/30/2003
* USD 311,135.00

The secreted proteins called "neurotrophic factors" exert diverse biological
effects on neurons in different developmental contexts, such as differentiation,
target innervation, and synaptic specification. Recent studies by our group and
others suggest that glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) and
neurturin (NRTN), the two closely related neurotrophic factors, are required for
the normal development of several parasympathetic neuron populations and that
these proteins are released from target tissues at early embryonic ages. The
goal of this project is to elucidate the functional role of GDNF in the
generation and differentiation of parasympathetic ciliary ganglion neurons that
innervate striate muscle and smooth muscle in the eye. The following three
questions will be addressed: (1) Does GDNF promote neurogenesis or neuronal
differentiation in the ciliary ganglion? (2) Does GDNF provide a guidance cue
for growing ciliary axons? (3) Does GDNF regulate the expression of a proper
number of neurotransmitter receptors in ciliary ganglion neurons? Normal
functions of GDNF will be manipulated both in vitro and in vivo, and resultant
changes in gene expression, protein synthesis, axon outgrowth and receptor
localization will be analyzed. These experiments would represent the first
systematic attempt to isolate molecular and cellular mechanisms associated with
parasympathetic neuron development, and substantially advance our understanding
of neuronal identity and specification.