* 0134134
* CAREER: InP-based Micro-electro-mechanical Systems (MEMS) for Optical Microsystems
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2002,07/31/2008
* Reza Ghodssi, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2008
* USD 375,000.00

There is a great demand for next-generation optical communication devices that
are capable of wavelength-division multiplexed (WDM) switching while avoiding
optical-electronic-optical interconnects which compromise transmission speed.
Compound semiconductors such as Indium Phosphide (InP) have direct bandgaps that
allow active optical devices like lasers and optical amplifiers to be realized -
an advantage over silicon, an indirect bandgap material limited primarily to
electronic devices. The monolithic integration of InP-based active
optoelectronics with micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS) actuators will
enable the realization of versatile WDM lossless switches, tunable lasers and
tunable optical filters at 1.55 mm. At this wavelength optical fibers have
minimal losses. This CAREER award supports an interdisciplinary research and
education program by combining the three technical areas of MEMS,
optoelectronics, and microfabrication of III-V materials for integrated optical
microsystems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research component aims to demonstrate
the advantages of using InP-based materials in monolithic integration of MEMS
and optical structures by reducing the optical losses on the chip, thus making
complex devices achievable. The initial focus of this program is to investigate
the electro-mechanical behavior of InP for development of electrostatically
driven linear microactuators. The results of this study will enable the use of
InP-based materials for (1) development of an innovative 4x4 optical cross-
connect switch by combining the MEMS linear microactuators and optical
waveguides and (2) integration of the optical cross-connect switch with
semiconductor optical amplifiers (SOAs) to minimize optical losses in the
microsystem. The educational component focuses on a research oriented curriculum
by integrating well-formulated research problems in teaching undergraduate and
graduate level courses in MEMS and Microsystems and by exposing students to
hands-on experience, industrial practice, and teamwork in both classrooms and
laboratories. An early exposure of students to interactive research environments
is accomplished by providing avenues for direct interaction between
undergraduate and graduate students on collaborative research projects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;