* 0134924
* CAREER: Interaction between Turbulence Structures and Suspended Sediment in Rivers
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2002,10/31/2003
* Mark Schmeeckle, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 10/31/2003
* USD 137,170.00

The transport of sediment in suspension by turbulent flows is important to a
large number of geologic and environmental problems. In most instances, the
suspended sediment concentration decreases very rapidly moving away from the
sediment bed. Therefore, the most important factor in predicting the suspended
sediment flux is an accurate estimate of suspended sediment very near the
sediment bed. Numerous formulas have been introduced to predict this near-bed
concentration, but estimates from these formulas vary considerably. There exists
no qualitative or quantitative model for the actual process by which suspended
sediment grains are entrained and disentrained from the bed of a hydraulically
rough flow. One of the primary goals of this award is to develop an
understanding of the process of suspended sediment entrainment and
disentrainment from a hydraulically rough bed with simultaneous bedload
transport. It is hypothesized that the entrainment and disentrainment process is
governed not only by near-bed turbulence structures with positive, vertically
upward velocities, but also by the availability of suspended-size particles at
the bed surface. The availability is presumably controlled by the exhumation and
burial of suspended-size particles at the bed surface. To understand this
process, a number of quantitative visualization experiments will be conducted in
a laboratory flume using a high-speed video system, laser light sheet, and a
suite of novel hybrid PIV-PTV algorithms. A numerical simulation of the overall
entrainment and disentrainment will be performed by calculating the simultaneous
motions of a very large number of bedload and suspended-size particles. The
motions will be driven by temporally and spatially realistic turbulent
structures. Finally, the suspended sediment transport field will be coupled to
large-scale lateral turbulent structures occurring in river channels. The
lateral structures will be investigated in a laboratory stream table and in a
river using PIV-PTV velocimetry techniques. Then the modification of the
sediment transport field by the structures will be calculated. A Student Earth
Surface Fluid Laboratory will be built with the help of graduate and
undergraduate students. The laboratory will consist of a hele-shaw cell for
ground-water flow investigations, a stream table for flow and channel change
investigations, and a sediment recirculating flume for sediment transport
experiments. Also, the lab will be equipped with tools and materials to build
other small experimental devices for student directed projects. A set of flow-
structure-resolving numerical routines will be written for each of the
laboratory devices. A course in earth surface fluid experiments will be
developed. The course will provide hands-on experience of how to build, setup,
and take measurements of flow structures. The focus of the class will be on
developing student directed research projects. A newly introduced sediment
transport mechanics course for graduate students will continue to be developed
with material incorporated from results of this proposed research. Also, a new
"shadow course" for geology undergraduates will continue to be developed that
tutors students with their homework while introducing geologic applications of
calculus and physics.