* 0134775
* Quantum Simulation of Chemical Dynamics in Solution
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Peter Rossky, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Raima Larter
* 12/31/2005
* USD 424,200.00

Peter Rossky of the University of Texas at Austin is supported by the
Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to carry out research that
addresses the development and application of simulation methods to describe
nonadiabatic chemical processes in condensed phases, emphasizing electronic
processes in liquid environments. The plan includes a balanced approach to the
development of methods and the application of these theoretical methods to
experimentally studied systems. The project will focus on three areas. First,
non-adiabatic electronic dynamics for intramolecular electron transfer will be
explored using direct simulation, to investigate intramolecular and solvent
dynamical effects on rates, spectroscopy and electronic coupling, the
environmental dependence of electronic structure, and the role of non-
equilibrium initial conditions. Next, fully detailed two state/harmonic bath
models of solvated electrons and of intramolecular charge transfer systems will
be developed and implemented, allowing considerably more rigorous validation of
reduced descriptions and of theoretical algorithms, as well as enabling new
insights into molecular chemical dynamics. Finally, new theory and algorithms
will be developed for atomistic non-adiabatic simulation, including alternative
descriptions of environmentally induced electronic quantum coherence decay and
alternative algorithms for implementing dissipative quantum dynamics simulation.
Outcomes from this effort are expected to reveal the mechanistic character of
the individual chemical examples of interest, increase the interpretive capacity
of model-based descriptions of experimental data, and enhance the predictive
capacity of theory and modeling applied to increasingly complex
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most chemical processes occur in a condensed
liquid or solid, including those reactions that are responsible for biological
function and synthetic materials performance. This research project aims to
elucidate theoretical principles underlying chemical phenomena that involve
changes in electronic state. Continued advances in related experimental methods
will make theory and experiment increasingly able to interact directly, and
promise to enhance the understanding and predicted capability of models for
electroluminescent materials, biological processes such as photosynthesis, and
chemical processes that occur in solution phase photochemistry. &lt;br/&gt;