* 0134013
* The Role of eIF4E Family Members in Zebrafish
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2007
* Bhavesh Joshi, University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute
* Continuing grant
* Vicki B. Vance
* 01/31/2007
* USD 526,233.00

The translational initiation factor eIF4E is a central component in the
initiation and regulation of translation in eukaryotic cells. Through its
interaction with the 5' cap structure of mRNA and its translation partner,
eIF4G, eIF4E functions to recruit mRNAs to the ribosome. The rapid accumulation
of vertebrate EST and genome sequences has allowed the identification of
multiple eIF4E family members. Based on sequence homologies and/or function,
three classes of eIF4E have been recognized; Class I (archetypal eIF4E and sub-
types), Class II (eIF4ELP/HP) and Class III (eIF4E-3, vertebrates only). The
uncovering of multiple eIF4E related proteins suggests an unexpected complexity
of the mRNA recruitment step and its regulation in vertebrates and has
exemplified the difficulties in annotating DNA sequences on the basis of
sequence homologies only. One hypothesis is that each form fills a specialized
niche in the recruitment of capped mRNAs by the ribosome. Alternatively, it is
possible that not all eIF4E family members function as initiation factors or in
translational regulation directly, but in an unrelated function such as RNA/RNP
export or RNA splicing. The overall goal of this project is to use the knowledge
of eIF4E family members and unique reagents accumulated by the Jagus laboratory
to elucidate their respective roles in the regulation of gene expression in
higher eukaryotes. The objectives are to characterize the functions of eIF4E
family members and determine their role in the regulation of gene expression
through the following specific aims: 1) analysis of expression pattern of each
family member in different tissues and at various developmental stages; 2)
determination of the function of each eIF4E family member (from zebrafish and
mammals) in translation using a variety of established assays; and 3) kinetic
analyses of the interaction of each class with cap-structures, eIF4G and the
4EBPs.

The production of cellular proteins begins with the template genetic code that
is copied in the form of mRNA. The information encoded by mRNA is translated on
the ribosomes into proteins. Control of the recruitment of mRNA by ribosomes is
an important form of regulation of gene expression in animal cells. Several
protein factors are required for the recruitment of mRNA by the ribosome, the
most important of which is the translation factor eIF4E. eIF4E recognizes and
binds to the cap structure at the 5' end of mRNA. The accumulation of DNA
sequence data has allowed the Jagus laboratory to recognize three classes of
eIF4E; Class I (prototypical eIF4E and sub-types), Class II (eIF4ELP/HP) and
Class III (eIF4E-3, vertebrates only). The overall goal of this project is to
characterize the functions of eIF4E family members and determine their role in
the regulation of gene expression in the zebrafish developmental system.