* 0134792
* CAREER: Design and Synthesis of Artificial Light-Gated Transmembrane Ion Channels
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Mary Gin, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph L. Templeton
* 05/31/2007
* USD 500,000.00

The Advanced Materials Program in the Division of Chemistry makes this Career
award to University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign to study light-gated synthetic
ion channels to control transmembrane currents. With this award, Professor Mary
Gin will synthesize cyclodextrin-based channel scaffolds after regiospecific
modifications. Modified cyclodextrins with a trapped pH sensitive dye will be
embedded in homogenous lipid vesicles of approximately 25nm diameter. Ion
transport activities of these lipid vesicles will be determined by measuring the
fluorescence intensity changes in the dye. The planned studies are expected to
result in the development of sensors; time released drugs and improved water
purification systems. The educational component of the award is to assist
students in Elementary Organic Chemistry courses, and to provide graduate and
undergraduate students with hand-on experience in organic synthesis and
modification of bioderived materials.

Light-activated synthetic ion channels will be prepared from regiospecific-
modified cyclodextrins and embedded in homogenous lipid vesicles with uniform
diameter. Changes in fluorescence intensity of a pH sensitive dye trapped in
these modified cyclodextrins will be utilized to measure ion transport
activities of these synthetic ion channels. Sensors, time released drugs and
improved water purification systems would be some of the potential applications
coming out of these studies. In addition, this Career award will increase
assistance to students in Elementary Organic Chemistry courses, and will provide
them with research opportunities in organic synthesis and chemical modifications
of bioderived materials.