* 0134106
* CAREER:  Research and Education on Multi-Scale Structure Development in Chaotic Mixing of Polymers
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2002,07/31/2007
* Sadhan Jana, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Joycelyn S. Harrison
* 07/31/2007
* USD 387,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award focuses on research and
education on the subject of evolution of multi-scale structures of polymeric
material during processing. The influence of these evolving structures on
mechanical, electrical, and thermal properties in chaotic mixing of miscible and
immiscible polymers and nanofiller systems under controlled conditions of strain
rates and temperatures is experimentally investigated. Chaotic mixing offers the
following highly desirable attributes: (a) mixing occurs by both shear and
extensional flow components, (b) polymer-polymer or polymer-filler interfacial
areas are created at exponential rates, with much less energy consumption for
the same degree of mixing than in conventional extrusion processes, (c) self-
similar mixing microstructures are formed by repeated stretching and folding of
the interfaces, showing nested striations, droplets, or layers of one polymer in
the other leading to potential morphologies so far not achieved in conventional
single and twin-screw extrusion schemes and (d) mixing uniformity is achieved
with retention of self-similar microstructures, as opposed to randomization in
conventional single- and twin-screw extruders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rapid
interfacial area generation will expedite reactions between functional polymers
in reactive processing and in compatibilization in addition to rapid reduction
in dispersed domain sizes. The self-similar microstructures produced will offer
preferred orientation of the crystallites/dispersed phases for augmentation of
anisotropic electrical, mechanical, and chemical properties and will act as
tools for creating unusual morphologies for design of polymer products with
tailored properties. The study to be undertaken using twin-rotor chaotic batch
mixer and continuous chaotic mixer will yield low cost, rapid, and energy-
efficient mixing technology for scale-up studies, optimization of existing
products, and process development in association with industrial partners. The
education program will provide hands-on polymer education to high school and
undergraduate students, including minority, through summer research and senior
research projects and through participation in seminars and presentations. A new
course will be developed on the applications of chaotic mixing in materials
processing for graduate students and industry, which will draw heavily from the
proposed research activities. In addition, web based course modules will be
designed on rheology and polymerization reactor engineering to reach a much
larger body of students outside conventional classrooms.