* 0134290
* CAREER:  Development of Polymerizable Diacetylene Surfactant Monomers for Two-Dimensional Imprinting and Sensors
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2008
* David Spivak, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 05/31/2008
* USD 360,787.00

The Advanced Materials Program in the Division of Chemistry makes this award to
Louisianan State University. With this Career award, Professor David Spivak will
design, synthesize, process and characterize polymer monolayers with imprinted
recognition and transduction sites. Surfactant diacetylene monomers with
different head groups will be ordered and oriented at the air-water interface
with proteins in the water sub-phase to provide recognition sites for the
monomers before they are polymerized by ultraviolet radiation. Reversible signal
transduction in response to binding/unbinding of analytes will be detected
directly by the polymer monolayer by colorimetric, electrochemical, uv-visible
or fluorescence methods, and these monolayers may be developed to devices and
sensors for specific biological and chemical detection. The PI with the support
from the department will develop a multidisciplinary program in nanoscale
sciences with special emphases on Chemistry, Biology and Engineering. In
addition, a new Macromolecular Studies program with teaching and hand-on
laboratory courses will be reactivated and offered to both graduate and
undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Monolayers based on
polydiacetylene with different head groups will be designed, synthesized,
processed and characterized for potential application in bio- and chemical-
sensors and devices. In addition, these monolayers with specific recognition
sites for analytes will have reversible signal transduction properties and
signal may be processed by colorimetric, electrochemical, uv-visible or
fluorescence methods. As part of the education program, a multidisciplinary
program with training and research opportunities will be offered to both
graduate and undergraduate students.