* 0134123
* CAREER: Mechanics of Microstructural Development at Crystal Surfaces: Micro- and Nano-scale Modeling and Simulation
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2008
* Robert Kukta, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 05/31/2008
* USD 375,001.00

This CAREER project develops a multiscale approach to modeling and simulation of
microstructural development in epitaxial thin films. The energetics and kinetics
of surface steps and their interactions with lattice dislocations will be
investigated. To capture features&lt;br/&gt;over a wide range of length scales,
three modeling methodologies, atomistic, micromechanical, and continuum, will be
utilized. Models suited for larger length scale simulations will be built from
their smaller length scale counterparts, while retaining relevant physics. This
approach is critical to engineering structures of interest for current and
emerging micro- and nano-technologies, which are too large to model directly
using atomistic approaches, but small enough that atomic-level phenomena have a
large role in determining behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education component
builds on the PI's current activities to address the needs of high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students and local industries. Specific initiatives
include&lt;br/&gt;instruction and assistance to high school teachers on the
principles of engineering and developing events and programs designed to promote
participation and inclusiveness in the ASME student section at Stony Brook. A
high school outreach program to underrepresented minority students will be
developed together with the students of ASME and the minority engineering
student organizations at Stony Brook. In addition to attracting minorities to
engineering, the program is intended to teach leadership and organization skills
to participating&lt;br/&gt;students and to convey a sense of duty for community
service.&lt;br/&gt;