* 0134286
* CAREER:  High Temperature Deformation of Stand-Alone Plasma-Sprayed Yttria-doped Zirconia Coatings
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2002,02/29/2008
* Rodney Trice, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 02/29/2008
* USD 375,000.00

Thermal barrier coatings of plasma-sprayed 7 wt.% Y2O3-ZrO2 (YSZ) are to be
extensively studied at representative use temperatures (800 degrees C-1400
degrees C) using a modified compression test for stand-alone coatings. For the
test, the YSZ coating is removed from the substrate to isolate its behavior, and
creep testing, stress relaxation, and fast fracture experiments will be
performed. In addition to mechanical testing, we will use the following
characterization methods for the proposed work: dilatometry, transmission
electron microscopy, X-ray diffraction, Raman Spectroscopy, and laser flash (to
measure thermal conductivity). Each method listed will provide the necessary
information to interpret the mechanical testing results. Thus, the principal
output of this research will be structure-property relationships of plasma-
sprayed YSZ in simulated operating environments. This will involve establishing
deformation mechanisms as a function of temperature, stress, time, and sample
microstructure (i.e. porosity and lamella size). This program will also
establish a foundation for a lifetime of educational excellence through
curriculum development, outreach, and mentoring. To increase non-majors
participation in materials classes at Purdue, web-based modules will be designed
that directly relate materials science applications to each of the engineering
majors, and then incorporated into the introductory materials course. Beyond the
activities at Purdue, an outreach program for science students at Jefferson High
School (JHS) in Lafayette, Indiana will be established. In this program, high
school juniors will spend 8 weeks of the summer with our research group, then
continue their research in the fall and spring of their senior year through an
established research based science class at JHS. There will also be a
significant undergraduate mentoring component in the proposed work through
support of a Purdue MSE undergraduate student every fall and spring semester of
the program, as well as a Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) student
every summer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Virtually every commercial and military
aircraft flying today uses thermal barrier coatings (TBCs) to protect the
metallic structure of its gas turbine engine(s) from temperature extremes and/or
to allow the engine to be operated at higher, more efficient temperatures. In
addition to the transportation sector, the energy sector also relies on the
efficiency boosts TBCs provide industrial gas turbines (IGTs) as they produce
electricity. While the benefits of TBCs result in significant cost savings in
these and other sectors, there are still many aspects of TBCs we don't
understand. For example, they often shrink, crack and even detach from the
underlying metallic structure during elevated temperature service. Thus, basic
research into their high temperature mechanical properties will allow us to
fully utilize the benefits of using these coatings. At its most fundamental
level, then, this proposal focuses on determining the material properties that
govern how well TBCs "work" while they are in service and will serve as a basis
for designing next-generation TBCs. &lt;br/&gt;