* 0134910
* CAREER:  The Role of Relative Motion and Intermolecular Ordering on Dynamic Behavior of Polymers and Polymer Blends
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2007
* Janna Maranas, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 12/31/2007
* USD 421,000.00

The objectives of this research project are to (1) correlate relative motion in
relaxation processes of glass-forming polymers with the character of inter- and
intra-molecular packing, and (2) assess the way in which intermolecular packing
changes as a function of environment and the relation of these changes to know
relaxation behavior in blends. The importance of the spatial region
corresponding to the preferred intermolecular packing distance has previously
been demonstrated. However, not all polymers have similar degrees of
intermolecular ordering, and the effect of this on dynamics is unknown. Further,
intermolecular ordering shifts depending on environment, and the effect of this
is unknown as well. To achieve the objectives stated above, a series of
polymers, wherein the degree of intermolecular ordering ranges from very little
to extensive will be considered. A given polymer [A] will then be considered in
a series of second components [B]. Changes in the degree of intermolecular
ordering will be observed, including the original polymer [A-A], and the new
ordering [A-B} induced by the changing environment. Observations will be made by
coherent neutron scattering, which reveals relative motion on selected spatial
scales, and molecular simulation, will assess the location and extent of spatial
separations relevant to interchain packing. This combination of techniques has
been chosen because they can follow relative motion with spatial selectivity.
The ability of neutron measurements to select for spatial scales will be
exploited to separate the contributions of the a and b-relaxations, and assess
the influence of environment of each individually. The novelty of the proposal
lies in following relative, rather than self motion, investigating carefully
selected series of materials, and integrating molecular simulation. This work,
when completed, will allow us to connect features intermolecular packing with
relative motion, and to unambiguously delineate the role of environment in
miscible blend dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;Educational activities are
centered on bringing research-oriented activities to students who would not
otherwise have these experiences. Specifically, open-ended
experimental/simulation problems will be introduced in core chemical engineering
courses, research opportunities will be provided to students in non-research
universities, and a senior elective course on molecular simulation and its role
alongside experiment will be added to the Chemical Engineering curriculum.
Selected undergraduate students entering their senior year at Cal Poly Pomona,
and industrially oriented university with no formal research program, will be
invited to spend a summer pursuing research in the PI's group. The students'
research will continue as their senior thesis project during their final year.
These students will develop a course project based on the research they conduct
at Penn State. At the same time, open-ended projects will be developed and used
in the reaction engineering and thermodynamics courses, and an experiment with a
simulation comp0nent will be added to the senior laboratory course. These
projects will be compiled, and in the last year of the Plan, used as modules in
a senior elective course. This course, aimed at non-simulators, will teach
students how to use and interpret simulation data, much as a traditional
laboratory course does the same for experimental data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research to be carried out in this proposal falls in the general area of short-
time dynamic behavior in polymer melts and blends, an area important for its
relevance to the glass transition and processing behavior of these common
materials.&lt;br/&gt;