* 0134481
* CAREER:  Interdisciplinary Design in Biotechnology and Biomedical Applications using Microelectromechanical Systems Technology
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Li Cao, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 05/31/2007
* USD 407,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project addresses an integrated
research and education plan for a new generation of mechanical engineers in
interdisciplinary design in biotechnology and biomedical applications (i.e.,
BioMEMS) using Microelectromechanical systems technology. The research
objectives of this CAREER project are to experimentally: (1) evaluate the
ability of electrowetting actuation to precisely transport and manipulate nano-
liter to femto-liter discrete droplets in a discrete moving manner in BioMEMS
devices; (2) determine how the design parameters and fabrication variables
affect the performance of electrowetting-actuated discrete droplets in BioMEMS
devices; and (3) determine an interdisciplinary design methodology for BioMEMS
applications. Integrating the proposed research with education, the PI will
incorporate MEMS education with existing curriculum in mechanical engineering,
develop a new MEMS design course in mechanical engineering, organize a MEMS
seminar at Iowa State University, advise graduate and undergraduate students
through the proposed research, and work with a high school student and teacher
on the proposed research during summers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
studies of the fundamental issues associated with the electrowetting actuation
will enable us to precisely, quantitatively and flexibly control the movement of
nano-liter to femto-liter discrete droplets, transport it to any designed
destination, and manipulate it to any designed size. The most significance of
this project will enable us to further reduce sample consumption to the range of
nano-liter to femto-liter volume, improve the overall performance, and achieve
the current unachievable functionality of BioMEMS devices. This project will
impact the current MEMS design methodology and promote the commercialization of
MEMS applications. The educational activities of this project will take place at
several levels (K-12 students and teachers, and undergraduate and graduate
students majoring and non-majoring in mechanical engineering). Through this
CAREER project, the PI will facilitate these audiences to succeed in the
technology-based world of tomorrow. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;