* 0134968
* Infrared Spectroscopic Studies of Plant Photosynthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2002,11/30/2003
* Bridgette Barry, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 11/30/2003
* USD 241,000.00

Oxygenic photosynthesis occurs in plants, cyanobacteria, and algae and is
essential in the maintenance of life on earth. This type of photosynthesis
requires the concerted action of two light-absorbing reaction centers, which
convert light energy into a transmembrane charge separation. One of these
reaction centers, photosystem II catalyzes the oxidation of water and produces
molecular oxygen and reduced plastoquinone. Photosystem II accumulates the four
oxidizing equivalents necessary for oxygen production at a manganese-containing
catalytic site. The sequentially oxidized forms of the catalytic site are called
the S states. Photosystem II consists both of integral, membrane-spanning
subunits and of extrinsic subunits, that do not span the membrane. A subset of
these extrinsic subunits is known to influence light-driven electron and proton
transfer events. The extrinsic subunit known as the manganese stabilizing
protein, MSP, prevents loss of manganese from the PSII active site and is
required for optimal rates of oxygen evolution. In this multidisciplinary
project, vibrational spectroscopy will be used to obtain detailed information
about structural changes occurring during the S state cycle. The ultimate goal
is to determine how oxygen-oxygen bond formation occurs in photosynthetic oxygen
evolution. In addition, vibrational spectroscopy will be employed to test a
possible mechanism by which MSP may influence water oxidation. Finally, the idea
that MSP changes conformation or folds when it binds to the PSII reaction center
will be tested using X-ray scattering. These experiments will provide new
information about the function and assembly of complex membrane proteins.