* 0134956
* CAREER:  Variable Temperature Electric Force and Magnetic Resonance Force Microscopy Studies of Organic Electronic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2007
* John Marohn, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 12/31/2007
* USD 499,405.00

This project aims to develop new leading-edge instrumentation as tools for
advancing the understanding of chemical and physical mechanisms of doping and
charge conduction in organic conductors and semiconductors. The goal is to
enhance the ability to quantify and image surface charge since the detecting
charge with better than single electron sensitivity over a wide range of
temperatures and pressures will significantly advance the science and
engineering of organic device fabrication. Another goal is to explore the
possibilities for measuring sub-femto Newton forces and ultimately single-
molecule nuclear magnetic resonance imaging by force microscopy. The educational
goals include exploring the integration of this research with chemistry-based
materials science directed to training undergraduates, particularly engineers,
and for outreach to Kindergarten through grade 12 students.

%%%

The development of all silicon technology hinges upon the inherently low charge
trap density at the silicon / silicon dioxide interface. The presence of
interface charge traps in organic devices has seriously retarded the development
of high-efficiency organic transistor type devices. Designing and using tools
that can be used to characterize and remove these charge traps will be crucial
to the commercialization of organic based devices. Students trained in these
areas will compete very effectively for job opportunities.