* 0134544
* CAREER:  Advanced Materials for Photonics
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Bethanie Stadler, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Rongqing Hui
* 06/30/2007
* USD 375,000.00

The proposed activities are organized according to the impacted student group
from graduate down to preschool students. Maintaining an active research program
on the cutting edge of technology will enable truly applicable lessons to be
brought to each age group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Towards graduate education, the
P1 will continue to teach a course entitled "Principles of Thin Film
Technology," and will focus on two specific goals over the next 5 years. One is
the development of a new textbook and the other is the continued development of
hands-on team-competition laboratories. These two goals are complimentary in
that a laboratory manual will be published as an ancillary to the
textbook.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Towards graduate research, the proposed work aims
to equip integrated optical circuits with important devices that are currently
available only as discrete components. A great example would be magneto-optical
isolators, currently composed of doped yttrium iron garnet (YIG), which have
been cited as the most important components in fiber optic systems due to their
extension of laser lifetimes. The size, weight and cost of adding an isolator to
an optical system would be greatly reduced if the isolator could be integrated
directly into the optical source. Here, rapid progress will be made toward
integrated isolators using the foundation laid by prior NSF support (work
invited to Photonics West 2001). Various magneto-optical waveguides and
permanent magnet films will be investigated so that several generations of
integrated isolators will be developed over the next five
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to integrated isolators, the proposed
work will extend P1's expertise into the revolutionary field of photonic
crystals. She has started growing nanostructures in anodized alumina and plans
to apply these structures to develop 2D magnetophotonic bandgap materials. For
this application, the nanostructures must have excellent periodicity. Using a
novel vapor deposition technique, the structures will be observed directly in an
electron microscope as they grow. This will enable investigations of the growth
mechanisms so that nucleation can be suppressed while growth is encouraged,
resulting in extended long range order. These nanostructures will then be used
to pattern the best magneto-optical waveguides from the isolator work in order
to make magnetophotonic crystals. This work is revolutionary in that it adds a
new dimension to the current field of magnetophotonic crystals, which are
presently only studied as one-dimensional
multilayers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Towards undergraduate education and research,
a Local College Facilities Usage Program will be inaugurated, support of the MRS
Undergraduate Materials Research Initiative (a program founded by the P1) will
continue, and the NSF Research Experiences for Undergraduates Program in the
P1's department will be renewed. Both the NSF REU and the University of
Minnesota's UROP programs will be used to support undergraduate research
projects. Undergraduate teaching will take the form of recitations initially so
that the P1 can learn about the departmental courses that she will subsequently
teach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, preschool-12th grade science outreach will
include hiring a high school student to work with P1's group every summer, and
developing and delivering science demonstrations to preschool-12th grade groups.
As part of an underrepresented group, the P1 is often asked to deliver these
demonstrations to youth of the same group. This grassroots outreach has promise
for recruiting additional good students to science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;