* 0134163
* CAREER:  Quantitative Polyplex Structure-Function Relationships for Design of Artificial Viruses
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2008
* Daniel Pack, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 06/30/2008
* USD 375,000.00

0134163 Pack The objective of the proposed research is to develop the knowledge
and techniques to generate polymeric materials specifically designed to deliver
genetic material to human cells. These materials can be termed "artificial
viruses" and could bring benefits such as: (a) the capacity to carry large
genes, (b) improved safety, (c) systematic administration, and (d) relatively
easy production and purification. This research will focus on understanding how
DNA/polymer complexes (polyplexes) navigate through the cell. To deliver DNA
from outside the cell to the nucleus, a vector must be endocytosed, escape from
endocytic vesicles, undergo transport to and across the nuclear envelope, and
release the DNA from the complex. The proposed research will focus on escape
from the endocyric vesicles and transport to the nuclear envelope, since these
are often thought to be the limiting steps. The research will also address the
role of the cytoplasmic motility of polyplexes in moving through the cytosol to
the nuclear membrane. The speck aims of this research are to: (1) to quantify
the effects of polymer buffering on escape from the endocytic vesicles, (2)
elucidate the mechanism of polyplex transport across the nuclear membrane, and
(3) determine the kinetics and mechanisms of transport of polyplex vectors
through the cytoplasm.