* 0134109
* A Troubled Realm: Russian Agriculture's Spatial Constraints, Variance, and Prospects for Revival
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Grigory Ioffe, Radford University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/2005
* USD 180,000.00

This project explores the development constraints faced by Russian agriculture.
The project will quantify three critically important constraints with strong
spatial dimensions (physical environment, burden of space, and rural
demographics), help to understand their implications, and evaluate prospects for
Russia's agricultural development through the prism of these constraints.
Previously, explanations of Russian farming's failures have been mostly based on
aspatial socio-economic factors such as incentives, ownership, and communal
forms of life. However, low efficiency and poor production outcomes have
survived at least three changes in the dominant socio-economic order and this
provides motivation for an alternative explanation. The research methodology
will combine multivariate statistical analysis, field observations, and GIS. The
latter will be used to juxtapose place-specific estimates of agricultural
development constraints and to produce relevant and informative maps. The study
will involve two spatial scales: European Russia as a whole and three diverse
provinces of European Russia in particular. Following the delimitation of
"marginal" lands, factors of agricultural variance within non-marginal spaces
will be explored. These factors are fertility of the soil, accessibility to
major urban cores, and market conversion. It will be shown how their combined
effect produces differential productivity in the Russian agricultural
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will challenge aspatial and Human
Geography insensitive explanations of Russian agricultural travails and
contribute to knowledge about transitioning to market economy. The "breaking
news mentality" of the 1990s whereby the Russian scene was viewed through the
prism of upheavals and political personalities, rather than long-term processes
and their historical and geographical antecedents and roots, will also be
challenged. The study will establish an example of a replicable framework for
presenting both the data and results of our spatial statistical and cartographic
analysis. The databases assembled in the process of this research will be fully
documented and published in a software-independent format, queryable across the
Internet and useable by other researchers in the field. This design will
contribute to the ongoing development of research infrastructure to enable
integration of results from diverse area and case studies.&lt;br/&gt;