* 0134370
* CAREER:  Physical Modeling for Geotechnical Engineering Research and Education
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2008
* Joseph Wartman, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 06/30/2008
* USD 426,780.00

CMS-0134370, Joseph Wartman, Drexel University

"CAREER: Physical Modeling for Geotechnical Engineering Research and Education"

ABSTRACT: Earthquake-induced landslides damage many structures, roadways, and
utilities. Researchers have identified three mechanisms of earthquake-induced
deformation in slopes: (1) sliding displacement along a localized shear surface,
(2) deformation resulting from densification of unsaturated materials, termed
seismic compression, and (3) distributed deformations resulting from
accumulation of plastic strains in highly stressed regions of a slope, termed
cyclic straining. While researchers have studied a number of issues related to
sliding displacement, little effort has been devoted to understanding and
developing analysis procedures for computing the magnitude and location of
distributed deformations in slopes.

The research component of this career development plan employs physical models
to study seismically induced distributed (versus localized) deformations in
slopes. It uses both 1-g (shaking table) and centrifuge physical modeling
methods, complemented by numerical analyses. The project also consider issues
related to the reliability and repeatability of physical model experiments, and
explores ways of increasing use of physical modeling in engineering practice. It
also involves collaboration with physical modeling researchers at the Port and
Airport Research Institute of Yokosuka, Japan.

Specific objectives include: (1) Investigate the mechanisms of cyclic straining
and seismic compression in slopes. (2) Understand how various earthquake, slope
(topographic), and soil parameters influence the relative contributions of the
three deformation modes to total slope deformation. (3) Develop systematic
analysis procedures for computing the magnitude and locations of distributed
slope deformations. (4) Assess the reliability of model test results, and to
develop a reliability-based framework for interpreting model experiments. (5)
Investigate ways of increasing engineering practitioners' use of physical
modeling.

The educational component addresses the integration of physical modeling into
the geotechnical engineering curriculum at Drexel University. Models are used
for demonstration and experimental (laboratory) purposes. A wealth of
educational psychology research suggests that physical models will improve
students' understanding and comprehension of geotechnical engineering. The
educational component also includes initiatives to encourage student
intellectual growth through classroom instruction; involve undergraduate
students in research; and expose school students to the concepts of experimental
discovery.

This career development plan reflects the PI's long-term goals of using physical
models to study, and ultimately, to reduce worldwide exposure to seismic
hazards. -