* 0134224
* CAREER: Agent-Based Decentralized Control of Distributed Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Kenneth Frampton, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Suhada Jayasuriya
* 06/30/2007
* USD 381,617.00

The purpose of the proposed effort is to investigate the control of distributed
systems (i.e. systems with distributed mass, stiffness or other dynamic
properties) in the presence of decentralized, networked, embedded information
systems that deeply penetrate the system to be controlled. The networked
imbedded system consists of numerous nodes, each consisting of a small
microprocessor, sensor, and actuator. Furthermore, all of the nodes will be
capable of communicating over a wired or wireless network. This configuration
means that each node is subject to the following constraints: 1) limited
computational power and memory; 2) limited information as to overall system
response; and 3) limited authority over the physical system. The primary
challenge of this program will be the development of decentralized control
algorithms capable of performing successfully under such conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives will be accomplished through a parallel
theoretical/experimental effort. Theoretical work will focus on the development
of simulation tools and decentralized control algorithms that meet the outlined
objectives. The experimental efforts will seek to demonstrate this technology on
a series of increasingly complex systems. The research program promises to
develop new analysis tools and yield new insight into the behavior of
decentralized control systems and, in particular, their application to
distributed parameter systems. Among the many new contributions to the field
will be: the investigation and development of decentralized control of
distributed systems; improved knowledge on the global behavior of decentralized
systems defined by localized actions; methods for constructing global
performance metrics based on decentralized sensor processing; and the
development of adaptive control algorithms for the creation of desirable global
performance based on localized information. &lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of the
educational program is to lead the development of a Mechanical Engineering
curriculum that synergistically integrates a variety of learning/teaching
approaches in order to reach a more diverse student population. While
traditional lecture formats address the majority of individual learning modes,
the introduction of non-traditional approaches will not only enhance current
student's learning but also attract and enhance the retention of a more diverse
student population who's learning needs are not currently met. The goal will be
met by introducing several new elements to those aspects of the curriculum under
the PIs' purview. These include alternative lecture teaching techniques,
research oriented laboratory exercises, integration of graduate research methods
and equipment into undergraduate teaching labs, and improved research
opportunities for underrepresented individuals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;