* 0134056
* CAREER: Fundamental Physics and Device Issues of Novel GaAs Thermophotovoltaic Cells
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2008
* Janet Pan, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 01/31/2008
* USD 375,000.00

TNumerous civilian and military ventures are showing keen interest in the thermo
photovoltaic (TPV) generation of electricity as an attractive, clean, efficient,
and inexpensive alternative energy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The low power (about
1400 C) of TPV heat sources makes gallium antimonide (GaSb), rather than
silicon, the most common material for TPV cells. Research on GaSb TPV cells is
currently focused on: (1) increasing the TPV efficiency, and (2) reducing the
cost of production. This document proposes the first study of gallium arsenide
(GaAs) as a viable material for TPV cells. There are two compelling reasons.
First, the manufacture of TPV cells on a GaAs substrate could take advantage of
existing GaAs facilities for low-cost, high-yield, large-volume production
compatible with GaAs integrated circuits (ICs) on large six-inch substrates.
Second, our innovative TPV cells can be designed for exceptionally high
efficiency because of their&lt;br/&gt;simultaneous response, on the same GaAs
substrate, to both the near infrared (less than 1.5micron) and the mid-infrared
(2-5micron).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal develops three enabling
technologies for making high efficiency TPV cells on GaAs: (1) innovative design
of intersubband TPV devices for high power conversion efficiency of broadband
heat sources; (2) novel Low-Temperature Grown (LTG) GaAs designed for strong
absorption at the 1.5micron wavelength (an important TPV wavelength); (3) growth
and annealing of very highly doped (10^{20}cm^{-3}) contacts, and highly doped
tunnel junctions connecting series-TPV cells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposed work is ideally suited for an academic environment because of its
interdisciplinary nature, emphasizing: both theory and experiment; fundamental
studies of absorption, transport, and materials; and innovative TPV cells. One
innovation is the proposed design of Intersubband Tandem TPV (ITTPV) cells,
which have projected conversion efficiencies (35%) much higher than those (6%)
of existing devices. The proposed study of LTG-GaAs goes beyond previous work in
that it emphasizes the physics and engineering of a much stronger absorption at
1.5micron. The proposed work on very highly doped TPV tunnel junctions and
contacts emphasizes: developing physical models of doping limitations; and a
novel thermal anneal much more rapid (milliseconds instead of seconds) than the
state-of-the-art capability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI's educational program has
three components: (1) new curriculum development, (2) mentoring activities, and
(3) participation in research seminars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;