* 0134537
* US-India Cooperative Research:  A New Approach to Boolean Division that can Trade Performance for Computation
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Sharad Seth, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 02/28/2006
* USD 10,000.00

0134537&lt;br/&gt;Seth &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award supports
the US-India Cooperative Research: A New Approach to Boolean Division that can
Trade Performance for Computation. US PI Shared Seth, University of Nebraska-
Lincoln (UNL), Somenath Biswas, Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur (IITK)
and two of their graduate students will collaborate on solving an important
logic synthesis problem in microelectronic design automation. The investigators
will decompose a large circuit into three smaller ones by using Boolean division
to compute the two smaller circuits. The objective is to develop a best path
technique using approximate algorithms that trade-off performance with time. The
researchers will design and implement a single system that enables users to
control the trade-off between computational efficiency and quality of output.
The results of the proposed research may find extensive use in multilevel Very
Large-Scale Integrated (VLSI) circuit synthesis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope:
This project will enhance US infrastructure through the exchange of senior
scientists and graduate students between UNL and IITK, one of India's foremost
institutes for computer science. The students will present findings at a well-
established VLSI design conference in India; the PIs will publish final
documentation in an archival journal. The Office of International Science &amp;
Engineering and the Indian Department of Science and Technology (DST) support
this activity under the NSF/DST joint program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;