* 0134051
* CAREER:   Fostering Scoped Multi-Device Interaction In Ubiquitous Computing Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2008
* Richard Han, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 07/31/2008
* USD 472,000.00

Ubiquitous computing offers the vision of a fundamentally more responsive
physical environment in which users benefit from seamless interaction with a
pervasively internetworked world of myriad wireless and wired devices, e.g.
wireless personal digital assistants, video-enabled mobile phones, wearable
computers, appliances, kiosks, toys, and sensors. A key component of the
developing infrastructure for ubiquitous computing is based on the discovery and
advertisement of services. In a typical ubiquitous computing scenario, a user
who walks into a room is able to interact with a variety of services offered by
the devices in the room. The goal of the service discovery framework is to
assist the user's application in determining what services are available for
interaction in this room.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the current service
discovery framework represents an essential initial component of the ubiquitous
computing infrastructure, additional capabilities are needed to address the
challenges introduced by multidevice multi-user contexts. The objectives of this
CAREER proposal are to explore the means for fostering scoped multi-device
interaction in ubiquitous computing environments. Several key research areas are
identified in this proposal as challenging problems that must be solved in order
to enable multidevice multi-user ubiquitous computing:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Active device resolution among multiple devices, with special emphasis on social
context&lt;br/&gt; Active user resolution among multiple users, with special
emphasis on social context&lt;br/&gt; Composing joint wide-area and local-area
multi-device meta-services&lt;br/&gt; Beyond remote control: enabling new
classes of ubiquitous computing applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intent of
this proposal is to first understand the implications and requirements of multi-
device multiuser contexts, and to then design and develop the mobile computing
applications, distributed middleware systems, meta-services, and wireless and
application-level networking protocols that will assist in making the vision of
multi-device ubiquitous computing a reality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The initial
goal is to build the infrastructure necessary for ubiquitous computing in a
departmental Smart Spaces Lab. A course taught on ubiquitous computing will
allow students to make hands-on&lt;br/&gt;contributions to building portions of
the infrastructure in the Smart Spaces Lab, even as the curricula is upgraded to
reflect recent research innovations. The infrastructure will eventually be able
to support remote control applications, wireless peer-to-peer applications, and
event-notification applications, just to name a few. Once the research lab
technology matures, the goal is to deploy this infrastructure throughout the
university campus. The impact on the university at large will be highly
beneficial, as the most mature technology should be immediately available
throughout campus. As soon as the event notification, wireless message passing
and remote-control infrastructures are in place, students, professors, and
citizens should be able to immediately benefit from the fruits of our ubiquitous
computing research. Campus-wide deployment is expected to begin about halfway
through this five year research plan.