* 0134545
* CAREER: Heterogeneous Reactions and Groundwater Flow in Reactive Porous Media
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2011
* John Devlin, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Debra Reinhart
* 07/31/2011
* USD 470,890.00

0134545 Devlin This work proposes to use granular iron, a low alloyed steel
reclaimed from the scrap metal, as a model reactive porous medium to evaluate
the following hypothesis:&lt;br/&gt;the hypothesis applies to media found in
natural settings, such as sulfides and iron oxides, and has important
implications for engineered in situ passive treatment systems as well as natural
attenuation. The granular iron medium functions abiotically, simplifying the
experimental designs and analysis. The emphasis of this work is with reactions
involving organic pollutants in groundwater, and the processes selected for
investigation as part of this program are: (1) reactivity discrimination between
different classes of organic compounds and kinetics of reaction in systems with
finite reactive surface availability, (2) sensitivity of hydraulic conductivity
to precipitate accumulation, (3) relative importance of precipitate accumulation
rates compared with corrosion rates to assess overall porosity loss/gain rates,
(4) modeling of reactive transport with the appropriate kinetic models and (5)
assessing and quantifying the effects of surface carbon on reactivity.
&lt;br/&gt;The investigations are supported in the modeling and spectroscopic
aspects by collaborators in Canada, and in the effects of surface carbon by
Peerless, Michigan, a manufacturer of the material. Novel experimental
techniques and approaches are incorporated into the investigations as listed
above: (1) Reactivity experiments will be conducted in a batch reactor
especially designed to minimize mass transfer effects and abrasion of particles
at the same time. This will be accomplished by adhering the particles to a glass
encased magnetic rod suspended in the reactor vessel. Competition experiments
will provide evidence of reactive sites shared by different
compound&lt;br/&gt;classes; (2) corrosion rates will be estimated by 2
independent methods (measurement of hydrogen production rates and
electrochemically) and compared; (3) precipitation rates of anaerobic processes
will be estimated from surface area changes and mass accumulations and the
results compared; (4) changes to hydraulic conductivity will be investigated by
examining columns connected to a common manifold so that more than one flow path
is available should hydraulic conductivity changes occur to the reactive medium
and (5) surface carbon investigations will be conducted in flow through batch
reactors modified from earlier experiments (1 above). This technique will permit
a distinction to be made between mass losses due to sorption from those due to
reaction.&lt;br/&gt;