* 0134721
* CAREER:  The Science and Engineering of the Nonvolatile Superconducting Switch
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/2001,11/30/2006
* Charles Ahn, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 11/30/2006
* USD 433,100.00

This CAREER project addresses materials science issues and properties of
nonvolatile superconducting switches. The nature of the superconductor-insulator
quantum phase transition will be studied from a basic science perspective,
including the correlation of the longitudinal and transverse transport
properties, the nature of the temperature dependence of the insulating state,
and the interplay between disorder effects driving the localization of holes and
interaction effects responsible for pairing holes and producing the quantum
transition to a superconductor. Long-term goals include the application of
scanning probe microscopy to write in a nonvolatile, reversible fashion
nanoscale superconducting structures and devices, including small
superconducting islands, wires, and electronic Josephson junctions. Ultrathin,
epitaxial ferroelectric-superconductor heterostructures will be studied using
advanced thin film deposition techniques such as off-axis radio frequency
magnetron sputtering. Structural and electronic characterization of thin film
heterostructures will be carried out using atomic force microscopy (AFM),
scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), reflection high energy electron diffraction
(RHEED), x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), ultraviolet photoelectron
spectroscopy (UPS), nanoscale piezoelectric microscopy, and x-ray diffraction.
Nanosecond pulse measurements to test the switching speed will be carried out,
along with standard electronic transport measurements including resistivity,
Hall effect, and mobility. &lt;br/&gt;A primary focus of this integrated
research and education program involves teaching and training of undergraduate
and graduate students in thin film deposition, a broadly used technology in
materials research and engineering. Thin film fabrication research will be
carried out by undergraduate and graduate students, and an undergraduate class
devoted to physical vapor deposition techniques such as molecular beam epitaxy
and sputtering will be developed and taught by the PI. This program involves
collaborations with faculty members in the Departments of Applied Physics,
Electrical Engineering, and Physics, and is designed to form a broad foundation
in the study of thin film materials. &lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project
addresses fundamental research issues in a topical area of materials science
having high technological relevance. Outcomes of these studies are expected to
broaden our fundamental understanding of correlated oxide materials and lead to
new applications based upon the novel types of behavior observed in these
materials.&lt;br/&gt;The scope of the project will expose students to challenges
in materials synthesis, processing, device fabrication, and characterization. An
important feature of the project is the strong emphasis on education, and the
integration of research and education. &lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;