* 0134607
* CAREER:   Computational Studies of New Metallodielectric Structures for Manipulating Light At Sub-wavelengthscales
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Shanhui Fan, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 07/31/2007
* USD 375,000.00

Recent experimental and theoretical efforts on periodic metallic structures have
led to the discoveries of a number of extraordinary optical and electromagnetic
phenomena. Many of these phenomena are pointing towards new possibilities of
confining, transmitting and manipulating light at a length scale that is far
smaller than the wavelength of incident photons. Two recent examples include the
experimental discoveries of plasmon-assisted high transmission through sub-
wavelength apertures, and the theoretical proposal for constructing a lens with
a negative refractive index that allows for focusing at infinite resolution.
These discoveries are leading to new device possibilities in nano-fabrication
and imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These developments, in turn, raised many
interesting theoretical questions. A key ingredient in all these phenomena is
the use of micro and nano-structured metallic objects. Therefore, we need to
understand in general how micro and nano-structures interact with sub-wavelength
features in the electromagnetic fields. Since the novel effects here directly
result from the subtle interplay between the structural and geometrical
parameters. It is important to undertake theoretical studies that take into
account the full complexity of the structures in a first-principles
way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose to undertake a series of large-scale
simulations to elucidate the basic mechanisms associated with these phenomena,
and to explore new structures that might exhibit further interesting properties.
In particular, we will study the effects of microstructure on the resolution of
focusing, and the detailed mechanisms of using aperiodic structures to assist
tunneling through a single aperture. We will also explore the use of hybrid
metal and dielectric periodic structures as a novel negative refractive index
material that might be scaled down into the optical domain. These studies will
enhance our understanding in this new regime of optics, and will lead to new
opportunities for device applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program, in
combination with my other research programs on photonic crystals and micro-
photonic devices, will provide excellent research and educational opportunities
for students. The students will gain a deep theoretical understanding by
pursuing research in a new regime of optics. At the same time they will have
ample opportunities to collaborate with experimental groups in optics and in
nano-fabrication. The students will also learn state-of-the-art computational
techniques. In addition, the research program is designed so that undergraduate
and M. S. students can take on short-term projects to carry out sets of well-
defined simulation studies. Finally, in order to share our excitement in this
research field with the general public, we will explore the possibility of
constructing a sculpture of an acoustic crystal, so that a visitor may directly
experience the remarkable band gap effect.&lt;br/&gt;