* 0134598
* CAREER:  Enhancement of Power and Energy System Technology Through Research and Education
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Joydeep Mitra, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* James Momoh
* 06/30/2004
* USD 375,000.00

The proposed plan will rebuild the electric power and energy systems program at
the North Dakota Slate University through closely linked research and education
efforts. The research and educational plans will integrate contemporary issues
with traditional power systems concepts to prepare both undergraduate and
graduate students for the new requirements of the industry. The research plan
will advance the state of the art in reliability and cost assessment techniques
with particular focus on distributed energy resources and microgrid
architectures. The education plan consists of modernizing some existing courses
and developing new courses to build a power and energy systems curriculum that
is both comprehensive and contemporary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate
students will also be involved in research projects; graduate students will be
involved with contemporary original research. The proposed research and
education activities will significantly strengthen the power program at NDSU,
and provide it with the momentum it needs to grow into a larger and stronger
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unique and significant contribution of the
proposed research is that it will develop reliability and cost assessment
techniques that are suited to the evolving structure of the electric industry,
anticipate the future course of the industry and provide effective, cutting edge
tools for planning and designing future systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;