* 0134980
* CAREER: Physics and Applications of Hyperpolarized Gases
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2008
* Brian Saam, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Dunford
* 06/30/2008
* USD 545,220.00

This career development program combines innovative applications of
hyperpolarized (HP) noble gases with the development of a new track for
undergraduate physics majors, Physics of Modern Technology. Enormous non-
equilibrium nuclear-spin polarizations (of order 10%) can be achieved in He-3
and Xe-129 via spin-exchange optical pumping (SEOP), greatly enhancing the NMR
sensitivity of these nuclei. These hyperpolarized (HP) noble gases are being
applied to a broad range of problems in physics, chemistry, and biomedicine. The
recent strong push in applications of HP gases has created tremendous cross-
disciplinary excitement, but has left in its wake a number of important and
persistent problems in the physics that must be addressed to realize the full
potential of the various applications. This research program integrates the
study of the basic physics of SEOP and several applications. Studies include the
use of highly polarized Xe-129 both for polarization transfer to other nuclei of
interest, and for the study of a highly ordered lattice of spins, and a detailed
analysis to determine the relaxation mechanism of hyper-polarized gases at wall
surfaces. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Physics of Modern Technology: The educational
component of the program consists of co-development of a new track for physics
majors at the University of Utah, Physics of Modern Technology (PMT). The PMT
program is aimed at highly motivated students who will not be professional
physicists but do need preparation for careers and leadership positions in which
it will be valuable to have technical, quantitative and analytic strengths. The
PMT program contains a number of innovative pedagogical features, including a
modular structure in which important physical principles are explained and
demonstrated in the context of real-world technical problems, and the
integration of theory, experiment, and computation in each module. PMT will be
excellent preparation for careers such as journalism, patent law, and medicine,
and it will stimulate creative teaching and interaction with the rapidly
changing and technically oriented industrial world. &lt;br/&gt;