* 0134616
* Collaborative Research Symposium:  Some Next-Generation Leaders in Science and Technology Policy Workshop (November 2002)
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Daniel Sarewitz, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 06/30/2004
* USD 15,896.00

A symposium gathers together outstanding scholars, analysts, and practitioners
in science and technology policy who are within seven years of their PhDs. It
provides an opportunity to meet and exchange ideas and to present their work to
a high-level (senior) audience. This research symposium is oriented toward eight
theme tracks in science and technology policy: New history of science and
technology policy. R&D program analysis and evaluation Expertise, advice,
assessment, and evaluation Science, technology, and human needs and values
Science, technology, and international issues Science education, human
resources, and workforce Science and technology policy institutions and
processes Science, technology, and the public. Proposals for these tracks were
broadly solicited and peer reviewed for acceptance. Accepted authors were funded
to attend the workshop held in Washington, DC. Senior scholars and practitioners
served as discussants. The new scholarship presented and the interaction among
academics and practitioners have the potential to improve policy and programs
and to benefit education in science and technology policy in a variety of ways.
An edited book containing the presented papers will be published.