* 0134297
* PECASE:  Single Spin Transistors - Science, Application and Education
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2002,09/30/2002
* Jia Lu, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 09/30/2002
* USD 374,666.00



This is a proposal aimed at exploring the spin properties, both from the
fundamental physics point of view as well as from their relevance to the recent
technologically important area of spintronics. The PI proposes to combine the
recent experimental developments of single-electron transistors and magnetic
tunnel junctions to fabricate new spinelectronics devices, which we call single
spin transistors based on the controllability and manipulability of single-
electron spins. This proposal aims to fabricate and characterize single spin
transistors which use the carbon nanotube as the nano-sized island. It will
reveal new physical aspects of the quantum states and dynamic behavior of single
electron spins in the one dimensional system. This device is based on the proven
single electron transistor architecture and processing, with the island weakly
coupled to ferromagnetic electrodes to inject and detect polarized spins. These
nanoscale hybrid structures will be used to test various theoretically predicted
phenomena such as enhanced magnetoresistance, single electron charging effects,
conductance oscillations, and spin diffusion. One of the novel features of this
effort is to inject fully polarized spins into the one dimensional carbon
nanotubes, by spin filtering through the use of a magnetic semiconductor.
Ultimately, the localization of a single electron of controlled spin in a highly
sensitive nanostructure will enable novel and more versatile spin electronic
devices, which so far is being pursued based on the behavior of large numbers of
spin-polarized electrons. The proposed research will be critical to extremely
high-density magnetic information storage, electron-spin-based quantum
computing, magneto-electronic sensors, and perhaps future spin electronic
devices and systems yet to be imagined. To continue the education and training
of students, graduate students, undergraduates and high school students,
especially from the underrepresented groups, will be recruited to participate in
the proposed research. This program represents an excellent opportunity for the
students (of all levels) involved being educated in the nanoscience. They will
work in multidisciplinary areas - physics, materials science, and
nanoelectronics, the future trend in science and technology. These highly
educated and trained people will become either future educators or the technical
backbone of spin based information storage technology, which is already in short
supply in the U.S.

