* 0134272
* CAREER: Linking In situ Monitoring with Damage Modeling for Life-Cycle Performance Simulations of the Concrete Infrastructure
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2002,02/29/2008
* W. Jason Weiss, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Mahendra P. Singh
* 02/29/2008
* USD 374,998.00

This project will unite sensing and modeling in a virtual environment to enable
simulation of as-built concrete structures and pavements. Embeddable sensors
will be developed to utilize acoustic, electric, ultrasonic, and thermal
measurements as complementary technologies, thereby enabling the in-place
concrete quality and integrity to be measured. The predicted development of
concrete properties will be compared with real-time field measurements to allow
the stiffness, porosity, load, and damage to be adjusted to accurately represent
the field concrete. Energy based damage criteria will be developed to compare
information obtained from the sensor with the model predictions. This
information will be used to characterize existing damage and to quantify the
risk for future irreversible damage and deterioration. This modeling approach
can permit contractors and inspectors to implement corrective actions during
construction that can improve long-term performance. In addition to providing
information during construction, these models will utilize early-age
measurements to compute long-term performance. These models can be used to
provide the owners of a structure with the feedback needed to assess alternate
construction strategies, to determine pay adjustments, or to plan repair
strategies. At the conclusion of this project the life-cycle performance models
may be utilized by a wide range of users which could include governmental
agencies (departments of transportation), material suppliers, contractors,
insurance and surety companies, repair material producers, researchers, and
students to predict the long-term performance of structures and to assess the
success of innovative material and design improvements. In addition to the
research, this project is focused on preparing both the construction engineer
and the construction workforce for tomorrow. This project utilizes a 'problem-
based-education' approach to encourage high school, undergraduate, and graduate
students to consider careers in civil engineering materials through 'hands-on'
projects in which they will learn to diagnose problems, conduct independent
research, and develop solution procedures. In addition, this project will use
continuing education courses and demonstrations to inform practicing engineers,
concrete laborers and testing technicians of the project developments.