* 0134779
* CAREER: Combinatorial Chemistry in the Classroom and Laboratory:  Identification of Novel Small Molecule Ligands for Apoptotic Proteins
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2007
* Paul Hergenrother, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 01/31/2007
* USD 366,000.00

With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program in the Chemistry Division,
Professor Paul Hergenrother, of the Department of Chemistry at the University of
Illinois- Urbana-Champaign, will investigate using small molecules to
investigate and modulate biological systems. The overall goal of the research
being the synthesis, identification, and use of small molecules that bind
tightly and selectively to proteins involved in apoptosis. An approach to
apoptosis is proposed in which small molecules that bind tightly to their
protein target are synthesized and then used in vivo to "knock-out" the proteins
in the pathway. Such molecules will be invaluable tools in the study of this
exquisitely important system, and they also have potential as therapeutic
agents. Initial protein targets will be the caspase family of cysteine
proteases, as well as regulators of apoptosis such as Smac/DLABLO and IAP. The
small molecules used for this study will be synthesized on the solid phase in a
combinatorial fashion, and then screened for binding as small molecule
microarrays. Use of small molecule microarrays are essential, as it will allow
for both rapid evaluation of the library against multiple protein targets, and
assessment of the selectivity of the synthesized compounds for one caspase
versus another. The library aimed at the caspases will be a "focused" library
and will be structurally biased towards compounds that will inhibit cysteine
proteases. The library that will be screened against Smac/DIABLO, IAP, and other
apoptotic proteins is a "primary" library in which an attempt has been made to
maximize the diversity within the library. Such primary libraries that
incorporate multiple chemical scaffolds have not been created on the solid
phase, and the successful production of the library described herein will
represent a significant advance in combinatorial synthesis.

Professor Paul Hergenrother, of the Department of Chemistry at the University of
Illinois- Urbana-Champaign, with the support of the Organic Dynamics Program for
his CAREER award, will also develop an integrated program for teaching
combinatorial chemistry in the classroom and applying combinatorial chemistry
and high-throughput screening in the laboratory. The ultimate goal in the
training of students is to create a group whose research is on the cutting edge
of the chemistry-biology interface while developing in the student a wide
variety of skills, from cell and molecular biology to organic synthesis.