* 0134631
* CAREER: Structure and Dynamics of Negative Ions via Photoelectron Imaging Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Andrei Sanov, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 05/31/2007
* USD 434,986.00

&lt;br/&gt;In this project funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program
of the Chemistry Division, Sanov will combine femtosecond spectroscopy with
photoelectron imaging to monitor the evolution of molecular orbitals in the
course of chemical reactions. The initial systems to be studied include isolated
and hydrated sulfur-containing molecular anions, and cluster anions. These are
chosen for their practical importance and for serving as prototypes for the
development of the new methodology. Photodissociation and unimolecular
decomposition, dynamics at conical intersections, microscopic solvation, wave
packet evolution, and bimolecular reactions in ionic clusters will be
investigated. The results of this research will find immediate application in
modeling the structure and dynamics of negative ions and solutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many important chemical processes involve ionic reactions,
and the reactivity is affected strongly by interactions with the environment. In
this research cluster ions are used as model micro-solutions for the studies of
elementary processes relevant to biological and environmental chemistry. The
results will provide insight into how the intermolecular interactions affect the
behavior of electrons and chemical bonding. Photoelectron imaging experiments
will be incorporated in the undergraduate Physical Chemistry program as a way of
providing the students with hands-on research experience. A fast-track Internet-
based mechanism for publishing the results of student research will be
developed. Students will be trained in research techniques in preparation for
advanced studies and for entry into the scientific/technical
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;