* 0134753
* PECASE:  Measuring Cosmology and the Evolution of Structure Via Gravitational Lensing
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Ian Dell'Antonio, Brown University
* Continuing grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 08/31/2007
* USD 589,070.00



Proposal Title: PECASE: Measuring Cosmology and the Evolution of Structure via
Gravitational Lensing Institution: Brown University

Dr. Dell'Antonio of Brown University is awarded funds to conduct the Deep Lens
Survey (DLS), for which observations have already begun at the four-meter
telescopes at Kitt Peak National Observatory and Cerro Tololo Interamerican
Observatory. Through this survey, Dr. Dell'Antonio will attempt to determine the
amount of dark matter (DM) in the universe by studying its gravitational lensing
signal in a wide-field, deep optical imaging survey. The phenomenon of weak
gravitational lensing occurs when matter along the line of sight, which might
otherwise be unobservable, magnifies and distorts the images of background
galaxies. Because gravitational lensing is sensitive to all forms of mass, not
just luminous (ordinary) matter, it is an ideal tool for studying DM. In
addition, because the different models for the DM predict different degrees of
clustering, the actual distribution of mass can offer clues to the nature of the
DM. This project will determine the 2-dimensional distribution of projected mass
in the universe with great accuracy, and the 3-dimensional distribution with
somewhat less accuracy. The 3-dimensional distribution makes it possible to
study the evolution of clustering with distance from earth (and thus look-back
time). The evolution of clustering at redshifts between 0 and 1 depends
critically on the amount and nature of the dark energy (DE) thought to be
responsible for the present acceleration of the expansion of the universe, so
this proposal will differentiate between possible models for the DE. Dr.
Dell'Antonio will also use the data - which will include multi-color imaging of
about 25 million stars and galaxies - to design ancillary science projects at
several different levels. In addition to the traditional mentoring of
undergraduate and graduate students in research projects, he will also mentor
local high-school students. He plans to recruit students who traditionally have
not had opportunities for furthering their science background by partnering with
teachers at Providence inner-city schools. The students will present their
finished projects at public nights at Brown University's Ladd Observatory public
nights, so the community as a whole (and in particular the families of the
students) can see the effects of the mentoring program. The PI will also design
workshops and laboratories for introductory astronomy students that will allow
them to work with original data collected in the survey.

This project was originally funded as a CAREER award, and was converted to a
Presidential Early Career Award for Engineers and Scientists (PECASE) award in
May 2004.



