* 0134210
* CAREER: Integrated Engineering and Economic Modeling of Problems in Deregulated Electricity Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2008
* Shi-Jie Deng, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 08/31/2008
* USD 375,000.00

The focus of the proposed research is to develop parsimonious electricity market
models and to integrate asset valuation models with probabilistic simulation
models of an overall power system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tremendous market
volatility in electricity prices has been witnessed in recently established
power markets. Volatile electricity price not only puts pressure on efficient
operations of power generation assets, but also increases the importance of
having realistic power market models for the purpose of evaluating real assets
and performing risk management tasks in quantifying and controlling operational
and financial risks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two competing approaches are now being
used for modeling electric power market behaviors for the above mentioned
purposes: The "fundamental approach", which emphasizes on the engineering
aspects of power markets, relies on system simulation and market operation to
determine market prices; and the other so-called "technical approach', which is
economically oriented, involves the direct modeling of the stochastic behavior
of market prices from historical data and fundamental analysis. While the
fundamental approach provides finer details about electricity markets in
specific scenarios, it is computationally prohibitive due to the large number of
scenarios it entails. The proposed project will combine the strengths of the two
approaches by developing specific stochastic models for electricity prices that
are calibrated using a probabilistic simulation of an overall electric power
system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methodology and analytical models developed
during this project can make a significant impact on the divestiture process and
the evaluation of new projects by power system planners and marketers in the
deregulated power industry. Costs due to discrepancies in capacity valuation
resulting from differing valuation methodologies and assumptions of power price
dynamics are estimated to be in the millions. To lower such costs, this approach
is expected to yield realistic power asset valuation methodologies that properly
reflect the reliability of the power systems.&lt;br/&gt;