* 0134648
* Molecular Mechanisms of Adaptive Evolution
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2005
* Eugene Kroll, Molecular Sciences Institute
* Continuing grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 03/31/2005
* USD 416,484.00

Organisms evolve by changing their genomes, including small changes (point
mutations) and gross changes (genomic rearrangements). Genomic rearrangements
are more likely than point mutations to quickly produce novel traits by
rearranging functional domains and expression control sequences. Although
genomic rearrangements have profoundly impacted genome evolution, they have yet
to be shown to be directly advantageous in an experimentally evolving population
of a eukaryotic organism. The investigators have recently shown that the
exposure of budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae to suboptimal conditions such
as starvation or heavy water induces recombination genes in a small subset of
cells. It is important to understand whether this induction of recombination
genes plays a role in adaptation by producing adaptive genomic rearrangements
and, if so, what are the mechanisms that control such processes. Three ideas
will be tested in this work: 1) The rate of recombination is increased in
populations adapting to adverse environments, 2) Cells recombine at different
rates in adapting populations and 3) Adaptation-associated genomic
rearrangements are under genetic control. The investigators will analyze genomic
rearrangements arising in populations during adaptation to growth in heavy
water, a mild and broad selective agent that models previously unencountered
habitats, and compare it to starvation, a common selective condition that
parallels selection in nature. The rates of genomic rearrangements in adapting
yeast populations will be assayed using novel chromosome recombination reporter
constructs, genomic arrays and genomic polymorphism analysis. Distributions of
recombinants in adapting populations will be assayed by fluorescent protein
reporters coupled with flow cytometry. Finally, the investigators will analyze
genetic pathways that control the adaptation-associated rearrangements, using
available expression array data to find candidate genes, and analyze the
candidate pool using recombination reporter assays.

Learning about molecular mechanisms that control genomic rearrangements in
suboptimal conditions will help us understand the process and control of
adaptive evolution in eukaryotes. With the aid of genomic information available,
we will better understand how genomes are shaped by evolutionary forces.
Finally, the project may help to predict the evolutionary response of organisms
exposed to novel environments.