* 0134111
* CAREER: Deformation Mechanisms at the Materials' Microstructural Length Scale
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2002,02/29/2008
* Ashraf Bastawros, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 02/29/2008
* USD 392,000.00

Deformation Mechanisms at the Materials' Microstructural Length
Scale&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this CAREER project is to
integrate the study of the microscale materials behavior with a modern
educational program in the area of the mechanical properties of materials. The
proposed strategy is to develop an integrated experimental-numerical framework,
which will attempt to stimulate student curiosity to explore the deformation
mechanisms at these length scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is
to study the evolution of the heterogeneous deformation fields and the history
of hardening using a unique combination of efforts at the proper microstructure
length scale. The fundamental principles are quite general and may be applied to
many advanced materials systems that comprise deformation or material removal at
the micro/nano scale. The research objective will be realized through: 1)
development of unique and stable testing configurations for advanced materials
structures; 2) development of proper experimental techniques for full-field,
finite-deformation measurements to monitor the evolution of the heterogeneous
deformation and hardening at the proper length scale; and 3) applications of
this approach to the deformation induced crack tip toughening and the
interfacial toughening of layered structures. The measurements will be the
benchmark tests against which both phenomenological models and discrete
dislocation dynamics will be calibrated. The provided quantitative understanding
will be carried over to: 1) the mechanism-based modeling "or better informed
continuum models" employing finite element analysis, and 2) the possible
hierarchies of multi-scale modeling through collaborations with Ames National
Lab. This will allow a significant expansion in our ability to simulate the
material behavior and address its reliability at such scales. This is a
fundamental requirement for achieving further technological advancement for
these advanced materials' systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed educational
vision integrates a modern view of mechanical properties of materials into the
Iowa State University mechanics of materials curriculum, providing individuals
in academia and industry with specialized knowledge in mechanical properties in
small dimensions and the advanced experimental and computational techniques.
Utilizing the myriad of web-based instructional research and resources, a
specialized web-based experimental mechanics curriculum will be developed. In
addition, a small research oriented group that facilitates interaction among
honor and special-program students will be developed to give them the
opportunity to express their curiosity in understanding the mechanics of
materials and structure behaviors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;