* 0134874
* CAREER:  Hybrid Bio-Synthetic Polymers: Controlling Structure and Function on Nanometer Scales in Genetically Engineered Polymers Enhanced with Synthetic Blocks.
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Ilya Koltover, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2004
* USD 160,000.00

Controlling and manipulating molecular building blocks on a nanometer scale is
the central challenge of the emerging field of nanotechnology. Nature
accomplishes this task by synthesizing numerous exact copies of high molecular
weight protein molecules, with folding and function on nanometer scale encoded
in the primary sequence of their amino acid monomers. Thus, the cellular
apparatus of protein synthesis is uniquely suited for making giant molecules
with properties controlled on a nanometer scales. However, natural materials
also have many shortcomings, both in terms of the available chemical building
blocks, as well as the limited flexibility of the linear, step-wise protein
biosynthesis. Thus, combination of the precise natural biosynthetic process with
favorable attributes of diverse unnatural synthetic blocks could be used to
create materials with properties impossible to obtain with purely synthetic or
natural synthons. The PI propses a research program aimed at exploring the
synthesis and applications of novel materials consisting of genetically
engineered polypeptides (protein polymers) conjugated with synthetic
macromolecular building blocks: dendrons and/or conventional polymers. Two
specific aims will be addressed in the proposed research: (1) development of a
synthetic route towards monodisperse cylindrical molecules with nanometer-scale
length and diameter, and controlled distribution of polar and apolar surface
chemistries, that can be used as building blocks for thin films and monolayers
with nanoscale molecular ordering; (2) synthesis and processing of composites
consisting of ordered, nanometer-sized polypeptide blocks dispersed in a
synthetic polymer matrix, that will have high mechanical strength and toughness
comparable to or better than those of the natural dragline spider silk
fibers.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The PI will complement his interdisciplinary
research effort with a teaching program designed to integrate the biology and
materials science education. The PI's ultimate aim is to educate the next
generation of sscientists and engeineers capable of working at the interface
between the two disciplines. This will be realized by designing research
projects at the interface between biology and polymers science and suitable for
both undergraduate and graduate research. Furthermore, the PI will develop three
new undergraduate materials science classes that will introduce concepts and
techniques of life sciences to engineering students in the context of
biomaterials. Ultimately, the proposed research and training program will
facilitate the flow of ideas and techniques between the two disciplines. This
will then lead to the discovery of new methods for synthesis of materials with
diversity of functional properties approaching those of natural biopolymers, and
having stability and processing characteristics suitable for application in many
areas of nanoscale science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;