* 0134318
* CAREER:  Integration of Research and Education in the Study of Analysis and Partial Differential Equations in Carnot-Caratheodory Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2009
* Luca Capogna, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2009
* USD 360,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;--------&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
component of this proposal deals with the study of &lt;br/&gt;solutions to
certain non-linear systems of Partial Differential&lt;br/&gt;Equations which
arise in connections with the geometry of &lt;br/&gt;Carnot-Caratheodory spaces.
More precisely, we will study the &lt;br/&gt;sharp regularity of solutions to
quasilinear subelliptic &lt;br/&gt;systems, and apply the results to the theory
of quasi-regular &lt;br/&gt;maps in Carnot groups and in more general spaces.
&lt;br/&gt;We will study critical points of the energy for maps with
&lt;br/&gt;target in the Heisenberg group and with domain in a Riemannian
&lt;br/&gt;manifold or in the Minkowski space.&lt;br/&gt;The analysis of
boundary value problems for sub-elliptic &lt;br/&gt;operators, and the study of
qualitative and quantitative &lt;br/&gt;properties of solutions of some non-
divergence form non-linear &lt;br/&gt;equations, are also part of this
proposal.&lt;br/&gt;The educational component of this proposal is centered
around &lt;br/&gt;the creation of Integrated Research Groups, in which
&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate and graduate students work on basic research
&lt;br/&gt;projects supervised by the PI. One of thegoals of this
&lt;br/&gt;activity is the dissemination of information, through a
&lt;br/&gt;web-based data-base, seminars, and publications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partial differential equations are used to provide a
&lt;br/&gt;mathematical model for real-life phenomena, such as
&lt;br/&gt;chemical reactions, force-fields or conductivity. Such
models&lt;br/&gt;allow both to better understand the phenomena and to try to
&lt;br/&gt;forecast the future behavior of the system under study.
&lt;br/&gt;Roughly speaking, smooth solutions to PDE's correspond to
&lt;br/&gt;systems which can be well understood and modeled. The study
&lt;br/&gt;of regularity of solutions consists in finding smooth
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;The equations described in this proposal appear in the
study of&lt;br/&gt;motion under constraints (as in Robot arms
motion),&lt;br/&gt;and in the study of diffusion in a non isotropic
media.&lt;br/&gt;