* 0134362
* CAREER:  Effects of Surfaces on Bacterial Metabolic Activity and Survial:  Examination of a Physiochemical/Bioenergetic Mechanism
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2008
* Derick Brown, Lehigh University
* Continuing grant
* Clark C. K. Liu
* 05/31/2008
* USD 429,000.00

0134362 Brown It has long been recognized that the adhesion of bacteria to
surfaces can result in enhanced metabolic activity. This can be beneficial, such
as with attached-growth bioreactors for water and wastewater treatment,
biodegradation of subsurface contaminants and with nutrient cycling in soils.
However, it can also be harmful, such as with bacterial survival and growth in
water distribution systems, pathogen growth on medical implants and equipment,
plaque formation on dental surfaces, and bacterial attachment in pipelines with
concurrent degradation of the pipelines and the fluids they carry. Most research
in this area has focused on the availability of nutrients and growth substrate
adsorbed to the solid surface. The research approach proposed addresses this
issue from a different viewpoint by considering specific interactions between
the surface and the bacterial cell wall. The approach examines the link between
two disparate theories, one involving colloid deposition processes and the other
involving cell membrane bioenergetics. Specifically, this approach focuses on
the interactions between the physiochemical charge-regulation process, which
occurs as a surface containing ionizable groups (e.g. bacterial cells)
approaches another surface, and cellular membrane bioenergetics the chemiosmotic
theory of Peter Mitchell - which directly impacts metabolic activity and
survival. The proposed research project examines the link between the charge-
regulation and chemiosmotic processes through numerical and experimental
investigations. Numerical simulations of the proton motive force and the charge-
regulation process will be used to design and interpret experiments that will
systematically examine the effects of bacterial, solid surface, and solution
properties on bacterial metabolic activity and survival. The ultimate goal is to
elucidate the nature of the link between the charge-regulation and chemiosmotic
processes, allowing these models to be used as a tool to assess biochemical
processes in natural systems and to assist in the selection or design of
surfaces in engineered systems based on bacteriological constraints. The main
educational thrust of this proposal takes a step back and focuses on
Environmental Engineering curricula taught in middle- and high-schools. To reach
the widest possible number of teachers, the PI proposes to develop a
comprehensive web site. A main benefit of the web format is that the site will
be a living document, which will evolve based on feedback as the curricula is
used in the classroom. This site will be developed in conjunction with the
National Science Teachers Association (NSTA). The NSTA has agreed to assist in
setting-up reviewers in order to ensure that the site content and format are
tailored to the needs of middle- and high-school teachers.***