* 0134818
* CAREER: Combinatorial Neoglycopeptide Arrays: Synthesis and Application Toward Creating Bioactive Peptides Resistant to Proteolysis
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2008
* Michael Carrasco, Santa Clara University
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 01/31/2008
* USD 331,162.00

Professor Michael Carrasco, of the Department of Chemistry at Santa Clara
University, is supported by the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program for
his studies to determine how peptides and proteins can be made resistant to
proteolysis by the attachment of sugars or other small organic molecules. By
studying arrays of neoglycopeptides synthesized by a recently developed
combinatorial method, Professor Carrasco hopes to discover general structural
motifs that confer proteolytic resistance. These motifs will then be tested on
peptide and protein models of practical and theoretical interest. The stages of
research will be: (1) synthesizing a combinatorial array of neoglycopeptides,
(2) determining the proteolysis of the members of the neoglycopeptide array by a
variety of proteases, (3) analyzing the results to determine general, protective
structural motifs, and (4) introducing these motifs to bioactive peptides and
proteins to increase their proteolytic resistance without disturbing their
function. The results generated will provide new strategies for the design of
novel peptide and protein pharmaceuticals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The teaching
portion of this proposal focuses on extending the culture of research and
community of scholars present in the sciences to include underrepresented
students with a special emphasis on Latino students. Four concrete objectives
will be implemented to foster a network of students and faculty across the
scientific disciplines that will address both general scientific issues and
ancillary issues specific to those from multicultural backgrounds. The four
objectives are: (1) identifying and recruiting research students from
underrepresented groups, (2) creating a faculty and peer mentoring network, (3)
establishing a specific program of research presentations and attendance at
regional and national meetings, and (4) initiating a regular, special seminar
series given by prominent scientists from underrepresented groups. The main
emphasis of the program is providing both scientific and personal mentoring for
the students. Therefore, with the support of the Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program for this CAREER award, Professor Michael Carrasco, of the
Department of Chemistry at the Santa Clara University seeks to determine if
glycosylation can be an effective tool in developing more proteolytic-resistant
peptide and protein pharmaceutical as part of his research effort and will use
teaching and mentoring underrepresented students as part of his educational
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;