* 0134583
* CAREER: Laser-Assisted Layered Manufacturing of 3D Mesoscale Structures With Embedded Micro Sensors and Actuators
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2008
* Xiaochun Li, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 05/31/2008
* USD 381,000.00

The goal of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award is to integrate
research activities with educational efforts in two interdisciplinary fields:
layered manufacturing and smart materials and structures. Currently, little has
been reported on integrating these two fields, especially at the mesoscale (100
mm to 10 mm). In addition, fundamental issues for mesoscale layered
manufacturing processes have not been well defined or investigated.

This program involves research on mesoscale layered manufacturing of smart
structures with a special focus on thermomechanical issues at the mesoscale. The
approach is to integrate laser-assisted Shape Deposition Manufacturing (SDM) and
Laser Direct Write to build, at the mesoscale, geometrically, compositionally,
and functionally complex smart structures containing embedded micro sensors and
actuators. Analytical models, numerical simulation, and embedded micro sensors
will be used to investigate the thermomechanical phenomena. The educational plan
is to improve the existing curriculum in the arena of manufacturing by
developing new interdisciplinary elements that integrate the fields of layered
manufacturing, micro-manufacturing, and smart materials and structures.
Additionally, there will be substantial effort to mentor undergraduate and
graduate students, and to expose K-12 students, teachers, and industries to
novel manufacturing processes and smart devices. Strategies will be explored to
attract, retain, and engage students from under-represented groups (women and
especially students with disabilities) to manufacturing fields. The research
program will have significant implications for industry in that mesoscale smart
devices could become technologically and economically feasible for numerous
applications. Emphasis on interdisciplinary materials, hands-on experience,
teamwork, and high quality teaching and learning will better engineering
education for next generation engineers.