* 0134987
* Career: Research and Education of Flexible Methods for Statistical  Modeling and Prediction
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2007
* Yi Lin, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Grace Yang
* 02/28/2007
* USD 300,000.00

In recent years, many novel techniques for regression, classification, and
density estimation have been developed, both in statistics and in other related
areas such as machine learning and neural networks. Some of these methods have
been very successful in practice, but their statistical properties are not fully
understood. This hinders the further development of these techniques. The goal
of the proposed research is to gain statistical insights into these techniques,
and to develop new methodologies and improved algorithms. The specific
techniques investigated are the support vector machine, the randomized trees,
and the log density functional ANOVA model for continuous and mixed data.
Several new techniques are introduced. The support vector machine for multi-
category classification with arbitrary cost structures will be further
developed. A new framework is proposed that connects the adaptive nearest
neighbor estimation and the randomized trees. Through the use of the sparse grid
method, a backfitting type algorithm is proposed for fitting the log density
functional ANOVA model, with applications to graphical models for continuous and
mixed data. These new techniques will be examined through theoretical
investigation and empirical evaluation. The investigator will develop a graduate
level course on flexible methods for regression, classification, and density
estimation, and their applications. Part of the proposed research will be
incorporated into the course material.

Regression, classification, and density estimation are the standard problems in
statistics. Traditional methods typically employ strong distributional
assumptions. With the vast computing power of today, it becomes possible to
develop and implement more flexible methods, and a host of new techniques
emerged, both in statistics and other related areas. Many of these are
computationally intensive, and their statistical properties have not been
wellunderstood. A clear understanding of these methods is crucial for their
further development and statistical education. The proposed research develops
valuable insights into flexible statistical methods of current research
interest. The techniques developed in the research provides new and useful tools
to efficient data analysis, and can be applied to many problems in medical,
social, economical, environmental and biological sciences. An important aspect
of the current statistical education is the teaching of flexible statistical
methods that take advantage of the computing power we have today, and their
application in different scientific and industrial areas. The insights and new
techniques developed in the proposed research will be incorporated into graduate
level courses, and benefit the training of graduate students.