* 0134891
* Modes of Economic Governance
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Avinash Dixit, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 09/30/2005
* USD 166,431.00

This research examines the sources of relative advantages and disadvantages of
different systems of economic governance, and interactions among them. The focus
is on questions such as: Which system will be better under what circumstances?
When can different systems coexist, and when will one supplant the others? Will
each society select the mode that is optimal for its circumstances? Will new
systems be adopted when appropriate, or can groups remain locked into old modes
even though these may be outdated or dysfunctional? The methodology of the
research combines theoretical analysis, and testing this analysis against case
studies that are available or emerging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; In advanced
western economies, economic contracts are enforced by an impartial and effective
legal system. This enables strangers to deal with each other. In most other
countries, and historically in all countries, such a legal system may be
missing, or corrupt, or too slow. Other systems of governance then evolve. One
alternative comprises social norms and sanctions. Small close-knit groups can
use these effectively since they are well-informed about each other and in an
ongoing relationship. This system is common among businesses in many East-Asian
countries and among communities of traders linked by ethnic or similar ties.
Other methods of unofficial governance include private profit-motivated third
parties who collect and convey information about previous violations of
contractual obligations; credit-rating agencies perform such functions even in
advanced economies. Finally, they include private third parties who will enforce
contracts by punishing any breaches; organized crime groups have played this
role when the official state has broken down, for example in late 19th century
Sicily, just after World War II in Japan, and just after the collapse of the
communist regimes in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe. These third-party
alternatives have performed acceptably in some circumstances and have proved
dysfunctional in others. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Improving our conceptual
understanding of the mechanisms of enforcement of economic contracts is of
obvious basic importance in the theories of law and economics. The research also
has practical uses. For example, U.S. firms trading with, or investing in,
countries with different governance practices can better foresee any problems
they are likely to face in getting their local partners and governments to keep
promises, and can devise methods to protect themselves against breaches of
contract. Multilateral organizations like the World Bank and IMF that advise
less-developed countries on structural reforms can design their recommendations
better if they understand the governance structures under which the reformed
enterprises must operate; where necessary, they can recommend simultaneous
reforms of the methods of governance in these countries.&lt;br/&gt;