* 0134585
* CAREER:  Optically Transparent Gripper for Microassembly
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2008
* Eniko Enikov, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 01/31/2008
* USD 438,962.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award provides funding for the
development of a flexible and economical robotic system for micro-assembly. This
research will explore the possibility of applying electrostatic forces to
visually servoed micro-assembly, by developing an optically transparent
electrostatic micro-gripper, integrated into an automated assembly cell.
Characterization of the residual interfacial charge and dielectric breakdown of
several high-dielectric-constant materials will be performed in order to
optimize the operation of the gripper. A theoretical model for the trapped
charge will also be developed and experimentally verified using an electric
field scanning probe microscope (SPM). Using the SPM as a charge-writing tool,
the results of this research will be extended to nano-assembly and fixturing of
carbon nano-tubes and large molecules. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
outcome of this research will lead to development of economical techniques for
the automated manufacturing of complex micro-systems with heterogeneously
manufactured components. It will also generate experimental and theoretical data
on possible future assembly techniques for the nano-world, based on electric
charge writing. The interdisciplinary nature of the outlined research will
provide educational opportunities for senior-year undergraduate students through
participation in component design and system integration. A graduate-level
laboratory course on the application of electrostatic techniques in
manufacturing and sensing at micro and nano-meter length scales will be also
developed.