* 0134618
* CAREER: Intergenerational and Behavioral Issues in Public Economics
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Antonio Rangel, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 05/31/2007
* USD 311,658.00

This CAREER project proposes to analyze the role that intergenerational and
behavioral issues play on the design and analysis of public policy. The project
has three components. The first component studies what types of institutions,
existing or not, are able to generate optimal investment in future generations,
and to protect them from expropriation. It includes the development of
theoretical models to understand how to design fiscal constitutions that
generate optimal investment in intergenerational public goods, such as the
environment, and protect future generations from expropriation through fiscal
policy. The key question is: How can we design institutions that give a "voice"
to the interests of people who have not been born yet. We plan to test
empirically this theory by using the last 200 years of American history to study
the extent to which American institutions have generated "good"
intergenerational outcomes. This includes the development of a new database on
the finances of the Federal Government from 1820 to the present. The second
component develops a new model of decision-making and welfare that uses as
primitives brain structures and their operations, instead of preferences and
preference maximization. The model incorporates important insights from
psychology and neuro-science, and has the potential to explain why agents engage
in self-defeating behaviors such as under-saving and addiction. Also, and most
importantly for Public Economics, the model generates well-defined welfare
evaluations that can be used to evaluate public policy. This theory will be used
to improve our understanding of advertisement, savings policy, drug policy,
health policy, and risky behaviors. Finally, the third component of the project
is the career educational plan on Public and Behavioral Economics that includes,
among others, the development of a behavioral economics research group at
Stanford University, and the development of a new graduate textbook in Public
Economics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intergenerational and behavioral issues lie at
the center of some of the most important current debates in public policy.
Examples of intergenerational policy problems include Global Warming, R&amp;D,
and the AIDS epidemic. These problems are difficult to handle because the
generations that would benefit most from these policies are not the ones paying
for them. Examples of behavioral policy problems include the design of social
insurance programs, crime, and addiction. Behaviors such as systematic financial
mismanagement and the consumption of addictive substances challenge the
predictions and the policy prescriptions of standard economic analysis, which
presupposes that agents are quite "rational." The basic motivation for this
research is that an improved understanding of these issues will allow us to
design better public policies and ultimately better institutions.&lt;br/&gt;