* 0134464
* CAREER: Advanced Control Algorithms for Active Materials Actuators Used in Nanoscale Positioning
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2002,07/31/2007
* Stefan Seelecke, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Shaochen Chen
* 07/31/2007
* USD 375,000.00

For manipulations at the nanoscale, highly precise positioning capability is a
very basic, yet indispensable requirement. Possible applications in this area
range from the assembly of molecular structures to cell manipulations and highly
precise machining tasks. Currently employed devices for nanomanipulation
commonly rely on the use of actuators from active materials, mostly
piezoelectrics and magnetostrictives. It is only through these materials and
their inherent properties that the possibility of efficient actuation in an
extremely small volume is offered at all. On the other hand, these materials
exhibit a highly non-linear behavior characterized by the occurrence of
hysteresis loops. This greatly afflicts their control performance and limits
their applicability to low bandwidth and low stroke applications under
conventional (PID) feedback loops. It is of great relevance for almost every
nanomanufacturing task to improve speed and efficiency while at the same time
maintaining high precision. A way to treat the problem is to incorporate a model
of the material behavior into the control algorithm. A novel approach in the
field of shape memory alloys developed by the PI has recently established the
foundation for an extremely efficient type of algorithm. This approach not only
extends the range of currently employed methods to account for optimality
criteria like speed of adjustment or energy consumption; it is clearly real-time
capable due to its high computational speed. Based on the observation that, on
the icroscale, the physical mechanisms in shape memory alloys are closely
related to the ones observed in piezoelectric and magnetostrictive materials, a
unified model will be developed for all three materials. Based on such a unified
model, the real-time optimal control approach will be extended to account for
closed-loop feedback and parameter updating, and it will be validated in a real-
time hardware environment.

The educational plan involves four initiatives and will promote the development
of new multi-disciplinary courses from undergraduate to Ph.D. level, as well as
active undergraduate student research integration. The third effort will
increase the exposure of students to international issues and increase their
foreign language proficiency by offering possibilities to work with one of
Germany's leading institutions in nanotechnology. The final initiative is the
development of web based course materials, including "virtual lab experiments"
through a simulation based on JAVA versions for active materials models.