* 0134946
* CAREER:  The Evolution of Income Inequality During the 20th Century:  Effects of Taxation and Policy Consequences
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2010
* Emmanuel Saez, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 02/28/2010
* USD 332,326.00

The general objective of this research is to study the evolution of income
inequality in four OECD countries: the U.S., Canada, Australia, and New-Zealand
using income tax returns statistics available since the beginning of the
century. To carry out this study, homogeneous series of income shares received
from the top fractiles of the income distribution and the composition of income
within each of these fractiles will be build. All these countries have produced
detailed income tax statistics that are particularly well-suited for analyzing
the top of the income distribution. These statistics have not yet been used
extensively to study the evolution of inequality over the long-period. The goal
of the analysis is to assess whether changes in inequality are due primarily to
shocks such as world wars or macro-economic depressions and tax policy or due to
deeper technological transformations. The data will also allow to do a
comprehensive study of the short term, and long term effects of taxation on
incomes. Exploiting the numerous tax reforms, we plan to investigate how each
source of income responds to taxation, and in particular, whether the high top
tax rates on capital income over long time periods have had adverse effects on
the concentration of wealth.&lt;br/&gt; Understanding the mechanisms behind the
evolution of inequality of capitalist countries over the course of their
development is critical to assess whether capitalist economies have a natural
tendency to create increasing inequality and whether government interventions
are required or effective to curb the level of inequality. The analysis of the
behavioral response of of high incomes to taxation is of central importance to
assess the efficiency of the tax system and the costs of taxing the rich to
finance redistributive programs. Understanding better the mechanisms of these
behavioral responses to taxation can help improve current tax systems and
transfer programs for lower incomes.&lt;br/&gt;