* 0134950
* CAREER: Enabling Nanoscale Science and Devices Using Selective Biomolecular-inorganic Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Deron Walters, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 04/30/2005
* USD 94,671.00

The Advanced Materials Program in the Division of Chemistry makes this Career
award to University of Central Florida. With this award, Professor Deron Walters
will study interaction of peptides with carbon nanotubes (CNT) and will build
nanomaterials from bottom up. These studies will involve selecting nanotube-
binding peptides, studying electronic effects of peptide binding to individual
tubes, and linking tubes together with bifunctional binding/structural peptide
units. Modification of electronic properties and nanopatterning of CNT surfaces
by Atomic Force Microscopy will also be carried out with this award. Two- and
three-dimensional assembly and chiral separation of CNT-peptide complexes
planned with this award will be helpful for successful development of electronic
devices, circuits and sensors. The PI, with the departmental support, will
provide innovative approaches to teach quantum mechanics courses to
undergraduate students at University of Central Florida. In addition, principles
and behavior of the nanoscale world will be made available to the public, and
precollege teachers and students through the Orlando Science Center.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interaction of peptides with carbon nanotubes (CNT) and
nanopatterning of CNT surfaces by Atomic Force Microscopy will be carried to
build nanomaterials from bottom up. These studies will involve selecting
nanotube-binding peptides, studying electronic effects of peptide binding to
individual tubes, and linking tubes together with bifunctional
binding/structural peptide units. Modification of electronic properties and
nanopatterning of CNT surfaces, two- and three-dimensional assembly and chiral
separation of CNT-peptide complexes will be helpful for successful development
of electronic devices, circuits and sensors. Innovative approaches will be used
to teach quantum mechanics courses to undergraduate students at University of
Central Florida. In addition, nanoscale science will be made available to the
public, and precollege teachers and students through the Orlando Science Center.