* 0134129
* CAREER:  Control Design using Data-Driven Models:  Exploiting Model Structure
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2007
* Robert Parker, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 12/31/2007
* USD 381,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Robert S. Parker &lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Pittsburgh&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0134129&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Industry is demanding higher and higher levels of
performance from their processes and little capital investment is available for
retrofitting or additional sensors. Thus processes must operate in highly
nonlinear regimes, likely under linear control algorithms. This CAREER award
addresses the integration of research and education with the goal of developing
tools and students capable of solving problems in nonlinear model identification
and control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the research will focus on the
use of control-relevant process models in nonlinear model-based optimal
controller design. The modeling studies use third-order Volterra and Volterra-
Laguerre representations, a subclass of nonlinear polynomial moving-average
models. The selection of these model structures is motivated by (i) the ability
to tailor input sequences to excite (or cancel) particular model dynamics; (ii)
the opportunity to reduce the coefficient space and noise corruption with little
to no decrease in model accuracy; (iii) the wide class of systems these model
structures can approximate (e.g. polymerizers, distillation columns,
bioreactors); and (iv) the utility of these structures in controller synthesis.
Based on a polymerization reactor case study, third-order Volterra models will
be identified using tailored input sequences, design to excite the linear,
nonliear diagonal, or nonlinear off-diagonal terms. The resulting model will
then be projected onto the orthonormal Laguerre basis to reduce coefficient
dimension and noise effects on the output estimate. These models will then be
used to synthesize a nonlinear model predictive control algorithm. The
culmination of the project will be the integration of the identification and
control results into a single algorithm for simultaneous identification and
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational component has two primary aims.
The first is to help the student retain material from class to class, and to be
able to employ material from a given class on an application example. Consistent
with ABET 2000 criteria, these cross-curriculum problems will probe the
students' mathematical skills. The type of problems examined serve to vertically
integrate the curriculum with a recurring case study which draws on earlier
courses, and therefore reinforces retention of material across classes. The
integration of research and education is accomplished through the use of
research results in the development of two new units for the Process Control
Modules, case studies that examine data-driven model identification and
nonlinear model predictive control at a level accessible to the
undergraduate.&lt;br/&gt;