* 0134205
* CAREER: Virtual Functional Anatomy
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Frances Sheehan, Catholic University of America
* Continuing grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 05/31/2005
* USD 224,876.00

0134205 Sheehan Under this CAREER Award, the musculoskeletal system at the
component level (joint anatomy and tissue dynamics) during functional movements
will be characterized. Characterization will be accomplished by developing a set
of interdisciplinary tools (virtual functional anatomy - VFA) that will allow
the accurate and precise measurement of 3D static and dynamic musculoskeletal
anatomy. Fast-PC MRI (phase contrast magnetic resonance imaging) will be be
combined with high-resolution 3D musculoskeletal models to create subject-
specific 3D total joint anatomy models, animated based on actual joint movements
during volitional movement. The initial focus will be on the musculoskeletal
kinematics and kinetics of the knee joint while subjects extend and flex their
knees. Stress-strain properties of the patellar and quadriceps tendons along
with their moment arms, strain within the anterior and posterior cruciate
ligaments and the contribution of each quadriceps muscle to the resultant
extensor force will be determined. Once developed, the modular VFA tool can be
adapted to other musculoskeletal systems utilizing other sources of dynamic
and/or imaging data.

The educational component focuses on developing a mechanical engineering
Master's level curriculum specializing in biomechanics, which would be based on
two research-oriented courses-Imaging Technologies and Functional Movement
Analysis--that would integrate the VFA produced through the research and be
enhanced with web-based experimental programs. Outreach programs designed to
allow young women the opportunity to explore potential careers in science or
engineering will continue to be supported.