* 0134058
* CAREER:  Optical Spectroscopy of Quantum Coherence, Correlations, and Many-Body Effects in Nanostructures
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Junichiro Kono, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 12/31/2006
* USD 463,000.00

This CAREER development project explores optical phenomena in semiconductor
nanostructures. Various ultrafast and nonlinear optical techniques will be
employed to probe the dynamics of charge and spin carriers in nanostructures and
address issues of contemporary interest. More specifically, issues and questions
addressed include: Autler-Towns splitting or "dressed" excitons in quantum
wells, spin dephasing in semiconductor quantum wires, spin-charge separation in
Tomonaga-Luttinger liquids, and carrier-induced ferromagnetism in magnetic
semiconductors. The research work will train student researchers in frontier
projects to produce next generation experts in semiconductor optics with broad
knowledge in quantum optics, quantum information science, and nanotechnology.
The impact of this project includes: increased understanding of the quantum
states and dynamics of interacting and/or strongly driven electrons in
nanostructures; new spectroscopy techniques; novel device concepts and
implementations; establishment of the quantum nature of semiconductor-light
interaction; progress towards the solid-state realization of quantum information
processing, computation and communications; and provision of a controlled
environment in which to address unanswered questions in many-body physics.

This CAREER award will develop a five-year program that coherently integrates
research and education in the area of optical studies of semiconductor
nanostructures. The proposed research work will train undergraduate and graduate
students in frontier projects to produce next generation experts in
semiconductor optics with broad knowledge in quantum optics, quantum information
science, and nanotechnology. Various cutting-edge optical techniques will be
employed to study electron dynamics in nanostructures. Such research will
increase our understanding of quantum effects in nanostructures, increase
students' readiness for the fast-paced world of modern quantum technology, lead
to novel device concepts and implementations, and bring significant progress
towards the solid-state realization of quantum information processing,
computation and communications.