* 0134385
* CAREER: The Mechanics of Fracture in Superelastic Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2007
* Wendy Crone, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 12/31/2007
* USD 390,000.00

CAREER: The Mechanics of Fracture in Superelastic Materials&lt;br/&gt;
ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wendy C. Crone, Assistant
Professor&lt;br/&gt;Engineering Mechanics Program, Department of Engineering
Physics&lt;br/&gt;University of Wisconsin - Madison&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shape
memory alloys (SMA) constitute a unique class of materials that
have&lt;br/&gt;already proven to have wide-ranging applications in the
biomedical,&lt;br/&gt;aerospace, microelectronics, and automotive industries.
These materials&lt;br/&gt;have a crystallographic structure that can change
reversibly and&lt;br/&gt;reproducibly, allowing the material to display dramatic
stress-induced and&lt;br/&gt;temperature-induced recoverable deformations. One
key hurdle to their use&lt;br/&gt;is the development of reliable SMA materials
and structures, in which the&lt;br/&gt;material's microstructure is well
understood and its resistance to fatigue&lt;br/&gt;and fracture can be reliably
predicted. Critical topics to be investigated&lt;br/&gt;in this research
involve: determining the effect of process-induced&lt;br/&gt;microstructure on
fracture and fatigue behavior; exploring the effect of&lt;br/&gt;grain
refinement on the fracture behavior for grain sizes ranging
between&lt;br/&gt;the micron and nanometer scale; and developing experimentally-
based models&lt;br/&gt;that delineate the mechanisms influencing fracture and
fatigue in NiTi and&lt;br/&gt;Cu-based SMAs. In conjunction with this research,
education initiatives&lt;br/&gt;will be undertaken to develop widespread
training at the undergraduate and&lt;br/&gt;graduate levels in superelastic
behavior and shape memory materials, via&lt;br/&gt;new course material in the
areas of nanomaterials, micromechanics and&lt;br/&gt;fracture mechanics. Not
only will the expanded course material provide&lt;br/&gt;students with an
introduction to topics where mechanics has been developing&lt;br/&gt;influence
and making critical contributions to new technologies, it will&lt;br/&gt;also
have international impact via Smart Materials Exemplar of
the&lt;br/&gt;Worldwide Universities Network, an international network
of&lt;br/&gt;researchers/educators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;