* 0134429
* CAREER:    Electrophoresis of Proteins in Templated Nanoporous Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2007
* Jeffrey Carbeck, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 01/31/2007
* USD 375,000.00

CAREER: ELECTROPHORESIS OF PROTEINS IN TEMPLATED NANOPOROUS
MATERIALS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project brings together biophysical
and bioanalytical chemistry, with materials science and nanotechnology, to
address challenges in the field of proteomics. The description of complex
mixtures of proteins that make up a cell is done through a combination of
separation and identification. Separations are almost always done under
conditions that denature proteins and thereby obliterate their function. We seek
new materials that will support the rapid and efficient separation of complex
mixtures of proteins under conditions that maintain native protein structure and
function. Proteins separated in these materials will be available immediately
for the screening of function, such as ligand binding or enzymatic activity. We
propose to develop nanoporous silica, produced using surfactant liquid-crystal
templates, as a new matrix material for the electrophoretic separation of
proteins under non-denaturing conditions. These materials will be fabricated
into thin-films and microchannel arrays. Models of the electrophoretic motion of
proteins in nanochannels should guide identification of optimal separation
conditions. Our fundamental understanding of this process, however, is
incomplete. Protein charge ladders - collections of protein derivatives that
differ incrementally in net charge - have been useful in testing models of
protein electrophoresis in free solutions. We will use charge ladders to study
the role of protein charge and hydrodynamic size on the efficiency of separation
and resolution of different proteins in nanochannels. Knowledge gained from
these fundamental studies will test current models of electrophoresis in
nanochannels and direct the formulation of new models that will, in turn, aid in
the development of optimal conditions for protein separations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proteomics - the study of the complete protein complement
to the genome - seeks to answer the following two questions. Which proteins are
expressed (i.e., are present and functional) in a cell? What are the functional
interactions between the expressed proteins and other molecules in the cell?
Answers to the first question require the separation and identification of
complex mixtures of proteins isolated from cells. Separations are usually done
under conditions that denature proteins and thereby obliterate their function.
Answers to the second question require the biochemical analysis of individual
proteins; analysis is usually done with isolated samples of pure proteins in
their native functional state. Current attempts to answer these two questions
therefore involve independent and mutually exclusive techniques. Our approach
would combine separation with analysis of protein function. The goal is to
integrate protein separation, identification and analysis of function on a
single "chip". This integrated approach to protein analysis requires new matrix
materials that allow separations of proteins under conditions that maintain
their native structure and function. We believe our approach will allow this
integration. The development of these templated silica materials and the
understanding of the transport of proteins through them via electrophoresis
should also have significant impact on the use of such materials in bioprocess
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award integrates research with an
educational program that includes new course development at the university
level, research opportunities for high school students, and focused educational
outreach to elementary schools. The central theme of this educational program is
that engineering applications and technology are effective "hooks" that
introduce and draw students into the basic sciences and
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;