* 0134884
* CAREER: Nanoscale Imaging of Transport Processes in Mesoscopic Materials for Electrochemical Energy-Storage
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2007
* Keith Stevenson, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 12/31/2007
* USD 503,925.00

Professor Keith Stevenson of the University of Texas at Austin has received a
CAREER Award from the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program to study the
electrochemistry of unique nanostructures leading to efficient energy storage
and conversion. Optical and scanning probe microscopy will be applied to redox-
active materials, starting with the oxides used in lithium batteries, to observe
mixed conduction of electrons and ions at nanoscales. Together with
electrochemical methods, the approach will permit the correlation of structural
characteristics (e.g. atomic-level defects, porosity and morphology) with the
energetics and kinetics of ion insertion. The research will enable the
development of new nanostructured materials to improve ion transport and storage
capability. The PI plans to incorporate new modern electrochemistry, light
microscopy and scanning probe microscopy in innovative undergraduate laboratory
courses. In addition, he will develop an interactive public outreach module that
interfaces with existing UT-Austin outreach programs. Local high school students
will also be involved in the PI's research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Information
obtained from the research may lead to next-generation energy storage materials
and configurations, and lead to creation of potentially superior high-
performance electrochemical power sources. The students and public involved in
the work will gain perspectives about research in nanomaterials and cutting edge
ideas in energy storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;