* 0134313
* High Resolution Time-Series of California Climate Over the Last 12,000 Years: Testing the Influence of the North Atlantic and North Pacific
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2004
* Katrina Moser, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Gregory H. Chu
* 03/31/2004
* USD 75,922.00

Instrumental records of climate in California extend back approximately 100
years and are too short in length to capture the full range of natural
variability of temperature and precipitation in the state. The project will
provide records of climatic variability that extend back over 12,000 years. The
project will analyze fossil midge fly larva (Chironomids), crustaceans
(Cladocera), unicellular aquatic algae (diatoms), terrestrial plant
microfossils, and geochemical evidence from lake sediments from the eastern
Sierra Nevada to reconstruct records of temperature and effective moisture that
extend back over 12,000 years. Chronologies will be linked to the records by the
radiocarbon dating of organic matter in the lake sediments. Previous work has
developed mathematical models that provide numerical estimates of past
temperature and effective moisture from fossil chironomid and diatom
assemblages. Previous preliminary work has also led to the recovery of several
lake sediment records that extend back past 11,000 years in age and show clear
evidence of both high and low frequency changes in temperature and effective
moisture during the transition from glacial to modern climatic conditions
between 12,000 and 9000 years ago. This project will complete analysis of these
core sections. The project will then use the existing lake sediment cores and
new cores collected from climatically sensitive settings to reconstruct changes
in temperature and effective moisture over the past 9000 years. The project will
construct records with better than 50 year temporal resolution for both high and
mid-elevation sites. In addition to the significant multi-centennial to
millennial variations seen in the glacial to non-glacial transition, the project
will use previously published data for the past 2000 years to uncover evidence
of multi-decadal to multi-centennial droughts during the past 9000 years. The
temporal patterns of variations in California temperature and effective moisture
will be compared to temporal patterns of variability evident in cores from the
North Pacific Ocean, North Atlantic Ocean and Greenland Ice Cap, in order to
help deduce the larger scale causes of long-term variability in California
climate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Long-term climate records are essential to
anticipating the full range of variability in the severity and duration of long-
term drought periods, wet periods and warm and cold periods that can occur in
California. The records will help determine if there is long-term periodicity in
phenomena such as multi-decadal droughts that will make such events more
predictable. These records of past climate will also help in assessing the role
of changes in the Atlantic and Pacific oceans in driving climatic variations in
California. Finally, the long-term climatic records provided by this project
will furnish baseline data on natural variability of climate in California that
will allow for the detection of truly unusual variations that might be
attributable to greenhouse warming. The records will be of importance for water
resource management, forestry and conservation management, and climatic change
detection and management. &lt;br/&gt;