* 0134188
* CAREER: Linking Education and Research Through Measurement and Analysis
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2008
* John Schroeder, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 08/31/2008
* USD 580,169.00

Over the years, atmospheric scientists and wind engineers have enjoyed fruitful
collaborations that have addressed fundamental problems in the two disciplines.
The majority of the research projects active within the Atmospheric Science
Group and Wind Science and Engineering (WISE) center at Texas Tech University
involve field experimentation. It has been recognized, however, that the link
between the active research portfolio and the classroom could be stronger. The
work under this award will provide new tools to further interactions between
atmospheric scientists and wind engineers and incorporate these tools into a
classroom setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under this award, the Principal
Investigator will develop two new graduate classes, establish a Measurement and
Analysis Laboratory (MAL) and conduct a research agenda focused on the
atmospheric boundary layer in non-idealized (extreme) events. The initial
research focus will be on the wind structure found within the hurricane
planetary boundary layer (HPBL) -- specifically, documenting the HPBL wind flow
characteristics and relating them to storm-scale processes. Special attention
will be given to the coastal transition region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two new
graduate classes will focus on providing a fundamental foundation in making and
analyzing measurements. The courses will provide students a unique and
comprehensive experience at building instrumentation and acquisition systems,
acquiring relevant data sets and analyzing them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MAL
will provide a central resource for students and researchers to efficiently
learn about and develop instrumentation and data acquisition (DAQ) systems both
in and out of the classroom. The MAL will be used to teach both of the newly
developed courses and will be available to students and researchers to assist
them in the development and testing of instrumentation and DAQ systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the integrated approach is on providing a
bridge to the students between the classroom and the field. The strength of
existing programs within WISE will be enhanced because the current facilities
can be brought into the classroom and used as "real world" examples and sources
for class projects. This will link the educational aspects with the main
research thrusts of WISE and provide the graduate students an educational
foundation to accomplish the goals of their research projects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful completion of this research will lend new
insights into important meteorological phenomena such as the wind structure in
the hurricane boundary layer. The educational activities will provide an
excellent environment for developing the next generation of wind engineers and
atmospheric scientists and give them an exceptional background in observational
issues.