* 0134795
* Emergent Properties of Fungi Exposed to Long-Term Radiation:  Fungal Ecophysiology
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2002,06/30/2003
* John Dighton, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 06/30/2003
* USD 80,000.00

As a result of the extreme exposure to radiation at the site of the former
Chernobyl Atomic Electric Station, changes in the community composition of soil
fungi have been identified. Some of these fungi have been shown to be able to
decompose some of the carbon based radioactive materials from the fuel rods and
from contaminated roof material. One of the properties that has been found in
these fungi is that isolates from the Chernobyl area appear to show 'positive
radiotropism'. These fungi appear to have evolved an ability to recognize
radioactivity, the direction of the source and then grow towards the source.
This ability does not seem to have evolved in isolates of the same fungal
species isolated at a distance from Chernobyl.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our proposal
is to further investigate the mechanics of this 'radiotropism'. We wish to
identify the nature of the radioactive cues that elicit a response in the fungi
and will use a range of radioactive sources (a, b, g, mixed bg, neutron and
X-ray) at a range of doses to determine which type and dose of radioactivity
these fungi respond to. We will also initiate investigations of the underlying
biochemical changes that may be triggered to cause the growth changes in these
'adapted' fungi.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has ecological and environmental
significance in that, if we can show that fungi can respond to radioactive cues,
grow towards sources of radioactivity, which they can then decompose, this may
be a potential bioremediation tool that could be used in contaminant
remediation.&lt;br/&gt;