* 0134594
* CAREER:  Lipid Membrane Organization in the Presence of External Fluid Flow
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2008
* Mark Vaughn, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 08/31/2008
* USD 375,000.00

0134594&lt;br/&gt;Vaughn&lt;br/&gt;The PI's research proposes to study the
effect of flow on the molecular organization of lipid and lipid/protein
membranes by employing experiments and computational methods. He will make model
lipid membranes and use fluorescent microscopy to investigate the effect of flow
on protein and lipid mobility. Many cell types such as erythrocytes and
neutrophils are regularly exposed to stress and deformation in a flow field that
affect the behavior of proteins in membrane. This kind of stress stimulus has
profound biochemical effects on endothelial cells grown under flow conditions.
Other evidence, such as the alteration of membrane fluidity in disease states,
suggests that membrane/external flow interactions are important. The PI
hypothesized that the molecular organization of the membrane can be altered by
flow-induced stress, and that this alteration can have physiological
consequences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand molecular interactions, they
will develop a multi-scale continuum / molecular dynamic model of the membrane.
This multi-scale approach will allow us to model fluid flow as a continuum, but
impose its effect on the discrete atoms of the membrane lipids and proteins. As
a result, the length of the simulation will be extended to allow investigation
of long-range motion and order. It is expect this research to make a significant
contribution in molecular dynamics modeling and membrane biology. The
computational portion of this project contains several problems that are well
suited to the abilities of undergraduates. The educational component of this
proposal will be to involve undergraduates in long-term multidisciplinary
research. Undergraduate research and extracurricular work have both been shown
to have a positive impact on undergraduate development.&lt;br/&gt;