* 0134064
* CAREER:  The Mechanics of Web Handling
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2002,08/31/2008
* Eric Mockensturm, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2008
* USD 375,000.00

This CAREER proposal combines a research program on the
fundamental&lt;br/&gt;mechanics of web handing systems with two curriculum
development projects.&lt;br/&gt;The research development plan in web handling is
motivated by the needs of&lt;br/&gt;companies in many industries, including 3M,
Kodak, Procter &amp; Gamble, and SRS&lt;br/&gt;Technologies, to better
understand and more rapidly process thin, flexible&lt;br/&gt;material. These
handling processes produce a wide variety of products such&lt;br/&gt;as carpet,
fabric, shrink-wrap, diapers, and paper towel. Universal issues&lt;br/&gt;that
prevent more efficient operation-such as slip in wound
rolls,&lt;br/&gt;wrinkling, creasing, and vibration-will be studied. The
fundamental&lt;br/&gt;questions answered by this research will allow companies
to more rapidly and&lt;br/&gt;efficiently produce their products. The curriculum
development plan has two&lt;br/&gt;major thrusts. The first thrust will be the
development of two unique&lt;br/&gt;courses concerning the mathematical
modelling of solids and structures.&lt;br/&gt;These courses will expose students
to modelling issues that occur in the&lt;br/&gt;study of web handling systems
and throughout engineering. The second thrust&lt;br/&gt;will be an extensive
overhaul of Penn States required undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;vibrations course. One
section will be combined with the optional&lt;br/&gt;vibrations laboratory
class. Additionally, the studio concept, combining&lt;br/&gt;lecture, laboratory
and recitation into one educational experience, will be&lt;br/&gt;introduced.
Along with traditional lectures, small teams of students will&lt;br/&gt;use
classroom computers to complete activities, allowing them to
more&lt;br/&gt;thoroughly learn the subject.&lt;br/&gt;