* 0134706
* CAREER: Nanoelectronic and Nanophotonic Characterization of Hybrid Hard and Soft Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2007
* Mark Hersam, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 11/30/2007
* USD 519,724.00

This CAREER project addresses complementary scanned probe microscopy (SPM)
techniques for covalently nanopatterning polymer and biological molecules on
silicon surfaces with an integrated research and education plan. One approach
explores feedback controlled lithography as a means for templating hydrogen
passivated silicon surfaces for subsequent wet chemistry in ambient conditions,
and a second approach, termed liquid phase nanolithography (LPN), attempts to
pattern organic molecules onto silicon surfaces directly from solution using
conductive AFM. In addition to nanolithography, this project explores innovative
frequency dependent nanoelectronic and nanophotonic characterization schemes.
Nanoscale impedance spectroscopy (NIS) will be developed to delineate the phase
and amplitude response of current through a conductive AFM tip in response to a
variable frequency applied bias. NIS would provide, in effect, a nanoscale
spatial map of the frequency dependent electronic behavior of hybrid hard and
soft materials. In the case of photoactive materials, photocurrent will be
detected through the conductive AFM tip under sample illumination; whereas,
photons emitted from electroluminescent materials will be measured with a
photodiode and current preamplifier. The basic elements of these research ideas
will be incorporated into a comprehensive interdisciplinary nanoscale education
and outreach program. In an effort to induce interdisciplinary interactions
among graduate and undergraduate students, the research includes domestic and
international collaborations with faculty and industrial representatives from
other academic departments. &lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses
fundamental research issues in a topical area of materials science having
technological relevance. Outreach to undergraduates and underrepresented
minorities will be addressed through a Research Experience for Undergraduates
and Minority Internships in Nanotechnology program that the PI is co-organizing
through the Northwestern University Nanoscale Science and Engineering Center.
Additionally, the PI is involved in developing new web- based nanomaterials
coursework. This undergraduate coursework will then be adapted for the
development of a nanomaterials world module for K-12 students, non-science
majors, and the general public both domestically and abroad. The scope of the
project will expose students to new challenges and research approaches in
materials synthesis, processing, and characterization. An important feature of
the project is the strong emphasis on education, and the integration of research
and education. &lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;