* 0134837
* CAREER:  Granular Media: Experimental Kinetic Theory
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Mark Shattuck, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 06/30/2007
* USD 450,000.00

This CAREER project at CUNY City College will experimentally explore the region
of applicability of kinetic theory applied to idealized and industrially
relevant granular materials. Granular systems are collections of particles that
typically dissipate energy in collisions. A fundamental understanding of these
materials, comparable to our current understanding of fluids and solids, does
not exist today but would have far reaching impacts across many industries, such
as energy production, food processing, and pharmaceuticals. The assumptions used
to derive granular continuum equations for mass, momentum, and energy balance,
by analogy to normal fluids but including energy dissipation, are clearly
violated for some of these granular systems. The goal of the experiments is to
determine the conditions under which these equations produce quantitatively
accurate results and to modify the assumptions to encompass a broader range of
situations. The simple visual nature of these experiments creates an ideal
opportunity to incorporate research into the undergraduate and graduate science
curriculum through a combination of individual focused research opportunities,
an advanced research methods course, and a granular materials course. The
students and post-docs involved in the project will receive training in cutting
edge research methods and will be well prepared for careers in academe, industry
and government&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER development at CUNY City College
project will experimentally determine the region of applicability of competing
theories of granular materials for both idealized and industrially relevant
systems and will incorporate this research experience into the science
curriculum. Granular materials are collections of small particles, such sand in
an hourglass or grains in a silo. A fundamental understanding of granular
systems, comparable to our current understanding of fluids and solids, does not
exist today but would have far reaching impacts across many industries, such as
energy production, food processing, and pharmaceuticals. The basic assumptions
used to derive current theories of granular flow are similar to those of normal
fluids but are clearly violated for some granular systems. The goal of these
experiments is to determine the conditions under which these theories can be
used to calculate accurate results and to extend the theories to encompass a
broader range of situations. The simple visual nature of these experiments
creates an ideal opportunity to incorporate research into the undergraduate and
graduate science curriculum through a combination of individual focused research
opportunities, an advanced research methods course, and a granular materials
course. The students and post-docs involved in the project will receive training
in cutting edge research methods and will be well prepared for careers in
academe, industry and government&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;