* 0134843
* PECASE: Chemical Communication in Marine Ecosystems: Interactions Involving Harmful Algae and Zooplankton
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2008
* Julia Kubanek, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 03/31/2008
* USD 450,000.00

Proposal Title: PECASE: Chemical communication in marine ecosystems:
Interactions involving harmful algae and zooplankton Institution: Georgia Tech
Research Corporation - GA Institute of Technology

Most organisms use chemical signals to assess their environment and to
communicate with other organisms. Chemical cues for the purposes of defense,
mate attraction, habitat selection, and food tracking are known to be crucial,
widespread, and diverse. As our understanding of receptor-ligand interactions,
biosynthetic pathways, sensory biology, hydrodynamics, and ecosystem function
has improved dramatically in the last decade, the opportunity to address the
chemistry of marine biological processes has become more promising than ever
before. This project will focus on the ecological effects of chemical
communication in marine systems, demanding significant integration of biology
and chemistry, involving active participation of young scientists in hypothesis
building and testing, and training students in research methods and
communication. In this study, the Florida red tide dinoflagellate Karenia brevis
(= Gymnodinium breve) will be used as a model system for understanding how
phytoplankton natural products directly mediate critical interactions such as
predation, which affects population and community structure. Phytoplankton
chemistry may also induce food-web cascades affecting multiple ecosystems,
amplified by the movement of blooms over vast distances. Indirect evidence
suggests that some harmful algae use natural toxins to deter grazing by
zooplankters, shellfish, and planktivorous fish, or as allelopathic agents
against competing microalgae, perhaps contributing to bloom proliferation. This
study will test the hypothesis that chemical compounds produced by Karenia
brevis defend it against grazing by the co-occurring copepod Acartia tonsa.
Chemical fractionation guided by copepod behavioral and physiological feeding
assays will be used to isolate antifeedant compounds from K. brevis extracts.
Ecologically active compounds will be identified by spectroscopic techniques
such NMR spectroscopy and mass spectrometry (including LC-MS). This research
will provide adaptable methods for studying food-web and competitive
relationships between unicellular organisms and their enemies, effectively
decoupling chemical from morphological and nutritional factors. Students
involved in interdisciplinary science need to develop strong communication
skills for bridging fields and to acquire a breadth of experience without
sacrificing scientific rigor and depth in their specialty. Towards these ends,
two new educational opportunities have been designed. First, a new seminar
series is planned for graduate and upper-undergraduate students, researchers,
and faculty on the intersection of research, policy, and communication with non-
scientists, using harmful algal blooms as an example of science that holds
public interest. Second, a new interdisciplinary course will be developed for
graduate and upper-undergraduate students on methodologies for the discovery of
novel bioactive molecules that function as cues among aquatic organisms.

This project was originally funded as a CAREER award, and was converted to a
Presidential Early Career Award for Engineers and Scientists (PECASE) award in
May 2004.



