* 0134114
* CAREER:  Microbial Population Dynamics During Polychlorinated Biphenyl Bioremediation in Soils
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2008
* Elisa D'Angelo, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Clark C. K. Liu
* 05/31/2008
* USD 375,002.00

0134114&lt;br/&gt;D'Angelo&lt;br/&gt;There are hundreds of Superfund sites in
the US contaminated with PCBs and 38 states with fish consumption advisories due
to PCB bioaccumulation. Several biogeochemical processes, acting individually or
in combination, attenuate pollutants in soils. However processes are dependent
on environmental factors that regulate the growth and activities of specific
microbial groups or assemblages, as well as bioavailability of chemicals to
degradation. This study investigates the roles of these factors in regulating
microbial community composition and detoxification processes in PCB-contaminated
wetland soils collected from different parts of the country. Detoxification
mechanisms, including a variety of technologies will be investigated in order to
ameliorate a highly chlorinated PCB using indigenous soil organisms. This
research is unique in that it links changes in environmental conditions with
changes in microbial community structure and critical microbial detoxification
activities in soils. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of the proposed
research seeks to evaluate whether environmental selection pressures are
significantly and reproducibly manifested as changes in microbial populations
and PCB transforming activities in different soil environments. For the
educational component of the plan - a new Environmental Biogeochemistry
Laboratory Methods Manual will be published and used as text materials for a new
Environmental Biogeochemistry Summer Field Camp to be held at UK's research
forest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The teaching objective is aimed at integrating
research, teaching and mentoring through the publication of a Biogeochemistry
Laboratory Methods Manual and development of a Biogeochemistry Camp that will be
open to graduate and undergraduate students, post docs, and teachers interested
in environmental chemistry and microbial ecology. The manual will be a user-
friendly guide of step-by-step instructions on some of the latest techniques in
environmental research.&lt;br/&gt;