* 0134650
* CAREER:  Adaptive Architecture for Multicast Service Support in Large-Scale Mobile Ad Hoc Networks: Design and Evaluation Framework
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2002,04/30/2007
* Ahmed Helmy, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Scott F. Midkiff
* 04/30/2007
* USD 375,000.00

This proposal outlines a comprehensive career plan for advancement of research
and education in the field of wireless mobile ad hoc networks. The research plan
consists of two complementary pails. The first is to design and develop a novel
architecture for scalable multicast routing in wide-area ad hoc networks, while
the second part proposes new methodologies for evaluation of wireless ad hoc
routing protocols. The educational plan includes developing wireless networking
courses coupled with a laboratory, in addition to proposing novel methods to
improve student participation in the learning process. Also, proposed to design
a new scalable architecture for multicast services support in large-scale ad hoc
networks, the first of its kind.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
program intends to fully utilize high/v adaptive mechanisms in the various
components of the architecture. Specifically, to design an adaptive zone-based
hierarchy augmented by the notion of contact nodes to increase network coverage.
In addition, to provide novel schemes for multicast service support, based on
adaptive anycast for resource discovery. Also, introduce geographic multicast
address allocation to map groups into rendezvous regions. All the proposed
mechanisms are self-configurable, and promise desirable scaling and robustness
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;