* 0134860
* CAREER:   Computation, Combinatorics, and Reality in Algebraic Geometry, with Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Frank Sottile, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 08/31/2005
* USD 344,577.00

Sottile will work on projects ranging from research in algebraic geometry and
algebraic combinatorics, to strengthening links between algebraic geometry and
applied science, to educational outreach. His work in algebraic geometry will
focus on concrete aspects of flag manifolds and their Schubert varieties,
involving a range of problems from the real Schubert calculus, from extensions
of quantum Schubert calculus, from combinatorial problems in Schubert calculus,
and from the geometry of Schubert varieties. This will deepen our understanding
of computation, combinatorics, and real-number phenomena in algebraic geometry.
Sottile will study structural properties of certain combinatorial Hopf algebras,
work that has applications to polytopes, to the Schubert calculus, and to
certain combinatorial schemes in physics. He is actively engaged in applications
of computational algebraic geometry to other fields,particularly discrete
geometry and the applied sciences. A unifying theme in this scientific work is
studying concrete mathematical objects using computer experimentation to inform
theoretical work.

While algebraic geometry is concerned with abstract questions about solutions to
equations, its value to other disciplines is largely through concrete objects
and computational tools. A major activity of this project is to help disseminate
the modern computational tools from algebraic geometry to other fields,
including the applied sciences, through research collaboration, organizing
conferences, and co-authoring a textbook on algebraic geometry for applied
scientists. Sottile will also organize an outreach program for talented high
school students in Western Massachusetts with the particular goal of serving the
needs of students in nearby urban areas, many of whom come from groups
traditionally underrepresented in science. The intention of this work: the
research, the technology transfer, the service and the outreach, is to provide a
firm foundation for a lifetime of integrated research and educational activities
for Sottile.