* 0134418
* CAREER: Systematic Multiscale Modeling of Directed Assembly in Semiconductor Materials Processing
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2007
* Talid Sinno, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Patrick E. Phelan
* 02/28/2007
* USD 375,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
CTS-0134418&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Talid
Sinno&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Affiliation: University of
Pennsylvania&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: CAREER: Systematic Multiscale
Modeling of Directed Assembly in Semiconductor Materials
Processing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes to develop a synergistic
modeling framework, from continuum level through atomistic simulation, to
improve the understanding of diffusion reaction, and species aggregation during
electronic materials processing. The creation of novel structures at length
scales smaller than those available from traditional top-down fabrication
methods requires a detailed atomistic understanding of the physics and chemistry
governing multicomponent processes. This understanding must be linked also to
macroscopic scale process operating conditions. Potential application areas that
can benefit from such a paradigm include atomistic scale control of bulk dopant
and defect distribution in silicon microelectronics, defect control in other
electronic materials such as SiC, SiGe, and GaAs, and controlled deposition of
multilayered structures for advanced optoelectronic materials. A close coupling
of the analytical framework against available experimental results will be
included in the research program. A primary goal of the educational component of
the project will be to introduce electronic materials processing into the
curriculum choices for chemical engineering majors, particularly at the
University of Pennsylvania, to increase the number of those graduates who move
into this important industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;