* 0134333
* CAREER: Development of Nonlinear Modeling Tools for Analysis, Simulation, and Structural Health Monitoring
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2002,06/30/2009
* Andrew Smyth, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 06/30/2009
* USD 389,159.00

Much of our civil infrastructure is in a severe state of degradation. This
project will develop methods to assess the health of critical structural systems
based on limited information about their vibration response signature, providing
engineers with a set of reliable tools to evaluate their continued viability and
prioritize repair and maintenance within limited budgets. Unlike conventional
structural health monitoring methods (where data is analyzed in an off-
line/batch mode) the project, through an emphasis on algorithm efficiency
criteria, will develop new approaches in adaptive system identification
involving real-time damage detection into a set of application-oriented tools.
These tools will be evaluated through a phased experimental program, involving
numerical simulation, laboratory experimentation, and full-scale
evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;Building on the PI's prior work, the research will show
the potential of nonlinear identification techniques for application in the
structural health monitoring context, and in broader fields of structural
engineering/engineering mechanics. The research objectives are: 1) to develop
hybrid methodologies, circumventing difficulties associated with nonparametric
vs. parametric modeling of nonlinear structural systems for damage detection
purposes; 2) to develop nonlinear real-time identification techniques for
structural health monitoring and active control, and seek to benefit from
alternative sensor technologies; 3) to evaluate limitations in identification of
structural dynamics from low-level excitation or from response measurements only
(i.e., unknown excitation); 4) to evaluate limitations of inferring damage from
vibration sensor arrays that are sparse, and develop cost-effective
methodologies that enable engineers to readily detect structural damage; and 5)
to apply these tools to other engineering challenges, e.g., MEMS, soil-dynamics
and aerospace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complementing the research project, an
integrated educational project is undertaken. This educational project has three
main aspects: 1) the development of a lab facility for repeatable nonlinear
dynamic testing for research and student participation - repeatability achieved
through use of active control to synthesize nonlinear behavior; 2) the
development of a graduate-level course on health monitoring; and 3) a summer
outreach program to engage underprivileged, inner-city, New York high-school
students in the engineering research environment through teaching, field-trips,
laboratory demonstration, and hands-on testing - all in collaboration with
Columbia University's Double Discovery Center. &lt;br/&gt;