* 0134789
* CAREER:  Understanding Elevated-Temperature Grain Boundary Deformation Processes of High-Temperature Structural Alloys through Grain Boundary Engineering
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Carl Boehlert, Alfred University NY State College of Ceramics
* Continuing Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 07/31/2005
* USD 317,254.00

This project aims at applying grain-boundary engineering to develop high-
temperature structural alloys such as Ni-based superalloy and Ti2AlNb
intermetallics. Major objective of the proposed project is to develop better
understanding of the inter-relationship of processing steps, grain boundary
character distribution (GBCD), and creep behavior of high-temperature structural
alloys. The main goals of this study are ; (1) to process microstructures with a
distribution of random and special grain boundaries; (2) to measure grain
boundary character distribution (GBCD); (3) to perform creep testing of varied
microstructures; (4) to model the effects of grain size, grain boundary sliding,
and grain boundary character on mechanical behavior. The project leads to the
development of a processing methodology useful to enhance the mechanical
behavior of high-temperature structural materials. The educational outreach
component incorporates the research tools used in the research portion of the
project and contributes to an increase in the number of undergraduate students
majoring in materials science and engineering
(MS&amp;E).&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The research develops new understanding of
the deformation mechanisms of structural materials beyond the present state of
the art through grain-boundary engineering. The results are applicable for
development of better materials for high-temperature applications.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;