* 0134933
* CAREER: Dynamics of Self-Assembly at Strained Metal Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Karsten Pohl, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 08/31/2007
* USD 450,000.00

This CAREER award will fund a project whose goal is the development of a better
understanding of the fundamental mechanism of self-organizing behavior at
surfaces and the significance of interfacial stress, through direct dynamic
measurements of the driving forces of self-assembly using scanning tunneling
microscopy (STM). Two-dimensional nano-arrays in thermal equilibrium of large-
scale order and size uniformity will be grown on strained interfaces between a
bimetallic atomic layer and a dissimilar substrate in ultrahigh vacuum.
Combining the structural information (from unique real-time variable-temperature
STM measurements) with quantum-size effects in the electronic structure (from
high-resolution UV photoemission) will guide the development of new dynamic
models to describe the evolution and properties of nanoscale structures on
surfaces. This research will form an integral part of the proposed educational
outreach program. The newly designed course entitled "Modern Aspects of
Materials Physics for High School Teachers" and the proposed "Summer Materials
Science Institute for High School Students" will address the need to improve the
science achievement for students by enriching science teaching in the high
school classroom. In addition the graduate and undergraduate students involved
in this research will receive training in state of the art techniques, providing
them with a sound basis for their future scientific
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spontaneous formation of organized nanoscale
structures on surfaces has been observed in many systems. They are thought to
arise because of a delicate balance between long-range strain field interactions
and short-range chemical forces that stabilizes these structures. A detailed
understanding of the driving forces, however, does not exist. The goal of this
CAREER project is to identify and control these interactions that have the
potential to surpass standard patterning technologies and thus, to lead the way
to higher density magnetic storage, more selective catalytic materials, higher
sensitivity chemical sensors, and perhaps, quantum computers. Unique real-time
measurements of the dynamics of individual atoms self-ordering into nano-arrays
will be performed on a home-built (scanning tunneling) microscope. The results
will guide the development of new dynamic models to describe the evolution of
nanoscale structures on surfaces. This research will form an integral part of
the proposed educational outreach program. The newly designed course entitled
"Modern Aspects of Materials Physics for High School Teachers" and the proposed
"Summer Materials Science Institute for High School Students" will address the
need to improve the science achievement for students by enriching science
teaching in the high school classroom. In addition the graduate and
undergraduate students involved in this research will receive training in state
of the art techniques, providing them with a sound basis for their future
scientific careers.