* 0134128
* CAREER: Steady and Transient Dynamics of Catalyst-Assisted Combustion in Micro-Scale Power Generators
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2002,10/31/2007
* Hong Im, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Westmoreland
* 10/31/2007
* USD 375,000.00

A major limitation to the wide use of MEMS and other micro-scale devices is the
availability of suitable power sources. Combustion is an attractive power source
because of its high energy density, but there are major technical challenges
including ignition from cold start and control of sustained combustion. Given
the high surface-to-volume ratio inherent in a microcombustor, there is
attraction in using heterogeneous catalytic reactions to promote ignition and to
extend flammability limits. This is a computational and experimental study of
the physical and chemical processes relevant to this
strategy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advanced computational methods are developed and
validated with experimental measurements and parametric studies are done
specifically targeted at small-scale combustion systems. Two canonical
configurations are studied. First, stagnation-point flow over a catalytic
surface is analyzed by modifying existing transient one-dimensional stagnation-
point flow code with detailed surface and gas-phase chemical kinetics.
Parametric studies address various combustion regimes, modified ignition and
extinction limits due to catalytic reaction, and overall combustion performance.
Also, the effects of transient modulation of the surface temperature and inlet
flow are investigated as a potential control methodology. Second, a microchannel
combustor is modeled by developing a high-fidelity multidimensional direct
simulation code providing detailed temporal and spatial information on the
combustor process. The feasibility of a nonpremixed combustion mode (using a
coaxial supply of fuel and oxidizer) as a means of enhancement of ignition and
heat generation is assessed. For both configurations, experimental measurements
of temperature distribution and product species compositions are compared with
computational results to validate embedded submodels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As an
education program, interactive computational fluid dynamics (CFD) tools are
designed for undergraduate and graduate students in thermo-fluid sciences. These
include application packages that are compatible with widely used kinetic
simulation packages and web-based tools for solving differential equations and
simulating data on reacting flows. &lt;br/&gt;