* 0134208
* CAREER:  Optimal Diversification of Multiple Energy Sources
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2007
* Patrick Chapman, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Dagmar Niebur
* 03/31/2007
* USD 374,502.00

Our dependence on fossil fuel is causing social, political, technological,
economical, and environmental problems. The search for alternative energy has
given us many choices for replacing fossil-based energy. However, the choices
come with their own set of advantages, disadvantages, and risks. This integrated
research and education project will prepare students for solving energy problems
involving alternative energy sources.

The goal of this project is to make the best use of available energy sources by
combining them. Energy sources, including photovoltaic, hydrogen, and wind, each
can be converted to electrical energy such that it can be combined efficiently.
The most effective means to combine and manipulate electricity is power
electronics. In this project, new power electronic converters will be developed
that combine multiple energy sources in an optimal way. This not only requires
advances in control and topology - as multiple-input power converter technology
is undeveloped - but will also require a thorough assessment of trade-offs in
combining different energy sources. This will be supported by improved energy
awareness among all engineering students through new courses and through more
integration of energy-related topics in existing coursework.

The research portion of the project will culminate in both theoretical
algorithms and a hardware demonstration. The prototype will combine energy from
at least three different sources and will power at least two varieties of loads.
It is intended that this will be the first converter of its kind, and inspire a
new approach to electric power