* 0134890
* CAREER: Public-Sector Decision Modeling for Facility Location and Service Delivery
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2008
* Michael Johnson, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2008
* USD 399,491.00

This project will develop prescriptive planning models to addresses two
important problems: provision of subsidized housing for low-income families and
social services for the elderly. These application areas are important because
the recipients of these two types of services are usually considered society's
most deserving", yet in practice these services are delivered with little or no
use of quantitative planning methodologies that have become common in other
domains, such as transportation, medicine, emergency and police services and the
environment. Moreover, proactive planning for these two types of service
delivery is difficult due to the lack of knowledge regarding: forecasting of
demand for services; measuring dollar-valued and non-dollar-valued impacts of
alternative policies, and choosing policies that balance competing concerns of
efficiency, equity and effectiveness. Key analytical tools to be used in this
project are: optimization-based planning models from operations
research/management science (OR/MS) to generate policy alternatives given
limited resources and specific objectives; urban economic models to characterize
housing and labor markets and to identify impacts of various potential
configurations of subsidized housing; forecasting models based on statistics and
geographic information systems (GIS) to estimate demands for senior services,
and group negotiations and decisionmaking to identify most-preferred policies to
implement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will result in a number of
important contributions to quantitative public policy research and teaching.
First, it will enable the comprehensive evaluation of benefits and costs of
subsidized housing location and elderly service provision. Second, it will
enable the design of efficient strategies for solving difficult optimization
problems associated with these two domains. Third, through use of actual agency
data, researchers and policymakers may be persuaded that these planning models
could improve the quality of service provision as compared to current practice.
Fourth, it will provide a framework for the design and implementation of
multiple-stakeholder decision support systems (DSS) for subsidized housing
location and elderly service provision. Last, it will enable schools and
departments of public policy and public administration to better motivate course
offerings in MS/OR and information systems/information technology (IS/IT), and
to integrate these course more smoothly into traditional
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is important more generally because
the models it generates will help those who manage or advocate for subsidized
housing and elderly service delivery to better justify policy initiatives that
may seem controversial, at least in the short run. Many of the political
controversies arising in subsidized housing and elderly service delivery are
characterized by: incomplete data on current conditions, an inability to
identify realistic outcomes associated with alternative potential policy
initiatives, and great difficulty in negotiating towards a single policy
alternative acceptable to all parties. This academic research is not intended to
transform policy analysts or political activists into experts in OR/MS or IS/IT,
nor will it eliminate ambiguity and uncertainty surrounding these facets of
public-sector facility location and service delivery. However, the research may
persuade some actors in policy and political debates that the use of planning
models in general, along with more accurate data estimates and well-defined ways
to discuss policy alternatives, could result in outcomes in which society is
better off as compared to traditional policy-analytic and political advocacy
methods. Finally, this research will enable students of public policy and public
administration to more readily avail themselves of OR/MS- and IS/IT- based
quantitative planning and implementation tools that business school graduates
have used for years to improve the efficiency of private-sector organizations.