* 0134935
* Climate Sensitivity to Absorbing Tropospheric Aerosols in Experiments With a General Circulation Model
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Jan Perlwitz, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 02/28/2006
* USD 258,384.00

Direct radiative forcing by absorbing tropospheric aerosols such as carbonaceous
and soil dust aerosols is one of the most uncertain factors in climate change.
The main objective of this project is to improve understanding of the climate
response to forcing by these absorbing tropospheric aerosols for present day
conditions. The PI will conduct sensitivity experiments using the NASA Goddard
Institute of Space Studies General Circulation Model (GCM), plus other GCMs as
available and as time and resources allow, e.g., the Community Climate System
Model. He will analyze the response of main climate variables such as surface
temperature, precipitation, cloud cover, sea level pressure and geopotential
height on the global scale. Global and zonal averages, the horizontal patterns
and the variability in time of these variables between different experiments as
well as between experiments and observations, will be compared. From these
analyses, the PI will draw conclusions about the uncertainty, both in the
spatial structure and in the magnitude of the climate response in simulations of
the present day climate due to the uncertainty in the radiative parameters and
the vertical distribution of the absorbing tropospheric aerosols. The PI will
also estimate what accuracy of these parameters is necessary to obtain reliable
results from climate simulations with carbonaceous and soil dust aerosols.

This research is important because atmospheric aerosols strongly impact the
atmosphere's radiation budget and new knowledge about aerosol-radiation
interactions will improve the ability of climate modelers to project future
climates.