* 0134032
* CAREER: Electrically Active Organic/Inorganic Hybrid Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2008
* Zhonghua Peng, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 01/31/2008
* USD 405,000.00

Using a modular building block strategy, conjugated molecules and polymers
containing polyoxometalate (POM) clusters covalently linked in a variety of
architectures will be synthesized for the first time. The proposed research
stems from a recent discovery of a novel reaction protocol which allows the
efficient and facile functionalization of POM clusters with a variety of
aromatic amines and the recent demonstration that functionalized POM clusters
can undergo Pd-catalyzed organic coupling reactions. The proposed hybrid systems
not only represent truly new and novel classes of functional materials where
strong electronic interactions exist between delocalized d-electrons, they are
also expected to possess extremely interesting electrical and optical
properties. Preliminary studies clearly demonstrate the suitability of the
proposed modular building block approach.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The
educational goal of this Career Development plan is threefold: to be an
excellent mentor producing creative and productive scientists, an efficient
instructor promoting chemical science education, and a passionate community
member assisting the local school district with its science education. A new
teaching style has been brought to the Organic Chemistry class and students'
response has been extremely positive. Strong efforts have been and will continue
to be made towards training science teachers for the local community and
exposing young high school students to research laboratories. The proposed
research is geared toward discovery of new chemistry and innovative materials.
The planned educational activities represent combined efforts in effective
education and community involvement. They form a unified career plan, a journey
toward becoming a creative researcher and an effective educator.&lt;br/&gt;