* 0134034
* CAREER: Stress Redistribution Imaging for Rock Failure Prediction
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2008
* Erik Westman, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* John Daniel
* 12/31/2008
* USD 401,650.00

CMS-0134034&lt;br/&gt;PI: Erik Westman&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Virginia
Polytechnic Institute and State University&lt;br/&gt;Title: "CAREER: Stress
Redistribution Imaging for Rock Failure Prediction"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) research and education project uses
high-resolution, three-dimensional tomographic imaging to better understand and
communicate the process of failure in rock. Accomplishing the ultimate goal of
predicting rock mass failure will result in significantly reduced fatalities,
lowered construction costs, and increased environmental protection. Failure
prediction extends to all aspects of rock mechanics including tunnels, mines,
rock slopes, earthquakes, waste repositories, and bridge and dam abutments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To predict rock failure, it is quite helpful to monitor
the redistribution of stresses within the rock. Recent advances in computational
power have allowed this to be done using acoustic waves and tomographic imaging.
The basic principal behind monitoring the redistribution of stresses is that
microfractures within the rock are closed under increased loading, allowing the
acoustic wave to travel at a greater velocity and with less attenuation. This
method has been used successfully in the laboratory and has had growing, but
poorly founded, application in the field. This project will put the technique of
imaging stress redistribution in rock on a sound theoretical and practical
foundation by 1) standardizing methods and 2) extending results of prior studies
into the gap between laboratory- and field-scale studies. Educational efforts
related to rock failure prediction will also be
enhanced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific tasks associated with both education and
research include 1) generating three-dimensional tomographic images to observe
relevant alterations to the fabric of rock samples loaded to failure, and 2)
using those images to calibrate numerical modeling results. By collecting data
as rock samples are loaded, time-lapse animations will be developed which will
assist in the communication of stress-analysis to undergraduates. Additional
educational efforts focus on transitioning from a presentational teaching method
to a constructivist model for two of the proposer's undergraduate courses and
developing a graduate-level course for understanding failure through coupled
analysis of imaging and numerical modeling results. &lt;br/&gt;