* 0134433
* PECASE: Integrated Modeling and Experimental Evaluations of Competition Between PCE-Dehalogenating Populations: Implications for In Situ Bioremediation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2002,04/30/2010
* Jennifer Becker, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Paul L. Bishop
* 04/30/2010
* USD 375,030.00

&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: PECASE: Integrated Modeling and Experimental
Evaluations of Competition Between PCE-Dehalogenating Populations: Implications
for In Situ Bioremediation&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Maryland College
Park&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chlorinated solvents tetrachloroethene (PCE) and
trichloroethene (TCE) are among the most common contaminants of groundwater. The
toxicity and physical properties of these compounds, along with the frequency
with which they are detected, mean that cleanup of groundwater systems
contaminated with PCE and TCE is both critical to protecting human health and
technically challenging. Biological transformation of PCE is limited to
anaerobic reductive dehalogenation. From a remediation standpoint, only complete
dechlorination of PCE to ethene is an acceptable outcome, because lightly
chlorinated ethenes also pose a health hazard. Unfortunately, the potential for
complete detoxification of highly chlorinated ethenes is frequently not realized
in situ, resulting in the accumulation of lightly chlorinated ethenes. An
improved understanding of the factors that influence the extent of PCE
transformation that occurs in impacted environments is needed to better predict
contaminant fate and transport, protect human health, and improve the
effectiveness of bioremediation strategies. The proposed research addresses a
specific type of microbial interaction, competition between dehalogenating
populations for chlorinated ethenes and electron donors. Competition between
dehalogenating populations may have a major impact on the fate of chlorinated
ethenes in situ because these organisms differ with respect to transformation
rates, and even more importantly, the extent of dechlorination.&lt;br/&gt;The
goals of the proposed research are:(1) to determine how competition among
dehalogenating populations is influenced by the intrinsic biokinetics of the
dehalogenating populations, the nature and concentrations of the available
electron donors, and chlorinated ethene concentrations; and (2) to develop tools
for predicting the outcome of competition between dehalogenating populations,
the impact on chlorinated ethene fate, and the success of bioaugmentation
strategies. These goals will be accomplished using an integrated approach
involving modeling predictions and verification in a series of increasingly
complex experimental systems, including defined co-culture competition
experiments and field surveys involving microbiological and chemical
characterization of groundwater at PCE-impacted sites. Quantification of key
PCE-dehalogenating populations in groundwater systems will be achieved through
16S rRNA-based methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was originally funded
as a CAREER award, and was converted to a Presidential Early Career Award for
Engineers and Scientists (PECASE) award in May 2004.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;