* 0134787
* CAREER: Synthesis and Characterization of One-Dimensional Chemical Nanostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2007
* Hongkun Park, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph L. Templeton
* 01/31/2007
* USD 452,325.00

The Advanced Materials Program in the Division of Chemistry makes this Career
award to Harvard University to study one-dimensional chemical nanostructures.
With this award, Professor Hongkun Park will study the synthesis of large-
diameter Single Walled carbon Nanotubes (SWNTs) with controlled diameter and
helicity by chemical vapor deposition using well-isolated catalyst nanoparticles
with uniform size distributions. Scanned-probe microscopy (SPM) will be used to
determine electromechanical properties and the coupling between global radial
deformation and electron transport properties of these SWNTs. Synthesis of
individual single-crystalline nanowires prepared from barium titanate and
related compounds and their subsequent characterization by variable-temperature
SPM will also be carried out with this award. The SPM to study ferroelectric and
piezoelectric properties of nanowires should provide fundamental knowledge that
governs the thermodynamics as well as the kinetics of phase transition and
polarization switching. Electrostatic force microscopy will be used to 'read'
and 'write' by measuring the local electric polarization on the nanowires. The
PI, with the help of other faculty members, will give lectures in materials
science and nanotechnology to middle school students as part of the "Early
College Awareness Program" to attract students to science related studies and
careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large-diameter Single Walled carbon Nanotubes
(SWNTs) with controlled diameter and helicity will be synthesized by chemical
vapor deposition using well-isolated catalyst nanoparticles with uniform size
distributions, and these nanotubes may have potential electromechanical
applications in devices. In addition, single-crystalline ferroelectric nanowires
will be prepared from barium titanate and related compounds and their
ferroelectric and piezoelectric properties determined by variable-temperature
scanned-probe microscopy. These experiments will determine phase transitions of
individual nanowires as a function of temperature and nanowire diameter. "Early
College Awareness Program" will expose school students in different aspects of
science, and will attract them for advanced studies in science.