* 0134377
* CAREER:  Structure and Dynamics of Disordered and Out-of-Equilibrium Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2007
* Robert Leheny, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 02/28/2007
* USD 450,000.00

This CAREER development project considers an common and intriguing aspect of
condensed matter systems: Many naturally occurring, or artificially structured,
materials fail to achieve thermodynamic equilibrium. In some cases this is
desirable, as in molecular beam epitaxy. But in bulk materials, understanding
out-of-equilibrium behavior is crucial to achieve a complete description of the
system. This project involves the development of an integrated education and
research program designed to play a leading role in advancing the frontier field
of disordered and out-of-equilibrium systems. Susceptibility studies, which
characterize macroscopic response, and x-ray and neutron scattering, which
directly probe microscopic behavior, will be applied in concert to model
disordered systems such as liquid crystals, sheared fluids, and quenched glass
formers. The objective is to illuminate essential features of the out-of-
equilibrium "state" and to test new theoretical paradigms. In parallel with
this, an interdisciplinary course on the science of complex fluids will be
initiated at Johns Hopkins and an undergraduate thesis program for Physics and
Astronomy majors will be developed. Collectively, these efforts, along with the
coordination of community outreach between Hopkins and local public schools,
will seek to create a prominent and productive program on the physics of out-of-
equilibrium systems that strives to be inclusive of young scientists and
potential scientists.

This is a CAREER development project in the field of condensed matter physics.
In many common materials, the microscopic constituents are subjected to forces
that prevent the materials from organizing in their most energy efficient and
simplest state. These forces can be "intrinsic" as in the forces between
molecules that lead to a liquid cooling into glass, instead of a crystal, or
"external", as for a fluid confined within tiny randomly connected pores. Again
the fluid is prevented from reaching solid state with long-range order. In
either case the resulting disorganization creates unique material properties
that pose unusual challenges for physics. This project will develop an
integrated education and research program designed to play a leading role in
advancing physical insight into such "disordered" materials. The research
strategy will involve experimental comparisons of different realizations of
disorder in order to elucidate potentially universal features that might form
the basis for a broad theoretical understanding. In parallel with this work, an
interdisciplinary course on the science of these materials targeted at upper-
level undergraduates and beginning graduate students will be initiated at Johns
Hopkins and an undergraduate thesis program for Physics and Astronomy majors
will be developed. Collectively, these efforts, along with the coordination of
community outreach between Hopkins and local public schools, will seek to
advance the science of disorder in a manner that strives to be inclusive of
young scientists and potential scientists.

