* 0134226
* CAREER: Multi-Scale Experiments of Fracture in Elastic-Plastic Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Jeffrey Kysar, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 06/30/2007
* USD 374,244.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research and educational program consists of
developing a multi-scale&lt;br/&gt;experimental program to study the mechanics
of fracture in elastic-plastic&lt;br/&gt;materials. The research is intended to
complement and guide multi-scale&lt;br/&gt;simulations of fracture in elastic-
plastic materials. The experiments will&lt;br/&gt;focus on understanding the
behavior of cracks that exist along the grain&lt;br/&gt;boundary of symmetric
tilt bicrystals of either pure aluminum or pure&lt;br/&gt;copper. In such a
specimen there is a well known, but poorly understood,&lt;br/&gt;phenomenon
known as directional dependence of fracture. If a crack is&lt;br/&gt;introduced
along the grain boundary, the amount it grows macroscopically&lt;br/&gt;depends
upon the direction within the grain boundary that it propagates.
A&lt;br/&gt;judicious choice of crystallographic orientation and loading
techniques&lt;br/&gt;will ensure that the mechanical properties at the
macroscopic length scale&lt;br/&gt;are identical for both cracks, yet the amount
of macroscopic growth will&lt;br/&gt;be different. Thus the explanation for the
directional dependence must&lt;br/&gt;depend upon deformation mechanisms at the
smaller length scales as well as&lt;br/&gt;the interaction of the deformation
mechanisms across length scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the experiments, cracks
will be introduced and propagated in opposite&lt;br/&gt;directions within the
grain boundary of symmetric tilt bicrystals. The&lt;br/&gt;structure of the
asymptotic deformation fields will be measured under&lt;br/&gt;plane strain
conditions to investigate a certain type of strain&lt;br/&gt;discontinuity,
known as kink shear discontinuity, that is predicted by&lt;br/&gt;theory and
observed in some materials under certain conditions. The&lt;br/&gt;existence of
kink shear discontinuities depends critically upon
plastic&lt;br/&gt;constitutive relations at very small length scales. The next
set of&lt;br/&gt;experiments will be to measure the directional dependence of
fracture&lt;br/&gt;under both a monotonic and cyclic loading to document the
degree of crack&lt;br/&gt;growth in different directions along a grain boundary.
The final set of&lt;br/&gt;experiments will measure the lattice curvature of the
crystal close to the&lt;br/&gt;crack tip to ascertain the density of
geometrically necessary dislocations&lt;br/&gt;which play an important role in
strain gradient plasticity. All the&lt;br/&gt;experiments will be simulated with
the discrete dislocation plasticity&lt;br/&gt;technique in collaboration with
other researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational component is to reach
out to secondary schools in the&lt;br/&gt;neighborhoods around Columbia
University, particularly in Harlem, to&lt;br/&gt;develop a science module that
is suitable for students in their final two&lt;br/&gt;years of high school with
the goal of inspiring them to continue their&lt;br/&gt;educations. The module
will demonstrate that materials are made of&lt;br/&gt;discrete atoms by
discussing the phenomenon of diffraction. To do so, the&lt;br/&gt;students will
first gain intuition into the diffraction phenomenon by&lt;br/&gt;identifying
and matching symmetries in diffraction gratings and the&lt;br/&gt;related
diffraction patterns that are created with a standard laser&lt;br/&gt;pointer.
Then the crystallographic aspects of face-centered cubic metals&lt;br/&gt;and
the symmetries of a cube will be introduced. Finally the students
will&lt;br/&gt;be asked to identify the two-fold, three-fold, and four-fold
rotation&lt;br/&gt;symmetries in separate Laue back reflection x-ray diffraction
patterns and&lt;br/&gt;correlate the patterns with the crystallographic
orientations that exhibit&lt;br/&gt;the same sets of symmetries. Thus the
students will identify the&lt;br/&gt;symmetries inherent in crystals without
having to understand any of the&lt;br/&gt;details of the diffraction
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;