* 0134629
* CAREER:  High-Performance Ultra-Wideband Radio Design
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Won Namgoong, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Rongqing Hui
* 05/31/2007
* USD 329,865.00

0134629&lt;br/&gt;Namgoong&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultra-wideband (UWB) radio
systems are emerging as one of the key technologies for high bandwidth digital
wireless communications. The rationale for deploying UWB radio systems lies in
the benefits of exceptionally wide bandwidths: covertness (very low power
density signal), very accurate ranging (down to a few centimeters), good
material penetration (at low frequencies) and high performance in dense
multipath (because of fine time resolution).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common
concern among UWB proponents is that an integrated, high-performance radio may
not be achievable, because of the extremely high bandwidth, dynamic range, and
clock speeds required. Such concern appears to lead to two alternative
development paths. In the first, the UWB radio system is scaled down to operate
at a much reduced bandwidth, compromising much of the benefits of an UWB system.
In the other, advanced process technology with numerous discrete components is
employed, albeit at the expense of significantly higher cost and power
consumption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal, the PI presents a promising
approach to realizing an integrated high-performance UWB radio using today's
low-cost standard CMOS technology without compromising the signal bandwidth. To
meet the design requirements of a high-performance UWB radio, which are
currently far from being practical, he proposes an architecture that channelizes
the incoming signal into frequency subbands, then processes them in parallel. By
channelizing the incoming signal, the circuit requirements in both the analog
front-end and digital back-end are dramatically relaxed, especially when large
narrowband interfering signals are present.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will demonstrate the feasibility and effectiveness of the proposed architecture
for reception and transmission of UWB signals. He will provide a complete design
framework based on a clear understanding of various design options and the
corresponding trade-offs in performance and implementation complexity.
Furthermore, he will demonstrate the feasibility and the advantages of the
proposed architecture by realizing it on silicon. The goal is to design a high-
performance single-chip UWB radio.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many of the concepts and
techniques developed in the proposed research are not limited to UWB systems.
They can be generalized to other high-bandwidth communication systems, such as
high-speed satellite and wireline communication systems. A specific application
that he plans to pursue in this project based on the techniques developed for
the UWB radio is multimodal radios, which are radios that support multiple
communication standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The above research plan is coupled
with an education plan that describes the PI's educational motivation and
strategy at all levels of teaching. It includes specific plans to teach students
how to learn, introduce a new class on communication transceiver design, instill
high-quality oral and written skills, train research students with broad
technical backgrounds, assist with university-sponsored outreach programs aimed
at helping the neighboring area, and pursue applied research that is guided by
the needs of our society.&lt;br/&gt;