* 0134191
* RUI: Molecular Phylogenetics and Biogeography of the Poison Frogs (Family Dendrobatidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Kyle Summers, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2005
* USD 146,521.00

This award is to fund an investigation of the systematics and biogeography of
the poison frogs (family Dendrobatidae) in Peru and other parts of Amazonia. The
award will fund the collection of specimens in the field, and the analysis of
DNA from tissue samples in the laboratory.

Tissue samples (toe clips) will be collected from poison frogs from remote parts
of the Peruvian rainforest. These and previously obtained samples from other
regions of Amazonia will be used to obtain DNA sequences from six gene regions
via molecular genetic analysis. The DNA sequence variation among populations and
species will be used in a phylogenetic analysis of the systematic relationships
of the poison frog family. Information on DNA sequence variation among
populations will also be used to investigate associations between genetic
divergence and geographic barriers to gene flow in Amazonia. Finally, the
information obtained on the systematic relationships of the poison frogs will be
used to investigate evolutionary associations between life history and
ecological characteristics of the poison frogs, including parental care, egg and
clutch size, tadpole deposition pool size, tadpole cannibalism, mating systems,
and sexual dimorphism.

This research will provide the first thorough analysis of systematic
relationships in the poison frog family. It will also provide an important
contribution to recent debates about why the Amazon River basin supports such a
huge number of species. Most of these debates have centered on the contribution
of specific geographic barriers to genetic divergence, and this research will
directly address the relevant hypotheses. The systematic results from this
research will be used to investigate important questions concerning the
evolutionary ecology of the poison frogs in a comparative framework.