* 0134476
* PECASE:Development of Bioactive Implants Using Calcium Phosphate Nanopowders.
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2008
* Susmita Bose, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Marc S. Ingber
* 12/31/2008
* USD 422,500.00

Proposal Title: PECASE: Development of Bioactive Implants using Calcium
Phosphate Nanopowders. Institution: Washington State University

The PI proposes to investigate the synthesis of calcium phosphate based ceramic
nano-podwers and its use in the development of bioactive bone implants of
improved mechanical properties. The proposal includes a very well planned
/structured research plan addressing key aspects from the synthesis of the
material (nanopowders) to processing of various composites for implants, to the
detailed physical/mechanical and biological characterization. The proposal
brings a variety of skills to the project, all very well integrated. An entire
interdisciplinary program/plan seems to be associated with this proposal. The PI
is a very active outstanding young faculty who has a multidisciplinary
background, interacts with researchers with various backgrounds and expertise,
and is an expert herself on the main experimental techniques to be used within
the proposed research activities. The research questions address in the research
plan are highly relevant and the approaches are novel. The proposed level of
characterization of mechanical properties of the implant materials/scaffolding
materials is consistent with the current needs of the tissue-engineering field.
The results of this investigation may significantly contribute to the
advancement in the development of scaffolds for bone tissue engineering.

This project was originally funded as a CAREER award, and was converted to a
Presidential Early Career Award for Engineers and Scientists (PECASE) award in
May 2004.