* 0134023
* CAREER:  Self-Assembly Through Water-Mediated Interactions:  A New Statistical Thermodynamics and Simulations Approach
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/2001,12/31/2007
* Shekhar Garde, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 12/31/2007
* USD 374,965.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;CTS-0134255&lt;br/&gt;Garde, Shekhar&lt;br/&gt;Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the CAREER proposal is to
develop a successful research program for quantitative molecular modeling of
biomolecular self-assembly processes in solution using fundamental understanding
of the underlying water-mediated interactions. It presents a vision for combing
statistical mechanical theories with novel efficient molecular simulation
techniques to develop a generalized approach to study thermodynamic, structural,
and kinetic aspects of biomolecular interactions. Quantitative modeling of
biomolecules in solution, in general, and proteins in particular is of interest
to chemical engineers because of its direct relevance to biotech and
pharmaceutical applications, designing novel self-assembling materials, and
applications in molecular medicine. This project focuses specifically on the T,
P, and salt and cosolvent effects on protein stability and interactions in
solution. To this end, the specific steps in the proposed research
are:&lt;br/&gt;1. (a) To quantify, using atomically detailed simulations and
theory, interactions between various "archetype" (building blocks or protein
constituents) solutes mediated by water.&lt;br/&gt; (b) To develop, for the
first time, an extensive library of the distance dependent free energies of
solute-solute interactions in water- the potentials of mean force (PMFs) - for
archetype solutes as a function of temperature, pressure, and salt and cosolvent
concentration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. To develop a general and highly
efficient statistical mechanical approach that integrates water-mediated
interactions contained in the PMF-library for applications to a variety of self-
assembly processes in water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. To apply this predictive
approach to study of protein thermodynamics as a function of various
environmental stresses. Perform complementary large-scale explicit water
simulations for selected test systems for investigation of further mechanistic
details, assessment of predictions, and fine-tuning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;