* 0134255
* CAREER: Facilitated Ion Transport in Nanostructured Titanosilicates
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/2001,11/30/2007
* Hugh Hillhouse, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 11/30/2007
* USD 374,981.00

Abstract CTS-0134255 Hillhouse, Hugh W. Purdue Univesity

Semiconductor nanowires that exhibit quantum-size effects are predicted to have
revolutionary thermoelectric transport properties, potentially resulting in
solid-state cooling devices with efficiencies greater than vapor-compression
refrigeration technology. However, in order to realize such devices, continuous
wires must be synthesized with diameters much smaller than their thermal de
Broglie wavelength to reach the quantum confinement regime. One technique being
investigated to synthesize such nanowires is a template assisted approach in
which ordered nanoporous materials such as microporous zeolites, mesoporous
silica (i.e. SBA-15, MCM-41), and anodic alumina are used as passive hosts to
template the diameter and form of the wire. However, nanowires with a
sufficiently small diameter have not yet been realized, and in the smallest pore
materials attempts have failed due to mass transport limitations. It is proposed
that this limitation can be overcome by using electrochemical growth techniques
with a new class of titanosilicate whose nanostructured framework facilitates
cation transport.

This new class of titanosilicate, designated as ETS, was first reported in 1989.
Several framework topologies have been identified that have micropores ranging
from just under 0.4 nm up to 0.8 nm. One structure in particular (Sr-ETS-4) has
recently been shown to be possess extraordinary gas separation properties for
N2/CH4, N2/O2, and Ar/O2 separations. A key feature that is unique to all of the
ETS structures is the presence of continuous titania chains (-O-Ti-O-Ti-) that
run parallel to the micropores. Each titanium unit in the chain carries two
units of negative charge and must be balanced by cations in the micropore. This
unique nanostructure is fundamentally different from classical zeolites, and is
hypothesized to facilitate cation transport though the structure by acting as a
rope to pull cations through the framework. This 'rope' may be 'pulled'
electrochemically by reducing a framework cation at one end of the pore. This
creates a state of charge imbalance in the structure and induces a series of
correlated cation hops that pull an additional cation into the framework at the
opposite end of the pore. In the process, the cathode grows through the
framework forming an array of nanowires that mimic the pores. This phenomenon
will be investigated in a body of proposed research that focuses on:

Synthesizing high quality single crystals of ETS-10, ETS-4, and related
structures.

Understanding the fundamentals ion transport in these unique nanostructured
materials by using complex impedance spectroscopy to examine ion conductivities,
activation energies, and relaxation frequencies for Group IA, Group IIA, gold,
lead, bismuth, and tellurium cations.

Electrochemical growth of sub-nanometer wires in the pores of ETS frameworks for
the development of thermoelectric devices.

This multidisciplinary research is at the cross roads of engineering, chemistry,
physics, and materials science, and is one part of an integrated education and
research plan that seeks to: (1) train and mentor graduate students in a
multidisciplinary environment to become creative independent researchers who
have the background and skills to discover and develop new ideas in the area of
nanotechnology, (2) actively encourage and support undergraduate research
participation, and (3) develop and implement a new teaching approach that
utilizes student authorship of web based content to facilitate lifelong learning
and engage student participation in the context of a new course on
nanostructured materials chemistry.