* 0134750
* CAREER: The Physics of Relativistic Jets from Multiwavelength Observations
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2007
* Rita Sambruna, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 03/31/2007
* USD 387,170.00

AST 0134750 Rita Sambruna

Dr. Sambruna, of George Mason University in Fairfax, Virginia, is awarded a
grant to continue her observational, multi-wavelength studies of relativistic
jets. These jets somehow form near the centers of active galaxies, and are
thought to originate from black holes. These enormous jets extend to many times
the size of the galaxy itself. Dr. Sambruna's research will take advantage of
new and upcoming instrumentation in order to probe the underlying physics of
these poorly understood phenomena. The proposed observations include facilities
such as the Hubble Space Telescope and the Chandra X-ray telescope in space, the
ground-based radio Very Large Array and Very Long Baseline Array, and the
upcoming VERITAS (Very Energetic Radiation Imaging Telescope Array System)
ground-based gamma-ray observatory. She will address questions such as the
origin of the multi-wavelength emission, the mechanism for particle
acceleration, and the calculation of kinetic energy in the jets.

Dr. Sambruna will also use her grant to enhance her educational activities. She
will implement peer instruction techniques into her introductory astronomy
courses, establish an astronomy club for the departmental majors, and organize a
series of workshops for local science teachers.