* 0134579
* CAREER: Design and Development of Novel Responsive Cutting Tools for Laser-Assisted Machining and Diagnosis of Structural Ceramics: A Research Integrated Education Career Landscape
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2008
* Shuting Lei, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 01/31/2008
* USD 399,000.00

The overall goal of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award is to
design and establish a research-integrated education program for machining
difficult-to-machine materials. Machining difficult-to-machine ceramics,
superalloys, and composites presents numerous challenges. Structural ceramics
such as silicon nitride are finding applications in aerospace, automobile, and
related industries. However, machining these materials is expensive and can
induce subsurface cracks that compromise the strength of the material. The
research objective is to develop novel laser integrated cutting tools that will
be used for cost-effective machining of structural ceramics that is insensitive
to part quantity and geometric shapes. Temperature monitoring capability will be
built into the cutting tool to provide feedback for process control during
machining. Micromechanical simulation of the machining process will be developed
for producing ceramic components with minimal subsurface cracks. The educational
components will address the specific educational needs of various sectors of the
community through innovative means such as a new multifunctional laboratory for
undergraduate and graduate students and area K-12 students and teachers.
Integration of research and cooperative learning and effective assessment
techniques will form a dynamic learning environment for undergraduate and
graduate students. Short courses in machining difficult-to-machine materials
will be developed for non-traditional students from industry who want to keep
current with the new technologies being developed in this
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential impact of this project includes new
cutting tools for machining difficult-to-machine materials, new scientific
knowledge on thermally assisted machining processes, and the creation of a
world-class workforce in the area of machining structural ceramics.&lt;br/&gt;