* 0134955
* CAREER:  Development and Applications of Weak Turbulence Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2008
* Yuri Lvov, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2008
* USD 350,000.00

DMS Award Abstract Award #: 0134955 PI: Lvov, Yuri Institution: Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute Program: Applied Mathematics Program Manager: Catherine
Mavriplis

Title: CAREER: Development and Applications of Weak Turbulence Theory

Weak turbulence theory provides a broad framework for the study of steady-state
statistical properties exibited by large classes of weakly nonlinear or weakly
coupled physical systems. Within this framework, the research component of this
work will focus on three fundamental problems in physics: the Garrett-Munk
spetrum of internal waves in the ocean, finite-flux spectra in semiconductors
with applications to semiconductor lasers, and Bose Einstein condensates. In
each case, novel weak-turbulence-inspired techniques will be developed to
compute the stationary energy spectra of the phenomena under investigation,
which will provide an analytic statistical description of their long-term
dynamics. Applications of this work include environmental aspects of ocean
dynamics, semiconductor manufacturing and increases in laser efficiency, and
condensed-matter physics and materials science at low temperatures. The
educational component includes course development on undergraduate and graduate
level that will incorporate an experimental component in an undergraduate
mathematical modelling course, and a graduate course on waves and weak
turbulence theory.

What do internal waves deep below the ocean surface, semiconductor lasers, and
extremely cold metallic vapors have in common? They are all very complicated
physical systems composed of simple components that interact weakly. Weak
turbulence theory addresses these type of systems, and precdicts how the energy
they contain will behave on average over long times. The question of how the
energy of an internal ocean wave depends on this wave's length has an elegant
experimental answer pointing to a universal law, but has eluded theoretical
explanation for more than thirty years. This work aims to provide such an
explanation, which will furnish new insights into the oceanic environment.
Semiconductors and semiconductor lasers manufacturing and operation requires
ever increasing efficiency. This work will explore an improvement that is based
on a more efficient way of delivering energy to the working semiconductors and
semiconductor lasers. Three quarters of a century ago Bose and Einstein
predicted a new phase of materials, the Bose-Einstein condensate, that can only
occur at extremely low temperatures. Finally, six years ago, this phase was
realized experimentally, and the the creators of the experiment received this
year's Nobel Prize. This work will provide a theoretical explanation of how
extremely cold metal vapors settle into the Bose-Einstein condensate phase.

Date: December 17, 2001