* 0134998
* CAREER: Connectivity Among Marine Fish Populations: Emphasizing Ecological Links Between Estuaries and the Coastal Ocean through an Integrated Program of Interdisciplinary Res/Educ
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2007
* Simon Thorrold, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/28/2007
* USD 686,214.00

The need for spatially?explicit models of marine populations has become obvious
as fisheries scientists search for alternatives to traditional management
strategies for marine resources. Efforts to develop spatial models for marine
fish populations have been handicapped, however, by the absence of quantitative
estimates of exchange rates among geographically?separated groups
("connectivity"). This lack of knowledge is primarily due to the difficulty of
conducting mark?recapture studies in species that are characterized by the
production of large numbers of small pelagic offspring that suffer high initial
mortality rates. In this study, Dr. Thorrold will continue development and
application of a marking approach that relies upon natural variations in the
geochemistry of fish otoliths (ear bones) as a marker of source location. Recent
work suggests that it is possible to track individual fish from juvenile nursery
areas to adult spawning locations using these geochemical signatures as a
natural tag of natal location. The otolith is an ideal natural tag
because:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deposition time of any material in the otolith can
be determined by reference to periodic&lt;br/&gt; increments in the
otolith.&lt;br/&gt;Otoliths are metabolically inert, and material is not
re?worked or re?sorbed after deposition.&lt;br/&gt;The chemical composition of
the otolith reflects, to some degree, the environment in which the&lt;br/&gt;
fish has lived.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; They will begin with a series of
laboratory studies to investigate factors influencing the
elemental&lt;br/&gt;composition of otoliths in larval Atlantic silversides
(Menidia menidia). Then characterize&lt;br/&gt;geochernical signatures in
otoliths of young?of?the?year (YOY) Menidia from 10 estuaries along the
coast&lt;br/&gt;of New England. Otoliths will be assayed for VC, 8"0, "Sr/16 Sr
ratios, and a number of trace elements&lt;br/&gt;(Mg/Ca, Mn/Ca, Sr/Ca and
Ba/Ca). This process will include the development of a technique
for&lt;br/&gt;quantifying 87 Sr/ 86 Sr isotope ratios in otoliths using
multi?collector inductively coupled plasma mass&lt;br/&gt;spectrometry. The
resulting multivariate chemical signatures in these otoliths will be used to
develop&lt;br/&gt;maximum likelihood estimators to classify adult Menidia
returning to estuarine waters to spawn the&lt;br/&gt;following year. Otoliths
ftom spawning adults will be sectioned to reveal the section of the otolith
laid&lt;br/&gt;down during juvenile residency in their natal estuary. A
combination of micro?drilling and laser ablation&lt;br/&gt;ICP?MS will be used
to assay geochemical signatures in this portion of the otolith. Adult fish
collected&lt;br/&gt;from each of the 10 estuaries will be assigned to natal
estuary based on the MLE algorithm developed&lt;br/&gt;from ground?truthed
signatures of juveniles captured in the estuaries the previous year. These data
will&lt;br/&gt;provide quantitative estimates of connectivity through natal
homing and straying in a coastal fish species&lt;br/&gt;on an unprecedented
spatial scale. More generally, the study will provide a framework for research
aimed&lt;br/&gt;at quantifying connectivity in marine ecosystems through the use
of natural signatures in calcified&lt;br/&gt;structures of marine organisms.
&lt;br/&gt; The educational component of the proposed research will include
the&lt;br/&gt;development of topics courses in fisheries ecology and
oceanography for the MIT[WHOl joint program in&lt;br/&gt;biological
oceanography, the mentoring of undergraduates on summer student fellowships at
WHOI, and&lt;br/&gt;the development and implementation of teacher training
workshops for high school teachers in&lt;br/&gt;Massachusetts. They will focus
on a common fish species that is a critical component of coastal
habitats&lt;br/&gt;with which students are most familiar. The ability to track
the movements of fish from the backdoors of&lt;br/&gt;local students to other
estuarine and coastal habitats will stress the interconnectedness of salt
marshes,&lt;br/&gt;estuaries and the coastal ocean.