* 0134736
* CAREER:  Light in Chaotic Dielectrics - Resonances and Scattering
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2007
* Evgeniy Narimanov, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 01/31/2007
* USD 300,000.00

This is a CAREER award which supports both research and education. In
particular, the PI will study the behavior of light in chaotic dielectrics. Due
to the extremely high degree of coherence and the ability to manipulate ray
dynamics by changing the shape and the size of the system, deformed dielectric
resonators represent an ideal system to study the fundamental phenomena which
determine the evolution of generic conservative dynamical systems. In the last
few years, such structures were also used to develop a number of novel photonics
devices, e.g., our "bow-tie" microlaser with power output increased by three
orders of magnitude.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary research goal of this
grant is the study of resonances and light scattering in these dielectric
systems. Research topics will include: a semiclassical theory of resonance
lifetimes and emission patterns in deformed dielectric resonators; Arnold
diffusion and chaos-assisted tunneling in open systems; dynamic Anderson
localization and "scars" in dielectric resonators, both in two- and three-
dimensional geometries; light scattering by nonspherical dielectric
particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nonlinear dynamics and modern classical
methods which play the major role in research are also the focus of the
education program. Here the primary goal is to bring these ideas to the optics
curriculum at both the undergraduate and graduate
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a CAREER award which supports both research
and education. In particular, the PI will study the behavior of light in chaotic
dielectrics. Due to the extremely high degree of coherence and the ability to
manipulate ray dynamics by changing the shape and the size of the system,
deformed dielectric resonators represent an ideal system to study the
fundamental phenomena which determine the evolution of generic conservative
dynamical systems. The primary research goal of this grant is the study of
resonances and light scattering in these dielectric
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nonlinear dynamics and modern classical
methods which play the major role in research are also the focus of the
education program. Here the primary goal is to bring these ideas to the optics
curriculum at both the undergraduate and graduate
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;