* 0134688
* CAREER:  Chiral Ceramic Sensors
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2003
* Richard Smith, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2003
* USD 81,000.00

Specific: A variety of technologies (e.g. fuel cells, catalysis, sensors) rely
on electro/chemical phenomena that occur at ceramic surfaces and interfaces. Our
overall understanding of these interfaces is however immature, in that we
generally lack mechanistic and predictive structure-property relations. The
ultimate goal of this research is to advance such relations for the surface
properties that are the basis of sensor and catalyst applications. It will be
approached within the framework of developing a new class of metal oxide gas
sensors, based on chiral (handed) surfaces, capable of detecting and
differentiating chiral molecules. Hence, the underlying experimental objective
is to develop a mechanistic understanding of the interactions between organic
molecules and chiral oxide surfaces. This will include surfaces that are chiral
on the atomic scale, e.g. Mo8O23(010), and those that are tailored to have
chiral nano/microstructures. Surface properties will be investigated through the
fabrication and testing of model sensors and temperature programmed desorption
spectroscopy, while surface and bulk structure will be interrogated using
appropriate probes. This study will advance our general understanding of the
roles surface and molecular structure play in oxide reactivity (i.e. surface
structure-property relations) as well as new and powerful sensor
functionalities. Complementary education and outreach activities include, (1.)
the development, in collaboration with secondary science instructors, of
multimedia course modules centered on electrochemical technologies that will
enhance middle/high school science curricula and raise students' awareness of
materials science, (2.) the establishment of an outreach program with a local
community college to provide research and mentoring opportunities to students
from underrepresented groups, and (3.) an outreach program designed to align the
PI's research goals with the needs of industry and augment his development as a
researcher and educator. This will include extended visits to industrial and
government laboratories (U.S. and abroad) focused on electrochemical and
interfacial technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;General: Metal oxides have unique
surface properties that make them useful for detecting, synthesizing, and
purifying chemicals and our environment. Sensory applications include detecting
poisons (such as carbon monoxide) and monitoring the fuel mix in automobiles to
minimize greenhouse gas emissions. Metal oxide catalysts are vital to the large-
scale production of plastics and pharmaceuticals and can be used to purify our
air and water. While the surface properties of metal oxides are already
exploited on large and diverse scales, our overall understanding of these
properties is limited, particularly our ability to engineer and predict them. As
a result, we often rely on time consuming and costly trial-and-error methods of
development. Hence, the ultimate goal of this research is to advance our
fundamental understanding of the structure and chemical properties of metal
oxide surfaces. The knowledge gained will lead to powerful new types of sensors
and, more importantly, enhance our ability to efficiently engineer metal oxide
surfaces for a variety of applications. Concurrent with this research, the PI
will conduct a number of education and outreach activities intended to (1.)
enhance science education at the secondary and undergraduate levels, (2.)
recruit new students to the vital fields of materials and electrochemical
sciences, and (3.) augment the PI's own development as an educator and
researcher.&lt;br/&gt;