* 0134335
* CAREER:  Acoustic Wave Filters for High Frequency Wireless Communication Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2009
* Mauricio Pereira da Cunha, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 02/28/2009
* USD 417,000.00

Expanding commercial and military applications crowd the wireless communications
frequency band, creating a critical need to expand the band to higher
frequencies. The application of newly discovered high velocity pseudo surface
acoustic waves (HVPSAWs), has the potential of satisfying the high frequency
requirements of the next generation of wireless communications.

This CAREER proposal involves an integrated research and education plan for high
radio frequency (RF) microwave acoustic devices. The research objective is to
identify piezoelectric materials and specific orientations in which HVPSAWs
exist, and to design, fabricate, and test prototype HVPSAW filters. Specific
research tasks are: (i) search for piezoelectric materials and orientations in
which HVPSAWs exist; (ii) characterize theoretical mode propagation; (iii)
determine HVPSAW phase velocity, propagation loss, temperature behavior,
electromechanical coupling, and power flow angle; (iv) experimentally verify the
theoretically predicted HVPSAW properties; develop a theoretical model for the
HVPSAW interdigital transducer (IDT) structure, and its experimental
verification; (v) model and characterize integral HVPSAW filters structures,
such as reflectors, multistrip couplers, guiding structures; (vi) integrate
HVPSAW structure components into HVPSAW filter design; and (vii) fabricate and
test prototype HVPSAW filters. The educational objective is to provide a
learning experience in a fast moving state-of-the-art area to students ranging
from high school to graduate level. The learning experience will range from team
projects at the high school level to theses at the graduate level. In summary
this project will not only provide the necessary research to realize the next
generation of wireless communications but also educate students in a very
relevant high need technology area which has applications ranging from cellular
phones to high speed communication and signal processing systems.

