* 0134131
* CAREER:  Understanding Molecular-level Processes of Gas-phase Ammonia Uptake by Aqueous Sulfuric Acid Surfaces using Broadband Sum Frequency Generation Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2007
* Heather Allen, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 02/28/2007
* USD 551,216.00

Professor Heather Allen of Ohio State University has received a CAREER award
from the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program for sum frequency generation
studies on gas-liquid surfaces, especially ones of environmental interest.
Ammonia uptake by aqueous sulfuric acid solution surfaces will be investigated
using broad-band SFG, allowing the acquisition of vibrational spectra specific
to the surface region. The spectra will be interpreted to give molecular level
pictures of the surface uptake mechanisms of the reactive gas by the liquid. The
ammonia-sulfuric acid system has relevance to the formation and growth of
ammonium sulfate aerosols throughout the troposphere and is particularly
important in polluted urban atmospheres. The PI will incorporate problem-based-
learning in undergraduate courses, and will sponsor a program that will award
summer research internships with the goal of increasing the participation of
women and underrepresented minorities in scientific research.

Work on the chemical and physical properties of aerosols will lead to a better
understanding of their role in atmospheric chemical cycles and in climate.
Previous droplet-train experiments showed evidence for surface-mediated
reactions, and new laser-based spectroscopies allow the examination of those
reactions in a direct manner. Students involved in this research and education
plan will be exposed to work that will lead to a better understanding of
pollution, as well as the role of basic research in solving complex chemical
problems relevant to society.

