* 0134832
* Conferences on China's Economic Transition -Toronto, Canada, Summer 2002 and Pittsburgh, Summer 2003
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Thomas Rawski, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/2006
* USD 90,000.00

China's protracted boom is a major episode in world economic history. Beginning
in the late 1970s, China experienced two decades of extraordinary growth that
raised every indicator of material welfare, lifted several hundred million from
absolute poverty, and rocketed China from near autarchy into unprecedented
global prominence. Current research, however, leaves fundamental questions about
the economic, political and social dimensions of this growth process and its
future prospects unanswered. To address these issues, this project initiates a
major interdisciplinary effort focused on China's long boom of the past two
decades. It seeks a comprehensive and integrated analysis of the underpinnings
and dynamics of China's protracted growth spurt that will be both path breaking
and policy relevant. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on two earlier
efforts: one directed by Hugh Patrick and Henry Rosovsky that produced the path-
breaking volume Asia's New Giant: How the Japanese Economy Works. A second,
organized by Thomas Rawski, inspired a series of volumes that have contributed
to deepening the economic content of Chinese historical studies and integrating
Chinese experience into the study of global economic history. The project's plan
includes two conferences scheduled for summer 2002 and summer 2003. The
conferences consider three groups of papers: five overviews that lay out themes,
issues, and methods from several interdisciplinary perspectives; fifteen
thematic papers that focus on specific dimensions of China's recent economic
experience, e.g. openness, international trade and foreign direct investment,
agriculture, fiscal policy, and industrial organization and enterprise
governance; and three interpretative studies that consider the implications of
China's twenty-year boom for China's future evolution, for China-oriented
economics research, and for broader studies in economics and social science. The
first conference will apply key results from the overviews to enrich and
integrate the prospectuses for the thematic studies. The second conference will
review the completed thematic studies and apply their results to expand and
deepen the initial drafts of the interpretive essays.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These papers will result in substantial publications,
including a book, tentatively entitled The Transition That Worked, and at least
one special journal issue, that will appear in Chinese as well as English. The
results of this project will provide a springboard for future China-focused
economic inquiry, expand the information base underpinning China-related policy
discussions, and stimulate the integration of recent Chinese experience into
research on development, transition, and social change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;