* 0134104
* CAREER:  Detachment from Biofilms Under Dynamic Operating Conditions - Integrating Fundamental Research and Practical Biofilm Modeling Education
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Eberhard Morgenroth, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Cynthia J. Ekstein
* 06/30/2007
* USD 380,921.00

0134104 Morgenroth The overall objective of this proposal is to determine the
influence of dynamic variations of shear stress on biofilm detachment.
Mechanisms of biofilm detachment are poorly understood and procedures for the
design and operation of biofilm reactors are mainly empirical. In biofilm
reactors, the process of detachment is necessary to balance bacterial growth and
to prevent clogging. In addition, the overall rate and time dependent variation
of detachment significantly influence bacterial selection within the biofilm
community. Specific objectives of this proposal are to determine the
relationship between detachment rate, detached particle characteristics, and
overall reactor performance under constant or dynamically fluctuating shear
conditions. Based on experimental results, a dynamic mathematical biofilm model
will be developed. The model will be used for experimental design,
interpretation of research results and to teach students and practitioners the
underlying principles governing the application of biofilms in biological
treatment processes.

Innovative tools for on-line monitoring of detachment will be developed. Laser
backscattering and in-line video microscopy will be adapted to provide
continuous information on the size and shape characteristics of detached
particles. On-line techniques for measuring bacterial respiration rates within
the biofilm reactor will be developed and used to correlate overall biofilm
reactor performance with detachment dynamics. Detached particles will also be
characterized for strength, surface hydrophobicity, surface charge, and
abundance of nitrifying bacteria. Laboratory scale biofilm systems will be
developed that allow biofilms to grow under defined hydrodynamic conditions
(annular reactor) or under conditions used in full-scale reactors (packed bed
reactor, airlift reactor). A mathematical biofilm model will be developed that
will be applied both in research and in teaching. Inputs to the model will
consist of wastewater composition, biofilm thickness distribution, and detached
particle size distribution. The mathematical model will be tested in the
laboratory and in full-scale biofilm reactors.