* 0134554
* CAREER: Twinning Induced Grain Boundary Engineering In Ultrafine Grain Materials: A Multidisciplinary Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Ibrahim Karaman, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 08/31/2007
* USD 386,769.00

CAREER: "Twinning Induced Grain Boundary Engineering In Ultrafine Grain
Materials: A Multidisciplinary Approach"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ibrahim
Karaman&lt;br/&gt;Department of Mechanical Engineering, Texas A&amp;M
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The manipulation of the
interface content and structure of solids can be considered as one of the most
important processes in the evolution of materials. This is particularly
important for controlling the physical and mechanical properties of ultrafine
grain materials (UFG) (grain size &lt; 1 mm) because of the large volume
fraction of interfaces. This CAREER program aims at developing new strategies
for twinning induced grain boundary engineering (GBE), furthering the
understanding of GBE in UFG materials, and developing predictive and control
capabilities for the materials properties that are governed by grain boundaries
and their interiors, utilizing an integrated research and education
methodology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RESEARCH PLAN focuses on three thrust
areas: 1) processing: fabrication of UFG materials by severe plastic deformation
processing followed by thermal treatments starting either from powder precursors
or bulk precursors to vary the structure and fraction of the boundaries and the
texture, 2) characterization: microstructural characterization of boundary
character distribution, texture, and internal stress distribution utilizing
unique experimental techniques such as orientation imaging microscopy and in-
situ neutron diffraction, 3) modeling: developing a hierarchically structured
materials modeling approach across length scales to predict the mechanical
properties and microstructural evolution of UFG materials. Specific emphasis
will be given to deformation and annealing twinning induced interfaces in low
stacking fault energy, high strength steels. The research plan is SIGNIFICANT
because, despite the importance of controlling the grain boundary character,
there has never been a study combining GBE and bulk UFG materials and
investigating the effect of twinning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The EDUCATION PLAN is
to strengthen the faculty of materials engineering at Texas A&amp;M University
(TAMU) by developing a rigorous curriculum on metallic materials, and by
motivating and preparing students who can contribute to UFG materials
engineering on a long-term basis both as engineers and researchers. Since the
micro materials world is a stranger to public, particularly the younger ones, in
spite of all its fascinating developments, a significant effort will be put to
bridge this gap. A pilot instructional unit will be developed, in collaboration
with an area high school, to offer students a physical feel and hands-on
experience with materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt
;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;