* 0134770
* CAREER:  Quantum Properties of Ultrasmall Homogeneous Superconducting Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2007
* Alexey Bezryadin, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 02/28/2007
* USD 450,000.00

This CAREER development award will support a young physics faculty member at the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. The project is focused on
fundamental problems of phase coherence in quasi-one-dimensional superconducting
systems. A novel nanofabrication method developed by the PI will be applied in
order to investigate fundamental properties of ultrasmall superconductors. The
fabrication technique involves metallic decoration of single-wall carbon
nanotubes and provides nanowires as thin as 5 nm in diameter. The following
basic problems will be addressed:: (i) the interplay between the fermionic and
bosonic mechanisms of superconductivity suppression in one dimension, (ii) the
effects of a "dissipative" environment on quantum superconductor-insulator
transitions, and (iii) macroscopic quantum effects in homogeneous
superconducting nanostructures. In addition to training students and
postdoctoral researchers, the project PI will develop a course on mesoscopic
physics and modern nanotechnology for undergraduate and graduate students. The
multidisciplinary character of modern nanotechnology will be emphasized in the
course in order to attract students from different disciplines. The students
will receive training and education in cutting edge research techniques that
will prepare them for careers in academe, industry and government.

This five-year CAREER development project will integrate research at the
forefront of condensed matter physics and nanotechnology with an
interdisciplinary educational program. In the research portion of the project,
new techniques will be used to investigate the properties of superconducting
systems with dimensions approaching 5 nanometers-a virtually unexplored size
scale of great importance to the development of future generations of ultrafast
computers and electronic devices. Novel experimental approaches will be used to
study the behavior of superconducting materials in ultra-small structures.
Understanding these phenomena may provide information useful for the technical
development of highly integrated superconducting quantum computers. Nanoscale
science and technology is becoming increasingly important in ensuring the
nation's scientific leadership, and the project will also support the
development of new coursework on mesoscopic physics and nanotechnology for
undergraduate and graduate students at the University of Illinois. The students
will receive training and education in cutting edge research techniques that
will prepare them for careers in academe, industry and government.