* 0134549
* Collaborative Research: ITR/AP: Towards The Development Of Operational Adjoint Method Based Ensemble Prediction Techniques For El Nino Southern Oscillation
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Richard Kleeman, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 08/31/2005
* USD 116,367.00

This research project will explore the utility of adjoint-based methods of
ensemble prediction for El Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO), with the view to
support the development of a new operational ensemble prediction scheme for
ENSO. The PIs will use a hierarchy of coupled ENSO models that represent
different levels of approximation of coupled ocean-atmosphere General
Circulation Models (GCM). In addition to exploring singular vector and
stochastic optimal based ensemble prediction techniques, they will compare these
techniques with the method of bred modes that is currently used for ensemble
weather prediction at the National Centers for Environmental Prediction. The
ensemble prediction experiments will be analyzed using conventional statistical
techniques and using a new theoretical framework based on information theory.
The research builds on existing methods and ideas that have been applied
successfully to Numerical Weather Prediction on timescales of 5-10 days using
complex state-of-the-art atmospheric GCMs. The techniques have been applied
successfully to ENSO prediction using simple coupled models, however, the
application of existing ideas to complex ENSO prediction presents some
significant new challenges that need to be addressed. The work is important
because it has the potential to improve ENSO forecasts, which has important
societal benefits.