* 0134225
* PECASE: Acculturation, Health, and the Ecology of Immune Function:  Integrated Research and Education in Human Population Biology
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2002,10/31/2007
* Thomas McDade, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna E. Lambert
* 10/31/2007
* USD 300,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: PECASE: Acculturation, health, and the
ecology of immune function: Integrated research and education in human
population biology&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Northwestern
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acculturation and urbanization have been linked
to a wide range of human health issues, but the associations are mixed: A number
of studies highlight the health benefits of improved access to infrastructure,
health services, and education, while others draw attention to rising rates of
stress-related, chronic degenerative, and atopic diseases. Further research in
this area is needed, especially since indigenous groups around the world are
becoming increasingly incorporated into a single global economy. Previous
research has focused largely on adults, and additional research is needed on the
specific health issues confronting children and adolescents, and their unique
experiences in the context of rapid culture change. In addition, improvements in
the methods used to assess health and human biology are required to overcome the
constraints of research conducted in field settings. This project addresses
these issues in pursuit of the following objectives: 1) investigate immune
function and child/adolescent health in the context of social and economic
transitions in lowland Bolivia, 2) develop and evaluate minimally-invasive
methods for assessing immunocompetence in remote field settings, and 3) create a
series of educational opportunities in which high school, undergraduate,
graduate, and international students can participate in mentored original
research.&lt;br/&gt;Initial research efforts (Project 1) will be focused on a
prospective study of culture change and health in lowland Bolivia. 600
participants between the ages of 5 and 20 years will be recruited from 9
villages, and sociocultural, demographic, socioeconomic, anthropometric, and
morbidity data will be collected at multiple time points. Saliva and finger
prick blood samples will be collected to assess physiological markers of immune
function and health. By applying a uniform set of biological and socio-cultural
methods across a range of cultural-ecological settings, this project will
investigate the multidimensional nature of acculturation, and its positive and
negative implications for child and adolescent well-being. In addition,
assessment of immunocompetence-using methods that do not require venipuncture-in
conjunction with growth and morbidity will reveal underlying physiological
processes that may mediate the associations between shifting cultural-ecological
environments and adverse growth and health outcomes. Subsequent research efforts
(Projects 2 and 3) will be dedicated to a comparative analysis of immune
development: Multiple dimensions of immunity will be compared in samples
collected from 5-20 year-olds in Bolivia, Samoa, and the U.S. to gain insight
into the range of variation in immune development, and to explore the
contribution of a comparative, ecological perspective to current understandings
of human immune function.&lt;br/&gt;Broader merits of the project include a
number of educational initiatives: 1) development of a two-course sequence in
Human Biology Research; 2) mentored research experience for undergraduate
students; 3) summer workshop in laboratory methods for graduate students; 4)
training of international students in Bolivia, and 5) establishment of a
partnership with a local high school to provide internship and research
opportunities for high school students. Participating students will engage in
the scientific process, apply new methodological skills to issues in human
biology and health, and become members of a collaborative research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was originally funded as
a CAREER award, and was converted to a Presidential Early Career Award for
Engineers and Scientists (PECASE) award in May
2004.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;