* 0134301
* CAREER:  Disinfection Using Membranes: Optimizing Virus and Disinfection By-Product Control
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2010
* Shankar Chellam, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Paul L. Bishop
* 06/30/2010
* USD 420,985.00

0134301&lt;br/&gt;Chellam&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal of this research is to
develop tools to predict the removal of pathogenic viruses and precursors to
potentially carcinogenic, mutagenic, and teratogenic disinfection by products by
membranes as a step towards reducing microbial and chemical risks in drinking
water. The proposed work is based on the following
hypotheses:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Hindered diffusion of natural organic matter
(NOM) contributes significantly to its transport across nanofiltration membranes
leading to formation of toxic disinfection by-products (DBPs) upon
chlorination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Diffusion of pathogenic viruses
contributes substantially to their transport across microfilters and
ultrafilters and its dependence on water chemistry, temperature, and pore size
can be quantified.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Direct measurements of membrane pore
size distributions and transport parameters of NOM and viruses in membranes can
be incorporated into theoretical models to predict their
removal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Even though early research had been conducted on
diffusive transport of salts across reverse osmosis, this investigation will be
the first to perform direct measurements of NOM diffusion across nanofiltration
membranes. Transport of NOM, DBP precursors, and viruses across membranes will
be investigated experimentally and theoretically. Direct measurements of
convection and diffusion of these contaminants across membranes under varying
water chemistry conditions will be interpreted by undertaking numerical
calculations of hindered transport. Universally applicable models (independent
of membrane used and source water location) to predict trihalomethane and
haloacetic acid speciation in "precursor-limited" waters (low NOM content) will
also be derived.&lt;br/&gt;