* 0134966
* Career: Geochemistry of Redox-Sensitive Elements and Osmium and Uranium Isotopes in Large Pristine Rivers
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2002,09/30/2008
* Youngsook Huh, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 09/30/2008
* USD 374,995.00

0134966&lt;br/&gt;Hud&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Continental weathering is an
important component of global geochemical cycles and is one of the most
significant determinants of the atmospheric CO2 levels, and hence climate, on
geologic time scales. Weathering of organic carbon is an important source of
CO2; weathering of silicates a sink. The long-term goal of the PI's research is
to understand the mechanisms and magnitudes of continental weathering in various
pristine environments at present and to then project the results into the
geologic past using suitable proxies. In this endeavor, characterizing the
behavior of different chemical elements as a function of weathering environment
is important. The PI proposes to study weathering of organic carbon rich
reducing sediments as manifested in large pristine rivers. This proposal
describes an integrative approach using redox-sensitive, oxyanion-forming
elements (Re, Mo, V, U) and the Os isotopic system (187Os/188Os) intimately
related to them. These elements are enriched in reducing sediments and are
released as soluble oxyanions when they undergo fast oxidative weathering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research activities consist of three parts:
field work, instrumental analyses and data interpretation. Field work will be
carried out in western China, eastern Tibet, and northern Vietnam, areas
affected by the Himalayan collision but whose fluvial geochemistry is poorly
understood. This will be a continuation of the successful collaboration with
scientists in China and Vietnam. A graduate student at Northwestern University
and visiting scholars from China/Vietnam will be involved in all three
activities. At undergraduate students level, this research will be integrated
into the Analytical Methods in Geochemistry course that the PI is developing to
strengthen the interdisciplinary Environmental Science Program at Northwestern
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will provide fundamental
understanding of the behavior of redox-sensitive elements and Os isotopes, which
is in turn important in deciphering the paleo-environments of the Earth.
Additional benefit is documenting the present weathering regime of the Upper
Yangtze, which is important for the Chinese scientists in their attempt to
monitor the effect of the Three Gorges Dam and erosion of top soil that is
becoming a serious problem. Also, a clear comparison can be made between the
undeveloped headwaters and the agriculturally impacted lower reaches of the
Chinese and Vietnamese rivers.&lt;br/&gt;