* 0134719
* CAREER:  The Coordinated Theory and Experiments of the Fundamental Metal Oxidation Kinetics As Visualized By In Situ UHV_TEM
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2008
* Judith Yang, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 06/30/2008
* USD 506,250.00

This project aims in applying in-situ transmission electron microscopy under
ultra high vacuum conditions to develop a fundamental understanding of the
oxidation processes at the nanoscale. Major objectives of the proposed study is
to develop better understanding of the nanoscale stages of oxidation from the
nucleation of the metal oxide to the formation of thermodynamically stable
oxide. Systematic experimental studies will be made on thin films of copper and
aluminum. The project involves collaborations with the Materials Research
Laboratory at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC), Lawrence
Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) and the Institute for Materials Research
and Engineering (IMRE), Singapore where a specialized in situ chamber for Al
thin film deposition inside the UHV-TEM exist. This research has technological
relevance where surface oxidation processes play critical roles in environmental
stability, high temperature corrosion, electrochemistry, catalytic reactions,
gate oxides and thin film growth as well as fuel reactions. The educational
component incorporates the research tools developed in the project in the
development of new courses at both the undergraduate and graduate levels in
materials science and engineering (MS&amp;E) curriculum as well as a new web
site accessible for public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research develops a new
understanding of the fundamental processes involved in nanoscale oxidation on
thin metals that would have direct relevance in technologies where corrosion is
the limiting factor.&lt;br/&gt;