* 0134264
* CAREER:  Self-Similarity: Roadblock or Breakthrough?
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2007
* Tilmann Gneiting, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Grace Yang
* 05/31/2007
* USD 300,000.00

Following Mandelbrot's seminal work, fractal based analyses of time series,
profiles, and natural or man-made surfaces have found extensive applications in
almost all scientific disciplines. The fractal dimension, D, of an object or
data set is a roughness measure and routinely estimated in scientific studies.
Long-memory dependence in time series or spatial data plays key roles in the
discussion of issues such as global warming. It is associated with power-law
correlations and quantified by the Hurst coefficient, H. In principle, fractal
dimension, D, and Hurst coefficient, H, are independent of each other: fractal
dimension is a local property, and long-memory dependence is a global
characteristic. Nevertheless, the two notions have been linked through the
celebrated relationship that indicates that the fractal dimension added to the
Hurst coefficient equals n+1, for a self-similar surface in n-dimensional space.
This relationship is based on the assumption of self-similarity, which has
hardly ever been put to test. Recently developed stochastic models allow for any
combination of fractal dimension, D, and Hurst coefficient, H, and therefore
challenge the relationship and the role of self-similarity. Has the prevalence
of self-similar model been a roadblock, keeping scientists from exploring and
understanding a wide range of local and global behavior in complex systems? Or
is it indeed a breakthrough, which lets scientists focus on models for which the
above relationship holds, while other combinations of D and H are physically
meaningless? This research develops tests for self-similarity and thereby
addresses these problems. Along the way, new insight into the behavior of
statistical estimators of fractal dimension and Hurst coefficient, software for
the fast and exact simulation of self-similar and related classes of random
processes, an analysis of topographic data for Oregon and Washington state, and
new theoretical results for stationary random functions will emerge.
Visualization tools and Freshman Seminars at the University of Washington will
introduce undergraduate students to mathematical and statistical modeling, to
fractals, long-memory dependence, and self-similarity, and to the natural beauty
and diversity of the Pacific Northwest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many natural
phenomena such as mountains, clouds, ferns and rocks have features that look
alike across scales. A little piece might indeed resemble the whole if the scale
is not disclosed. Over the past decades, this notion of self-similarity has
emerged as a popular and fruitful theme in a vast number of scientific studies.
This research develops statistical tests, which allow scientists to assess
whether their observations and data are compatible with classical assumptions of
self-similarity. Alternative models allow for distinct behaviors at different
scales and might inspire and encourage new theories across disciplines. The
research is paired with the development of visualization and simulation tools as
well as Freshman Seminars, through which students are introduced to mathematical
and statistical modeling, to fractals, long-memory dependence, and self-
similarity, and to the natural beauty and diversity of the Pacific Northwest.
&lt;br/&gt;