* 0134742
* CAREER: The Earth's Climate. Understanding the Past and Educating for the Future
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2008
* Amy Clement, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 03/31/2008
* USD 315,154.00

This award will support the creative integration of paleoclimate research and
educational outreach to better understand the interplay of low- and high-
latitude climate processes in Earth's natural climate evolution and to describe
this interplay in a manner useful to social scientists engaged in the economic
and policy aspects of global climate change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In general,
the researcher will use a series of numerical experiments to examine how orbital
forcing of low latitude tropical climates might impact high latitude ice sheet
growth during the Quaternary Ice Ages and the occurrence of climatic events such
as the El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO). Specifically, the researcher will
pursue a scientific strategy to investigate the physical processes involved in
the response of the tropical climate to orbital forcing, compare purely orbital
signatures with glacial stage signatures in tropical climate, investigate the
relative effects of orbital and glacial forcing on variability within tropical
climates, and investigate how the telconnection between low and high latitudes
might be altered as the mean climate state changes (i.e., when ice cover and
atmospheric levels of CO2 change).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher's long-
term scientific goals are complemented by a near-term educational goal of
contributing a quantitative paleoclimatic perspective to the development of a
university-wide undergraduate course covering the scientific, economic, and
social aspects of climate change.