* 0134490
* Collaborative Research: Transient Protein Expression in Plant Tissue Culture
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2003
* Hugh Mason, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Continuing Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 09/30/2003
* USD 169,266.00

The Principal Investigators (PIs)' overall objective is to develop plant cell
and tissue culture technology, which will permit rapid evaluation of
heterologous gene expression in plants. This work includes the development of
rigorous principles for the monitoring, control and operation of bioreactors for
plant cell and tissue culture. These bioreactor operational principles will be
utilized to correlate performance of transient expression systems using
Agrobacterium co-cultivation for DNA transformation and the TMV vector or a
single-stranded DNA geminivirus vector capable of DNA amplification for protein
production (based on tobacco and corn seed endosperm) while testing expression
and accumulation of three therapeutic proteins: a monoclonal antibody (NR-LU-10
MAb), a cytokine (human growth hormone, hGH), and a blood transport protein
(human transferrin, hTR). The specific objectives are to: (1) Develop
operational and control strategies for bioreactor growth of plant cell and root
culture, (2) Develop and optimize techniques / conditions for DNA delivery for
transient expression, and (3) Utilize bioreactor control strategies and
optimized transient therapeutic protein expression systems to evaluate
heterologous transgene expression in plant cell and tissue culture, followed by
correlation with performance in transgenic plants with the same proteins.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a collaborative GOALI project involving three PIs
with different complementary scientific and technological expertise. Wayne
Curtis the primary PI at the Pennsylvania State University is an expert in the
area of bioreactor technology, Hugh Mason the second PI at the Boyce Thompson
Institute and Cornell University in the area of transgenic plants, and Doug
Russell at the Integrated Protein Technologies of Monsanto in the area of
production of proteins from transgenic plants.&lt;br/&gt;