* 0134628
* CAREER:  Statistical Depth Functions and their Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,07/31/2002
* Yijun Zuo, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Grace Yang
* 07/31/2002
* USD 120,000.00

Statistical depth functions have become increasingly pursued as a promising tool
in robust and nonparametric multivariate data analysis and inference. This
project is to conduct a systematic and thorough study of these functions and
their applications. The objectives of this project include: 1)to establish bases
and provide specific guidance for selection of depth functions and their induced
estimators for practitioners, 2) to introduce depth associated practical
inference procedures, 3) to deepen and extend existing depth applications while
pushing depth methodology to new frontiers, 4) to develop fast and accurate
algorithms and toolkits for the practical computing of depth functions and
associated procedures, and 5) to incorporate research activities into the
educational process and to engage the participation of underrepresented
minorities in the proposed activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Simple one-
dimensional statistics based on ordering have played such an important role in
one-dimensional data analysis and their multi-dimensional analogues have been
sought for years, without completely satisfactory results. The extension to
higher dimensions of these one-dimensional statistics, such as the median, is
difficult because there is no natural and unambiguous method of fully ordering
or ranking multi-dimensional observations. Statistical depth functions are
proving to be a very promising tool for ordering multi-dimensional observations.
The main idea of depth functions is to provide from the "deepest" point a
"center-outward" ordering of multi-dimensional observations. Multi-dimensional
data ordering is not the only application of depth functions though. Depth
functions have brought us new perspectives towards multidimensional exploratory
data analysis and inference, and have been proven to have significant
applications in disciplines ranging from industrial engineering to biomedical
sciences. Research in depth theory and methodology, however, is still in its
preliminary stage and a number of fundamental issues are yet to be addressed
including: 1) depth functions have been introduced ad hoc in many areas, and in
great variety, without regards as to whether they meet any particular set of
criteria and without regard to a general mechanism to construct them, 2) a large
number of depth induced estimators exist with little guidance for choosing among
them, an obstacle both, to potential users and to those designing software
packages, 3) computing depth functions and associated procedures is
challenging-- without fast and accurate algorithms further developments of depth
methodology can be hampered, 4) depth-associated inference procedures have not
been developed in general, and applications of depth functions are yet to be
further deepened, broadened, and pushed to new frontiers: and finally, 5) depth
methodology has not been integrated into the educational process. The proposal
will address all these issues. The project will 1) extend the areas of
application and methodological advantages of one-dimensional statistical
procedures and methods based on ordering to the higher-dimensional context, 2)
stimulate discovery and understanding within the field of depth theory and
methodology, 3) advance nonparametric and robust multivariate exploratory data
analysis built on the depth methodology, 4) promote inspired teaching and
enthusiastic learning while broadening the participation of underrepresented
groups, 5) establish a strong research and education program in statistics
involving researchers in the depth community and train undergraduate and
graduate students from various disciplines, and 6) build for the PI a firm
foundation for a lifetime of integrated contributions to research and
education.&lt;br/&gt;