* 0134691
* CAREER:  The Nature of Excitations in Dendrimers and Educational Development of the  Physical Properties of Macromolecules
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2002,09/30/2004
* Theodore Gore Goodson, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 09/30/2004
* USD 280,000.00

This CAREER award involves ultra fast spectroscopic investigations of
dendrimers. Initially, femtosecond time-resolved measurements will be carried
out with an upconversion setup on both homogeneous and inhomogeneous dendrimer
systems in order to investigate the coherent nature of the excitations. The long
radiative lifetimes of several of the novel dendrimer systems will also be
measured by time-correlated single-photon counting measurements. These initial
studies will also determine superior candidates for other light emitting
applications as well. In the second stage of the anisotropy measurements in
order to probe the fast kinetics of the energy migration process in organic
dendrimers. In order to measure the homogeneous line-width more quantitatively
as well as the dephasing dynamics in the dendrimer systems that possess strong
interactions, he will carry out three pulse photon echo experiments. With this
information quantitative comparisons to various excitonic theoretical
predictions can be carried out. This research will help answer an important
question that not only concerns organic dendrimers, but also concerns
excitations in any branched (fractal) molecular geometry. The question, how do
we describe the coherent nature of strongly interacting branched chromophores,
will have a significant impact on the materials science, photo-physics, and
technological communities.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The CAREER educational plan
is focused on the physics and characterization of macromolecules. The first
component is to expose undergraduate students to the real world of research and
developments in industry that is concerned with the physical properties of
macromolecules. Secondly, the PI will integrate these programs into larger group
interactions. This will include both undergraduate and younger high school
students in the Detroit Metro public school district, an area that has been
underrepresented in science in the past. This will be done in conjunction with
ongoing programs that the PI is involved with including the ACS-project SEED
program. The third component to the CAREER educational plan is to enhance the
instructional aspects of the physical chemistry lecture and laboratory courses
by including more instruction and experimental understanding of
macromolecules.&lt;br/&gt;