* 0134969
* CAREER: Studies of Collective Motion In Complex Liquids: Heterogeneity, Disorder and Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2002,03/31/2005
* David Reichman, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Raima Larter
* 03/31/2005
* USD 448,500.00

In this project funded by the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program of
the Chemistry Division, Reichman will conduct a five-stage program to develop
computational and theoretical tools to gain a better microscopic understanding
of collective motion in molecular, supercooled, and polymeric liquids. The first
stage involves a microscopic understanding of collective and heterogeneous
behavior in supercooled liquids near the glass transition temperature using
computer simulation. The second stage develops new molecular hydrodynamic
approaches in order to understand collective motion in supercooled liquids and
polyelectrolyte solutions. In the third stage the PI applies novel field-
theoretic techniques to study dynamics in random heteropolymers. The fourth
stage centers on the application of a molecular hydrodynamic approach to
understand nonlinear Raman in liquids. The final stage includes three
educational initiatives. The first is a continuation and improvement of a multi-
institutional theoretical chemistry tutorial series for undergraduate, graduate,
and postdoctoral students in the Boston area. The second centers on a new
computational chemistry course for undergraduate students that includes seminars
by outside speakers and student presentations on their computer projects. The
third involves mentoring undergraduate student collaborators on projects in the
PI's laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of the difficulty with theories used
to understand the behavior of supercooled liquids lies in the arbitrary
approximations that are commonly made to achieve tractable results. While such
theories have been surprisingly successful in applications to supercooled
liquids, for example, there have also been many underlying doubts arising from a
perceived lack of rigor in the theory. In this project Reichman is developing a
new formulation of Mode Coupling Theory (MCT) that restores a considerable
amount of rigor while making transparent the nature and consequences of any
approximations that are made. He will also apply this reformulated theory to a
number of important condensed-phase problems involving materials that have
significant technological importance, such as glasses and amorphous materials.
In the educational component of this project, Reichman is expanding the
undergraduate curriculum to include modern chemical physics methods that will
demonstrate to students the integral role played by the computer in theoretical
chemistry today. In the collaborative pedagogical seminar series that he has co-
organized, he is taking advantage of the rich physical chemistry environment
that the Boston/Cambridge area presents, and is an excellent educational tool.
This lecture series is especially appropriate for the area because of the ease
of public transportation and the large number of research groups that might
participate.&lt;br/&gt;