* 0134482
* CAREER: "Biology on Display: Museums and the New Life Sciences in America"
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2002,08/31/2007
* Karen Rader, Sarah Lawrence College
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2007
* USD 309,785.00

Proposal SES 01-34482&lt;br/&gt;Biology on Display: Museums and the New Life
Sciences in America&lt;br/&gt;Karen A. Rader, Sarah Lawrence
College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER Award integrates research and teaching
toward a detailed exploration of the historical relations between academic and
public understandings of biology in the twentieth century United States. The
five-year research project examines with historical research methods the
changing display patterns of life science exhibitions in American museums
between 1900 to 1980 -- a subject uncharted by historians of science. This study
clarifies central issues about the academic and social reconfiguration of
biology as a science, including the relationship of the people and practices
involved in life science laboratory research to those involved in its public
presentation; the interplay of disciplinary and material forces that led
biological exhibits to play a central role in newer science and technology
museums, as well as in American culture more broadly; and, ultimately, the
changing institutional role of the museum in sustaining social support for the
twentieth-century life sciences. Research activities include a program of museum
fieldwork in New York and at archives and museum sites in Washington, Boston,
Philadelphia, Los Angeles, San Francisco, Chicago, and Columbus
(Ohio).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alongside the research project, the PI is
developing two new courses that involve undergraduate students in independent
historical and/or sociological research. Students in an open seminar, "Public
Science/Popular Science: Knowledge-Making and Scientific Literacy in the Modern
World," explores how science is constructed as a public enterprise. This course
investigates the general relationship between laboratory practice and processes
of social and political change, as well as the particular meaning and
significance of scientific literacy issues in differing historical and cultural
contexts. Also, an advanced undergraduate seminar, "Nature on Display: Museums
in Science," focuses on how science and culture co-construct one another in the
museum setting, with special attention to the historical evolution of different
types of science museums, and the process of exhibition construction. This
latter course requires students to undertake field placements at local science
museums, in order to experience first hand (either by researching primary source
historical documents, or by becoming a participant-observer in the design of a
contemporary display) the process of museum science in-the-making. Located in
the New York Metropolitan area, Sarah Lawrence College is an innovative liberal
arts school with a unique undergraduate course structure that features small
seminars, writing-across-the-curriculum, and individual tutorials; thus the
pedagogical aims of this plan are uniquely suited to the institution's niche. To
further encourage public outreach during the seminars, the PI is developing a
workshop series on "The Meaning of Public Science," in which exceptional local
and national scholars, artists, and scientists will be invited to address their
work to class themes in small panel discussions and lectures. All educational
efforts make considered use of a WWW infrastructure for information and
interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal is production of a book, as
well as conference presentations (for students and the PI) and articles in
scholarly journals and general education venues. By providing an overview of the
history of biology displays, this research project re-situates museums as
important institutions in relation to the existing histories of research
practices and popularization in the life sciences. By placing liberal arts
students in museums, the PI's pedagogical activities can expose them to social
science methodologies, as well advance community and disciplinary outreach
between the public and academic worlds of science.&lt;br/&gt;