* 0135425
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Nationalism, Reproduction, and Labor Migration in Israel
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2002,06/30/2003
* Peter Brown, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 06/30/2003
* USD 10,258.00

This dissertation research project investigates experiences regarding pregnancy
and reproduction in two of the most populous, and markedly different, groups of
migrant workers currently working in Tel Aviv, Israel: Nigerian and Filipina
women. Given Israel's nationalist ideal of an ethno-religious Jewish majority,
non-Jewish migrants' reproduction is perceived as an unbearable economic burden
and a threat to Israeli national integrity. In this ethnographic context, this
study--conducted in affiliation with the Physicians for Human Rights Open Clinic
and the municipal Mesila Aid and Information Center--investigates individual
women's experiences of pregnancy and parenthood through semi-structured
interviews, participant observation, and life history interviews. Findings will
be anchored in a broader exploration of the microsocial, sociocultural, and
political economic contexts of migrant women's lives in a foreign, and often
unwelcoming, host society. This study broadens the global discussions regarding
transnational labor migration through ethnographic and theoretical elaboration
of migrant women's experiences of biological reproduction, and the dynamic
interrelationship among nationalist sentiment, demographic speculation,
administrative policies and constraints, and transnational labor migration
flows.