* 0135318
* Acquisition of an X-Ray Fluorescence Spectrometer for Geological and Environmental Analysis
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2002,11/30/2004
* Samuel Traina, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 11/30/2004
* USD 131,200.00

EAR-0135318&lt;br/&gt;Lyons&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A state-of-the-art X-ray
Fluorescence Spectrometer will provide new elemental chemical analysis
capabilities for a variety of Earth and environmental sciences research projects
at the Ohio State University. The instrument will also be used by both
undergraduate and graduate students as part of courses and their research
projects with faculty. Some selected research projects that will use the new
instrument are described below. Profs. W. Berry Lyons and Anne Carey and their
students will investigate major sources of geochemical input into the world's
oceans from suspended materials in rivers that may contribute a large portion of
the sediment that enters the oceans. In order to understand ocean chemistry, the
main sources of chemical species from natural and anthropogenic origins must be
determined. Prof. David Elliot's research group will collect and analyze a
igneous rocks in order to understand better the tectonic processes and transport
of magma associated with initial Gondwana break-up. This research will
contribute to understanding changes in earth history, specifically the break up
and movement of continents. Prof. Samuel Traina's group will investigate the
nature of adsorption of inorganic chemical contaminants onto soils and
sediments. Understanding these processes is important because adsorption of
pollutants, including radioactive waste, to soils and sediments could control
their transport and effect on living organisms. Prof. Frank Schwartz, an Ohio
Eminent Scholar, and his students, will study how inhomogeneities in surface
soils affect the propagation of reaction fronts. This information will be used
to understand better potential processes for remediation of polluted sites.
Prof. Prabir Dutta's group will make measurements to support their development
of senor arrays for toxic gases in high temperature environments, such as
automobile engines. Prof. Lonnie Thompson and his research group, will analyze
dust from ice cores that they have collected from throughout the world. In order
to assess current or future global climate change, past history and the factors
that caused climate change must be understood. The ice cores from polar ice
sheets and high altitude tropical ice caps, collected by Thompson and co-
workers, contain high-resolution records of climatic and environmental variation
that can extend over thousands of years. The information gained from this
research will be useful in assessing historical changes in global climate.
&lt;br/&gt;