* 0135142
* SGER:  Query Optimization to Meet Performance Targets in a Wide Area Environment
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2004
* Louiqa Raschid, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 09/30/2004
* USD 57,358.00

The goal of this research project is to develop a performance target (PT)
sensitive optimizer. Performance targets are relevant in the noisy wide area
environment where access costs to Internet accessible WebSources exhibit
transient behavior, and are best characterized by a distribution of access
costs. A PT sensitive optimizer will have the ability to differentiate among
multiple alternate WebSources, and to choose a combination of WebSources so as
to best meet a performance target for some query (and its query evaluation
plan). The ability to meet a target is quantified by a utility function.
Existing optimizers and their cost model consider either specific values or
expected values for access costs, and are not sensitive to performance targets.
This approach characterizes each plan with the expected value of the cost of the
plan, as well as the delay; delay is the deviation above the expected value. A
Cost-Delay measure (CDM) combines these two values using a cost factor and a
delay factor. A simulation based study of the optimizer's aggregate behavior,
for a set of queries and a set of remote relations on WebSources will be used to
correlate the PT optimizer's selection of plans and WebSources with its success
in maximizing utility or meeting a performance target. The results of this
project will provide a tunable optimizer for noisy environments that allow
applications to be sensitive to performance targets and to better utilize
Internet resources.