* 0135443
* Collection of Perishable Data from the Nisqually Earthquake for Improving Casualty Loss Estimation Methodologies
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2003
* Kimberley Shoaf, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 08/31/2003
* USD 94,548.00

This prooposal has the specific objective to collect perishable data on injuries
and related building damage for the recent Nisqually earthquake. The data
collected under the proposed effort would enhance existing injury and damage
databases compiled for recent U.S. earthquakes (the Whittier Narrows, Loma
Prieta and Northridge earthquakes), and will build on current NSF-funded
research (CMS 99-00062 & CMS 00-85314) to establish a standardized earthquake
injury categorization scheme, intended to help refine casualty estimation models
for earthquake response and mitigation. Injury data will be collected from
hospital emergency department logs and abstracted from hospital patient records.
Information on building damage and repair cost is collected by various local
jurisdictions, and is often aggregated at the county and state level. Detailed
data may be available from a number of communities, and this data will be sought
for correlation to data on earthquake-related injuries. This information will be
matched by address to injury locations to help identify structure-related injury
risk factors. Future work for which additional funding will be sought includes:
analysis of trends found in the building damage/injury data: cross-sectional
survey of the population and injury cases for a case-control study of injuries;
geographic analysis of injuries and building damage; integration into modeling
for casualty estimation.