* 0135210
* Microbial Genome Seqencing:  A Genomic Approach to Sulfur Biotransformations in the Ocean: The Genome Sequence of a Marine Roseobacter
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2001,12/31/2007
* Ronald Kiene, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 12/31/2007
* USD 926,753.00

The emission of dimethylsulfide (DMS) from the ocean represents the major
natural input of sulfur to the Earth's atmosphere. Once in the atmosphere, DMS
is rapidly oxidized, forming sulfur aerosols that have an important impact on
atmospheric chemistry and the global climate system. Recent evidence points to a
key role for members of the marine roseobacter lineage in carrying out these
globally-important functions. Representatives of the roseobacter group,
including Silicibacter sp. DSS-3, are known to carry out many, if not most, of
the major biogeochemical transformations of DMS and its precursor compound,
dimethylsulfonioproionate (DMSP). Of particular importance is the fact that
organisms like DSS-3 have the ability to produce DMS from DMSP but also the
ability to metabolize DMSP by an alternative pathway that bypasses DMS
altogether. Little is currently known about how these different pathways are
regulated in marine bacteria, or how pathway regulation affects the complex DMS
biogeochemistry in the sea. Thus the genome sequence of Silicibacter sp. DSS-3
will provide key information for deciphering how marine bacterioplankton control
sulfur emission from the ocean. In this project, a fully closed and annotated
sequence of Silicibacter sp. DSS-3 will be obtained, with the goal of developing
molecular tools that can be used to investigate the microbiology and ecology of
bacterially mediated organic sulfur transformations in the ocean. The
roseobacter group is currently the only major lineage of marine heterotrophs
whose members can be readily cultured and manipulated in the laboratory. As
such, a genome sequence of Silicibacter sp. DSS-3 will also be of broad interest
to marine biogeochemists and microbial ecologists. Sequence data will be
provided to the scientific community through the TIGR Microbial Database site
(www.tigr.org/tdb/tdb.html). Initial release of the sequence data will be in the
form of contigs assembled at 3-fold sequence coverage, with monthly data
releases thereafter. This is a Microbial Genome Sequencing Award funded through
a collaborative activity between the National Science Foundation and the
Department of Agriculture Initiative for Future Agriculture and Food
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;