* 0135783
* SGER:  Thermal Monitoring of Gut Ischemia
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2004
* H Bowman, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 09/30/2004
* USD 50,679.00

0135783 Bowman In this application, it is proposed to apply the Thermal
Diffusion Probe (TDP) technique which quantifies perfusion to monitor gut
ischemia by a proxy measurement of rectal wall blood flow. Feasibility will be
demonstrated by the correlation of rectal wall blood flow with small bowel blood
flow in a porcine model. Successful demonstration of this correlation will be
followed by the bioengineering of a non-invasive probe system for the
measurement of rectal wall perfusion. Shock occurs when arterial pressure and
subsequently tissue blood flow (perfusion) drop so low that the delivered oxygen
is not able to meet the metabolic needs of the tissue. During shock, the body
directs blood to the heart and the brain, often at the expense of "sacrificial"
organs such as the liver, skin, muscle, and gut. Prolonged shock may diminish
blood flow to the gut such that the normal intestinal barrier function is
disrupted and gut-derived bacteria and endotoxins are translocated to other
organs via the blood. This, in turn, may lead to bacteremia, sepsis,
inflammatory response and ultimately multi-organ failure - one of the major
causes of patient mortality in the ICU. Conventional resuscitation therapy is
directed toward first assuring that oxygen is being supplied to the patient and
that it is being transported through the circulation to the organs to support
life. Circulatory distress is addressed with the infusion of fluids and
pharmacological agents (inotropes) to increase cardiac output. Therapy is
typically titrated to attain a target heart rate (HR), systolic blood pressure,
mean arterial blood pressure (MAP), urine output, and normal arterial pH.
Cardiac output (CO) may also be monitored. While these conventional parameters
are thought to give an indirect indication of tissue oxygenation, they correlate
poorly with survival in critically ill patients (Astiz and Rackow, 1993;
Shoemaker et al., 1993). Techniques have been proposed to monitor parameters
(pO2, pH, pCO2, lactate, etc.) in sacrificial tissues that are susceptible to
hypoperfusion, hypoxia and ischemia to provide an optimal ipend pointll to guide
resuscitation therapy. While these parameters are an attempt to assess the local
tissue blood flow, and hence the oxygen delivery, they also depend on metabolism
and their respective arterial blood concentrations. It is evident that a
reliable monitor for gut ischemia could significantly impact the management of
shock patients.