* 0135877
* Determining the Essential Role of the Major Phosphoprotein of Vaccinia Virus: Vp11
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Michael Reddy, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Jo Ann Wise
* 12/31/2006
* USD 401,138.00

The activities of many viral proteins required for viral DNA replication and
morphogenesis are regulated by phosphorylation. That this is the case in
vaccinia virus (VV), which is the best-understood member of the Poxviridae, is
increasingly clear. Poxviruses encode the vast majority of their own enzymatic
components required for the transcription and replication of their viral genome.
This remarkable autonomy from the host makes VV one of the most premier
eukaryotic biochemical and genetic model systems available. The study of VV
continues to shed light on parallel systems such as DNA replication, chromatin
condensation, post-translational modification of proteins, and dynamic aspects
of kinases and phosphatases. In particular, VV encodes two protein kinases (F10
and B1) and a dual-specificity phosphatase (H1). These enzymes are all essential
in the viral life cycle. However, the precise molecular role dynamic
phosphorylation plays during the viral life cycle remains largely undefined. The
vaccinia viral protein that is at the heart of this research, Vp11, is an
11-kDa-phosphoserine protein. Although Vp11 (encoded by the gene F17) is the
most abundant protein (in terms of number of molecules) in the virion, its
precise in vivo function(s) remains elusive. As such, the primary goal of this
research is to determine the in vivo function(s) of Vp11. Vp11 binds to DNA in
vitro, and has long been postulated to be involved in condensation of the viral
genomic DNA. By modulating nucleic acid-binding activity, protein
phosphorylation can be a positive or negative regulator of gene expression.
Phosphorylation may also be necessary for the oligomerization of a protein.
Furthermore, protein phosphorylation can also be required for the proper
subcellular localization of a protein, or may be critical for the protein's
stability in vivo. This project is designed to explore these scenarios. Recent
results from this project point to an important role of the MAP/ERK kinase-
signaling pathway during the VV life cycle. The proven tractability of vaccinia
as a model system allows a dissection of this possible contribution of the host
cell. Aspects of these processes are addressed within this project by a focused
molecular characterization of Vp11 as well as the role of the MAP/ERK signaling
pathway in the life cycle of poxviruses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
described in this project involves an animal virus called vaccinia. Vaccinia was
the live vaccine used to eradicate smallpox. The study of vaccinia virus by
biochemists has long provided insights into the more complicated workings of
human cells. For the correct growth of a human cell, many forms of control (also
called "regulation") are required. Without this regulation, cell growth becomes
abnormal. The most common type of regulation is a simple chemical process by
which a phosphate ion is placed on certain types of protein. Regulation of this
sort is termed "phosphorylation". This NSF-funded research will provide a window
into this crucial event by using a much simpler, and therefore more tractable,
viral model system.