* 0135923
* Board on Atmospheric Sciences and Climate Core Support
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Chris Elfring, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 12/31/2004
* USD 820,000.00

This is a grant to support the continuation of the core activities of the Board
on Atmospheric Sciences and Climate (BASC) of the National Academy of Sciences.
The objectives of the effort include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(i) providing a
national and international forum for the atmospheric sciences, focusing on
research needs, policy issues, educational implications and issues and the
resources required to improve understanding of the atmosphere and its
interaction with human societies and other components of the Earth
System;&lt;br/&gt;(ii) coordinating and overseeing the BASC study units involved
in developing and publishing disciplinary assessments that probe the frontiers
articulated in the Atmospheric Sciences Entering the Twenty-First Century
report, and other studies requested by agencies on specific
issues;&lt;br/&gt;(iii) serving as a continuing resource to inform and provide
advice from the atmospheric sciences community to federal agencies and other
relevant decision-makers, and to serve as a linkage to the entire cross-section
of the atmospheric sciences community. To this end, BASC proposes to initiate
annual forums to discuss the Federal plans and budgets for the atmospheric
sciences and climate related research. The resulting forums will serve as major
mechanisms for improving the coordination of the entire Federal program in these
vital areas.&lt;br/&gt;(iv) coordinating atmospheric science expertise for other
National Research Council (NRC) units (most frequently with Ocean Studies Board,
Polar Research Board, Board on Earth Sciences and Resources, Board on
Environmental Studies and Toxicology, Space Studies Board, and the Committee on
Global Change Research, but others as needed), international project offices,
and bodies whose activities involve atmospheric sciences and whose actions may
impact atmospheric science policy, societal impacts and educational issues. The
relationship with the Committee on Global Change Research is particularly close
with both the BASC chair and the chair of the Climate Research Committee serving
as members.&lt;br/&gt;(v) creating a national forum for responsive dialogue on a
number of atmospheric science phenomena of immediate and growing concern to
society, including the conduct of specific studies and workshops in response to
emerging science issues and Federal agency needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These
activities are important because they provide advice to and review of the
Federal atmospheric and climate sciences funding agencies.