* 0135586
* Dissertation Research:   Vertebrate Paleontology and the Evolutionary Synthesis
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2005
* William Provine, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 01/31/2005
* USD 11,989.00

From 1870 to 1930, vertebrate paleontology enjoyed a central position among the
sciences working out the details of Darwin's Theory of Evolution By Natural
Selection. During the next twenty years, and the so-called "modern synthesis" of
evolutionary biology, vertebrate paleontology moved to the periphery of
disciplines now orbiting chromosome genetics and theoretical population
genetics. Existing histories of vertebrate paleontology seem to accept this life
span for the discipline: the very few that venture into the 20th century end
before 1940. The emergent new fields, conversely, gained "origin myths" told,
debated, refined and studied scientists and historians alike. The dissertation
research supported by this grant is a last phase of work that will support a
dissertation in the history of biology. That project has three aims. First, it
is an empirical project that will recover the history of American vertebrate
paleontology between 1900 and 1950. Second, the study will consider the role of
history-writing by scientists as they forge a place for their discipline among
others. Third, the project will consider the historiographic problems inherent
to producing a new account of the evolutionary synthesis told from the
perspective of an "outsider" discipline. How does the marginalization of a
science and its history in the present relate to the project of describing the
past moment in which that move was accomplished? The research carried out under
this grant consists of interviews with scientists and historians who have
contributed to our understanding of vertebrate paleontology's place in the
evolutionary synthesis. Many of those men are at retirement age or older; the
few who can give "eye-witness" accounts of events during the synthesis are
invaluable to this study. Information and opinions from these conversations will
be combined with completed research using primary- and secondary material. The
perceptions of these scientists are crucial for a project intended to measure
the impact of history-writing in science. A second, equally important product of
this grant's research is the set of interview transcripts. In order to enlarge
the set of primary materials representing vertebrate paleontology during the
1930s and 1940s, the set of interviews will be tape recorded, transcribed and
deposited as a collection with the American Philosophical Society. The intention
is to provide some sort of solution to this project's basic methodological
concern with the connection between disciplines that are poorly represented in
modern biology, in historical studies and in archives.

