* 0135621
* Adsorbate Mediated Electrodeposition: Experimental and Multiscale Numerical Investigations on Surface Roughness and Shape Evolution
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2004
* Richard Alkire, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Glenn L. Schrader
* 12/31/2004
* USD 390,000.00

Proposal Title: Adsorbate Mediated Electrodeposition: Experimental and
Multiscale Numerical Investigations on Surface Roughness and Shape Evolution
Proposal Number: CTS-0135621 Principal Investigator:Richard Alkire
Institution:University of Illinois

The objective of this collaborative effort is to improve understanding of how
surface roughness and shape evolution are influenced by trace quantities of
solution additives during electrodeposition of metals and alloys. Multiscale
simulations of the electrodeposition process including both continuum and non-
continuum behavior will be performed. Hypotheses for how additives influence
surface roughness evolution will be inferred from large datasets obtained
through atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements carried out in conjunction
with high throughput electrochemical cells and well-characterized model additive
systems. Hypotheses will be refined through quantitative comparison of these
data with multiscale simulations of roughness evolution. Non-continuum phenomena
will be modeled by a three-dimensional kinetic Monte Carlo method that simulates
how roughness evolution is controlled by additives. Verification experiments
that measure shape evolution on surfaces of convoluted geometry will be carried
out to test predictions over multiple length scales. This work will lead to a
better understanding of processes used in the manufacture of novel structures
formed by electrodeposition of metals, alloys and semiconductors.