* 0135526
* Rural Systemic Initiatives in Science, Mathematics,and Technology Education - RSI: Arizona Rural Systemic Initiative
* EDU,DRL
* 03/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Roberto Canchola, Arizona State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jody Chase
* 08/31/2007
* USD 4,634,444.00

The Arizona-Rural Systemic Initiative (AZ-RSI) proposes to create a learning
environment to improve science, mathematics and technology education in 22
rural, economically disadvantaged K-12 schools/communities with high American
Indian and Hispanic enrollments. The 22 schools are located within the
boundaries of 7 public school districts and 2 Bureau of Indian Affairs agencies
with a total student enrollment of 9,698. The AZ-RSI is a partnership among the
22 rural schools, 2 County School Offices, Arizona State University East, and
WestEd Education Laboratory. Memoranda of Agreement with school boards support
the proposed implementation plan to improve mathematics and science education
for nearly 10,000 students by focusing on comprehensive and cohesive capacity-
building at the local site. The AZ-RSI has designed an implementation plan that
emphasizes reform at the school level. The plan is flexible and full of
technical assistance and leadership training for all stakeholders to help build
requisite capacity for implementing and sustaining lasting reform. The AZ-RSI
has formed a highly qualified management team to oversee the implementation
plan. Field specialists with expertise in classroom implementation of effective
instructional strategies and experience in education reform will provide on-site
support to Local Leadership Teams. Said teams will implement school-wide plans
to improve mathematics and science for all students with the help from field
specialists. The AZ-RSI anticipates that the overall impacts will be improved
student achievement in mathematics and science in participating schools,
increased capacity of schools to sustain improvements, and a significant
contribution to rural education research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;