* 0135162
* Neural Mechanisms of Dominance Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2007
* Donald Edwards, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* J. Steven de Belle
* 09/30/2007
* USD 512,788.00

Lay Abstract: D.H. Edwards (PI), "Neural mechanisms of dominance
behavior"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The neural bases of dominance hierarchy formation
are not well understood. In crayfish and lobster, formation of a dominance
hierarchy begins with fighting between pairs of animals in which both animals
perform similar behavior patterns: approaches, attacks, and offensive tailflips.
At some point, one animal becomes subordinate by switching to defensive behavior
and retreating or performing any of three types of escape tailflips. The changes
in behavior result from changes in the excitabilities of the neural circuits
that mediate the behavior patterns. Changes in circuit excitability may result
from changes in neuromodulation of the circuit. Serotonin is one neuromodulator
that has been shown to affect escape behavior in a manner that depends on the
animal's social status. The present research will determine whether serotonin
modulates neural circuits for other behaviors that are important for dominance
decisions, including another form of tailflip, backward walking (i.e., retreat),
and body posture. The research will also determine whether the serotonergic
neurons that normally modulate these circuits are themselves affected by changes
in social status. The project will help provide a comprehensive view of the role
of serotonergic neuromodulation in the formation of dominance hierarchies by
crayfish. &lt;br/&gt;