* 0135509
* Hierarchical Self-assembly and Characterization of Photonic Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Charles Drain, CUNY Hunter College
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 03/31/2006
* USD 370,675.00

The objective of this work is to prepare a number of metalloporphyrin material
building blocks and then assemble them into photonic materials. A number of
metalloporphyrins will be or have been prepared and the thermodynamics,
kinetics, and cooperative interactions involved in the self assembly of these
materials will be studied. These self assembled materials will then be assembled
into supramolecualr photonics with multiple functions and these photonic systems
will be processed onto surfaces and into polymers. The assemblies thus formed
will be characterized by a number of physical methods, some in the laboratory of
the PI and some in collaboration with other
investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Organic and
Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Dr. Charles M.
Drain of the Department of Chemistry at CUNY Hunter College. Dr. Drain will
explore the synthesis of photonic materials. Photonic materials are assemblies
of molecules which can absorb and emit photons in small defined spaces. These
light absorbing materials (chromophores) are typically assembled onto surfaces
(photogated transistors for example or materials on surfaces with controllable
luminesence properties) or into polymers or wires. Students trained as a result
of working on this project will gain experience in materials research as well as
supramolecular organic chemistry, hence they will have skills needed by both the
specialty chemicals and the computer/materials industries.&lt;br/&gt;