* 0135615
* The Dispersion of Feynman Diagrams in Postwar Physics
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2003
* David Kaiser, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Fixed Price Award
* Keith R. Benson
* 01/31/2003
* USD 51,264.00

Project Abstract SES 0135615 The Dispersion of Feynman Diagrams in Postwar
Physics David Kaiser MIT

Unlike traditional approaches to the history and philosophy of theoretical
physics, which have been framed as intellectual or conceptual histories, this
project examines the history of recent physics with a focus on calculational
skills, local practices, and theoretical tools and techniques. In particular,
this project traces the history of a theoretical tool which came to dominate
nearly every branch of modern physics: Richard Feynman 's simple line-drawings,
introduced in the late 1940s. Of central interest is how generations of young
theorists learned to frame their research in terms of the diagrams, in and out
of a series of competing theoretical frameworks for describing sub-atomic
matter. Such a skills-based view allows historians to unpack the history of
postwar theoretical physics from the ground up, as a story ultimately about
designing, deploying, and disputing the tools which undergird everyday
calculations. Complementing earlier studies of conceptual worldviews or
"paradigms," Kaiser's historical project concentrates on the simultaneous
crafting of research practices and of the scientific practitioners who put them
to work. Focusing on Feynman diagrams and their dispersion from the late 1940s
through the mid-1960s illuminates larger transitions within postwar physics,
including changing notions of how to collaborate with roomfuls of graduate
students; how to make sense of unprecedented reams of experimental data; how to
train young physicists at the postdoctoral stage; and how to communicate new
research techniques in mimeographed summer school lecture notes and preprints.
The competing uses and interpretations of Feynman diagrams during the early
postwar decades can only be understood within the context of these institutional
and pedagogical transitions. At stake was nothing less than what should count as
"theoretical physics," and how someone should be trained to become a "theorist."
This project should therefore be of interest both to historians and sociologists
of modern physics, as well as to philosophers of science who work on theory
construction and selection. The expected outcome is book on the early history of
Feynman diagrams, as well as conference presentations and published articles.