* 0135082
* CAREER:   Development of Continuous-Flow Laser-Spin Polarized Xe-129 NMR Spectroscopy in Magnetic Stray Fields for the Investigation of Nanoporous Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2007
* Thomas Meersmann, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 03/31/2007
* USD 520,500.00

In this project funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Meersmann will combine continuous-flow laser-spin-polarized
129Xe nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy with pulsed-field-gradient
diffusion techniques to develop a non-invasive analytical technique that allows
the study of porosity, pore-size distribution and pore connectivity in porous
host materials. A combination of magnetic stray fields with continuous flow
laser polarized xenon Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) will be used to study
long range structural order in materials with small diffusion constants. An
important system that will be probed with this new technique is the gas dynamics
in one-dimensional nanochannels that is driven by very slow single-file
diffusion processes. A variety of novel phenomena such as the correlation of
xenon lineshape with diffusion or concerted cluster diffusion can be probed for
the first time with these experiments.

A non-invasive analytical technique will be developed to provide information
about the porosity, pore-size distribution and pore connectivity of porous
materials. Nano-channels play an important role in a wide range of industrial
catalytic, geologic and biological processes. The results of this research are
expected to make a significant contribution to material science concerned with
heterogeneous catalysis, separation processes and in the understanding of
fundamental physical chemistry. Graduate and undergraduate students will
participate in this research. They will gain excellent training in forefront
research techniques in preparation for advanced studies or entry into the
scientific/technological workforce.