* 0135517
* Thermochemistry of Metal-Ligand Bonds and the Dynamics of Collision-Induced Dissociation
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Peter Armentrout, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 06/30/2005
* USD 674,225.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal: CHE-0135517&lt;br/&gt;PI: Armentrout,
Peter B.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of continuing
research in the fields of chemical dynamics and gas-phase organometallic ion
chemistry using a combined techniques of flow tube ion production and guided ion
beam tandem mass spectrometry (GIBMS). With this apparatus, thermalized atomic
and polyatomic ions will be produced. Detailed kinetic and thermodynamic data on
single mass-selected species will be obtained by accurately measuring the
absolute reaction probabilities at thermal and hyperthermal energies. Two new
experimental facilities will be developed: 1) An electrospray ion (ESI) source
that should enable more routine generation of nonvolatile and thermally fragile
ions in the gas phase and provide easier access to multiply charged species. 2)
A source to study state-specific chemistry of heavier transition elements that
utilizes "electronic state chromatography". A range of chemical systems will be
studied and will emphasize three related areas: 1) the dynamics of collision-
induced dissociation; 2) the chemistry of the heavier third-row transition
metals; and 3) metal ion binding to biologically relevant molecules. Implicit in
all three areas will be theoretical calculations needed to augment the
experiments. One motivation for this program is the obvious interest in making
better correlations between the detailed information available from gas-phase
ion studies with the "real world" of condensed-phase organometallic chemistry,
homogeneous catalysis, and biological systems. We make the conscious choice to
study simple systems that progress in complexity in order to quantitatively
assess trends in metal chemistry. By comprehensively studying the
thermochemistry of many metals and many ligands, the trends (periodic, changes
with number of ligands, variations in electronic states) in the thermodynamic
data allow us to transcend the gas-phase venue where the data are obtained.
Students and post doctoral research associates will participate in this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As chemical reagents, metals are important
components of biological systems, acting as active sites in enzymes and helping
to regulate cell function and to control structure. Technologically, metals are
used extensively as catalysts to produce a wide range of important fine
chemicals and fuels. In addition, molecules specifically designed to interact
selectively with certain metals are needed for nuclear waste cleanup and
decontamination. The research done in this project is designed to provide
fundamental information about the strength of the interactions of metals with
chemical components relevant to biological systems and the chemical industry.
This is most readily accomplished by examining model systems that progress in
complexity. This permits the trends in this information to be quantitatively
assessed, which allows the development of predictive capabilities for more
complex chemical environments. In this work, specialized devices known as guided
ion beam tandem mass spectrometers are utilized to examine metal ion
interactions with a variety of chemical species. This can be accomplished on
single molecules such that interfering interactions from the environment can be
eliminated. This allows the study to focus on elucidating the specific factors
that control the interaction. A close collaboration with theory provides
additional insight and provides essential predictive capabilities. The research
will be done with students and post doctoral research associates who thereby
receive training in preparation for advanced studies or entering the
scientific/technical workforce.&lt;br/&gt;