* 0135167
* Proximate Mechanisms of Sexual Size Dimorphism in Lizards
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Henry John-Alder, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 12/31/2004
* USD 230,337.00

Sexual size dimorphism (SSD) is a widespread biological phenomenon in which
adults of one sex attain characteristically larger body sizes than the other
sex. Depending on the species, males might be larger than females, or vice
versa. It is often assumed that SSD evolves due to differential selection on
body size, and several adaptive hypotheses invoking advantages for male- or
female-biased SSD have been widely discussed. However, the genetic basis and
thus the potential for evolution of SSD is almost completely undescribed, and
relatively little is known about physiological and other proximate mechanisms
that lead to sex differences in body size in the vast majority of species. It is
therefore premature to focus on ultimate as opposed to proximate causation of
SSD, as has been the general tilt of previous studies in this area. The present
project will focus on physiological and ecological mechanisms of proximate
causation of SSD in a lizard (Sceloporus undulatus) in which females grow faster
as juveniles to become about 10% larger than males as adults. This project will
address the following questions: 1) Is testosterone fundamentally responsible
for sexually dimorphic growth rates and the development of female-biased SSD? 2)
To what extent is SSD subject to environmental variation? 3) How do constraints
imposed by growth/activity trade-offs affect the occurrence of SSD? To answer
the questions posed in this project, two sets of studies will be done. 1)
Descriptive studies will characterize growth rates, behavior, and sex steroid
levels in juvenile lizards active in their native habitat. 2) Experimental
studies involving hormone manipulations will resolve unambiguously the potential
role of testosterone in leading to female-biased SSD. The work completed in this
project will contribute important new information regarding the general question
of how sex differences in growth lead to SSD. This work may open the door for
future comparative studies on growth regulation in phrynosomatid lizards, a
large family with a well-described phylogenetic history. Future comparative
molecular studies in this group could provide a detailed understanding of the
evolution of the regulation of growth-promoting gene expression and could help
to resolve the contribution of genetic vs. environmental determinants of growth
and SSD. As such, phrynosomatid lizards may prove to become a significant new
model system for studies on growth regulation.