* 0135581
* Ultrafast Dynamics and Reactivity in Ground and Excited States: Beyond the Pump-probe Method
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2005
* Marcos Dantus, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 03/31/2005
* USD 378,742.00

In this project funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Dantus will use three-pulse, four-wave mixing (FWM) non-
linear spectroscopy to study the dynamics of wave packet motion in the ground
and excited states of NO2, CF3NO, and N2O4. The purpose of the work is to
investigate intramolecular vibrational energy redistribution (IVR) and curve
crossing dynamics in polyatomic systems and thereby open up the way for more
general, and wider ranging investigations than done heretofore on diatomics.
Specific questions to be answered in this research are about the initial steps
of energy dissipation and IVR in polyatomics, what is the nature of wave packet
localization in phase space for multidimensional systems, and what is the ground
state dynamics in systems with chemically significant amounts of energy, up to
12,000 cm-1.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project deals with fundamental questions
of how energy absorbed into specific molecular energy states redistributes
itself throughout a molecule in the course of time. A good understanding of
these intramolecular processes may lead to the laser control of chemical
reactions. This research is undertaken with students and postdoctoral research
associates. They will acquire training and knowledge in one the forefront areas
of contemporary physical chemistry in preparation for advanced studies or
employment in industry, government or academia.&lt;br/&gt;