* 0135069
* Indian Knowledge-Systems on the Eve of Colonialism
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2008
* Yigal Bronner, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 01/31/2008
* USD 149,763.00

Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt;SES Proposal 0135069&lt;br/&gt;Indian Knowledge-
Systems on the Eve of Colonialism&lt;br/&gt;Sheldon Pollock, University of
Chicago&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Indian Knowledge-Systems (IKS) on the
Eve of Colonialism is an internationa collaborative research project, which
draws on the talents of ten scholars from five countries to examine the nature
of scientific and scholarly knowledge and the social existence of scholars and
scientists in South Asia during the period from 1550 (the approximate date of
two innovative thinkers, one in north India, one in the south) to
1750&lt;br/&gt;(the approximate date of the consolidation of British power in
the region). This large problematic has been narrowed by three limits, each with
its own particular logic: (1) Eight disciplines, chosen for their centrality to
traditional scientific culture or for their uncommon popularity during the
period in question, are targeted for study: language philosophy, logic-
epistemology, hermeneutics, literary theory, law, astronomy, medicine, and
ritual science; (2) In order to gain a better understanding of the variety of
social&lt;br/&gt;and political contexts for precolonial science, knowledge
production in the eight disciplines are to be examined in four distinct regional
centers: Delhi/Varanasi; Navadvip (Bengal)/Mithila; Thanjavur/Madurai;
Maharashtra; (3) The science that found expression in Sanskrit, the premier
language of learning outside the Persianate order, is considered.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;After conducting a systematic census of manuscripts and
published works in the disciplines, team members select manuscripts preserved in
South Asia (and to a lesser degree Europe and the U.S.) for collection and
archival preservation. Prosopographical data from unpublished sources as well as
from published editions and all relevant secondary scholarship is sifted and
entered into a database. This is a version of FileMaker Pro modified for
networked data entry and for specific project needs. A small number of major
texts are chosen for study according to a uniform analytic matrix. These
address, among other things: key problematics; principal disciplinary positions;
tenets of the author or school in question; dominant modes of argument,
evidence, and method. On the basis of the census of texts, the bio-biographical
database, and text-analyses, team members plan a book of essays on the character
of Indian scientific and scholarly knowledge and its social&lt;br/&gt;setting.
Both the database and the manuscript archives (with links to the database) are
to be available to the public on the IKS Website, in hopes that the database can
be enriched even beyond the limits of the IKS project, to become a key tool of
Indian studies. Comparative histories of Indo-Persian and eventually European
science are initiatives built into the logic and structure of the IKS project.
&lt;br/&gt;