* 0135434
* Regulation of M. xanthus Social Gliding by Dif Pathway
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Zhaomin Yang, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 08/31/2006
* USD 408,160.00

Myxococcus xanthus exhibits the most spectacular morphogenesis among bacteria
during its developmental life cycle. In response to starvation, tens of
thousands of cells move by gliding motility to aggregate and to form
multicellular fruiting bodies visible to the naked eye. Vegetative cells within
mature fruiting bodies differentiate into dormant and stress-resistant
myxospores. Distinct from any other known gliding bacteria, M. xanthus possesses
two gliding systems, the adventurous (A) and the social (S) motility systems.
While A motility enables M. xanthus cells to move as isolated individuals, S
motility is manifested as movement of large cell groups. It remains an enigma
how M. xanthus cells interact and coordinate with one another to bring about S
motility. A new set of genes, the dif genes, is implicated in S motility. The
predicted dif gene products show high similarity to chemotaxis proteins from
many bacteria. It is known that bacterial chemotaxis proteins constitute sensory
signal transduction pathways that are responsible for bacterial tactic responses
to environmental stimuli. The similarity between Dif and chemotaxis proteins and
the S-motility defects of dif mutants strongly suggest the involvement of a
sensory component in the regulation of S-motility. This project takes a
multidisciplinary approach of genetics, molecular biology and biochemistry to
examine and to consolidate working hypotheses. dif mutations will be constructed
for functional and structural studies. Genetic suppressors of difA mutants will
be characterized to identify genes with functional, biochemical and/or physical
interactions with the dif chemotaxis-like signal transduction pathway.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a broader context, the outcome of this project is
expected to advance our understanding of cell-cell interactions and
intercellular communications, which are widespread and play essential roles in
various biological systems and processes.&lt;br/&gt;