* 0135860
* Social Inequality and African Independent Churches in Mozambique
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2004
* James Pfeiffer, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 01/31/2004
* USD 71,293.00

0135860 Pfeiffer Over the last decade central Mozambique has experienced a
dramatic proliferation of independent Christian faith-healing churches whose
membership has jumped from an estimated 10% of poor peri-urban populations to
well over 50%. Rooted in the Zimbabwean and South African "Zionist" and
"Apostolic" movements, the majority of the churches are "syncretistic",
combining local Shona religious notions of illness causation with Pentecostal
beliefs in the healing power of the "Holy Spirit" to recruit new members, mostly
women, through treatment of reproductive and child health problems. Often
referred to as the African Independent Churches (AICs), these denominations are
a distinctively African expression of a world-wide Pentecostal boom that has
gained remarkable momentum over the last 20 years. Throughout southern Africa,
the AIC movements represent an extensive transformation of public discourse on
health and treatment-seeking among the poor. During this period of AIC
proliferation, central Mozambique also experienced rapid growth in economic
disparity and social inequality as a result of economic reforms, privatization,
and an influx of foreign aid projects. The research will examine the hypothesis
that growing social inequality has fueled the popularity of the AICs, since poor
women's social and economic vulnerability in urban settings is perceived to have
intensified in the increasingly competitive environment. The project will test
the hypothesis that reduced social cohesion and greater social competition find
cultural expression in increased fears of witchcraft, sorcery, and new
categories of avenging spirits believed to cause reproductive health problems.
AICs appear to offer unique protection from these perceived threats to women and
children's health. Using surveys and in-depth interviewing the research will a)
identify demographic characteristics of AIC participants, b) measure community
perceptions of change in social inequality, social cohesion, and
sorcery/witchcraft practices that affect health, and 3) examine how new church
recruits made decisions concerning how to treat their reproductive health
problems and why they eventually chose to consult church healers. Research
findings will help provide a better understanding of why religious movements
influenced by Pentecostalism have become so popular in the developing world and
why healing plays such a key role in recruitment. The results will contribute to
a growing body of research among public health and economic development planners
on the relationship between economic disparity, social environment, and health.
The findings will also provide insight into health care utilization patterns,
useful to policy makers for improvement of primary health care delivery in
Mozambique and Southern Africa.