* 0135279
* RUI: Atranyl-Nucleosides as Ribozyme Probes
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Edward Fenlon, Xavier University
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 08/31/2003
* USD 73,356.00

Current models for the catalytic mechanisms of protein enzymes are far more
advanced&lt;br/&gt;than those for RNA enzymes (ribozymes). This project will
contribute to understanding how the&lt;br/&gt;catalytic mechanisms of ribozymes
compare with those of protein enzymes. The specific&lt;br/&gt;objectives of this
project are to: (1) synthesize atranyl-nucleosides 1-3; (2) characterize
and&lt;br/&gt;determine the aqueous stability of atranyl-nucleosides; (3) use
atranyl-nucleosides as transition&lt;br/&gt;state analogues (TSAs) to study the
hammerhead and lead-dependent (leadzyme) ribozymes via&lt;br/&gt;collaborations;
and (4) train undergraduate students in synthetic organic techniques
in&lt;br/&gt;preparation for graduate study and/or careers in science. TSAs are
useful for enzyme studies;&lt;br/&gt;however, suitable TSAs for phosphoryl
transfer reactions are lacking. Compounds 1-3 have an&lt;br/&gt;atrane moiety
incorporated into a ribonucleoside. The atrane contains a trigonal
bipyramidal&lt;br/&gt;silicon, germanium, tin, or titanium atom; and thus, 1-3
mimic the oxyphosphorane transition&lt;br/&gt;state of the ribozyme-catalyzed
reaction. Compound 2 is a protected phosphoramidite that&lt;br/&gt;contains
uridine and deoxyadenosine connected through the atrane moiety. Several
syntheses of&lt;br/&gt;2 starting from 5'-O-DMT-2'-amino-2'-deoxyuridine will be
evaluated. Prof. William G. Scott of&lt;br/&gt;UC-Santa Cruz will incorporate 2
into the hammerhead substrate by solid-phase synthesis to&lt;br/&gt;obtain a
hammerhead ribozyme-TSA crystal structure. Prof. Arthur Pardi of the University
of&lt;br/&gt;Colorado-Boulder will similarly determine the structure in solution
using NMR spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;Analogous approaches will be taken for
leadzyme structural studies following the synthesis of&lt;br/&gt;phosphoramidite
3. These experiments will elucidate the magnitude of
conformational&lt;br/&gt;rearrangement required to reach the transition state in
each of these small RNA catalysts. This&lt;br/&gt;research will also help
identify the role of specific RNA functional groups and metal cations
in&lt;br/&gt;catalysis. This knowledge is paramount for understanding the pre-
biotic "RNA world" and how&lt;br/&gt;our current life forms evolved from it.