* 0135428
* Mechanisms of Fast Neurotransmitter Secretion
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2002,01/31/2006
* Konrad Zinsmaier, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 01/31/2006
* USD 345,000.00

Regulated neurotransmitter exocytosis is a fundamental process for the
intercellular communication among neurons. It is widely accepted that
neurotransmitter secretion is a tightly regulated form of constitutive vesicular
exocytosis shared by all eukaryotic cells. At the nerve terminal, a
depolarization-induced Ca2+ influx through ion specific channels triggers the
fusion of synaptic vesicles, which expel their neurotransmitter cargo onto the
postsynaptic cell.&lt;br/&gt;A combination of biochemical and genetic approaches
by many laboratories has lead to molecular models describing exocytotic and
endocytotic mechanisms. In particular, recent advances uncovered the SNARE- or
core complex driving constitutive membrane fusion. However, little is known
about mechanism that mediate vesicle docking, arrest fusion-competent vesicles
in the readily releasable pool, accomplish Ca2+ signaling from the sensor to the
fusion machinery, adjust the probability of vesicle fusion, or regulate the size
of readily releasable pool.&lt;br/&gt;We have initiated a genetic screen to
identify further components mediating Ca2+-triggered exocytosis at nerve
terminals and identified several novel mutations, which potentially affect
neurotransmission. Of these, the mutation B682 is especially interesting because
it inhibits a unique activity-dependent loss of evoked release, which coincides
with a simultaneous increase in spontaneous neurotransmitter release, suggestive
of an impaired releasable vesicle pool. A unifying hypothesis suggests that B682
protein mediates a late step in synaptic vesicle maturation that accumulates
fusion-competent vesicles in the "readily releasable vesicle pool".
Specifically, B682 may "clamp" these fusogenic vesicles such that they await the
fusion-triggering Ca2+ signal.&lt;br/&gt;To test this hypothesis (and explore
others if warranted), loss- and gain-of-function B682 mutations will be examined
for their effects on synaptic function at NMJs. These effects will be examined
by a multi-disciplinary approach including electrophysiology, Ca2+ imaging,
FM1-43 imaging, confocal and electron microscopy, and
biochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;The first two Objectives will lay basic and essential
groundwork for evaluating B682's synaptic role. Specifically, we will verify
that B682 is indeed a presynaptic protein that affects a physiological step of
synaptic transmission but not neuromuscular synaptogenesis. Once these points
are fully established the third Objective will test the essence of the B682
protein hypothesis. Specifically, it will test the prediction that B682
mutations do not impair Ca2+ entry and/or extrusion. In addition, this objective
will test whether the abnormal vesicle distribution in B682 mutants is caused by
a defect in vesicle recycling, steps of vesicle trafficking to active zones
and/or refilling the readily releasable vesicle pool. Together, these studies
will help to better understand the molecular mechanisms that mediate the
regulation of fast, synchronous neurotransmitter exocytosis at nerve
terminals.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;