* 0135920
* Dissertation Research: The Tainted Gift: A comparative study of the framings of risk and safety of the contamination of the blood supply with AIDS virus in France and the U.S
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2003
* Stephen Hilgartner, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Keith R. Benson
* 12/31/2003
* USD 7,992.00

This dissertation research project proposes to examine how framings of risk and
safety, and understandings about which entities pose risks, change over time,
and how these changes influence political, technical, social, and medical
decisions. It will focus on the contamination of the blood supply with the AIDS
virus in France and the United States. Through examination of the dynamic
process of risk perception and the construction of conceptual objects of risk
from a network of elements, this study will trace an episode of contention of
science and/or politics, and grapple with the question of why attempts to
contain crisis can often have the opposite effect. The contamination of blood
during the early 1980s provides a particularly good site for tracing the
succession and interaction of conceptual objects of risk. The proposed project
covers the mid-1980s when the etiology of AIDS was not well understood, and when
knowledge about the disease was evolving rapidly. In addition, the populations
"at risk" for the disease were not yet well defined. Hemophiliacs framed the
threat in terms of their previous experience with hepatitis, blood bankers
struggled against a threat to an adequate supply of blood, and doctors in both
countries identified antibodies to the virus as indicators of protection and as
indicators of infection. The study of AIDS in the blood supply by tracing risk
objects can provide a better understanding of the dynamics of risk more
generally. It is socially significant for assessing the role of risk perception,
identification, and change in policy making processes, and can point to new ways
of producing knowledge about potential risk for scholars and professionals in
policy-related areas, public health, risk management, and health-related fields,
particularly when dealing with situations of great uncertainty and grave
potential consequences, such as AIDS in the 1980s or variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob
disease today. NSF funds will pay primarily for archival work in the
Washington/Baltimore area, which has the largest number of interview and
research sites relevant to the project.