* 0135333
* 'Dreamers with Shovels': Science and Technology in the New Deal Political Imagination
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Jessica Wang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Fixed Amount Award
* Frederick Kronz
* 06/30/2006
* USD 90,000.00

Project Abstract SES Proposal 0135333 "Dreamers with Shovels:" Science and
Technology in the New Deal Political Imagination Jessica Wang, University of
California, Los Angeles

The project investigates, through a series of biographically-based historical
case studies, the role of science and technology in political thought and action
during the New Deal period in the United States. Within science and technology
studies, many observers of technocratic political thought have emphasized its
hegemonic, instrumentalist, and undemocratic character. In recent years,
however, scholars have recognized that while this approach has contributed much
toward understanding the nature of technological society, it needs to be revised
and augmented. A study of the New Deal provides an important opportunity to
reconsider prevailing assumptions and scrutinize the complex nature of
technocratic politics as a set of beliefs and practices.

The study centers on three main subjects -- planning, electrification, and
state-building -- and discusses how science and technology affected policymaking
in each of these areas during the New Deal years. The section on planning
illuminates how Rexford Guy Tugwell, Frederic A. Delano, Wesley C. Mitchell, and
Charles E. Merriam sought to translate technocratic ideology into action. With
electrification, the study turns to technology itself and investigates the
conflicts within the Tennessee Valley Authority and the Rural Electrification
Administration over the proper relationship between technology and human values,
and the appropriate political structures for technological development. The
discussion of state-building examines how Jerome N. Frank and William M.
Leiserson used ideas about science to legitimize the New Deal state and justify
its expansion of state power via the new administrative agencies of the 1930s.
The final part of the project probes the postwar experiences of Henry A. Wallace
and David E. Lilienthal, examines the transformation of technocratic politics
wrought by the cold war, and explores how cold war instrumentalism replaced the
technocratic liberalism of the New Deal.

By examining how the New Dealers understood science and technology as a resource
for politics, the project contributes to a renewed debate within STS over the
nature of technocratic ideology and its political ramifications. The New Deal
reveals the full complexity behind technocratic politics. Some of the New
Dealers adopted subjectivist beliefs about the nature of knowledge, some brought
a nostalgic, agrarian dimension to their version of technological progress, and
most took seriously the problematic relationship between experts and democratic
society and struggled over the question of whether technocratic politics could
be made consistent with democratic values. The diverse range of thought and
experience among the New Dealers suggests that an image of technocratic politics
as naively positivist, dedicated to an unwavering faith in technological
progress, and overly willing to subordinate democratic values to a cult of
expertise requires refinement and reevaluation. The project will reinforce STS's
current efforts to readdress the relationship between expertise and democracy
and explore the full meaning of science and technology as forms of political
thought and practice.