* 0135247
* Studies of Chemical Processes Using Rydberg Atoms
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2006
* F. Barry Dunning, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 03/31/2006
* USD 231,000.00

In this project funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Dunning will use atoms in high Rydberg states as a tool with
which to conduct a comprehensive study of the formation and properties of a wide
variety of negative ion species. Electron transfer reactions in which the
excited Rydberg electron is captured by a target molecule will be investigated
to obtain information on the energetics of dissociative electron attachment.
This will be accomplished through detailed measurements of the angular and
velocity distributions of the product ions. Kinematic studies will be used to
explore the mechanisms by which such species are created. The dependence of
their lifetime on the rotational (and vibrational) states of the parent neutral
will be investigated to gain new insights into the coupling of rotational and
electronic motions. Collisions of dipole-bound ions with attaching and polar
targets will be examined to explore their chemical properties.

Atoms in which one electron is excited to a high-lying state will be used to
conduct a comprehensive study of electron capture by molecules. Aside from their
fundamental interest, the results of this research will have important practical
application in areas such as breakdown in high-voltage electrical equipment,
industrial plasma processing, and in screening the toxicological properties of
new compounds. The work will provide practical training for both graduate and
undergraduate students and equip them with a valuable array of experimental
skills in preparation for advanced studies or entry into the
scientific/technological workforce.