* 0135674
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: The Political Economy of Subnational Industrial Promotion in India and Mexico
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2003
* Karen Remmer, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 01/31/2003
* USD 9,774.00

This Doctoral dissertation research moves beyond the existing literature on the
politics of economic development by focusing on the political economy of
industrial promotion programs at the subnational level. Market-oriented reforms
in combination with administrative decentralization have increased the
importance of subnational governments for promoting industrial development, yet
we do not have adequate explanations for either the level or the type of
subnational government action in industrial promotion. This Doctoral
Dissertation Research combines in-depth qualitative comparison of industrial
policy in three states in both India and Mexico with a large-n cross-sectional
time-series analysis of sub national policy choice. Focusing upon variations
both in the level and type of subnational development policy, the research
enhances our understanding of the ways in which institutional context shapes
policy choices among policy alternatives. The Ph.D. student draws on a variety
of types of evidence, including interviews with elected officials, political
party leaders, ministry bureaucrats, domestic industrialists, labor union
officials, leaders of industrial associations, and foreign investors; surveys of
industrial development offices and private sector development organizations;
examination of legislative records; and measures of institutional factors,
including executive power, legislative professionalism, the competitive balance
of the party system, and labor and business strength. Using these types of
information, the study explores the factors guiding developmental policy choice
on the basis of a comparative analysis of state-level politics in India and
Mexico.

By bridging the gap separating the study of development efforts that rely upon
the statist promotional policies from those emphasizing market-oriented policies
of deregulation, the current study contributes to theoretical work on the
political economy of development, enhances our understanding of subnational
politics in emerging market nations, and establishes a stronger theoretical
basis for understanding the ways in which variations in institutional context
shape choices among development strategies. 0135674