* 0135009
* CAREER: Theory and Simulation of the Structure and Mechanical Properties of Non-crystalline Solids
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2008
* Michael Falk, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 01/31/2008
* USD 300,000.00

This is a CAREER grant that combines research and education activities. The
focus is on the theory and simulation of properties associated with non-
crystalline solids. Non-crystalline solids exist as metals, ceramics,
semiconductors and polymers, and find wide application in industry. Yet the
atomic-level mechanisms that control the mechanical properties of non-crystals
are poorly understood compared to the understanding of these mechanisms in
crystals. The research on this grant will address fundamental questions
regarding the atomic level microstructure of non-crystals as they relate to
measurable mechanical properties. This will be accomplished by implementing
large-scale parallel computer simulation methods to simulate the atomic level
response of non-network forming glasses to applied stresses. The data from these
simulations will be analyzed using a variety of correlation functions - some
inspired by recent investigations in supercooled liquids and experimental
fluctuation microscopy studies. Once analyzed, the data from the simulations
will provide the foundation for a theory of non-crystalline plastic deformation
based on well characterized atomic level processes. This theory will then be
implemented numerically and continuum simulations will be directly compared to
atomistic results to test the predictions of the theory. A greatly increased
understanding of deformation and failure in non-crystalline materials will
result from this investigation. In addition, this research will validate
diagnostics for the microscopic characterization of these
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is timely because
significant recent advances in four areas of research each have bearing on such
an investigation. (1) Focusing on non-network forming glasses will allow this
research to directly address issues critical to the development of an emerging
new material, bulk metallic glass. (2) These investigations will build on recent
advances using molecular dynamics simulation techniques to develop an
understanding of plastic deformation in glasses below the glass transition
temperature. (3) By focusing on non-network forming glasses this research will
be able to directly link current research regarding the nature of the glass
transition to the consequences of the details of this transition for the
structure and properties of the glassy solid state. (4) The information gained
about the relationship between medium-range order and non-crystalline
deformation in non-network forming glasses will also help extend the
applicability of fluctuation microscopy techniques to the characterization of
these galsses in ways relevant to predicting their mechanical
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This computational and theoretical research
program will be integrated with an educational prgram at the University of
Michigan that addresses the need to fully integrate computational and
mathematical methods into the Materials Science and Engineering core curriculum.
Introduction of these techniques on the undergraduate level will be accomplished
in stages starting with a thorough redesign of the undergraduate "Kinetics and
Transport" class and continuing with other core classes. The PI has taught, and
is continuing to develop, a course on the graduate level covering computational
materials science methods for molecular simulation. This course will also serve
as an educational forum fo rteaching simulation methods developed and utilized
in the research program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to addressing
educational issues through the university curriculum, this CAREER program also
includes a targeted outreach effort to local community college students. This
effort will address the motovational issues of under-represented minority
students in introductory science classes at Washtenaw Community College. The
goal of this effort is both to increase the rate at which these students
transfer to the University of Michigan to pursue engineering as a career and to
lay the groundwork for increased success amongst these students post-
transfer.&lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;This is a CAREER grant that combines research
and education activities. The focus is on the theory and simulation of
properties associated with non-crystalline solids. Non-crystalline solids exist
as metals, ceramics, semiconductors and polymers, and find wide application in
industry. Yet the atomic-level mechanisms that control the mechanical properties
of non-crystals are poorly understood compared to the understanding of these
mechanisms in crystals. The research on this grant will address fundamental
questions regarding the atomic level microstructure of non-crystals as they
relate to measurable mechanical properties. This will be accomplished by
implementing large-scale parallel computer simulation methods to simulate the
atomic level response of non-network forming glasses to applied stresses. The
data from these simulations will be analyzed using a variety of correlation
functions - some inspired by recent investigations in supercooled liquids and
experimental fluctuation microscopy studies. Once analyzed, the data from the
simulations will provide the foundation for a theory of non-crystalline plastic
deformation based on well characterized atomic level processes. This theory will
then be implemented numerically and continuum simulations will be directly
compared to atomistic results to test the predictions of the theory. A greatly
increased understanding of deformation and failure in non-crystalline materials
will result from this investigation. In addition, this research will validate
diagnostics for the microscopic characterization of these
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This computational and theoretical research
program will be integrated with an educational prgram at the University of
Michigan that addresses the need to fully integrate computational and
mathematical methods into the Materials Science and Engineering core curriculum.
Introduction of these techniques on the undergraduate level will be accomplished
in stages starting with a thorough redesign of the undergraduate "Kinetics and
Transport" class and continuing with other core classes. The PI has taught, and
is continuing to develop, a course on the graduate level covering computational
materials science methods for molecular simulation. This course will also serve
as an educational forum fo rteaching simulation methods developed and utilized
in the research program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to addressing
educational issues through the university curriculum, this CAREER program also
includes a targeted outreach effort to local community college students. This
effort will address the motovational issues of under-represented minority
students in introductory science classes at Washtenaw Community College. The
goal of this effort is both to increase the rate at which these students
transfer to the University of Michigan to pursue engineering as a career and to
lay the groundwork for increased success amongst these students post-
transfer.&lt;br/&gt;