* 0135717
* Conference:  Sensory Transduction in Microorgranisms; January 13-18, 2002, Ventura, California
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2002
* Jeffrey Segall, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Ronald M. Weiner
* 11/30/2002
* USD 4,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This award is in partial support of the Gordon Conference on Sensory
Transduction in Microorganisms to be held Jan 13 - Jan 18, 2002 at the Ventura
Beach Hotel in Ventura, CA. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This meeting provides a unique
opportunity for cross fertilization of cutting edge research in prokaryotic and
eukaryotic organisms. The isolated, informal atmosphere characteristic of the
Gordon Conference format is important for providing the opportunities for
generating novel concepts. It is anticipated that there will be around 150
attendees from the United States and abroad to discuss the latest developments
and ideas regarding the molecular mechanisms of signal transduction in
unicellular microorganisms. The species covered will include bacteria, yeast,
slime molds and ciliates, as well as selected examples of speicalized cell types
from higher organisms (e.g., pollen tubes, neutrophils) where sensory
transduction mechanisms are key to functionality. There will be 9 formal
sessions, each consisting of an introduction by a leading researcher, 4 - 5
major presentations, and 2 - 3 'minitalks' that provide special opportunities
for students and postdoctoral fellows to present poster data. The selection
criteria for invited speakers (and participants) include expertise relevant to
the meeting topics, gender balance, minority representation, and promise as a
future scientific leader. The sessions will be integrated across species and
explore fundamental topics such as receptor structure and function,
transmembrane signaling, intracellular signaling pathways, and coupling to
output responses. In addition, sessions on important emerging topics such as
microbial biofilms/quorum sensing and genomic/proteomic approaches will aid in
directing future research. A combination of poster and oral presentations will
enable scientists ranging from graduate students to senior professors to present
and discuss their work.&lt;br/&gt;