* 0135238
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar:  Cross-Cultural Study in e-Business
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2003
* Jung Shim, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 02/28/2003
* USD 25,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;0135238&lt;br/&gt;Shim&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the
participation of American scientists in a U.S.-Japan seminar on a cross-cultural
study of Electronic Commerce (E-Commerce) and Mobile Commerce "M-Commerce." to
be held in Niigata and Tokyo, Japan from April 1-5, 2002. The co-organizers are
Professor Jung P. Shim of Mississippi State University and Professor Takuro
Munizawa at Niigata University in Japan. Participants will also be attending
from Hong Kong, Korea and Taiwan. The Internet/Web has become one of the most
important mediums for the sharing of business information between firms and
their customers (B2C). While E-commerce and M-commerce have received
considerable attention, virtually all the studies dealing with E-Commerce and
M-Commerce have given cursory attention to the cross-cultural study. In Japan,
the recent increase of handy-phones (mobile phones) and Internet users are
remarkable. Over seventy percentage of Japanese are using mobile phones and half
of them use the internet/web. In addition, new "I-Commerce" handy-phone systems
enable the end users to connect to e-mail, view homepages, and do e-trading and
e-commerce. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Several surveys estimate that Internet/Web
users are growing exponentially. "Forrester Research" estimates the worldwide
E-Commerce market will grow to $3.2 trillion by the year 2003. Emerging
technologies (e.g., voice over Internet Protocol, video streaming and
synchronized multimedia integration language) are opening the way E-Commerce is
transacted. These technologies could have significant implications for the
E-Commerce and M-Commerce market. The seminar may also have important
implications for individuals in both the academic and professional communities.
The project advances international human resources through the participation of
many junior faculty, postdocs, graduate students and an undergraduate student.
Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our base
of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and cooperation. The
researchers plan to publish results of the seminar proceedings on the World Wide
Web.&lt;br/&gt;