* 0135492
* Sociopolitical Organizaton of Chevelon Ruin and the Homol'ovi Settlement Cluster, Northeastern Arizona
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2002,12/31/2006
* E. Charles Adams, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2006
* USD 230,357.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. E. Charles Adams and his
colleagues will conduct three field seasons of archaeological research at
Chevelon Ruin. Chevelon is the third largest member, at 500 rooms, of a cluster
of ancestral Hopi settlements in northeastern Arizona collectively called the
Homol'ovi cluster. This cluster was occupied from A.D. 1250-1400, a period of
enormous political and social change in ancient Pueblo communities throughout
the northern Southwest. This change is most clearly evident in increased average
village size, which tripled to more than 500 rooms during the cluster's
occupation. Excavation has been conducted in five other members of the Homol'ovi
cluster enabling Adams and his colleagues to establish the local chronology and
study details of village reorganization associated with village growth. Because
the cluster is situated along the Little Colorado River and villages were
dependent on stream flow for growing crops and drinking water, they were
dependent on one another economically and probably interacted politically.
Chevelon is located upstream from all but one of the other villages along
Chevelon Creek, one of two permanent streams flowing into the Little Colorado
River that provide water to the cluster. Chevelon differs from the other
villages at Homol'ovi in having five to ten times more ceramics traded from
villages 100 km east of the cluster. Either Chevelon had a unique trade
relationship with these eastern villages or immigrants from these pueblos lived
at Chevelon. The focus of the research will be to locate plaza spaces, abutment
and bonding of walls, the presence and location of spinal room blocks, and the
location of ritual structures at Chevelon using a total station and wall tracing
followed by excavations. An important concept identified in previous excavations
in Homol'ovi villages is what we term "enriched deposits." Enriched deposits
have high quantities of whole and unusual objects and highly formalized deposits
that are associated with ritual activity. The testing program will also look for
deposits that have concentrations of exchanged pottery or riparian resources
unique to the Chevelon area. The relationship of these deposits to architectural
units within Chevelon should inform on the distribution of wealth within the
community and the nature of groups or households controlling this wealth.
Heterarchal, hierarchical, corporate, and communal models of village
organization will be tested. In addition, the connection of the villages through
sharing Little Colorado River water suggests cluster-level organization. The
location of Chevelon along a permanent stream with potentially unique fauna and
flora and its distinctive ceramic assemblage identify objects that could be
exchanged with other cluster members. Tracing these objects to previously
excavated villages will allow the team to assess the flow of these items from
Chevelon to other cluster members and whether these follow patterns associated
with confederacy or hierarchical models of cluster organization. The results of
this research will inform archaeologists working in the Southwest and elsewhere
on the material correlates and associated behaviors to power and sociopolitical
organization within non-state societies and how these are expressed beyond the
level of the village.