* 0135507
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant: The Nature of Race: Concepts of Human Difference in the Social and Natural Sciences
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2002
* Marta Tienda, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 12/31/2002
* USD 7,965.00

It is often claimed that the idea of significant biological differences existing
between racial groups has all but disappeared from science, if not from the
minds of the American public. Yet some observers challenge this depiction,
arguing instead that many scientists continue to understand race to be a human
biological marker. This dissertation research project, "The Nature of Race,"
addresses this debate by posing two broad research questions: How do scientists
today define and conceptualize race? What kinds of concepts of race are
transmitted by scientists to the public? Drawing on the sociology of knowledge
and on relevant existing research findings, a series of hypotheses concerning
the relationship between social location (e.g. gender, age, academic discipline)
and racial conceptualization are also assessed. Funds support the collection of
data, which will occur through interviews conducted with approximately 100
U.S.-born faculty and undergraduate students at two universities. Faculty
respondents are randomly sampled from departments of anthropology and of
biology; undergraduates from among those who have declared majors in
anthropology, biology, or other fields. Qualitative content analysis is used to
characterize respondents' definitions of race and the types
of&lt;br/&gt;arguments, claims, evidence, images and metaphors they use to
support and elaborate these understandings. Quantitative analyses including
descriptive statistics and chi-square testing are used to explore patterns of
variation in racial conceptualization according to social status. The project
findings are particularly relevant for educators at all levels. Both academic
scientists and other educators have demonstrated ethical concern that scientific
research relating to human diversity be conveyed to the public in a manner that
does not exacerbate but rather attenuates racism. But blanket statements
assuring that biological race is an unscientific concept may need to be re-
evaluated if the scientists whose legitimacy is being evoked in anti-racist
public education in fact hold a markedly diverse range of beliefs on the matter.
This project provides a careful assessment of how scientists in different
disciplines understand race and racial difference.&lt;br/&gt;