* 0135412
* MCAA: Molecular Markers to Assess the Relative Importance of Sexual and Natural Selection in the Evolution of Paternal Care
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2002,02/29/2004
* Colette St. Mary, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jerry  O. Wolff
* 02/29/2004
* USD 59,259.00

MCAA: MOLECULAR MARKERS TO ASSESS THE RELATIVE IMPORTANCE OF SEXUAL AND NATURAL
SELECTION IN THE EVOLUTION OF PATERNAL CARE COLETTE M. ST. MARY

Lay Summary

Life-history traits are potentially under both natural and sexual selection. In
systems with male parental care (exemplified by fishes and birds), benefits to
males and females can accrue via both natural and sexual selection. That is,
care can increase offspring survivorship or quality (i.e., via natural
selection), and also increase mate attraction resulting from female preferences
for paternal investment (i.e., via sexual selection). Indeed, it is conceivable
that care may first evolve in response to sexual and not natural selection under
some circumstances. If this is the case, then parental behavior and mating
preferences should coevolve in a sexually selected process. Life history theory
is focused on the role of natural selection and therefore, the integration of
sexual selection should provide significant new understanding of life-history
evolution. My long-term research plan is to develop and formalize this
hypothesis and to initiate a program to evaluate it experimentally. This work is
part of an international collaboration with Dr. Kai Lindstrom, University of
Helsinki, and a local collaboration with Dr. Joel Trexler, Florida International
University. Dr. Lindstrom and I have recently recognized the Florida flagfish,
Jordanella floridae, as an ideal species in which to explore the evolution of
paternal care and the relative importance of natural and sexual selection and
have been working together to pursue these ideas. Dr. Trexler is involved in
complementary work focused on life history variation and population genetic
structure in Everglades populations of flagfish. We recognize that the use of
molecular markers, microsatellites (short repeat sequences of DNA) in
particular, will greatly enhance our research program. Indeed, the development
of these markers will enable us to estimate the heritability of male traits
(care behavior and secondary sexual characteristics), and therefore understand
their potential to evolve. Furthermore, we can use these markers to evaluate the
population genetic structure of flagfish. The essence of this career advancement
proposal is to train members of my lab (myself, a technician, and an
undergraduate) in the isolation and development of variable microsatellite
markers for flagfish and then to use those markers to estimate the heritability
of male traits and to ascertain that the markers will also be useful in future
studies of population genetic structure. This training will not only improve the
probability of funding in the near term but will also enhance the quality of my
future studies of natural and sexual selection in the evolution of life history
by enabling me to use new approaches. Enriched with this new tool, my long-term,
collaborative research program will provide new understanding of the
distribution of parental care and the factors influencing its evolution.



