* 0135949
* Deep-Sea Biodiversity: A Morphological Dimension
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2005
* Michael Rex, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 03/31/2005
* USD 175,109.00

Research on the biodiversity of deep-sea soft sediment habitats has centered
largely on a?diversity, that is estimating local species diversity and its
geographic variation in the ontext of traditional explanations involving
disturbance, biological interactions and environmental heterogeneity. Little is
known about the natural history and distributional patterns of the species
themselves - information that is vital to understanding the roles species play
in community organization, and the relationship between local diversity and the
regional-scale processes that ultimately regulate it. Here we propose two
avenues of research to relate biogeographic and life-history characteristics of
species to deep-sea species diversity. The first is to introduce morphological
variation in shell architecture of gastropods as a new dimension of
biodiversity. The second is to explore the relationship of body size to depth
within and among species of prosobranch snails. Both add a new level of
understanding about how deep-sea communities are structured that could not be
attained by analyses of simple a-diversity. The proposed research directly
addresses the NSF Biological Oceanography theme of Biological Diversity in
Marine Systems, particularly the areas of distribution, abundance, and life
history of marine organisms from deep-sea ecosystems; adaptations of marine
organisms; and their population ecology.

1. Morphological Variation. We present a preliminary analysis of bathymetric
ranges and variation in shell architecture in lower bathyal and abyssal
assemblages of gastropods from the western North Atlantic. The abyssal fauna is
revealed to be merely a subset of the bathyal fauna consisting of species that
extend their ranges deeper and out onto the abyss. In gastropods, shell
architecture reflects feeding type, mode of development, predator defense
mechanisms, locomotion and calcium carbonate conservation. We construct both
empirical and theoretical morphospaces of shell form by using an eigenshape
analysis and Raups model of shell geometry. Both approaches yield the same
result. In terms of the range of basic shell types, the abyssal fauna appears to
be a random subset of the richer bathyal fauna. However, the abyssal fauna is
dominated numerically by a few core deposit-feeding species of bathyal origin
with shells that are preadapted for carbonate conservation below the CaCO3
compensation depth. The combination of morphological variation, bathymetric
range, feeding type and dispersal ability suggests a new hypothesis for abyssal
biodiversity that is radically different from the ecological determinism of
current theories. We propose that bathyal and abyssal environments comprise a
source-sink system in which the abyssal fauna largely represents a mass effect.
The abyssal fauna appears to be an attenuation of the bathyal fauna with a small
minority of abundant species, and a majority of extremely rare species that may
represent nonreproducing populations maintained by dispersal. We will test this
hypothesis by extending the analysis to four other deep-sea basins, and by
determining the reproductive state of bathyal and abyssal populations of the
same species. Since the great abyssal plains represent such a huge ecosystem,
this research has very significant implications for the genesis and maintenance
of diversity, and for estimating the level of global deep-sea biodiversity.

2. Body Size. Body size is an issue of fundamental significance in biology, and
one that has an important bearing on abundance, distribution, macroecology and
biodiversity.

Results from prior NSF support (OCE-9301687) showed that, in contrast to the
prevailing view, individual gastropod species increase in size with depth. Size-
depth clines decrease in slope with depth and bathymetric ranges expand. We
present a conceptual model that integrates this very consistent trend within
species with the observation that average size among species appears to decrease
with depth. We propose measuring the average size component of the model. This
research has the potential to reconcile a very basic paradox in deep-sea
ecology, and will provide, by far, the largest and most well-controlled database
on size in the deep-sea benthos.