* 0135381
* Dissertation Research:  Disciplinary Emergence in the Environmental Health Sciences, 1940-2000
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2002
* Adele Clarke, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 12/31/2002
* USD 7,720.00

This dissertation project is a historical sociological analysis of the emergence
of genetic/genomic practices in epidemiology and toxicology, the environmental
health sciences. Drawing on historical and qualitative research methodologies,
this project addresses three broad and interrelated areas of inquiry. First, it
analyzes the scientific,clinical, social, political, and economic concerns that
have shaped the introduction, application, and development of genetic/genomic
technologies in the environmental health sciences. This analysis focuses
especially on the emergence of molecular epidemiology and toxicogenomics,
examining the processes through which molecular biomarkers and DNA microarrays
have been constructed as the "right tools for the job" (Clarke and Fujimura
1992) of environmental health research. Second, this research examines the
consequences of molecular epidemiology and toxicogenomics for the practice and
organization of environmental health risk assessment. It investigates the co-
construction of technologies and practice, examining both the effects of
molecular biomarkers and DNA microarrays on environmental health risk assessment
and the ways in which the demands of regulatory science (Jasanoff 1995) have
shaped the development and meanings of these technologies. Finally, this project
explores the social, cultural, and political implications of the use(s) of
genetic/genomic technologies in the environmental health sciences. It follows
such technologies, and the knowledge they produce, outside of the laboratories
and clinics where they have been developed, in order to describe how they are
reinterpreted, reconfigured, renegotiated, reified, and/or resisted by actors in
multiple social locations and with what varied consequences. NSF funds will
support the collection of historical and ethnographic data on genetic/genomic
technologies and research methods in the environmental health sciences and in
environmental health risk assessment. One of the important research sites is
National Institutes of Environmental Health Sciences in Research Triangle, NC.
Funds will in part support interview transcriptions.

