* 0135565
* Analyzing the Concept of Mental Disorder
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2003
* Patricia Ross, Ross                    Patricia       A
* Fixed Amount Award
* Keith R. Benson
* 01/31/2003
* USD 40,000.00

PROJECT ABSTRACT SES 0135565 Patricia Ross, Analyzing the Concept of Mental
Disorder

This project is a philosophical examination of a very important concept in
abnormal psychology and psychiatry -- that of a mental disorder. There is little
agreement, in theory or practice, as to exactly what a mental disorder is. This
is due, in large part, to fundamental disagreements about the basic concept of a
disorder. These disagreements about the nature of disorder are, in turn, based
on differing positions on key issues in our general understanding of science:
reductive explanation, objectivity and values, and functional accounts of
behavior.

This project has three objectives. The first is to provide a general taxonomy of
the various recent accounts of disorder. This taxonomy is not limited to mental
disorders, but includes accounts of physical disease, which are needed for a
thorough understanding of mental disorder. Special attention is paid to the
fundamental assumptions, sometimes unstated, that motivate the accounts. These
involve such issues as the common, but mistaken, assumption that any fully
acceptable account of disorder will involve a reduction to a purely
physiological basis, and the question of whether scientific objectivity is
possible in a domain that appears to contain an unavoidable inclusion of value-
laden concepts.

This leads to the second objective, an analysis of the special problems
surrounding the concept of a mental disorder. Some of these problems are
inherited from accounts of physical disease. Perhaps the most important of these
is the status of functional accounts of disorder, for such functional accounts
are among the most promising current candidates. But even within the context of
functional accounts there are challenges peculiar to an adequate account of
mental disorder, for it has not so far been clear how the function of the mental
can be characterized without importing some values that undermine the
objectivity of the account.

The third objective is to point the way to an adequate functional account of
mental disorder that can avoid the general criticisms leveled against such
accounts. This is done by establishing a central role for empirical psychology
in characterizing the goals and functions of the mental. This is coupled to
reevaluations of the role of reduction in science and the way in which
scientific objectivity need not be undermined by the appearance of values in the
account.

The project puts some standard philosophical issues (reduction, objectivity,
functionalism) in a new context, thereby acting as a testing ground for recent
treatments of them. It also points the way out of a current stalemate in
psychology and psychiatry, a stalemate that is due, in large part, to
unnecessary allegiances to outmoded ideas about what an adequate account of
disorder must look like.