* 0135056
* PECASE:  The Utilization of Complex Molecule Synthesis to Drive the Development of New Reaction Methods that Promote New Directions in Synthesis.  A 'Teufelskreis' of Opportunity.
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2007
* Brian Stoltz, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 01/31/2007
* USD 634,500.00

&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: PECASE: The Utilization of Complex Molecule Synthesis
to Drive the Development of New Reaction Methods that Promote New Directions in
Synthesis. A 'Teufelskreis' of Opportunity.&lt;br/&gt;Institution: California
Institute of Technology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this research is to
develop new synthetic methodology in the context of complex molecule synthesis.
Projects involving palladium-catalyzed oxidative [4+2] cycloaddition reactions
and tandem Bamford-Stevens/Claisen rearrangements will be carried out and a
concise, stereoselective route to the hypoglycemogenic diterpenoid, saudin will
be developed. In the educational realm, courses on synthesis and pharmaceutical
chemistry are being developed and outreach activities enabling students to
interact with the broader local community are in place.&lt;br/&gt;With this
PECASE award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the
research and educational efforts of Dr. Brian Stoltz of the Department of
Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at the California Institute of Technology.
Professor Stoltz will focus his research on the development of new synthetic
methodology within the framework of natural product total synthesis. The
illustrative target molecule, saudin, has interesting biological properties of
interest to the pharmaceutical industry. The education activities will stress
outreach to local middle schools and high schools and will also focus on course
development at the undergraduate and graduate level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project was originally funded as a CAREER award, and was converted to a
Presidential Early Career Award for Engineers and Scientists (PECASE) award in
May 2004.&lt;br/&gt;