* 0135682
* Scientific Pluralism, a workshop to be held at the University of Minnesota, October 10 -13, 2002
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Helen Longino, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Keith R. Benson
* 07/31/2003
* USD 7,884.00

Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt;SES Proposal 0135682&lt;br/&gt;Scientific Pluralism,
A Workshop to be held at the University of Minnesota Oct. 10-13, 2002
&lt;br/&gt;C. K. Waters, University of
Minnesota&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports a small
interdisciplinary workshop entitled "Scientific Pluralism" at the University of
Minnesota, October 10 - 13, 2002. The Principal Investigators are bringing
together leading philosophers of science and scientists who have independently
advanced views consistent with the idea that some natural phenomena cannot be
fully explained by a single theory or fully investigated using a single
approach. The aim of the workshop is to develop an understanding of the various
forms of pluralism being advanced and to explore their philosophical
implications. The goal is to determine whether a consistent philosophical
account of scientific pluralism can be developed that goes beyond the mere
rejection of the unity of science doctrine. This workshop brings together
philosophers who have advanced pluralist solutions to puzzles encountered in
their analysis of science with practicing scientists. The philosophers and
scientists participating in the meeting represent a broad range of sciences
including physics and mathematics, biology, and social and behavioral science.
Philosophical participants are focusing their research and workshop
presentations on detailed case studies that warrant pluralist interpretations.
Workshop discussion includes scientists' commentaries on the detailed case
studies and general discussions on the broad philosophical implications of the
presented works. The Principal Investigators plan to publish results of the
workshop in a volume of "Minnesota Studies in Philosophy of Science."&lt;br/&gt;