* 0135427
* Femtosecond IR Probe of Ultrafast Dynamics of Molecular Adsorbates on Nanoparticles: Solvation and Electron Transfer
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Tianquan Lian, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 04/30/2005
* USD 312,387.00

Dr. Tianquan Lian of Emory University is funded for his research on femtosecond
IR probe of ultrafast dynamics of molecular adsorbates on nanoparticles -
solvation by a grant in the Physical Chemistry program of the Chemistry
Division. He will further develop and test the theory of solvation-induced
vibrational peak shift and use this novel approach to study solvation dynamics
of molecules at nanoparticle/liquid interfaces. For molecules with large dipole
moment changes between ground and excited states, femtosecond excitation
prepares the excited molecule in a non-equilibrium solvent configuration. The
effect of the subsequent solvation on solute vibrational spectra is not yet
understood, unlike the well-studied effect on solute electronic spectra. He is
developing a theory of solvation-induced solute dynamic vibrational peak shift
based on the Onsager dielectric continuum model of solvent-solute interaction.
Dynamic peak shifts will be measured in Re(dcbpy)(CO)3Cl and related molecules
in different solvents. The magnitude and dynamics of the CO stretching peak
shifts will be used to compare with and critically test the theoretical model.
He also will use vibrational peak shift as a new method to study solvation
dynamics at solid-liquid interfaces. The combination of IR probe and
nanocrystalline films will allow the study of solvation dynamics in a wide range
of solvents. This approach is complementary to existing techniques such as
fluorescence Stokes shift and the optical Kerr effect, and may have unique
applications in slightly scattering media such as nanocrystalline thin films,
that are difficult to study using these extant techniques. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is a continuation of Dr. Lian's research effort
in understanding ultrafast dynamics of molecular adsorbates on nanoparticles.
Semiconductor and metal nanoparticles have many potential applications ranging
from nanoelectronics, solar energy conversion, to biomedical-imaging. Most
nanoparticles are synthesized or modified with attached molecules as
passivating, structural linkage, sensitizing, or molecular sensing groups. These
molecules play essential roles in transfer, transport and dissipation of charge
and energy in these systems. The proposed work will lead to a fundamental
understanding of the dynamics of molecules on the nanoparticle surface, such as
solvation and energy relaxation. This knowledge is essential to developing more
efficient devices based on nanoparticles. The proposed research will also allow
the training of postdoctoral fellows, graduate students and undergraduate
students in the area of nanoscience and nanotechnology, educating the workforce
of the future.&lt;br/&gt;