* 0135350
* RUI: Recruitment Limitation and Space: Vochysia ferruginea and Dipteryx oleifera in Post-Hurricane Secondary Forest
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Douglas Boucher, Hood College
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 04/30/2005
* USD 234,997.00

Ecologists have long asked how hundreds of species of trees can coexist in
tropical rain forests without a few superior species outcompeting all the rest
and driving them extinct. Two recent theories to explain this situation are
recruitment limitation - lack of seed production or germination prevents
dominant species from outcompeting others, and spatial variation - seeds only
travel limited distances, so each species only competes with a limited number of
neighbors. Dr. Boucher, his Nicaraguan colleague Javier Ruiz Perez and their
students will test these theories in forests in southeastern Nicaragua. To do
this, they will tag, map, trap seeds, and measure soil and light variables for
two important forest trees: Vochysia ferruginea and Dipteryx
oleifera.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two theories they will test are important for
knowing how to preserve tropical biodiversity and for predicting whether global
warming will lead to forests being taken over by a few "weedy" species. The two
tree species under study are both economically valuable, so their work will also
be useful for developing sustainable forestry systems for rain forests.
Undergraduates from a US and a Nicaraguan small college will work together to
gather and analyze the data, strengthening international cooperation and
developing capacities for conservation and sustainable use of tropical rain
forests. &lt;br/&gt;