* 0135622
* Public Science: Discourse on the Strategic Defense Initiative, 1983-1888
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2005
* Hugh Gusterson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ronald Rainger
* 01/31/2005
* USD 84,000.00

Project Abstract SES 0135622 Public Science: Discourse on the Strategic Defense
Initiative, 1983-1988 Gusterson/Slayton MIT

Scientists hold a paradoxical place in American society today, for while their
knowledge is woven into the fabric of everyday human life, scientists themselves
are often imagined to dwell above the plane of everyday human concerns. This
postdoctoral project explores this paradox -- both its roots and its
implications for science policy and communications -- by examining dialogue on
the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) in the mid-1980's. Three immediate
objectives lie in examinations of three interacting communities: scientists in
the political sphere, journalists and others presenting the debate, and a
pluralistic public. Findings from this research are to be communicated in
academic journals, in conference papers, and in ongoing dialogue with local
scholars. Longer-range goals tie this research to the retraining of Rebecca
Slayton in historical and sociological studies of science and technology.
Slayton builds on doctoral training in physical chemistry at Harvard, working
under the sponsorship of PI Hugh Gusterson and co-PI David Kaiser, both at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

This project brings together historical studies of scientists in the political
sphere and studies of public communication of science. In debate over SDI, the
same scientists acted as advisors and political activists, straining a long-
standing tension between fears of technical tyranny and the need for technical
expertise. Slayton examines the political roles that scientists assumed in
debate surrounding SDI from a historical perspective, contributing to an
understanding of the shifting role of the scientist in society. Because this
role has been reflected in popular depictions of scientists, this project also
examines public images of scientists and technology, as portrayed in magazines,
newspapers, and on television. By comparing portrayals within and among these
media, this work emphasizes how the constraints of particular media shape
presentations of science and technology. Finally, this project examines
discourse about scientists and SDI among several communities, analyzing the role
particular communal values played in understanding science communication as an
interactive process.

Slayton's retraining involves coursework in sociological and historical
approaches to science will build relevant methodological skills; courses in
media studies; and teaching an undergraduate seminar course with the hope of
stimulating dialogue about popular voices of science and their implications for
the social roles of scientists. Her research plan includes interviewing
scientists and analyzing their technical assessments and political statements;
gathering and analyzing public presentations of scientific aspects of SDI in
newspapers, magazines, and on television; examining public discourse in letters
to editors in a variety of newspapers and among several smaller communities with
common concerns. Ultimately, this project result in a better understanding of
dialogue between scientists and publics, a dialogue that is central to today's
science policy and culture.