* 0135884
* Terahertz Studies of Transient Photoconductivity in Quantum Dots and Electron Transfer in Bacterial Reaction Centers
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Charles Schmuttenmaer, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 04/30/2006
* USD 351,000.00

Dr. Charles Schmuttenmaer of Yale University is funded for his research in
terahertz studies of transient photoconductivity in quantum dots and electron
transfer in bacterial reaction centers by a grant in the Physical Chemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division. The PI will measure time-dependent
photoconductivity in isolated quantum dots (QDs) as well as in arrays of QDs.
This information is of importance in the design of optoelectronics devices based
on QD technology, where it is essential to understand the timescales that
carriers remain mobile after absorption of a photon, and the actual value of the
mobility. The PI also will develop a new and direct method for monitoring charge
transfer events. The motion of the electron itself, rather than a change in
absorption or fluorescence spectrum, provides the measured signal. This occurs
because accelerating charges generate electromagnetic pulses, and if the charge
transfer and/or solvent reorientation timescale is on the order of 100 fs to 10
ps, then a THz pulse is generated. This methodology has been benchmarked on dye
molecules oriented in strong electric fields, and will be used to study the
primary step of charge transfer in bacterial reaction centers that are spatially
oriented by using a poly-histidine tag that anchors a specific residue of the
protein to a functionalized quartz slide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the last
several years, the PI's group at Yale University has learned how to carry out
and properly interpret a new class of experiments using short pulses of far-
infrared light. For technical reasons involving the intensity of light sources
and sensitivity of detectors, the far-infrared region of the spectrum has been
historically neglected for spectroscopic experiments compared to other regions
of the spectrum. With regard to time-resolved spectroscopic experiments, wherein
one "excites" or changes a sample with one pulse of light, and then monitors the
change in the sample with a second pulse of light (which is essentially the type
of work for which the Nobel Prize in Chemistry was awarded to Ahmed Zewail in
1999), there has been essentially no representation in the far-infrared region
of the spectrum. The PI and his group will use these new pulse techniques to
elucidate two important scientific issues. First, they will investigate
transient photoconductivity in quantum dots. Quantum dots are a new type of
material that is radically changing materials science because their properties
depend not only on their composition, but also on their size (once they are
small enough that quantum effects become important). The PI will assess how well
and for how long these particles conduct electricity after absorbing photons of
light. At a very basic and fundamental level, there are many important
applications with respect to new types of optoelectronic devices and high speed
communications. Second, they will focus on the primary charge separation step in
photosynthesis. Photosynthesis is arguably the most important process that
transpires on this planet. It provides the oxygen we breath, and equally
important, it is the source of all fossil fuels - the energy which is so
important to our society. The PI will monitor this primary charge transfer event
in a much more direct and unambiguous manner than heretofore possible, and
provide further characterization of the mechanisms of charge transfer. There is
an urgent need for scientific personnel trained in nanotechnology, and the
students and post-docs working on QDs will be trained in a wide variety of
techniques in this emerging and rapidly changing field. Students and post-docs
working on the photosynthesis project will receive training in ultrafast
spectroscopy and will learn about electron transfer in photosynthetic systems.