* 0135190
* Genetic and Biochemical Analysis of Chromatin Modulators in Yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2005
* Michael Hampsey, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-Robert Wood
* Continuing Grant
* Ming Lei
* 01/31/2005
* USD 380,228.00

The metabolic activity of eukaryotic DNA is restricted by its packaging into
chromatin. Accordingly, transcription, replication and repair require chromatin
remodeling activities to allow factor access to template DNA. Two classes of
chromatin remodeling activities have been described. One promotes ATP-dependent
remodeling, as exemplified by the highly conserved and well-characterized
SWI/SNF complex. The other class catalyzes covalent modification of the
histones, primarily at their N-terminal tails. Histone acetylation, methylation,
phosphorylation and ubiquitination have been described. Presumably these
modifications weaken histone-DNA or nucleosome-nucleosome interactions, thereby
allowing factor access to DNA. This project addresses the role of covalent
chromatin modifiers in gene silencing. The premise of the project is that the
novel Set2 and Hsl7 proteins directly catalyze histone modifications as
components of chromatin modifying complexes. Three specific Aims are being
pursued, exploiting a powerful combination of yeast genetics, biochemistry and
genomics. Aim #1 is to identify factors that genetically interact with Set2 and
Hsl7; Aim #2 is to isolate and define Set2 and Hsl7 complexes; Aim #3 is to
define the interplay among histone methyltransferases, acetyltransferases,
kinases and deacetylases. This project is based on the recent characterization
of the effects of histone acetylation and deacetylation on silencing. The
successful outcome of this project is likely to identify novel chromatin
modifiers and to define how these factors interact to regulate gene
expression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The genetic information in higher organisms is
packaged into chromatin, a complex structure consisting of DNA and histone
proteins. In the past several years several proteins have been identified that
regulate gene expression by affecting chromatin structure. The goal of this
project is to isolate and define new proteins that control gene expression by
biochemically modifying histones. A powerful combination of genetics,
biochemistry and genomics will be used in this project. Novel information gained
from this study is likely to be generally applicable given that chromatin
structure and known histone modifiers are highly conserved among different
organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;