* 0135347
* SGER: Exploratory Investigation of Simulation of Solar Plasma with Accelerated Compact Toroid
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2002
* David Hwang, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Thomas J.  Bogdan
* 08/31/2002
* USD 29,360.00

The investigators will generate magnetic plasmoids that can excite non-linear
processes relevant to solar and inter planetary plasmas. The main effort is to
develop the laboratory diagnostics capable of measuring the non-linear processes
and to develop theoretical and computer models of the physical processes and
their relevancy to solar and interplanetary plasmas. The Spheromak-like compact
toroid (SCT) is a magnetized blob of ionized material (plasmoid) with self-
generated equilibrium magnetic field structures that can confine the plasma over
its lifetime of several tens of microseconds. This type of plasmoid is of great
interest in laboratory magnetic fusion experiments and its development has been
supported through DOE projects. One of the unique properties of the SCT is that
it can withstand a tremendous accelerating force, so high speed (over 100
km/sec) can be reached in relatively short distance. Therefore, SCT accelerators
are fairly compact and easily usable in laboratory experiments. In the past, one
of the drawbacks of the SCT accelerator is the limit on its repetition rate by
lack of high power repeatable switches. The low rate limits the use of this
apparatus in physics experiment where statically meaningful database is required
in a reasonable time frame. The investigators have now developed and operated a
repeatable SCT accelerator using passive switching. At present, the pulse rate
has increased from one per minute to one every 5 seconds. Improvement in the gas
valve system will increase the rate to over 100 Hz. Moreover, the reliability of
the accelerator has achieved over 1000 shots at the .2 Hz rate. Laboratory
plasmas have the distinct advantage that its physical parameters can be
carefully controlled and dynamic processes can be precisely diagnosed. Neither
of these is possible with astrophysical plasmas.