* 0135257
* Completion of Computing History Memoir (II)
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2003
* Herbert Grosch, Grosch, Herbert R
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 05/31/2003
* USD 18,000.00

EIA - 0135257 Grosch, Herbert

TITLE: Completion of Computing History Memoir

The investigator has published two editions of an autobiography/history
intended to cover the early years of the computer revolution. The first edition,
in hardcover, called COMPUTER [see B. in Biographical Sketch], ran through
mid-1959 and ended with his first departure from IBM. The second edition, on
CD/ROM, was produced under NSF auspices (Grant No. CDA-9622944) and also covered
the subsequent years through mid-1967, when the investigator was drafted to re-
launch the Center for Computer Sciences and Technology at the National Bureau of
Standards now NIST. The material added to the second edition was primarily
concerned with the international computer scene, and included a visit to Japan
in 1960 and two long tours of European user installations and European
manufacturers on behalf of the young Control Data Corporation, in 1962. On the
domestic side, the second edition ended with the investigator's direction of an
Air Force-funded research project in computational linguistics for GE Santa
Barbara. It is proposed to carry the memoir through six years at NBS, three as
director of CCST and three as Senior Research Fellow after IBM requested his
removal from the earlier post for halting all Federal procurement of the new
System/3 (which was withdrawn some years later). The investigator emerged to
become the first editorial director of the burgeoning newspaper COMPUTERWORLD,
which was to be the foundation of the McGovern IDG empire.