* 0135286
* Molecular Basis of Arabidopsis Susceptibility to Pseudomonas Syringae Infection
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2006
* Sheng He, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 01/31/2006
* USD 345,000.00

In the co-evolution between plants and microbial pathogens, most plants have
developed sophisticated defense mechanisms to ward off the majority of (but not
all) potential pathogens. When a plant fails to mount a defense response and the
pathogen carries appropriate positive virulence factors, disease occurs. In the
past decade, significant efforts have been invested in studying how plants
defend against pathogens. The use of the Arabidopsis-Pseudomonas syringae
pathosystem played a critical role in advancing the understanding of pathogen
recognition and plant resistance responses. In contrast, very little is known
about how a plant fails to defend itself and ultimately succumbs to infection by
virulent pathogens. The goal of this research is to understand the molecular
mechanism by which Pseudomonas syringae causes infection in Arabidopsis
thaliana. This research is based on the recent finding that the majority of
bacterial pathogens of humans, animals, and plants use a specialized protein
secretion system (the type III secretion system) to actively "inject" virulence
proteins into the host cell. Mutations affecting this pathogen secretion system
often eliminate the ability of pathogens to infect the respective hosts,
suggesting an important role of "type III virulence proteins" in modulating host
susceptibility. However, the molecular mechanisms by which these type III
virulence proteins affect host signaling and metabolic processes, which
ultimately lead to the establishment of the susceptible interaction, is not
understood in any system. In this research, two specific objectives are
proposed. The first objective is to link the effects of Pst DC3000 infection to
expression of specific Arabidopsis response genes. Successful accomplishment of
this objective will remove a major roadblock to progress in the study of
susceptible host-bacteria interactions, namely the lack of host cellular and
molecular markers. The second objective of this proposal is aimed at achieving a
deep understanding of how a specific type III virulence protein, VirPtoB,
modulates host susceptibility. Emphasis will be on how VirPtoB, when
transgenically expressed inside Arabidopsis leaf cells, alters Arabidopsis gene
expression and response to pathogen infection. This research involves the use of
genomic, transgenic, and pathogenic methods. Successful completion of this study
will contribute to our understanding of those plant cellular mechanisms that
must be altered for a plant to become susceptible to pathogens. A postdoctoral
student and an undergraduate student will be trained during the course of this
research project.