* 0135823
* Electron Propagator Theory and Anion Electronic Structure
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2005
* Joseph Ortiz, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Raima Larter
* 12/31/2005
* USD 429,000.00

In this project funded by the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program of
the Chemistry Division and the Americas Program in the Division of International
Programs, Ortiz will interpret experimental results on several types of unusual
anions using new quantum mechanical methodology. This research effort combines
the development of a new generation of electronic structure methods for
theoretical modeling of electron attachment and detachment processes with
calculations that aim at testing these approaches and at investigating chemical
species of practical interest. The computer codes developed will be used to
address a wide range of chemical species, including "double Rydberg" anions,
zwitterions, dianions, polyanions, and metal oxide clusters. Study of these
chemical systems requires the implementation and use of new electron propagator
methods that can treat electron correlation in anionic states as well as large
orbital relaxation effects that accompany electron detachment. Quasiparticle
self-consistent-field methods extend current techniques and satisfy the demands
of the systems under study. They also offer an alternative one-electron picture
of electronic structure that is complementary to that provided by previously
implemented theories. This project involves a collaboration with Ana Martinez
and her coworkers at UNAM in Mexico City.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research involves the development of new and improved algorithms for calculating
ionization potentials and electron affinities. The challenge to theory is not
simply to reproduce a few measured experimental data, but rather to develop a
theoretical model that is consistent with known data and capable of predicting
consequences subject to subsequent measurement. The propagator method used here,
especially in the novel context of a quantitative independent-particle model, is
admirably suited to the development of insight and understanding. The resulting
new formalisms developed in this project hold promise for enhanced accuracy,
improved computational performance, and more straightforward interpretation of
the computed data. These methods will be applied to several systems of current
experimental interest and will be available to the public for general use. The
students who will travel and work with the foreign collaborators in Mexico will
gain experience with international collaboration that will enhance their
scientific and educational training.&lt;br/&gt;