* 0135294
* The Pacific Northwest Ocean-Land Response to Millennial Scale Climate Change: An Integration of Model and Geologic Data Sets
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2007
* Robert Duncan, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* David Verardo
* 02/28/2007
* USD 478,315.00

This award will integrate marine and terrestrial data from the Pacific Northwest
with the National Center For Atmospheric Research (NCAR) Regional Climate Model
2 (RegCM2) to investigate regional-scale climate variability over the last
150,000 years. The investigators will use the RegCM2 model because it offers an
advantage in spatial resolution (i.e., tens of kilometers compared to hundreds
of kilometers in global circulation models) that will provide rigorous data-
model comparisons and the resolution of potentially important climate feedbacks
in the Pacific Northwest region; a region where climate is strongly influenced
by topographic complexity, coastlines, and proximity to the Pacific Ocean.

The investigators will test the following three scientific hypotheses:

"Hypothesis 1. On millennial time scales, local and regional changes in sea-
surface temperatures in the Northeast Pacific, and perhaps changes in
continental heating, are large enough to have influenced atmospheric pressure
gradients that in turn substantially affected the intensity of coastal
upwelling."

"Hypothesis 2. The marine pollen record faithfully reflects climate-induced
changes in the distribution of terrestrial vegetation while changes in oceanic
transport play a secondary role in the observed marine pollen records of the
Northeast Pacific."

"Hypothesis 3. Changes in sediment provenance and terrigenous sediment
accumulation in the Northeast Pacific reflect regional climate change and its
effect on continental runoff and surface-ocean circulation."

Furthermore, this award will address several hypotheses of importance to the
field of paleoclimatology in an integrative and holistic manner using marine and
terrestrial data from the Pacific Northwest as inputs to climate models. In
addition to integrative scientific goals, the award will also provide unique
training in integrative climate research for graduate and undergraduate students
at Oregon State University.