* 0135955
* Dynamic Subcellular Protein Localization During Bacillus Subtilis Sporulation
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Kit Pogliano, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 03/31/2006
* USD 510,858.00

The localization of membrane proteins to specific regions of the cell is a
conserved and essential feature of both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. In
bacteria, protein localization is essential for cell division, DNA replication,
as well as for chemotaxis, pathogenesis and the development of specialized cell
types. However, in contrast to eukaryotic cells, little is known about the
mechanism by which proteins reach their correct subcellular location in
bacterial cells. Many cases of protein localization in bacteria involve the
localization of membrane proteins to specific regions of the cytoplasmic
membrane, often at the cell pole or septum. During B. subtilis sporulation,
protein localization involves the specific localization of proteins to one of
two separate membranes within the cell, similar to eukaryotic protein
localization.&lt;br/&gt;The long term goals of the research described here are
to understand the mechanism by which bacterial membrane proteins assemble at
their correct locations within the cell. This project uses genetic and cell
biological methods to investigate the mechanism by which proteins localize to
specific membrane regions during sporulation, and to investigate the possibility
that B. subtilis contains two integral membrane protein insertion complexes that
serve to direct membrane proteins to different locations within the cell. It
will also develop new methods to investigate if proteins made before division
are restricted to one or the other cell after division, or if they are
differently localized in the two cells, as these processes may provide a simple
mechanism to generate daughter cells of differing fate. They also may control
the activity of proteins that act in a vectoral manner across a newly-
synthesized septum.&lt;br/&gt;These studies will provide further insight into
the mechanism by which integral membrane proteins reach their correct
subcellular address in bacterial cells. Thus far, the mechanisms of integral
membrane protein insertion and assembly have been almost exclusively studied in
Gram negative bacteria, primarily in E. coli. These studies will be extended to
the Gram positive bacterium B. subtilis, which represents a separate bacterial
kingdom that includes many human pathogens such as the Mycobacteria,
Streptococcus sp. and Staphylococcus sp., and many bacteria of industrial
importance, such as the Actinomycetes.&lt;br/&gt;The project will contribute to
training graduate and undergraduate students in microbial cell biology and
genetics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;