* 0135632
* U.S.-Japan Seminar:  Nanoscale Thermal Science and Engineering
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2003
* Arunava Majumdar, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 02/28/2003
* USD 17,000.00

0135632&lt;br/&gt;Majumdar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the
participation of American scientists in a U.S.-Japan seminar on nanoscale
thermal science and engineering to be held in San Francisco, California from
June 25-28, 2002. The co-organizers are Professor Arunava Majumdar of the
University of California, Berkeley and Professor Ken Okazaki at the Tokyo
Institute of Technology in Japan. Both Japan and the U.S. are deeply committed
to the emerging field of nanotechnology. This seminar will present an
opportunity to share their knowledge in the area of nanoscale thermophysics and
energy conversion, which is key to nanotechnology. Examples of this include:
transport and interactions between electrons, phonons, and photons in low-
dimensional nanostructures (semiconductor superlattices, nanowires, quantum
dots); novel thermoelectric and optoelectronic phenomena and devices on
nanostructured; thin film growth and cluster formation; experimental techniques
involving scanning probe microscopes; femtosecond laser diagnostics and probing
of materials; and molecular dynamic and Monte Carlo simulations of energy
conversion and transport of nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although a lot
of effort in the past has been directed towards understanding the electronic and
materials behavior of nanostructures, the thermophysics of nanostructures and
nanodevices as well as biomolecular transport phenomena in micro/nanodevices
have not been adequately addressed. It must be recognized that although the
nature of physical phenomena at nanometer scales can be quite diverse, they must
all satisfy the basic laws of thermodynamics. Hence thermophysics at nanometer
scales provides a unique window to study a wide variety of phenomena. For
biomolecular analysis, there is tremendous opportunity to use the thermodynamics
and fluidics of biomolecules such as DNA and proteins to understand their
transport and transformations, which are both fundamental in biotechnology. The
project advances international human resources through the participation of many
junior faculty, postdocs and graduate students. Through the exchange of ideas
and technology, this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and
promote international understanding and cooperation. The researchers plan to
publish results of the research in the Journal "Microscale Thermophysical
Engineering."&lt;br/&gt;