* 0135602
* Dynamics of On-line Communities on Topics of Professional Management
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2002,02/29/2004
* Gerardine DeSanctis, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Priscilla Regan
* 02/29/2004
* USD 72,480.00

What organization design factors account for the growth or decline of online
learning communities? What does one need to know in order to build sustainable,
professional interest groups online? "On-line learning communities" in this
project refers to discussion forums devoted to topics of professional management
interest, such as knowledge management, supply chain management, or customer
relationship management. The forums are publicly accessible through the Internet
and attract professionals who have similar interests and confront practical
problems related to the topic at hand. "Meta-communities" are the full
collection of online communities devoted to anyone topic area. Online learning
communities offer the potential to operate as inter-organizational professional
groups, that is, as relatively distinctive entities with their own participants,
knowledge resources and ongoing routines. In a sense, each community is akin to
a new firm in an industry or market that competes with other firms to attract
resources and grow. Of scientific interest is the question of why some of these
communities grow and thrive whereas others fail to flourish, or become active
for a time and then die. &lt;br/&gt;The research begins by examining one full
population (i.e., meta-community) of all online communities devoted to a single
topic area and then expands to include a second meta-community in order to test
the generalizability of findings. Three types of analyses will be conducted
within each meta-community: &lt;br/&gt;Estimation of the effects of community
size, posting volume, linked resources, and discussion routines on community
growth and mortality rates&lt;br/&gt;Mapping of social network structures,
including the strength of information exchange ties within the communities and
inter-community participation patterns&lt;br/&gt;Content coding of communication
to gauge amounts and types of organizational learning that occur in each
community, specifically, question asking, feedback seeking, experimentation, and
reflection. &lt;br/&gt;Communities that grow and thrive will be compared with
those that have died or failed to thrive. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
complements the work of other scholars who are investigating samples of online
communities but not populations, who study special niche or general purpose
communities other than communities of practicing managers, and who examine the
social life of online communities rather than their organization structures. The
findings should be directly useful to online community building activities. The
data will be made available to researchers at other universities interested in
the study of online communities and new organizational forms. &lt;br/&gt;