* 0135442
* Exploring Approaches for Microarray Databases That Enable Flexible Design and Integrative Analysis
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2002,10/31/2007
* Mark Gerstein, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 10/31/2007
* USD 492,485.00

This proposal will explore a number of technologies for representing, storing,
and processing microarray data, applied to development of the Yale Microarray
Database (YMD). Microarray data sets, while providing information about gene
expression or protein interactions, present one of the significant challenges in
data management. Three specific technologies are involved. Collectively these
approaches will allow us to address a number of the important issues in
microarray database design: (i) dealing with large-scale and diverse
information; (ii) allowing data dissemination; (iii) facilitating interoperation
and exchange of data among heterogeneous information resources; and (iv)
supporting integrative data analysis.&lt;br/&gt;1. The use of the flexible EAV
data modeling approach. The entity-attribute-value (EAV) approach in modeling a
wide variety of sparsely populated attributes in a flexible fashion will be
utilized in YMD to represent heterogeneous data including experimental
conditions and multi-level analysis results. &lt;br/&gt;2. XML-based
interoperability. XML can facilitate the conversion and merging of heterogeneous
(but related) data sets from different information sources into a common format
so that integrated data access can be facilitated. MAGEML (an XML-based markup
language for describing gene expression data) as a common data exchange
mechanism between YMD and other MIAME-compliant microarray data repositories
will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;3. Parallel computing. A distributed, parallel
computing approach to help speed up complex queries and analyses of large
amounts of gene expression data will be used, providing users with integrated
access to a variety of tools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;