* 0135626
* Development of the Next Generation Megabar High-Pressure Cells: A COMPRES Grand Challenge
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2002,12/31/2005
* Ho-kwang Mao, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 12/31/2005
* USD 651,737.00

0135626&lt;br/&gt;Hemley&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose to develop the next
generation static ultrahigh-pressure apparatus that will allow an increase in
sample volumes in excess of 100 times those currently available in conventional
diamond cells at megabar pressures. This will enable myriad mainstream
analytical techniques currently unavailable for ultrahigh-pressure research,
including those required for the successful utilization of major neutron and
synchrotron radiation facilities that are coming on line. The new class of high-
pressure cells will also improve measurement accuracy for existing in situ probe
techniques, provide well-calibrated hydrostatic pressures and uniform
temperatures, allow higher and more uniform temperatures to be achieved with
laser heating, and provide robust and user-friendly operation. These
capabilities are required to address numerous current problems in high-pressure
geochemistry, geophysics, and planetary science; as such, the proposed advances
are expected to have major impact in each of these areas. The increases in
sample volume for the new cells will result from a combination of improvements
that include enlarged anvils, modified culet shapes, designed gaskets, and added
binding support for the anvils. Single-crystal diamonds synthesized at high
pressures and temperatures will be enlarged by homoepitaxial chemical vapor
deposition overgrowth of single-crystal diamond films to create anvils reaching
25 carats and above. Synthetic moissanite (SiC) anvils will be used for testing
and for 100-fold volume increases at pressures up to 50 GPa. The larger sample
chamber, in turn, will remove restrictions currently imposed by microscopic
volumes and greatly improve the pressure-temperature conditions and probing
capabilities at ultrahigh pressures. New presses will be built to provide the
loads necessary for the larger volumes. The project will be carried out in
coordination with the newly formed COnsortium for Materials Properties Research
in the Earth Sciences (COMPRES), through which the new high-pressure
capabilities will be made available to the high-pressure geoscience
community.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;