* 0135306
* Dissertation Improvement: Ethnobotanical Knowledge and Communication Networks: An Interactionist Approach to Understanding Indigenous Education in the Sierra Tarahumara, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2003
* Brent Berlin, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 02/28/2003
* USD 11,018.00

This research project, to be conducted by a doctoral student in Anthropology at
the University of Georgia, contributes to an understanding of some of the
processes of knowledge acquisition and transfer in formal and informal social
contexts. Plant knowledge diversity and consensus are hypothesized to be
correlated with variation in the structure of communication networks and
community interaction patterns. Qualitative and quantitative techniques are used
to test these hypotheses and document variation in ethnobotanical knowledge and
change in several Raramuri (Tarahumara) communities in Chihuahua, Mexico. The
project identifies environmental factors contributing to differential botanical
expertise among children and adults at three levels of interaction: 1) the
social interaction patterns between households; 2) a child's immediate
environment interactions, both biophysical and sociocultural; and 3) a child's
personal characteristics and social roles. Results will contribute to the
development of an interactionist model of indigenous education, and to
understanding the relationships between individual learning and community
processes of change. It will also contribute to ongoing Raramuri biocultural
conservation efforts and to the design of effective environmental education
projects.