* 0135078
* CAREER: Singularities and Microstructure - Multiple Scale Analysis for Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations (PDE), Geometric Problems, and the Physical Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Shankar Venkataramani, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 12/31/2004
* USD 306,219.00

DMS Award Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Award #: 0135078&lt;br/&gt;PI: Venkataramani,
Shankar &lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Chicago&lt;br/&gt;Program: Applied
Mathematics&lt;br/&gt;Program Manager: Catherine
Mavriplis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER: Singularities and Microstructure -
Multiple Scale Analysis for Nonlinear PDE, Geometric Problems, and the Physical
Sciences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There exist a variety of tools for studying
multiple scale behaviors&lt;br/&gt;in nonlinear systems, and the method of
choice for a particular&lt;br/&gt;problem often depends on whether the
investigator is an analyst, an&lt;br/&gt;applied mathematician or a physicist.
An important goal is to&lt;br/&gt;effectively merge the various approaches, and
develop new ways of&lt;br/&gt;thinking about multi-scale problems. To this end,
this project focuses&lt;br/&gt;on investigating five interdisciplinary problems,
using ideas from&lt;br/&gt;functional analysis, geometry, topology, matched
asymptotics and&lt;br/&gt;scaling arguments, in conjunction with numerical
simulations. These&lt;br/&gt;problems are (1) Generalized crumpling: Combining
functional analytic&lt;br/&gt;methods with geometric/topological ideas to study
singularities and&lt;br/&gt;microstructure; (2) Blowup in Parabolic PDEs:
Applying Morse theory to&lt;br/&gt;the dynamics of blowup solutions; (3)
Dynamics of microstructure:&lt;br/&gt;Studying global bifurcations involving the
change of microstructure in&lt;br/&gt;a model system; (4) Pattern formation and
non-equilibrium phase&lt;br/&gt;transitions: Investigating multiple scale
behaviors in nonlinear&lt;br/&gt;systems in the presence of noise; and (5)
Topological transitions in&lt;br/&gt;fluid interfaces: Using tools from PDE to
investigate topological&lt;br/&gt;transitions in 2 fluid
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many real world systems are interesting precisely
because they exhibit&lt;br/&gt;different behaviors on different scales. This is
certainly true for&lt;br/&gt;living organisms, geological and geophysical
systems, technologically&lt;br/&gt;important composite materials and even social
structures and&lt;br/&gt;hierarchies. Thus researchers across many disciplines
grapple with the&lt;br/&gt;following two questions, which are the essence of
multiple scale&lt;br/&gt;analysis: (1) How does the large scale (macroscopic)
behavior emerge&lt;br/&gt;out of the collective behavior of the small scale
(microscopic)&lt;br/&gt;units?, and (2) What are the rules governing the large
scale behavior,&lt;br/&gt;and how does this influence the behavior of the small
scale units? The&lt;br/&gt;research component of this project studies these
questions in a&lt;br/&gt;mathematical setting through problems that arise in
material science&lt;br/&gt;and in physics. The overall goal is to meld together
a variety of&lt;br/&gt;techniques to develop tools that can successfully handle
complex&lt;br/&gt;real-world multiple scale problems. This is combined with
an&lt;br/&gt;integrated approach to pedagogy, that features a strong involvement
in&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate and graduate research, development of
research&lt;br/&gt;opportunities for groups that are under-represented in
mathematics and&lt;br/&gt;the physical sciences, curriculum development both at
the graduate and&lt;br/&gt;the undergraduate level, and development of materials
for scientific&lt;br/&gt;outreach to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Date: December 17, 2001&lt;br/&gt;