* 0135345
* Vertical Integration of Research and Education in the Mathematical Sciences - VIGRE: Research Focus Groups in Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2008
* Joel Hass, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2008
* USD 3,201,784.00

DMS-0135345&lt;br/&gt;PI: Bruno L. Nachtergaele, UC Davis&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Research Focus Groups in
Mathematics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UCDavis VIGRE
project offers a range of activities designed to integrate the excitement of
research mathematics into every facet of its undergraduate, graduate and
postdoctoral programs. To accomplish this, the investigators and their
colleagues are running up to four Research Focus Groups as a means to coordinate
the activities in four research areas. Each Research Focus Group includes
regular faculty members, postdoctoral fellows, graduate students, and
undergraduates. The areas of research of the Groups vary from year to year,
depending on the interests and expertise of the faculty and graduate students.
Initial proposals include: 1) Geometry and Topology, including Computational
Aspects; 2) Dynamics of Classical and Quantum Many-Body Systems; 3) Mathematical
Biology, including Protein Structure and Function, Biofluid Mechanics, and
Spatial Models in Ecology; 4) Discrete Mathematics, including Algebraic and
Geometric Combinatorics and Stochastic Discrete Optimization. The Research Focus
Group activities include a research seminar, a reading seminar, research
projects, and outreach programs. An internship program has also been set up as
part of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the goals of the Research Focus
Groups are to introduce undergraduates to mathematical research, to provide a
mechanism for graduate students to interact closely with faculty and
postdoctoral fellows early in their graduate careers, and to give postdoctoral
fellows an opportunity to learn leadership skills necessary to a successful
mathematical career. The Research Focus Groups offer participants direct
involvement in active areas of research of great current interest. This allows
beginning students to focus on a promising career path in mathematics early on,
and creates an environment where they can be more effectively prepared for such
careers. The VIGRE project and the Research&lt;br/&gt;Focus Groups also serve as
a focus of new initiatives in graduate recruitment. Feedback from Research Focus
Groups and internship participants is used to revise the mathematics
undergraduate and graduate programs at UC Davis.&lt;br/&gt;