* 0135251
* Collaborative Research:   Aquifer Deformation Using GPS
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* John Bell, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/2004
* USD 97,131.00

0135251 Blewitt Aquifer tests typically involve collecting time-drawdown data in
the vicinity of a pumping well for the purpose of producing plots for estimating
the storage coefficient and transmissivity of the aquifer or aquifer system.
Recent advances in GPS technology and INSAR (interferometric synthetic aperture
radar) satellite imagery, allow for detailed and precise calculation of land
surface displacements. Stationary GPS monitoring during an active pumping test
in conjunction with INSAR interferograms for the same region will allow for
time-compaction (and time-horizontal strain) data to be collected in conjunction
with the hydrograph data providing a far more diagnostic test for estimating
storage coefiricient of confined aquifers. Furthermore, in leaky aquifer systems
in which the confining unit is the primary compressible unit, the time-
compaction data can provide the necessary information to accurately calculate
the speciric storage and vertical hydraulic conductivity of the confining unit,
parameters that are typically difficult to evaluate. A new analytical solution
has been developed to derive the storage coefficient from time-subsidence data
and numerical simulation results applied to this semi-log (conrined) and semi-
log (leaky) methodology indicates that extremely accurate estimates for storage
of the aquifer and storage and vertical hydraulic conductivity of the confining
unit can be made. GPS and INSAR surveys will also provide detailed information
on horizontal deformation occurring at the land surface and can corroborate
results from hypothetical modeling of three-dimensional deformation and flow,
which indicate that more than 50 percent of pumped water is released from
storage associated with horizontal strain in confined aquifers. These results
may have tremendous implications with regard to measuring subsidence, the
quantity of leakage that can actually be expected through confining units, and
the interpretation of long-term aquifer tests. Furthermore, the strain
configuration through the confining unit will be much different in the presence
of three-dimensional strain, which will affect the potential compaction and
leakage through the confining unit over time. The potential contribution of
water from horizontal strain may require us to rethink the current definition of
storage coefficient where such strains have been neglected.