* 0135635
* Dissertation Research:  Conduits of Culture and Control: Roads, States, and Users in West-Central Africa, 1914 to 1980
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Eric Schatzberg, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 07/31/2004
* USD 11,995.00



This Science and Technology Studies Dissertation Improvement Grant examines the
history of roads in West-Central Africa from 1914 to 1980, analyzing this
technology along its material, political and cultural dimensions. The grant
primarily supports travel to access published archival materials, published
sources and to perform oral histories, primarily in France and West-Central
Africa, in order to shed light on roads as material artifacts, political
instruments, and the locus of cultural meanings, all built through the
sometimes-clashing agency of Africans and Westerners. Over the course of the
20th century, roads of various sorts became increasingly important as a primary
site or "contact zone" for encounters between westerners and Africans. But
westerners and Africans each brought their own, sometimes widely differing,
assumptions and expectations about roads to these encounters. Uncovering the
ways both westerners and Africans perceived and used roads is thus crucial to
understanding the nature and impact of encounters between Africa and the west,
and to understanding the complex roles of technology in those encounters. The
construction and maintenance of roads in west-central Africa during the 20th
century posed significant challenges and entailed difficult (and revealing)
decisions. The researcher will draw out the technological, political, social,
and symbolic aspects of roads both over the course of the colonial occupation
and as post-independence African nations maintained, expanded, and found new
uses for road systems inherited from colonial governments. The project also
argues for the pervasive and transforming role of a particular technology,
roads, not only on a policy level but also in the day-to-day lives of and
encounters between westerners and Africans in twentieth-century Africa. This
dissertation, then, includes the voices of Africans, as well as westerners, who
variously helped to build or repair roads, lived along (or away from) roads, and
traveled along roads.

