* 0135300
* Dissertation Research:  Visualization and Representation in Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI): A Cross-Cultural Comparison of Scientific Research in the United States and India
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2003
* Andrew Pickering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 01/31/2003
* USD 10,000.00

In the last thirty years medical practice has undergone a profound technological
change. Imaging technologies like MRI that emerged in this period are shifting
medicine's vision to a domain in which the body seems to have lost its
materiality and become a visual medium (Balsamo 1996). Apart from offering vast
diagnostic possibilities, medical imaging technologies like MRI are also
radically reconfiguring the human body and contributing to new enunciations of
individual and social selves. This dissertation research grant attempts to
contextualize this new visuality by analyzing the socio-economic and technical
contexts of the development of MRI. The study has two purposes. First, through a
comparative cross-cultural study to highlight the social/cultural factors
contributing to the making of this new digitalized visibility, the project will
attempt to uncover the socio-technical network within which visualization by
technologies like MRI is located and continues to develop. Further, the project
will attempt to show in what ways this computer-based visualization is re-
mapping spaces and bodies in different societies in the present era of
globalization. Second, MRI research since its birth in the 1970s has been
located at the interface of different disciplines, institutions, and nations.
The transnational cooperation has been further accelerated with the recent
development of information/communication technologies. Yet these cooperations
are not unhindered flows of information and technology. They are embedded in the
social, political, and economic interests of nations, education/research
institutions, multinational companies, and individuals. This study seeks to use
MRI as a case study to explore the nature of interaction and exchange of a non-
western country with the west in the development of sophisticated technologies.
Funding for this project supports research at two laboratories, one in the US
and the other in India. The research at these laboratories will entail combining
the "thick description" of the laboratory work through participant observation,
and interviews of scientists with textual analysis of scientific papers, policy
documents, lay articles, biographical, and autobiographical notes.