* 0135136
* CAREER: Simulating, Understanding, and Quantifying Albedo Feedback
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Alexander Hall, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Walter A. Robinson
* 06/30/2007
* USD 549,743.00

Research under this CAREER award will elucidate the role of surface albedo
feedback in climate variability and sensitivity. The following outstanding
issues will be addressed (i) What does our current knowledge of snow and ice
albedo imply about climate sensitivity? (ii) Do snow and sea ice albedo feedback
behave differently? (iii) How does albedo feedback impact the geographical and
seasonal distribution of the climate change signal? (iv) Do models need albedo
feedback to simulate the observed distribution of the climate change signal? (v)
What is the impact of albedo feedback on internal variability? (vi) Is it
possible to extract information about albedo feedback contribution to the real
climate's sensitivity to a future external forcing based on the observed record
of climate variability? The PI will perform a series of sensitivity experiments
with the UCLA General Circulation Mode and Community Climate System Model (CCSM)
to answer the above questions. For the integration of education, the PI will
introduce undergraduate students at Harvey Mudd and Biklent Univ. Ankara Turkey,
to projects related to the climate change experiments. Graduate students will be
involved in evaluating the climate change simulations in a graduate course the
PI will be teaching.

This research is important because it will improve knowledge about processes
important to issues of climate change and will help educate future scientists.