* 0135620
* NSF Workshop on Engineering Fundamentals of Low Temperature PEM Fuel Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Robert Savinell, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Glenn L. Schrader
* 08/31/2002
* USD 42,940.00

The focus of this workshop is to define the fundamental technical issues
critical for the development of low-temperature fuel cells. The workshop is
scheduled to take place during November, 2001 at the National Science
Foundation. The collective expertise of the group will identify feasible
approaches to improved understanding and to establish an agenda for basic
engineering research that will address these needs. The fuel-cell industry may
have a significant impact on the consumer market in the future, playing a role
wherever electrical power is needed. Although theoretically capable of high
efficiency, the catalyst and transport processes limit actual performance.
Engineering challenges of integrating and controlling the fuel-cell system (fuel
processor, fuel cell, and power conditioning) must be overcome, especially for
transient operation. Areas to be addressed include electrodes, membranes, fuel
storage and conversion, and modeling. The basic sciences that support fuel-cell
development are varied and require an interdisciplinary approach. Fuel cells
have the potential to provide a clean source of electrical power for household,
industrial, and transportation applications. A report defining the fundamental
scientific and engineering issues along with research approaches will be
prepared.