* 0135195
* CAREER: Scalable Mathematical and Computational Models for Biomolecular Modeling
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2008
* Jesus Izaguirre, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 01/31/2008
* USD 343,233.00

The proposed activities aim to create mathematical and computational methods for
modeling large biological molecules. Computational simulation of dynamics and
sampling of proteins, DNA, and nucleic acids promise to be a tool for
understanding the relationship between structure and function, and for computer
assisted drug design. Processes of interest include protein dynamics and folding
and the study of other cellular components. Despite significant progress in the
field, there is still a gap between the simulations that can be routinely
performed with current technology and the complexity of processes and systems of
biological interest. The proposed mathematical and computational methods will
overcome the size and time scale limitations inherent in atomistic dynamics and
sampling, while preserving the atomistic resolution of the biological systems.
The new methods will be disseminated for research and educational purposes
through an open source and scalable software framework called ProtoMol, and
tested in a range of systems, from small proteins to potassium channels that
reside in lipid bilayers. These new algorithms will translate into speedups of
one or more orders of magnitude over current methodologies. This technology will
enable simulations that are sorely needed in the expanding field of proteomics
and the processing of data from the human genome project. To study dynamical
processes, trajectories of large biomolecules are generated using molecular
dynamics (MD). In an attempt to overcome the time scale limitations, multiple
time stepping (MTS) integrators have been introduced. Nevertheless, even these
methods have been limited by stability, and thus the time steps used in MD have
not been dramatically increased. The PI proposes to devise multiscale algorithms
for MD that are not limited by stability. To accomplish this goal, research will
proceed in two phases: the _rst will extend the PI's work on stabler MTS
numerical integrators by overcoming instabilities present in these methods. This
will allow an estimated two- to eight-fold speedup over current methods for MD.
The second phase involves the use of a symplectic semi-implicit method for MD
using a splitting that separates cleanly many time scales, and incorporates the
faster and less interesting ones in a more approximate manner. Speedups of two
orders of magnitude or more are possible, depending on the degree of accuracy
desired. This proposal will also tackle the related problem of statistical
sampling. The large conformational space of biomolecular systems causes many
difficulties to traditional sampling methodologies such as MD and Monte Carlo
methods, or hybrids of both, all of which super performance degradation as the
system size increases. We will use a biased hybrid Monte Carlo method that
scales nearly linearly with system size. This will produce speedups of one or
two orders of magnitude over MD, MC, or conventional hybrid MC methods. Synergy
between this research project and teaching will occur at several levels. There
will be an enhancement of materials of undergraduate and graduate courses taught
by the PI, on data structures and applied algorithms, numerical methods, and
computational methods for biomolecular modeling. Learning modules for
engineering and science students will be developed in ProtoMol to facilitate an
understanding of the behavior of large biological molecules.