* 0135913
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Processes of Early Inca State Expansion in the Sacred Valley (Cusco, Peru)
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2002
* Joyce Marcus, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 12/31/2002
* USD 6,500.00

Under the direction of Dr. Joyce Marcus, Mr. R. Alan Covey will collect data for
his doctoral dissertation. Using samples of grass, carbonized corn, and charred
wood, he will obtain radiocarbon dates that will help to answer several
important questions about the Inka empire. The samples were collected during
Covey's regional survey research and excavations in the Vilcanota Valley (known
popularly as the Sacred Valley), located immediately to the north of Cusco, the
Inka capital. The new dates will help to refine our understanding of the
development of regional pottery and architectural styles between AD 1000-1450,
the time during which the Inka empire formed in the Cusco Valley and began its
first imperial conquests. A well-defined archaeological chronology for this
period will elucidate some of the processes enabling rapid Inka imperial
expansion, providing an additional line of evidence that can be compared to
Colonial Spanish accounts of Inka history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of Mr.
Covey's research is to describe how the Inka created a well-integrated imperial
heartland that included the Sacred Valley, an area occupied by several different
ethnic groups in the pre-Inka period. This work integrates four independent
datasets: (1) regional settlement patterns, collected in a systematic survey;
(2) excavation data from pre-Inka households; (3) Colonial period Spanish
accounts of Inka history; and (4) Colonial archival documents on land tenure in
the study region. While the Spanish chronicles provide valuable information
about Inka origins, they do not offer a reliable chronology for this period. The
full potential of archaeological data has remained unrealized because a clear
radiocarbon chronology is still not available to subdivide the period from AD
1000-1450. A more accurate chronology will in turn yield more powerful regional
data for analyzing the processes of early Inka territorial
expansion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is important because it will help
to demonstrate that processes of Inka imperial expansion and administration were
developed through a long period of regional political interactions and
integration strategies. Mr. Covey's research will advance our understanding of
the conditions that promote the formation and expansion of empires. It will also
assist in training a promising young scientist.&lt;br/&gt;