* 0135196
* Magnetostrictive Composites for Sensors and Actuators
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2001,02/28/2003
* Scott White, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 02/28/2003
* USD 49,657.00

Tremendous growth in information and biomedical technologies coupled with the
increased complexity of modern transportation systems has fostered an increased
demand for sensors and actuators with higher performance, enhanced reliability,
and lower cost. Magnetostrictive sensors/actuators have become increasingly
popular and can be found in a diverse set of applications ranging from on-line
torque sensors in automobiles to acoustic transducers in hearing aids. Yet,
monolithic versions of the most popular magnetostrictives are prone to several
technical problems including low tensile strength, brittle fracture, high eddy
current losses, and complex and costly manufacturing. One solution to these
problems is to develop a magnetostrictive composite sensor/actuator in which the
desirable properties of the magnetostrictive phase are combined with those of
the matrix phase to create a composite of high strength, excellent
processability, and low eddy current losses. Although some initial attempts have
been undertaken to develop magnetostrictive composites, very little work has
been accomplished in several key areas. A comprehensive experimental database
spanning the full range of volume fraction is currently lacking. No
comprehensive micromechanical model has emerged to design magnetostrictive
composites for specific performance targets. This research project will focus on
generating a complete set of magnetomechanical experimental data spanning the
full range of volume fraction for magnetostrictive (Terfenol-D) composites. The
experimental data will then be utilized in developing a micromechanical model
for performance prediction and design of sensors/actuators. The ultimate aim of
the research is to provide the scientific and engineering basis for industrial
application of magnetostrictive composites technology. From a broader
perspective this research project addresses the NSF and national initiative for
IT research and development by addressing the need for further scientific
efforts in developing new and better sensors and actuators.

