* 0135451
* History and Philosophy of the Relations between Evolutionary and Developmental Biology
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2002,01/31/2004
* Ronald Amundson, University of Hawaii at Hilo
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 01/31/2004
* USD 91,641.00

Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt;SES Proposal 0135451&lt;br/&gt;History and Philosophy
of the Relations between Evolutionary and&lt;br/&gt;Developmental
Biology&lt;br/&gt;Ronald Amundson, University of
Hawaii&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evolutionary developmental biology is a fast growing
new field, stimulated by the rapid advances in molecular developmental genetics
during the 1990s. Professional excitement is evident in the appearance of new
professional organizations, journals, textbooks, granting programs, and even a
new nickname, Evo Devo. But the relations between evolutionary and developmental
biology are anything but new. They began in the 1860s with Darwin's earliest
followers in evolutionary morphology. Their scientific program ran into
difficulties, and was abandoned during the 1890s. Evolutionary biology itself
was in a period of flux and controversy until the Evolutionary Synthesis of the
1930s and 1940s. The Evolutionary Synthesis unified many areas of biology, but
did not include development as a relevant factor for evolutionary understanding.
A lively debate about the importance of development arose again around 1980 with
equally fierce arguments from both defenders of the Synthesis and iconoclastic
advocates of development. The current scientific excitement about Evo Devo comes
not from the resolution of the methodological issues but from the promise of
increasingly rich progress in developmental genetics. In this project, Dr.
Amundson examines the history of the debates about the relevance of development
to evolution. He compares points of contention and the ways in which scientific
disputes are settled. Among the key questions are these: In what ways are
today's issues about development in biology similar to those of past debates in
the 19th or mid-20th centuries? To what extent do the debates depend on
empirical discoveries, and to what extent on differences in scientific method?
Will the methodological differences that still persist between Evo Devo and the
mainstream evolutionary theory be a barrier to an integrated theory of
evolution? The project suggests the importance of philosophy and methodology in
scientific debate and the significance of history in understanding contemporary
science.&lt;br/&gt;