* 0135530
* Workshop on Ultra-Large Networks:  Challenges and New Research Directions for Modeling and  Simulation
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2001,06/30/2003
* Bernard Zeigler, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Admela Jukan
* 06/30/2003
* USD 94,874.00

We propose to hold a two-day workshop in Tucson, Arizona during fall 2001 on
emerging ultra-large&lt;br/&gt;networks, such as the Internet. Hosted by Arizona
Center for Integrative Modeling and Simulation, the&lt;br/&gt;meeting will bring
together some of the world's leading researchers in the networking area to meet
with&lt;br/&gt;counterparts with expertise in modeling and simulation of
networks and of systems more generally. The&lt;br/&gt;workshop will provide
these researchers with the task of coming up with the unknowns of ultra-
large&lt;br/&gt;networks and with new directions of research in modeling and
simulation that can address these unknowns.&lt;br/&gt; The Internet is
increasing in connectivity, toward 1 billion nodes in 2005 and node capability
providing a&lt;br/&gt;highly interconnected and computationally powerful medium.
Such a globally and ubiquitously dispersed&lt;br/&gt;network will provide a new
frontier for new kinds of educational, commerce and entertainment
activities.&lt;br/&gt;However, there are many issues that arise in the emergence
of such a large, highly decentralized, collection&lt;br/&gt;of interaction
parts. The increased connectivity and capability creates new complexity and
dynamics that&lt;br/&gt;we are only on the verge of appreciating. Difficulties
in dealing with large-scale software systems are well&lt;br/&gt;documented in a
recent report by the National Research Council. Techniques that work for small
software&lt;br/&gt;systems fail markedly when the scale is increased by one
million fold. Computer-based modeling and&lt;br/&gt;simulation (M&amp;S)
methodology is required to address these issues since the scale is well beyond
what&lt;br/&gt;analytical tools alone can handle and there is limited ability to
do controlled experiments on the always&lt;br/&gt;on Internet. Traditional
M&amp;S approaches have focussed on the micro-level components rather than
the&lt;br/&gt;macro level integration of these components. However, with the
advent of ultra-large scale systems such as&lt;br/&gt;the Internet of the
future, it is necessary to develop M&amp;S approaches for understanding the
behaviors of&lt;br/&gt;very large inter-connected networks with very few loci of
control and many interacting and varied sources&lt;br/&gt;of input and services
demand.&lt;br/&gt; The results of this workshop are expected to be a set of
specific finding of gaps in our knowledge of the&lt;br/&gt;behavior of ultra-
large networks and how to deal with their design, management, and control.
Participants&lt;br/&gt;may assess whether current approaches can be evolved to
deal with the large increases in scale or whether&lt;br/&gt;different,
revolutionary paradigms are required. Participants will address the need for new
techniques and&lt;br/&gt;approaches for building models of ultra-large networks
and developing simulation environments for&lt;br/&gt;studying their behaviors.
Suggestions for borrowing points of view form other areas such as
complex&lt;br/&gt;adaptive systems and from basic theory of modeling and
simulation will be encouraged. The proceedings&lt;br/&gt;will be compiled in a
form that will provide a useable and significant guide for new NSF funding
initiatives&lt;br/&gt;for future network infrastructure research.