* 0135899
* RUI:Transcriptional Activation by the Bacillus Subtilis ComK Protein
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2006
* Charles Lovett, Williams College
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 02/28/2006
* USD 330,000.00

The objective of this research is to elucidate the mechanism by which the
Bacillus subtilis competence transcription factor, ComK, activates
transcription. Competence in B. subtilis is characterized by the cell's ability
to bind and take up exogenous DNA. In addition to controlling its own
expression, ComK is essential for the expression of the proteins that comprise
the DNA binding and uptake system and for the competence-related expression of
the recombination genes recA and addAB. ComK binds in the minor groove to
sequences upstream of the -35 region and causes bending of the DNA. Three
classes of ComK-regulated promoters are distinguished based on the spacing
between ComK dimer binding sites: In the first class (recA, addAB, dinA, and
nucA) the interval between dimer binding sites is 2 helical turns; the second
class, comprising the late competence genes (comC, -G, -E, and -F), contain
binding sites separated by 3 helical turns; and the third class contains a
single representative, the comK promoter, in which the binding sites are
separated by 4 helical turns. The downstream binding sites for all ComK-
dependent promoters are located in regions proposed for the binding of the alpha
subunits of E. coli RNA polymerase, which also binds in the minor groove. The PI
will characterize the DNA binding domain of ComK and test the hypothesis that
ComK affects the binding of the a subunits of RNA polymerase. The ComK DNA
binding domain will be characterized using a combination of mutational analysis,
NMR structural determination, and molecular modeling. The PI will determine
whether or not ComK interacts with RNA polymerase alpha when it binds to
representatives of the three classes of ComK-dependent promoters, recA, comG,
and comK, by a combination of hydroxyl radical footprinting, targeted
footprinting, protein-protein crosslinking, and mutational analyses. DNA binding
and transcriptional activation will be assessed for wild-type and mutant ComK
proteins using mobility shift assays, in vitro transcription assays, and
analyses of transcriptional activation of recA-lacZ, comG-lacZ, and comK-lacZ
fusions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research involves investigating the way in
which the ComK protein turns on the expression of an assortment of genes that
enable the bacterium Bacillus subtilis to take up external DNA and incorporate
this DNA into its chromosome. The results should elucidate how ComK controls the
expression of dozens of genes that are required when Bacillus subtilis cells
enter a specialized state for genetic exchange. Since the action of ComK likely
involves interactions with RNA polymerase, the enzyme that governs gene
expression in all bacteria, this research should further the understanding of
bacterial gene regulation in general.