* 0135563
* Dissertation Research Improvement Grants: Dissertation Research:  Dynamics of Discourse about Abribiotechnology:  Bt cotton in India
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Craig Harris, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 05/31/2004
* USD 12,000.00

The central theme of this dissertation project is to examine how democratic
decision-making about science and technology occurs in a developing society
where civil society is relatively well developed. Moreover, this study explores
how ethics and values are brought into decisions concerning science and
technology in a society which is trying to find ways to meet basic human needs
of its population through development. The introduction of Bt cotton in India
has been the source of ongoing controversy since the late 1990s. This
controversy and the discourse surrounding issues of Bt cotton in India makes it
possible to ask what are the processes of arriving at social understandings and
collective decisions about newly available science-based agricultural
technologies. How do ethics and values enter into the controversy surrounding
agribiotechnology? How are the efforts of actors facilitated by using science or
inhibited from participation in decision-making processes by not using science?
In a democratic developing society, how do science and non-scientific
considerations (ethics, beliefs, needs and preferences) play out in decision-
making processes? Funds for this project support the collection of data through
three methods: semi-structured and structured interviews, participant
observation, and content analysis to analyze how science, ethics and values are
used in discourse concerning agribiotechnology.