* 0135609
* Great Plains Network Workshop:  Network Resources for Enabling and Enhancing Research in the Earth Systems Science Community
* CSE,OAC
* 04/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Edward Martinko, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Gatchell
* 12/31/2005
* USD 24,961.00

The objective of the workshop is to facilitate use of Internet-enabled
technologies in conducting fundamental and applied research, disseminating
results and data between collaborating universities, and transferring research
and applications to the interested public. Specifically, the workshop will
foster interaction among ESS researchers at GPN alliance-member Universities who
are interested in 1) enhancing their individual research efforts, 2) developing
new collaborative research efforts, and 3) exploring the potential for GPN
resources in enhancing research infrastructure at member Universities. GPN
Alliance Universities include: &lt;br/&gt;North Dakota University, North Dakota
State University, University of North Dakota, South Dakota School of Mines and
Technology, South Dakota State University, University of South Dakota,
University of Kansas, University of Kansas Medical Center Kansas State
University, University of Nebraska - Lincoln, University of Oklahoma, University
of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, University of Tulsa, Oklahoma State
University, University of Arkansas, University of Arkansas at Little Rock,
University of Arkansas Medical Sciences, University of Missouri-Columbia,
University of Missouri&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To facilitate the objective and
goals of the workshop, researchers will be provided an overview of the network
and its resources, exposed to examples of technologies that are currently
available, and will hear from fellow GPN ESS researchers about research projects
and tools being developed in the other universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
support and facilitate follow-up meetings, discussions, future proposals and
collaborative efforts, and to facilitate use of the high performance network in
the ESS research community, each workshop attendee will be provided with a
PolyCom ViaVideo (H.323) videoconference unit. The PolyCom ViaVideo is USB-based
desktop videoconference unit that utilizes Internet2 networking and provides
business-quality video. The equipment will provide attendees with an important
tool to assist in follow-up discussions and in continuing collaborative research
and proposal development efforts.&lt;br/&gt;