* 0135940
* New Statistical Techniques for Probabilistic Weather Forecasting
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2006
* Roman Krzysztofowicz, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 06/30/2006
* USD 458,089.00

Rational decision making by industries, agencies, and the public in anticipation
of heavy precipitation, snow storm, flood or other disruptive weather
phenomenon, requires information about the degree of confidence that the user
can place in a weather forecast. It is vital, therefore, to advance the
meteorologist's capability of quantifying forecast uncertainty to meet the
society's rising expectations for reliable information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
long-term goal of this research is to lay down a methodological foundation for
the next generation of probabilistic forecasting systems. The specific objective
is to develop and test (i) a set of statistical techniques for probabilistic
forecasting of weather variates and (ii) a set of performance measures for
verification of probabilistic forecasts. The basic technique, called Bayesian
Processor of Output (BPO), will process output from a numerical weather
prediction (NWP) model and optimally fuse it with climatic data in order to
quantify uncertainty about a predictand. The extended technique, called Bayesian
Processor of Ensemble (BPE), will process an ensemble of the NWP model
output.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The techniques will harness recent advances in
Bayesian statistical theory, multivariate distributions, estimation methods, and
ensemble forecasting. Each technique will be developed and tested in three
versions, for (i) binary predictands (e.g., indicator of precipitation
occurrence), (ii) multi-category predictands (e.g., indicator of precipitation
type), and (iii) continuous predictands (e.g., precipitation amount conditional
on precipitation occurrence, temperature, visibility, ceiling height, wind
speed). The primary test will involve the production and verification of
probabilistic quantitative precipitation forecasts (PQPFs) for up to 3 days
ahead. The primary benchmark for evaluation of the new techniques will be the
30-year old Model Output Statistics (MOS) technique used currently in
operational forecasting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expected impacts of these new,
state-of-the-art techniques for probabilistic forecasting will be improved
forecasts of all major weather variates, and hence increased societal benefits.
In particular, reliable and informative PQPFs, produced by the BPO or the BPE
and suited to requirements of hydrologic models, will enable the production of
probabilistic river stage forecasts, probabilistic flood forecasts, and flood
warnings with explicitly stated detection probabilities.