* 0135693
* Enabling  a Basic Research Culture at Historically Black Colleges and Univesities (HBCUs)
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2001,07/31/2005
* Ralph Gomes, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2005
* USD 54,066.00

The Department of Sociology and Anthropology at Howard University is requesting
a Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) to plan and execute a two-day
conference, "Enabling a Basic Research Culture at Historically Black Colleges
and Universities (HBCU) in the Social Sciences October 18-20, 2001. The guiding
principle behind the conference is that it seeks to provide an opportunity for
young social science faculty at HBCUs to articulate their research goals, the
potential impact of this research on their teaching and what is needed to
facilitate and sustain a research culture at their institutions. More generally,
this conference is important because of its potential impact. The anticipated
outcome is a set of strategies that can aid the National Science Foundation
(NSF) and other funding agencies who seek to achieve greater diversity (i.e.,
institution, gender, race and ethnicity) in their support of research activities
in the social sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project proposes to
identify and engage young and new social science faculty in the construction of
strategies that will enable them to increase their participation in basic
research. For example, as a first step, using doctoral degree production data
from NSF's Survey of Doctorate Recipients as a measure of actual or potential
basic research and expertise, the investigators have identified a group of HBCUs
who are likely to expand their social science research capacity with additional
funding. Within these institutions the investigators propose to identify young
and new faculty who are currently engaged in research. The focus is on new
faculty because they are seen as having the greatest likelihood of establishing
and building a research culture for the social sciences at these institutions
through increased exposure to funding opportunities and networking with
researchers at other HBCUs and majority institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
conference will consist of three plenary sessions with researchers who have
successfully secured research funding and have studied or participated in
projects to increase minority participation in the nation's basic research
enterprise. Working sessions will be held to brainstorm and articulate what is
needed to enable interested faculty at HBCU's to conduct basic research and to
then integrate a research culture in their teaching activities. A funding
opportunities session will also be held with program directors from NSF.
Specific issues that will be addressed include: (1) cultivating research
capabilities in junior faculty, (2) exploiting mechanisms for basic research
funding, (3) the role of research in the primarily undergraduate institution,
and (4) establishing a research culture for the social
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recommendations that emerge from the
conference will be disseminated to HBCU's, NSF and other funding agencies. The
ultimate goal is to outline strategies for a primary concern-- how both HBCU
faculty and funding agencies can increase the number of scholars competing for
research funds, the quality of proposals, and ultimately the success rate of
investigators from social science scholars from HBCUs for large support
grants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;