* 0135272
* Microbial Genome Sequencing: Microsporidia and the Next Generation of Genome Scientists
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2007
* Charles Vossbrinck, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 09/30/2007
* USD 1,078,381.00

Except for a small number of human pathogens, microbial genome efforts have
steered clear of the diverse world of protozoans, many of which are important
agricultural parasites. Of particular interest are the Microsporidia, which by
eukaryotic standards have remarkably small genomes. Since they infect most
invertebrate taxa and all classes of vertebrates, their impact on agriculture
and fisheries is significant. They either cause disease or can serve as bio-
control agents. These same organisms have attracted the interests of biologists
and molecular evolutionists. They offer excellent models for studying
interactions between the genomes of a host and an obligate, intracellular
parasite. But molecular phylogenetic analyses point towards a confused
evolutionary history. To advance knowledge of these unusual microbes and to
address the ever-increasing demand for researchers broadly trained in genome
sciences, the genome of the microsporidian Nosema locustae will be sequenced to
closure and a comprehensive course in genome science will be established to
provide broad-based training in high throughput sequencing techniques and
bioinformatics. By integrating this course with the N. locustae project, nearly
100 students will be trained in all aspects of genomics. Although this model for
research and training could be applied to other microbial groups, Microsporidia
were selected because of their impact upon agriculture, their enigmatic
character in molecular evolution studies and what they may reveal about
interactions between the genomes of hosts and obligate intracellular parasites.
Sequence data (3X and higher coverage, monthly updates and annotation) will be
available to the research community on the Marine Biological Laboratory's web
server (www.mbl.edu). This is a Microbial Genome Sequencing Award funded through
a collaborative program between the National Science Foundation and the
Department of Agriculture Initiative for Future Agriculture and Food
Systems&lt;br/&gt;