* 0135290
* Vertical Integration of Research and Education in the Mathematical Sciences - VIGRE: VIGRE/GT: Vertical Integration of Research & Education at Georgia Tech
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2008
* John Pelesko, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2008
* USD 2,211,693.00

NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0135290

Mathematical Sciences: Vertical Integration of Research & Education at Georgia
Tech

Abstract DMS-0135290 Lacey



This VIGRE project will build on the strengths of the School of Mathematics at
The Georgia Institute of Technology, and on the many innovations introduced by
the curriculum review which accompanied the Institute's conversion to the
semester system two years ago. The project creates innovative educational
programs that link teaching and research and promote interactions among
undergraduate and graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and faculty members.

At the undergraduate level, the project will increase the number of mathematics
majors, improve retention, and provide students with a deeper and more relevant
educational experience. This will be accomplished by the introduction of new
courses and seminars for beginning students, more focused advising, and much
expanded efforts to foster undergraduate research.

The postdoctoral fellows supported by the VIGRE project will receive increased
guidance as they continue to develop their teaching and research skills. They
will interact more extensively with undergraduate and graduate students, both
through one-on-one mentoring and through seminars that they themselves will
organize.

The VIGRE program will have a major impact on Georgia Tech's doctoral program in
mathematics. Graduate trainees will be provided with full non-teaching support
during their first year and during summers and portions of their later years.
This will enable them to complete their degrees in a more timely fashion, and
will also provide them with the added freedom needed to broaden their education
by taking advantage of the many other strong programs at Georgia Tech. New
seminars will smooth the transition from coursework to dissertation research.
Increased contact with undergraduate mathematics majors and the school's
postdoctoral fellows will further diversify their training. The VIGRE program
will draw together the talents and energy of faculty members, postdoctoral
fellows, undergraduates, and graduate students to create an integrated community
of scholars dedicated to discovery and learning.