* 0135422
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: The Individual in the Global Economy: International Organization and the Politics of Fair Trade
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2003
* Jon Pevehouse, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 01/31/2003
* USD 10,055.00



States create and join multilateral trade organizations at a faster pace then
ever before in history. As these institutions grow in number and scope, mass
protests against globalization around the world challenge the legitimacy of
global governance through managed trade. The charge is clear: trade
organizations impact more than market access among states. They also contribute
to the demise of state capacity or willingness to protect individuals from
global market forces. Despite a wealth of research into the general impact of
international organizations on state-state relations, there is a virtual absence
of systematic research into their impact on state- individual relations. In this
Doctoral Dissertation Research Support project the student engages this debate
whether and how states' commitments to trade impact the lives of individuals in
a global economy. The argument is offered that human rights are a particularly
important case study to explore this tension.

Using an institutional approach to the study of international political economy,
the student challenges extant belief among many economists, political
scientists, activists, and policy- makers that state commitment to trade
organizations is inherently 'good' or 'bad' for human rights. Rather, it is
hypothesized that state choice between different organizations, in terms of
design and membership, will structure the impact of economic globalization on
individual human rights. Human rights and free trade are therefore potentially
compatible goals, which depend on the configuration of international and
domestic institutions; yet they are by no means inevitable. Using both
quantitative and qualitative methods, this research explores this proposition
across a sample of more than 150 states from the mid 1970s to the present.



