* 0135595
* Microbial Genome Sequencing: Genomic Biodiversity in Hypersaline Environments
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2001,12/31/2005
* Shiladitya DasSarma, University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2005
* USD 605,000.00

Extremely halophilic archaea inhabit brine pools containing 3-5 M NaCl, which
are extraordinarily diverse and dynamic with respect to salinity, pH,
temperature, pressure, nutrients, etc. In addition to their obligately
halophilic character,some are also acidophilic, alkaliphilic, psychrophilic,
barophilic, or slightly thermophilic. Extreme halophiles are easily cultured in
the laboratory and are excellent experimental systems with well-developed
genetic tools. However, thus far, only a single genome from an extremely
halophilic archaeon, Halobacterium species NRC-1, has been sequenced. In order
to study the genomic diversity of extreme halophiles, we plan to sequence the
genome of Haloarcula marismortui, a metabolically versatile halophile with a
high-resolution ribosome structure. If time and resources permit, additional
genomic analysis will be conducted on diverse strains, including Natrialba
asiatica, a non-pigmented alkaliphile. Halorubrum lacusprofundi, a psychrophile
capable of growing at temperatures down to 4oC, Halosimplex carlsbadense, a
likely ancient halophile recently isolated from a Permian brine inclusion, which
appears to be a genetic chimera, and Halobacterium species GRB, a closely
related strain to NRC-1. Sequencing will be conducted at the Institute for
Systems Biology and annotation will be done at the University of Maryland
Biotechnology Institute, Center of Marine Biotechnology. This project will
provide better understanding of biodiversity among extreme halophiles, including
genome structure and evolution, adaptation to extreme environments, and lateral
gene transfer. In the long term, the proposed work should provide novel
applications in biotechnology, e.g. engineering salt tolerance in crop plants
and development of new antibiotics. This is a Microbial Genome Sequencing Award
funded through a collaborative program between the National Science Foundation
and the Department of Agriculture Initiative for Future Agriculture and Food
Systems.