* 0135825
* Predator-Prey Interactions: A Multilevel Analysis of the Bat-Moth Arms Race
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2002,08/31/2005
* William Conner, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Godfrey R. Bourne
* 08/31/2005
* USD 133,600.00

Abstract

The interactions of insectivorous bats and their prey can be thought of as an
evolutionary arms race. Bats began the race with the evolution of sophisticated,
high frequency sonar with which they echolocate flying insects, track them
through space, and ultimately eat them. Many nocturnal insects including moths
countered with the evolution of sonar detection devices - ears - that alert
insects to the echolocation cries of approaching bats. Moths take evasive action
in the form of loops, spirals, and power dives and an impressive aerobatic "dog
fight" between predator and prey ensues. Tiger moths (Lepidoptera: Arctiidae)
have added a new twist to the fray. Tiger moths answer bats with a series of
intense ultrasonic clicks produced by paired thoracic structures called tymbals.
For over thirty years researchers have attempted to determine why tiger moths
answer bats. There are currently three theories about the proximate mechanisms
by which the sounds work. First, it is possible that moths produce sounds that
startle bats, giving them a momentary advantage in aerial combat. Second, bats
may jam the sophisticated ultrasonic echolocation system of bats by sending out
sounds that mimic moth echoes but with inappropriate timing. The third
possibility is that tiger moths send out an acoustic warning that they are not
palatable food items, much as insects use bright colors to warn visual predators
that they are noxious. These hypotheses are not considered mutually exclusive
and they may all work simultaneously. The proposed experiments will take the
three theories to the next level - from the level of proximate questions about
mechanism to the level of ultimate questions about the evolution of behavior.
Using two novel approaches - a learning approach and a phylogenetic approach -
the selective advantages of tymbals will be determined. Laboratory experiments
in which bats are pitted against insects with and without chemical defenses or
sound will reveal how learning has shaped bat-moth acoustic interactions.
Cladistic methods will then be used to explore when, where, and how tymbals
originated and why they have been maintained for millions of years since their
origin. The answers to these question will not only explain the fascinating
details of bat-tiger moth evolution, they will also illustrate how a keystone
behavioral innovation has allowed a temporary escape from predation and the
radiation of a clade of ~11,000 species in relatively predatory free space. The
results of these experiments will be shared with grade school children through a
new website dedicated to the interactions of "Bats and Bugs". The information
will also be added to an exciting new ecological and environmental curriculum
being developed in cooperation with the Archbold Biological Station near Lake
Placid, Florida.