* 0135811
* Congestion and Strategic Behavior in Queueing Systems
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Amnon Rapoport, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 05/31/2006
* USD 234,560.00

Queueing theory is a body of mathematical theory that attempts to find solutions
to a large class of problems where the arrival pattern of customers is assumed
to be exogenously determined. This is the case, for example, when motorists pull
into gas stations along the highway to refuel their cars. In a radical departure
from this approach, the focus of the present research is on queueing problems
when the arrival pattern of customers is assumed to be endogenously determined,
with each customer determining if and exactly when to join a queue. This is the
case, for example when drivers decide at what time to bring their cars for
emission inspection. If communication is not possible, endogenously determined
arrivals give rise to problems of tacit coordination. We are interested in
studying these problems from three perspectives-theoretical, experimental, and
empirical. From a theoretical perspective we formulate the problem as one of
interactive decision making, solve it using solution concepts of game theory,
and study its equilibrium behavior. Experimentally, we investigate the emergence
of tacit coordination, or any other patterns of behavior, in progressively more
realistic queueing problems. One proposed experiment controls the level of
congestion by manipulating the fixed service time. Another relaxes the
assumption that service time is fixed and models it as random variable drawn
from a commonly known distribution. A third experiment allows customers to form
queues before service commences. In yet another experiment, the investigation is
extended to multi-server queueing systems with parallel waiting lines.
Empirically, we propose to collect data on arrival time, waiting time, and
service time in actual emission control
stations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Congestion and waiting in lines have become
pernicious problems of modern society. Yet we know almost nothing about the
strategic thinking that governs the behavior of customers who wish to minimize
their waiting time in line by choosing the "right" arrival time. Nor do we know
much about the dynamics that result in improvement in coordination over time.
Decisions regarding the amount of service capacity to provide must frequently be
made in governmental offices, supermarkets, banks, medical clinics, gas
stations, etc. From the perspective of the agency, providing too much service
involves excessive cost, whereas providing too little service may cause the
waiting line to become excessively long. Excessive waiting time carries with it
heavy social costs, and at times costs of lost customers. Therefore, the
ultimate goal of the server is to achieve an economic balance between the cost
of service and the costs associated with waiting for that service. Our proposed
research is aimed at determining the factors that affect congestion, and the
conditions that may help or hinder tacit coordination when customers make
strategic decisions about joining queues.