* 0135450
* Assessment of Basal Melt of Petermann Gletscher in Northwestern Greenland
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Konrad Steffen, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 02/28/2006
* USD 181,986.00

&lt;br/&gt;0135450&lt;br/&gt;Steffan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is a
collaborative effort between the University of Colorado, Boulder, the British
Antarctic Survey, Cambridge, and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The Office of
Polar Programs (OPP) at National Science Foundation and the National
Aeronautical and Space Administration (NASA) will support the project. The
Greenland Ice Sheet is thinning rapidly along its outlet glaciers and is
contributing an estimated 0.13 mm/yr global sea level rise. Signs of its warming
have been documented, including rising air temperature in its central part and
retreating sea ice in its surrounding ocean. Extensive floating ice tongues in
the northwest sector are ice undergoing massive rates of ablation from the
surrounding warm ocean waters and are presently in a state of fragile
equilibrium, but this ablation rate has never been measured. The Petermann
Gletscher is the largest and most influential outlet glacier in northern
Greenland, draining an area of 71,580 km2, with a discharge of 12 cubic km of
ice per year. Remote sensing results suggest that its ice discharge exceeds that
required to maintain the ice sheet interior in a state of mass equilibrium by
63%, and its grounding line is retreating at an anticipated rate at nearly one
meter per year. Its floating ice tongue is only a few meters above sea level at
the ice front, so it is highly vulnerable to ice thinning. If confirmed by in-
situ observations and if this trend continues for several decades, the rate of
thinning would be sufficient to threaten the stability and survival of the ice
tongue. The Principal Investigators propose to do a detailed analysis of the
glacier floating ice tongue in front of Petermann Gletscher that integrates key
field observations with remote sensing data. The field program is designed to
obtain the in-situ observations to confirm, validate, and calibrate the remote
sensing estimates of basal melting, derive reliable estimates of surface melt
from an energy balance model, observe changes in ice volume with precision, and
understand the contribution of ice dynamics, surface melt and bottom melt to
volume changes of floating ice. The experiment is will take place at the most
crucial part of the glacier, the grounding line. Bottom melt rates are estimated
to reach 25 m/yr near the grounding zone from remote sensing data, and 75% of
the ice that crosses melts in contact with warm ocean waters in the first 20%
area of floating ice. Basal melting will be measured in-situ over several time
intervals using a novel phase-sensitive radar sounding system developed and
tested by the British Antarctic Survey. At the surface, the energy budget of the
ice will be characterized using a network of automated micrometeorological
stations, and the results will be employed to determine how well surface melt
can be predicted from an energy balance model and how much it changes with time.
Remote sensing data that include strain rates from interferometric synthetic-
aperture radar (InSAR), elevation changes from airborne laser altimetry, and ice
thickness from airborne ice-radar sounding, will be employed to yield spatial
estimates of basal melting to be compared with in-situ data. InSAR and Global
Positioning Systems will be used to detect changes in flow rate with time. The
results will provide invaluable insights into dynamics and climatic processes of
northern Greenland glaciers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;