* 0135678
* Density Functional Theory of Electronic Structure
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2006
* John Perdew, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 01/31/2006
* USD 312,000.00

This award supports theoretical research and education motivated in part by the
desire to improve the accuracy of density functional theory as practiced in
condensed matter physics and quantum chemistry. The PI describes a "ladder" of
approximations for the exchange-correlation functional in which the first rung
is the local spin density approximation and the second rung is the generalized
gradient approximation (GGA). These standard approximations do not enable
electronic structure calculations with chemical accuracy. In particular, they do
not accurately describe strongly correlated or strongly spatially inhomogeneous
densities, polarizabilities of long-chain molecules, or highly excited states.
The PI proposes to address these problems through work on several projects: (1)
Develop and test approximations for the exchange-correlation functional that
correspond to the third and fourth rungs of the "ladder" of approximations. The
meta-GGA would be developed as a controlled interpolation between the slowly
varying and iso-orbital density limits. The hyper-GGA uses the exact exchange
energy density to achieve freedom from self-interaction error and a correct non-
uniform scaling behavior. (2) The uniform electron gas will be explored using a
modified pair density functional method with a self-consistent electron-electron
interaction. An energy interpolation between exact high- and low-density limits
will be used to explore the spin-polarized electron gas. The results will be
compared with much more computationally expensive diffusion Monte Carlo
calculations. (3) Diffusion Monte Carlo, density-functional theory, and RPA
studies of the jellium surface energy will be carried out in parallel to resolve
the apparent discrepancy between surface energies calculated using diffusion
Monte Carlo and other methods. (4) Calculations for real solids will test a new
analytic equation of state and will construct a Kohn-Sham potential for the
orbital-dependent meta-GGA and hyper-GGA energy functionals. (5) A Laplacian-
level meta-GGA will be constructed non-empirically for the orbital kinetic
energy. This project also contributes directly to the education of undergraduate
and graduate students, and to the professional development of postdoctoral
researchers.

This award supports fundamental theoretical research with an aim to improve the
accuracy of density-functional based theories of materials. Analytical and
numerical methods will be used. Density functional theory is widely used to
predict a variety of materials properties, such as crystal structures, electron
spin densities, and phonon modes. Another component of the PI's research would
study fundamental problems associated with the electron gas and improved
approximations for the kinetic energy. The homogeneous electron gas plays a
fundamental role in the practical application of density functional theory. This
award also supports education at the undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
levels.