* 0135308
* Vertical Integration of Research and Education in the Mathematical Sciences - VIGRE: Vertical Integration in the Mathematical Sciences at The Ohio State University
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2008
* Henri Moscovici, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2008
* USD 3,941,811.00

NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0135308 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical Sciences:
Vertical Integration in the Mathematical Sciences at The Ohio State University
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0135308 &lt;br/&gt;March
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The VIGRE program of the Department
of Mathematics at the Ohio State University is designed to benefit the
mathematical sciences by bringing together working groups consisting of
undergraduate students, graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and faculty.
The program will implement strategies for introducing both graduate students and
undergraduate students to the research environment at a much earlier stage than
usual and acquainting them with a greater number of faculty. It will increase
the interactions between graduate and undergraduate students, postdoctoral
fellows, junior faculty, and senior faculty. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First-year
graduate students will take a course, Invitation to Research, consisting of a
number of short lecture series, taught by many different faculty, providing a
glimpse into the various areas of mathematics in an informal setting. Beginning
in their second year, students will be involved in Working Group Rotations that
acquaint them with different areas of mathematics, different research styles,
and different faculty throughout the year. The graduate students' professional
development is rounded out with courses that train them in effective
communication of mathematics. These initiatives will enhance the effectiveness
of the graduate program, lessen the time students require to obtain a Ph.D., and
improve their employment opportunities in academia and in
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Postdoctoral fellows will participate in the full
spectrum of VIGRE activities. Undergraduate students will be involved in working
group activities, in the Ross Summer Mathematics Program for high school
students and teachers, and in a National Undergraduate Mathematics Research
Conference that will be sponsored by Ohio State University. &lt;br/&gt;