* 0135324
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Core-Periphery Delineations in the Late-Prehistoric Greater Antilles: A Jamaican Investigation
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2003
* Tom Dillehay, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2003
* USD 12,000.00

Ms. Betty Jo Stokes, under the direction of Dr. Tom D. Dillehay, will conduct an
archaeological investigation to gather data for completion of her doctoral
dissertation at the University of Kentucky. She will complete an archaeological
survey in the White and Rio Nuevo River valleys on the island of Jamaica to
determine the historical relationship between the prehistoric Native American
groups (Taino) of the island compared to those found on other islands in the
Greater Antilles. Differences in the social organization of the Taino people at
the end of the 15th century A.D. on these islands has been oversimplified
identifying some islands, such as Jamaica, as less culturally developed than
others prior to European contact. Currently, Taino groups are labeled as either
part of the cultural "core" of the Taino world as on Puerto Rico island where
many of the characteristics of that culture are well understood and easily
recognized or as a part of the cultural "periphery" where groups are often
considered less developed. Jamaica is currently considered part of the Taino
periphery, but that designation has been based on very little concrete evidence,
and in fact, the historical accounts written by the first Spanish explorers into
this region refutes this. Using the Jamaican Taino as a test case, this project
seeks to provide a systematic study in one area of the Taino world where the
identification of what constitutes a "core" region and what constitutes a
"periphery" is unclear in order to elucidate the key factors involved in
identifying core versus periphery culture areas. This study compliments other
archaeological studies that have expanded the uses of core-periphery analysis
beyond modern global interactions as used for social geographical analysis to
draw out relationships in the prehistoric world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
collecting data through an archaeological survey, various aspects of Jamaican
Taino political, religious, and economic life can be identified and combined
with existing historical information to directly address the nature of the
social organization of Jamaican Taino. This project will clarify the culture
history and cultural identity of the indigenous peoples once inhabiting this
area. Additionally, it will give an indication how tribal chiefdom societies are
maintained and developed, highlight how island landscapes can be used as
productive cultural features, and provide a case example for comparison to other
tribal chiefdoms around the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is also
important because it will help shed new light on the historical social context
in which Europeans, and consequently African peoples, encountered the New World.
The culture of the Taino was abruptly abbreviated by the introduction of
European people into the Caribbean. However, remnants of this culture can still
be found in modern Jamaican traditions and identity. This project seeks to
recognize and embrace these components by providing an understanding of how
Jamaican Taino fits into the broader social context of the pre-contact Caribbean
and, thereby, a more accurate and complete picture of Jamaican history. It will
also contribute to training a promising young scientist.&lt;br/&gt;