* 0135931
* Quantum Transport of Correlated Systems in Novel Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2002,03/31/2004
* Michael Melloch, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 03/31/2004
* USD 303,000.00

Investigations of fundamental issues in strongly-correlated electron (SCE)
systems form a major area of condensed matter research today. This program
contains two main thrusts: (1) the observation and elucidation of new phenomena
in SCE, and (2) the development of nanoscale devices using novel fabrication
techniques both for the exploration of fundamental physics and for creating
opportunities to capitalize on nano-physics to help meet the challenges of next-
generation technological needs. The combination of fundamental research and the
implementation of novel devices are designed to maximize the impact of this
program, through scientific advances and the education/training of future
researchers. Two genres of correlated systems--non-Fermi liquids in
semiconductors, and metallic nanowires exhibiting correlated effects--will be
studied. Non-Fermi liquid behavior constitutes a central theme of SCR systems.
Unusual metallic behaviors observed in the normal state of high-Tc
superconductors and in one-dimensional conductors are pushing beyond the
standard Fermi liquid picture for conventional metals, toward a possible new
paradigm of non-Fermi liquids in low-dimensional correlated systems. Two such
systems are studied by transport measurements, the chiral Luttinger liquid at
the 1-dimensional edge of the fractional quantum Hall fluid, and the two
impurity Kondo system in double-quantum-dots. The edge of the fractional quantum
Hall fluid supports exotic fractionally-charged quasi-particles obeying
fractional statistics which will be investigated. Work in double-quantum-dots
serves a dual purpose. In addition to exploring non-Fermi liquid behavior, the
implementation of this system as a prototypical 2-qubit system will be pursued
to create a building block of a semiconductor-based quantum computer. From a
long term perspective, this may have a profound impact on bringing the
challenging task of implementing quantum computation closer to reality. In
metallic wires, investigation will concentrate on the phenomena of
superconductivity, magnetism, etc., in nanowires fabricated by a novel cleaved-
edge technique, as well as interaction between adjacent wires running parallel
to each other. Understanding the properties of nanowires in proximity may impact
next generation interconnects as device density in ULSI increases further. This
program will train students in nanoscience and technology with an emphasis in
nano-fabrication techniques and ultra low-noise electrical measurements. Such
skills are particularly valuable for preparing the students to help drive
forward the all important nano-science technology revolution which forms the
basis of the technology and economic engine of the 21st century. %%%
Investigations of strongly-correlated electron (SCE) systems form a major area
of condensed matter research today. This program contains two main thrusts: (1)
the observation and elucidation of new phenomena in strongly- correlated
systems, and (2) the development of nanoscale devices using novel fabrication
techniques both for the exploration of fundamental physics and for creating
opportunities to capitalize on nano-physics to help meet the challenges of next-
generation technological needs. The combination of fundamental research and the
implementation of novel devices is designed to maximize the impact of this
program, through scientific advances and the education/training of future
researchers. Strong correlations between electrons lead to unusual and novel
metallic behaviors. Examples include high temperature superconductors and other
low-dimensional conductors such as 0- and 1-dimensional conductors. Non-Fermi
liquid behavior constitutes a central theme of SCE systems. For these systems, a
new paradigm beyond the standard picture for conventional metals may become
necessary. Two such systems will be studied by electrical measurements, the
chiral Luttinger liquid at the 1-dimensional edge of the fractional quantum Hall
fluid, and the two impurity Kondo system in double-quantum-dots. The edge of the
fractional quantum Hall fluid supports exotic particles which carry charges in
fractional units of the fundamental electron charge. Work in double-quantum-dots
serves a dual purpose. In addition to exploring non-Fermi liquid behavior, the
implementation of this system as a 2-quantum qubit system will be pursued to
create a building block of a semiconductor- based quantum computer. If
successful this may have a profound impact in the long term on bringing quantum
computation to reality. In metallic wires, investigation will concentrate on the
phenomena of superconductivity, magnetism, etc., in nanowires as well as
interaction between wires in close proximity. Understanding the properties of
nanowires in proximity may impact next generation interconnects as device
density in ULSI increases further. This program will train students in
nanoscience and technology with an emphasis in nano-fabrication techniques and
ultra low-noise electrical measurements. Such skills are particularly valuable
for preparing the students to help drive forward the all important nano-science
technology revolution which forms the basis of the technology and economic
engine of the 21st century.