* 0135659
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar:  Neutrino-Nucleus Interactions in the Few GeV Region
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2003
* David Casper, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 06/30/2003
* USD 13,308.00

&lt;br/&gt;0135659&lt;br/&gt;Casper&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the
participation of American scientists in a U.S.-Japan seminar on neutrino-nucleus
interactions in the few GeV region to be held in Irvine, California from
December 2-4, 2003. The co-organizers are Professor David Casper of the
University of California at Irvine and Dr. Makoto Sakuda of the High Energy
Accelerator Research Organization (KEK) in Tsukuba, Japan. The recent discovery
of neutrino oscillation represents the first compelling evidence for physics
beyond the Standard Model, and has triggered enormous interest in future
experiments using intense neutrino sources. Unfortunately, the increased
statistical precision afforded by more powerful beams will be of little value
without corresponding progress in reducing systematic uncertainties. The very
large target masses necessary to detect neutrinos are typically comprised of
nuclei (Carbon, Oxygen or Iron), but data on neutrino-nucleus reactions are
sparse and the effects of the nuclear target are poorly understood. Moreover,
the few-GeV energy regime corresponds to the boundary between quasi-elastic and
resonant pion-production processes on one hand, and deep-inelastic scattering on
the other, where two qualitatively different pictures of the reaction dynamics
must be reconciled. Searches for rare oscillation signals in the K2K, Mini-BOONE
and MINOS experiments, as well as possible future studies aimed at probing
leptonic CP violation, will rely on an accurate description of exclusive
neutrino-nucleus cross-sections at these energies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As
partners in these experiments the U.S. and Japan are at the forefront of the
exciting and rapidly evolving field of neutrino physics. This workshop will
bring together theorists and experimentalists from the particle and nuclear
physics communities to lay the groundwork for future progress in understanding
neutrino interactions. They will attempt to confront existing models of neutrino
scattering and nuclear physics with available data and synthesize them into a
coherent description, which can be applied to planned or proposed experiments.
Strategies for gleaning new information from near-term experiments will be
explored, as well as the prospects for collaboration on future precision
measurements. The project advances international human resources through the
participation of a number of graduate students. Through the exchange of ideas
and technology, this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and
promote international understanding and cooperation. The researchers plan to
publish proceedings of the workshop on their web sites.&lt;br/&gt;