* 0135457
* Collaborative Research:  Continuing Support for the Basin and Range Geodetic Network (BARGEN):  Active Tectonics of Diffuse Intracontinental Deformation
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2004
* James Davis, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Continuing Grant
* Leonard E. Johnson
* 08/31/2004
* USD 143,000.00

0135457&lt;br/&gt;Davis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides two years of
continued support for the NSF-funded component of the Basin and Range Geodetic
Network (BARGEN). This component, known as the Northern Basin and Range network
or "NBAR," includes 18 remote, continuously monitored GPS sites with ~100 km
spacing, deployed in an east-west array near lat. 40 deg. N, spanning the
diffusely deforming western boundary of the North American plate. Installed in
1996 and 1997, these sites benefit from drilled, braced monuments anchored in
bedrock to a depth of 10m and a very dry climate. Daily position estimates in
the horizontal exhibit root-mean-square scatter at the 1-2 mm level, and time
series analysis and other statistical analyses of some 4.5 years of data
indicate errors in horizontal velocity of less than 0.2 mm/yr at one standard
deviation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Continued operation of this network is urgent,
because it represents an important prototype experiment for NSF's Plate Boundary
Observatory (PBO) initiative, which proposes the deployment of some 900 new
sites of similar design across the deforming western margin of the North
American plate. The NBAR sites are scheduled to be upgraded with new instruments
as early as 2004 provided PBO is funded (now under consideration as part of
NSF's FY 2003 budget). The NBAR sites will form the nucleus of PBO's 100-site
"backbone" network and of proposed site clusters in the northern Basin and
Range. Continuity of geodetic time series up to and through PBO implementation
will provide the strongest possible basis for predicting its ultimate
capability, and for assessing the merits of proposed strategies for site
locations. An additional two years of data from the NBAR sites will bear
significantly on three fundamental - and still controversial - questions: 1) the
degree to which GPS time series are contaminated by low-frequency noise; 2)
whether errors in vertical velocities will be low enough to provide
geophysically meaningful signal; and 3) whether to expect agreement between
geodetically determined velocities and geologically determined deformation
rates. Additional data will also provide the clearest possible understanding of
the capabilities and limitations of continuous GPS prior to PBO
deployment.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;