* 0135062
* CAREER:  An Integrated Approach to Researching Teacher Change
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Kay McClain, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 06/30/2007
* USD 643,676.00

&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of the proposed work is to coordinate the activities of
testing and refining a trajectory for supporting teacher change with that of
testing and refining an interpretive framework as a lens for analyzing that
change in both pre- and in-service teachers' perceptions of what it means to
teach mathematics effectively and how they develop an understanding of the
complexities involved. Following Simon (1997), a hypothetical learning
trajectory for teachers is proposed that builds from the current literature on
teacher change by incorporating the following:&lt;br/&gt;1. the importance of a
deep understanding of the mathematics to be taught,&lt;br/&gt;2. a focus on
pedagogical strategies to support students' learning of significant
mathematics,&lt;br/&gt;3. a focus on students' diverse ways of reasoning on
tasks,&lt;br/&gt;4. lesson planning and design that takes account of students'
current understandings, and&lt;br/&gt;5. teacher-developed cases from the
classroom as tools for reflection and critique.&lt;br/&gt;The trajectory
therefore involves conjectures about both a learning route and the means of
supporting that learning. &lt;br/&gt;The research will test an interpretive
framework referred to as the Critical Aspects of Teachers' Knowledge:&lt;br/&gt;
knowledge of content,&lt;br/&gt; knowledge of pedagogy, and&lt;br/&gt; knowledge
of institutional context.&lt;br/&gt;This framework builds from Shulman's (1986)
notion of pedagogical content knowledge to take account of the importance of
both content and pedagogy in teaching for understanding. It extends this work by
also acknowledging the importance of the institutional context of the teachers
and its implications for their decision-making.&lt;br/&gt; Numerous scholars
have noted the lack of carefully constructed and empirically grounded frameworks
for characterizing the process of teacher change. Thus, research is needed that
more fully explicates the criteria for conducting rigorous analyses of teacher
change. This study addresses the need by combining the efforts of testing and
revising the conjectured learning trajectory with analysis framed in terms of
the Critical Aspects of Teachers' Knowledge. This process is therefore
positioned to make a significant contribution and provide the opportunity for
development of new theories in the field. &lt;br/&gt; The proposed work takes
place in two phases. The first entails collaborating with a cohort of in-service
teachers (grades six through eight) with the goal of supporting and analyzing
their practice in order to document change. The activities of the cohort will
build from the conjectured learning trajectory to include a focus on 1) an in-
depth exploration of mathematics, 2) development of lesson sequences to address
the mathematics, and 3) development of cases from the teachers' classrooms where
the teaching of these lessons is the focus. The second phase of work involves
taking the teacher-developed cases as resources for modifying a mathematics
methods course for pre-service teachers so that it focuses on the Critical
Aspects of Teachers' Knowledge. In this way, the cases first serve as a vehicle
for the in-service teachers' change and then later as the tools for supporting
an emerging practice in the pre-service teachers. As a result, this process
provides a rich setting in which to investigate the utility of the interpretive
framework as a lens for analysis of both pre- and in-service teachers' growth
and change, tightly integrating the research and education
activities.&lt;br/&gt;