* 0135209
* International Workshop on Simulation and Evaluation Techniques for Modern Processors
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Kevin Skadron, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Pratibha Varma-Nelson
* 08/31/2004
* USD 20,000.00

The workshop will consider both short-term and longer-term issues in processor
evaluation. The rationale for considering at least some short-term issues is
clear: the simulation crisis is already here. Even the SPEC95 benchmarks cannot
be run to completion using cycle-accurate simulation. The SPEC2000 benchmarks
are substantially longer. A variety of techniques for reducing simulation time
are currently in use, yet there is no agreement on which techniques are most
appropriate. Some clearly-invalid evaluation techniques are in use simply
because there are no alternatives that offer scientifically-valid results with
the necessary turnaround times.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose to use the
following questions as a starting point for
discussion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metrics: What are the proper metrics to use for
various architectural studies?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Benchmarks: What are the
appropriate benchmarks to use for various architectural studies in the next 5
years?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstractions: How can researchers determine when
abstractions that accelerate simulation (but may reduce accuracy) are
appropriate and when they are not? How can their accuracy and precision be
characterized?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sampling: How/when/whether can researchers
use mixed-mode simulations that vary between high and low amounts of detail in a
single simulation? How can the accuracy of such simulations be
verified?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sensitivity: How can researchers structure
sensitivity studies to determine when a low-level error will translate into
large errors, as opposed to when the low-level error's effect will be masked
when aggregated into the full simulation?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Validation
methods: How can a processor simulation be validated before a similar processor
is built?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hardware assists: How can simulations make use of
hardware performance counters and other hardware assists for evaluating next-
generation processors (which may have different organizations than the systems
from which we are obtaining hardware counts)?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Portability:
Processor models are complex and often closely tied to the simulation
infrastructure (e.g., SimpleScalar, ATOM) on which they are developed, and once
a model has been validated, it becomes expensive to develop new models. Yet
different simulator platforms are best suited for different experiments. How can
the portability of processor models best be
accomplished?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Power: What new simulation questions are
raised by the growing interest among architects in power modeling?&lt;br/&gt;