* 0135438
* Dissertation: Biotechnology Research and Doctoral Socialization: The Impact of Changing Expectations and Modes of Support on Social Norms and Ethical Standards in the Life Sciences
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2002,01/31/2005
* Peggy Placier, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Priscilla Regan
* 01/31/2005
* USD 6,360.00

Across the country, the last two decades have witnessed an increasing emphasis
on biotechnology as an engine for state and national economic development.
Within the last two years, the amount of federal, state, and industry funding,
media attention, and public expectation focused on this issue at Missouri's
public Research I university has exploded. The combination of the culture of
academic science, the economic development goals of the state, and the
proprietary needs of industry may create a lively stew of potentially
conflicting value orientations around this initiative. Within this confluence of
changing expectations and values, the next generation of academic life
scientists is being socialized into their research roles. This dissertation
research project will address the ethical implications these changes may have
for these doctoral students. Qualitative research methods will be used to
ascertain student's perceptions regarding the existence of the biotechnology
initiative, the norms of research, the training they have received in research
ethics, and the possible impact of changing expectations on their career plans.
The results of this study will be shared with a variety of audiences who are
struggling with new ethical issues and conflicts associated with changing
expectations and modes of support in academic research.&lt;br/&gt;