* 0135132
* CAREER:  Investigation of Atomic Motion in Ultrafast Reactions of Metal Complexes with Ultrafast X-ray Pulses and Remotely accessible Real-time Experiments for High School Students
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2008
* Ting Guo, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 06/30/2008
* USD 464,000.00

We plan to elucidate the mechanisms of atomic motion and its relationship with
electron transfer in photon-induced ultrafast reactions of metal complexes using
a new type of ultrafast x-ray absorption spectroscopy, ultrafast selected energy
x-ray absorption spectroscopy (USEXAS) that is currently being developed in the
PI's laboratory. This method enables us to more directly investigate the atomic
motion in non-crystalline materials on the ultrafast timescale. The atomic and
electronic motion in several exemplary chemical systems will be investigated.
The outcome of these investigations can shed light on the structures of the
critical transition states in those systems. We will build an experimental
educational program for local high school students and help them understand
chemical reactions at the molecular level. Our aim is to enhance students'
ability to understand and appreciate physical and analytical chemistry at the
most fundamental levels and at a young age. In this program, Internet-connected,
remotely accessible, real-time chemical experiments (RARE) will be developed by
undergraduate and graduate students at UC Davis. PI's lab will be used to train
and prepare graduate students and undergraduate students.

Understanding atomic motion during chemical reactions is critical to improving
our ability to make new devices and materials such as solar cells, molecular
electronic components, and drugs. We plan to elucidate the details of the
interplay between atomic and electron motion in several important chemical
systems using a new type of ultrafast x-ray absorption spectroscopy that is
currently being developed in the PI's laboratory. This method allows us to
visualize the motion of atoms during fast chemical reactions in a more directly
manner. The educational component of this proposal involves the building of an
experimental educational program for local high school students that will help
them understand chemical reactions at the most fundamental levels and at a young
age. The experiments are Internet-connected, remotely accessible, real-time
chemical experiments (RARE) that will be developed by undergraduate and graduate
students at UC Davis.