* 0135446
* Hydrogen Tunneling in Enzyme Reactions
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2005
* Judith Klinman, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 02/28/2005
* USD 360,000.00

There are now close to 20 documented examples of a role for quantum effects in
enzyme catalyzed C-H activation processes. Insights from the ongoing work on
H-tunneling in enzymes include the recognition that enzymes modify the entire
reaction barrier shape (i.e., reaction barrier width as well as height) and that
protein dynamics may play a role in the bond cleavage events catalyzed by
enzymes. Further investigations are to be focused on establishing a firmer and
more detailed relationship between protein dynamics and H-tunneling. Several
hydride transfer reactions will be studied, catalyzed by a high temperature
alcohol dehydrogenase (ht-ADH) with homology to the mesophilic horse liver
alcohol dehydrogenase and a thermophilic dihydrofolate reductase (ht-DHFR) with
significant homology to mesophilic DHFR. In the case of ht-ADH, studies are in
progress to solve the three dimensional structure for this enzyme. This
structural information will guide site specific mutagenesis experiments to
analyze the effect of protein side chains on catalysis. In particular, the
effects at elevated temperatures where tunneling is dominant and at reduced
temperatures where H-transfer becomes more classical will be analyzed. Since the
ht-ADH is too large for a study of dynamics by NMR, H/D exchange, followed by
limited proteolysis and mass spectrometric analysis will be pursued to map out
protein flexibility. This laboratory has recently succeeded in cloning and over-
expressing a ht-DHFR from B. stearothermophilis. This protein will be analyzed
for the contribution of tunneling to H-transfer as a function of temperature. In
parallel studies, this small protein (19 KDa) will be studied by NMR (as a probe
of local dynamics) and by FT-IR H/D exchange (as a probe of global flexibility).