* 0135462
* Microbial Genome Sequencing:  Comparative Genomics of Telomeres in Pathogenic and Saprophytic Fungi
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2001,03/31/2005
* Chuck Staben, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 03/31/2005
* USD 803,000.00

Eukaryotic chromosomes are linear molecules that terminate in repeats of simple
DNA sequences. These structures, called telomeres, guard against loss of DNA
during replication and prevent fusion of different chromosomes. Telomeres also
have important roles in chromosome behavior, gene expression and genome
evolution. In fungi and other eukaryotic microbes, telomeric regions tend to be
rich in genes for ecological adaptation and are often highly variable, providing
evidence that they are subject to niche-dependent diversifying selection.
Despite their importance, telomeric sequences usually are not captured using
strategies employed for high-throughput genome sequencing and are, therefore,
highly underrepresented in genome databases. In this project, targeted
approaches will be used to isolate and sequence telomeric regions of two fungi:
Magnaporthe grisea, a very important plant pathogen; and Neurospora crassa, a
saprophyte whose study has made profound contributions to biology. Two strains
of each fungal species will be examined to provide a thorough view of their
telomere content and organization; and comparison of sequences between strains
will reveal mechanisms of telomere variability. This information will improve
understanding of how fungi adapt to their environment and, in particular, how
pathogenic fungi avoid host defenses. The 2.4 megabases of high-quality sequence
generated in this project will be essential for eventual completion of the
genome sequences of these fungi. The project will provide education through
undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral training in molecular genetics, high-
throughput sequencing, and bioinformatics. DNA libraries and clones generated in
the project will be available to other researchers. Assembled and annotated
sequences will be released to public databases and unfinished sequences will be
accessible through the websites: http://fungus.ceeb.uky.edu/cgibin/web-blast.cgi
and http://www.riceblast.org. This is a Microbial Genome Sequencing Award funded
through a collaborative activity between the National Science Foundation and the
Department of Agriculture Initiative for Future Agriculture and Food
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;