* 0135233
* CAREER:  New Polymeric Material Design at the Interfaces with Biology and Catalysis
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2008
* Zhibin Guan, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2008
* USD 405,000.00

The proposed research explores new polymeric material design at two interfaces:
(1) materials and biology, and (2) materials and catalysts. At the first
interface, high value advanced polymeric materials is targeted by mimicking the
structures and strategies used in natural materials. The remarkable combined
strength and toughness of muscle protein, titin, appears to derive from their
modular structures comprising a linear array of domains, in which each domain is
held together by secondary forces. Synthetic polymers will be constructed using
molecular nanostructures that simulate the modular, multi-domain design of
titin. These materials will be tested a both single molecule and bulk material
level. The proposed research at the material-catalysis interface is targeted at
developing new polymeric materials from simple commercial monomers. Built upon
previous successes, new directions are proposed to expand the scope of using
catalysts to control polymers with tunable topologies via catalysis, and design
of polymers with unconventional topologies via catalysis. In parallel to the
synthetic effort, the physical properties and potential applications for the new
polymers will be investigated through collaborations with chemists, materials
scientists and engineers on campus and at universities
nearby.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The PI's educational goal for the next 4-5years
is to build a strong polymer materials program at the University of California
at Irvine. The current rapid growth of this campus and the cross campus
Materials Initiative provide an excellent opportunity to implement this plan. An
effort was initiated to integrate the course offerings in polymer science across
a few disciplines to foster interdisciplinary interactions and collaborations.
The goal in the undergraduate education is to spark their interests in polymer
during introducing the basic concepts and essential knowledge of polymer
science. Attention will be paid to interactive teaching methods, the relevance
of polymers to our society, and the undergraduate laboratory research. The goal
in graduate polymer education is to provide students a solid foundation in
polymer chemistry by vigorous treatments of the fundamental mechanism,
thermodynamics, and kinetics of each type of polymerization while in the
meantime cover major research areas and recent progresses in polymer science.
These broad topics will be approached in an interdisciplinary manner and the
course format will be developed to encourage greater student involvement. In
addition to curriculum development, mentoring also figures prominently in
laboratory, classroom, and seminar contexts. The proposed research will increase
understanding of the molecular mechanisms for achieving excellent material
properties based on structural organization at nanoscale and produce materials
with potential biomedical applications. Insight into the relation between the
molecular properties of these materials and their performance should allow
rational materials designs. The proposed research on catalytic route to new
polymer synthesis has the potential to make new polymeric materials with complex
topologies from simple and readily available monomers.&lt;br/&gt;