* 0135559
* "Using Your Brain for a Change":  Neuroscience and Identity in Self-Help Literature
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Anne Harrington, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Ronald Rainger
* 06/30/2004
* USD 84,000.00

Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt;SES 0135559&lt;br/&gt;"Using Your Brain for a
Change:" Neuroscience and Identity in Self-Help Literature&lt;br/&gt;Anne
Harrington/ Ginger Hoffman&lt;br/&gt;Harvard
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What can a definition of a synapse
offer individuals seeking hope, solace, and self-improvement? This postdoctoral
project generates a detailed study of the role neuroscientific information plays
within a widely used resource for self-betterment: the self-help literature.
Specifically, a combination of historical, anthropological, and cultural/science
studies methods are used to realize three principal objectives: 1)to document
the types of neuroscientific information relayed to the public via the self-help
literature, 2)to explore how this information influences individuals '
identities and sense of agency, and 3) to chart how (1) and (2) have changed
over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fellowship holder's hypothesis is that
neuroscientific information within the self-help literature delivers complicated
messages about the relationship between us and our bodies, and that these
messages have profound implications for both who we are and who we can end up
being. To explore this claim, critical textual analysis of the self-help
literature is combined with interviews of self-help readers and self-help
authors, and will result in the production of several scholarly articles and the
foundations of a book.. These research activities are enhanced by three in-depth
training activities: 1)graduate level coursework in the history of science,
anthropology of science, and public understanding of science; 2) the development
and teaching of an undergraduate course on the history and philosophy of
neurobiological models of mental illness, and 3) participation in a
interdisciplinary working group (named Psychopharmaceuticals and Identity)
conducting ethnographic research. This training serves as a critical adjunct to
Hoffman's graduate training in neuroscience, and enables her research to be
conducted from a solid interdisciplinary
base.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigating the presence of neuroscientific data
within the self-help literature helps both scientists and the public understand
how scientific facts travel from the lab bench to popular culture, and indeed,
how these facts shape concepts of personhood, self-control, and the ways in
which hope and help are attained.&lt;br/&gt;