* 0135317
* Direct Probing and Modeling of Adsorbed Layers of Surfactant/Lipid/Protein Mixtures atT Air/Water Interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2005
* Elias Franses, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 01/31/2005
* USD 300,000.00

Abstract CTS-0135317 Franses, Elias I Purdue University

"Direct Probing and Modeling of Adsorbed Layers of Surfactant/Lipid/Protein
Mixtures at Air/Water Interfaces"

The main objectives are to understand quantitatively and qualitatively how
surfactants, lipids, and proteins adsorb at air/water interfaces. By adsorbing,
alone or in competition, surface active molecules modify the equilibrium and
dynamic surface tension, the surface charges, the foaming behavior, and the
protein denaturation behavior. These phenomena have important applications in
bioprocessing of biological and biochemical dispersions, spray drying of
pharmaceutical solutions, spreading of agricultural chemical in leaves; also in
foaming stability, and foam-based separations of dilute solutions of surfactants
and proteins, mineral ore flotation, and detergency. A major focus is the area
of replacement therapy of lung surfactant, which is a mixture of lipids and
proteins responsible for stabilizing the lung alveoli and controlling breathing.

The equilibrium and dynamic adsorption is probed not only with indirect surface
tension methods but with direct optical (ellipsometry, EL) and infrared
reflection absorption spectroscopy (IRRAS). IRRAS is used primarily to determine
the extent, rates, and mechanisms of individual components. IRRAS, in
combination with EL and surface tensiometry, has proven to be a valuable tool
for quantitative probing of complex industrial or biological mixtures. The
results are used to develop formulations which are technically effective, cost-
effective, and biologically or environmentally friendly; and to develop new,
potentially effective lung surfactant formulations. The systems examined are
bovine serum albumin, fibrinogen, various lipids and soaps, and model ionic
surfactants. The data are used to guide quantitative modeling of
diffusion/adsorption processes of surfactants, lipids, and proteins from the
bulk solution or dispersion to the interface. The models are used to help design
new improved formulations, and to predict how formulations may function in
different solutions and different geometries.