* 0135346
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar:  Seismic Disaster Mitigation in Urban Area by Geotechnical Engineering (Anchorage, Alaska May 21-22, 2002)
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2003
* Ross Boulanger, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 02/28/2003
* USD 15,613.00

0135346&lt;br/&gt;Boulanger&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the
participation of American scientists in a U.S.-Japan seminar on seismic disaster
mitigation in urban areas by geotechnical engineering to be held in Anchorage,
Alaska from May 21-22, 2002. The co-organizers are Professor Ross Boulanger of
the University of California, Davis and Professor Ikuo Towhata at the University
of Tokyo in Japan. Earthquakes can devastate major urban areas in a number of
ways, including through the hazards posed to the population, the disruption of
lifeline systems and services, and the economic impacts on the region, state, or
nation. Advances in our understanding of seismic hazards and their mitigation
continue to be learned from recent large earthquakes. Recently the 1999 Chi-Chi
(Taiwan), 1999 Kocaeli (Turkey), and 2000 Bhuj earthquakes caused tremendous
damage to the civil infrastructure in and around urban areas in those countries.
Reconnaissance teams sent independently from the U.S. and Japan investigated
these disasters. Geotechnical aspects of these disasters will be discussed,
including the effects of liquefaction, ground deformations, foundation failures,
landslides, and surface ruptures on civil infrastructure (e.g., lifelines, ports
and harbors, buildings, transportation systems). The objective of the seminar is
to facilitate advancement of our understanding and ability to mitigate
geotechnical aspects of seismic disasters. Discussions on these subjects will
include: 1) development of new engineering techniques for mitigation of these
hazards; 2) identification of those problems that should be solved with the
highest priority; and 3) sharing the most recent results of research to advance
our understanding of, and ability to predict, these types of hazards and
effectively plan mitigation efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A number of
researchers in both countries will continue to more thoroughly investigate
important sites for lessons that can advance our understanding of these hazards.
The project advances international human resources through the participation of
postdocs and a graduate student. Through the exchange of ideas and technology,
this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international
understanding and cooperation. The researchers plan to publish results of the
seminar proceedings on their web site at the Center for Geotechnical Modeling
(http://cgm.engr.ucdavis.edu/).&lt;br/&gt;