* 0135653
* Microbial Genome Sequencing:  Phages of Agronomic Bacteria: A Student-Based Genomics Approach
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* John Mullet, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 09/30/2005
* USD 310,000.00

A student-based program to establish a genomic database of bacteriophages that
infect agronomically important bacteria, especially agricultural pathogens will
be established. The initial bacterial host will be Pseudomonas syringae, which
causes a number of important plant diseases. After a development period, the
program will constitute the laboratory core of an advanced
undergraduate/beginning graduate course in Phage Genomics, in which the teams of
students will adopt a bacteriophage, determine and annotate its complete genome
sequence, and conduct standard physical and physiological analyses during a full
year of supervised&lt;br/&gt;research and lecture course activity. In addition
to the educational goals served by this effort, the&lt;br/&gt;phage genomics
database will be a resource to address questions about bacteriophage
evolution&lt;br/&gt;in the context of plant bacterial hosts and the influence of
phage on plant-bacteria interactions,&lt;br/&gt;and to probe the possible
utility of phage cocktails in biocontrol applications against acute
or&lt;br/&gt;chronic diseases of plants. This is a Microbial Genome Sequencing
Award funded through a collaborative activity between the National Science
Foundation and the Department of Agriculture Initiative for Future Agriculture
and Food Systems.