* 0135510
* The Formation of Vertical Vortices in the Atmospheric Convective Boundary Layer
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2006
* Katharine Kanak, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 01/31/2006
* USD 339,591.00

The boundary layer vortex, which includes the relatively well-known dust devil,
generally takes the form of a benign columnar atmospheric vortex. It is less
well understood than its more dramatic cousin, the tornado, but recent evidence
suggests that it may be more common than originally thought and may be important
as a controlling factor of boundary layer structure and interactions. An
investigation is proposed of the dynamics of the initiation and maintenance of
boundary layer vortices, in particular, the dust devil vortex.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives include the elucidation of the
necessary meteorological conditions required for the existence of vertical
vortices and the dynamical mechanisms responsible for their formation. Flow
regimes are classified into three categories: a) convection in the presence of
mean horizontal wind shear; b) convection in mean vertical wind shear; and c)
convection in the absence of ambient wind or wind shears. Vertical vortex
formation for category a) is straightforward and will not be considered under
this research. The methodological approach to regimes b) and c) will be
primarily through the use of a Large Eddy Simulation numerical model (LES) with
some complementary theoretical work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior research results
show that for category c), vertical vortices form readily at the vertices of
cellular convective patterns. The current research will expand to also consider
category b) in order to explore the parameter space of conditions that permit
vertical vortex formation in the convective boundary layer. Prior investigators
have suggested that strong mean winds can be inhibiting to the formation of dust
devils and this contention will be investigated in the current
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary emphasis, however, will remain on
category c), which is the most dynamically intriguing. In this case vertical
vorticity centers that may be generated by convective circulations themselves
and, subsequently tilted into the vertical, must exist initially above the
surface. Therefore, the questions of how vertical vorticity extrema become co-
located with updrafts and how a vortex becomes connected with the ground surface
will be examined. Higher resolution numerical simulations and analyses will be
performed to uncover the possible dynamical mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results may be applicable to other small-scale vortices, including steam devils,
fire-whirls and possibly tornadoes. This project may promote the understanding
of the interactions and/or relationship between a vertical vortex and larger
scale convective circulations. In turn the parameterization of the planetary
boundary layer and the effects of these vortical flows may be improved in large-
eddy simulation models. The results regarding vertical transports by such
boundary layer vortices may have impact on pollution studies, hazardous waste
management and possibly the deep convective initiation problem.