* 0136500
* The Use of 15NH3 to Estimate Fractionation of Nitrogen Isotopes during Diagenesis of Organic Matter
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2002,08/31/2005
* Douglas Hammond, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2005
* USD 201,809.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0136500&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
biogeochemical cycle of nitrogen is very susceptible to changes in environmental
conditions. Understanding the present and past response of the marine nitrogen
cycle to natural and anthropogenic changes is important for our ability to
predict the potential impact of future environmental changes on primary
production in the oceans, and consequently their effect on global and regional
marine ecosystems. One of the most powerful tools for deciphering past
fluctuations in the marine nitrogen cycle is the 15N isotopic composition (d15N)
of organic matter preserved in marine sediments. In various settings, this
tracer may provide information about variability in ocean productivity and the
degree of nutrient utilization, or about the relative importance of nitrogen
fixation or denitrification. However, to accurately interpret the
paleoceanographic record, a critical question that must be answered is to
estimate the extent of nitrogen isotope fractionation during diagenesis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study, researchers at the University of Southern
California will measure the d15 N of ammonia in pore waters of sediments from
several near-anoxic basins in the California Borderland and the Gulf of
California. Analyses of the solid phase abundance and d15N of bulk organic
nitrogen and THAA (total hydrolyzable amino acids)will also be made. Because
irrigation effects are absent from the study sites, it will be possible to
construct mass balances for 15N and 14N lost during diagenesis of solid phases
by fitting diffusion-advection-reaction models to pore water data. The
combination of these model calculations with information on sediment
accumulation rate and solid phase nitrogen data will establish the degree of
isotope fractionation, and will also be useful for evaluating whether bacterial
uptake of isotopically light nitrogen plays a significant role in the
sedimentary nitrogen budget. To evaluate the potential for fractionation at more
oxic sites, incubation experiments will be run using mixtures of sediment and
fresh plankton decomposing under both oxic and anoxic conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;