* 0136880
* Collaborative Proposal -- Media and Mobilization: The Case of Radio and Southern Textile Worker Mobilization, 1929-1934
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/2002,02/29/2004
* Vincent Roscigno, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 02/29/2004
* USD 54,619.00

Collaborative Proposals SES-0136880 SES-0136837 Vincent Roscigno William Danaher
Ohio State University University of Charleston

Traditional social movement theory has emphasized the importance of political
opportunity and collective identity for social movement formation, and for
movement stability, longevity, and success. Recent work incorporates aspects of
both into a single framework, highlighting the central role of social movement
culture in simultaneously fostering 1) group identity, 2) an alternative
interpretational frame of cause and effect, and 3) a sense of political efficacy
among potential movement participants. Little empirical attention, however, has
been devoted to examining the role media may play in forging movement culture
across geographic space.

The PIs will examine the largest labor mobilization in U.S. history --the
southern textile strike campaigns of 1929-1934, where upwards of 400,000 workers
walked off their jobs --and the extent to which media (and radio specifically)
played a vital role in fostering a cohesive social movement culture across
rural, mill communities. Indeed, the worker mobilization that occurred remains
an anomaly to social movement theorists and labor researchers, given the lack of
union involvement and the geographically disbursed nature of mill towns during
the time period in question. Specifically, the project will investigate
following: 1). Was there an empirical correspondence between radio station
foundings during the era in question and strike events, even controlling for
other influential factors? 2). What were transmission ranges at the time and to
what extent were they heard in and across mill towns? Who owned these stations,
and was there autonomy in terms of what could be broadcast? And, did mill
workers have radios? 3). What national, regional, and state-level political
information was transmitted that may have had the consequence of altering worker
perceptions of political opportunity? 4). What was the role of radio in forging,
or at least opening opportunity to, oppositional cultural messages. Were
solidarity and a sense of similarity across mill towns manifested as a
consequence?

The project will make important contributions to theoretical debates regarding
movement formation, communication technology, cultural transmission, labor
dynamics, and spatial diffusion processes most generally. The analyses will be
embedded in a historical context, while simultaneously highlighting broader
themes and debates pertaining to the study and understanding of media, social
movements, labor, and culture.