* 0136954
* Controls on the Abundance of Carbon Species in Unsedimented Submarine Hydrothermal Systems:  An Experimental Investigation
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2006
* Jeffrey Seewald, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 02/28/2006
* USD 287,833.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0136954&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As
more is discovered of the extent and nature of the large scale venting and
circulation of hydrothermal waters through the oceanic crust, delineation of
abiotic chemistries from subsurface biogeochemical cycles has become
increasingly blurred in some senses, yet clearly intertwined in others.
Consideration of the chemistry of organic compounds in aqueous hydrothermal
fluids currently poses many uncertainties and intriguing questions. The
deliberately constrained laboratory experimental approach of this study will use
flexible-cell hydrothermal vessels to investigate a number of key chemical
objectives: i) measurement of calcite solubility at temperatures and pressures
appropriate to the conditions experienced during the hydrothermal alteration of
oceanic basalts, ii) determination the mineral catalyzed rates of abiotic
reduction of CO2 to CH4 and iii) evaluation of the influence of the
thermodynamic activity of water on the effectiveness of catalytically active
minerals on the abiotic formation of reduced carbon
compounds.&lt;br/&gt;Interpretation of the results of these investigations has
impact upon topics as seemingly diverse as the mid-ocean ridge carbon cycle, the
geological sequestration of excess carbon dioxide, the existence of life in
extreme environments and even its origin. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;