* 0136441
* SGER: Isolation and Culture of Deeply Divergent, Mesophilic Rhizosphere Crenarchaeota
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2002,06/30/2003
* Holly Simon, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2003
* USD 66,128.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Holly M. Simon at the University of Wisconsin to
isolate and culture members of an unusual and little-understood group of soil
microorganisms that colonize plant roots. These microbes, known as mesophilic
crenarchaeota, are members of the archaea, a third domain of life separate from
bacteria and eukaryotes. Growth of archaea on plant roots will be exploited by
using the root as a starting point for their growth in vitro. Metabolic
differences between archaea and bacteria will be used to selectively enrich for
growth of the archaea while discouraging growth of bacteria also present on
roots. DNA will be recovered for analysis of the diversity and potential
metabolic activities of the assemblages present, which will in turn inform
enrichment strategies. While isolation of the root-colonizing archaea in pure
culture is the goal, their growth in vitro may require the presence of (an)other
organism(s). Discovery of such commensal relationships would represent
significant advancement of our knowledge about this unusual group of archaea.

Members of the archaea are important contributors to biosphere processes.
Examples include the production of methane, (a "greenhouse gas), and globally
significant transformations of sulfur. Archaea have also have often been
discovered in extreme environments, such as Yellowstone hot springs, or
submarine hydrothermal vents. The group of archaea being investigated in this
proposal was completely unknown a decade ago. They represent evolutionarily
divergent members within the archaeal division Crenarchaeota that are able to
grow under moderate (mesophilic) temperature conditions. The isolation and
growth in vitro of members from this enigmatic group of archaea will help us
understand their place in the scope of archaeal evolution, and will provide
insight into their metabolisms and ecological functions.