* 0136107
* Collaborative Research: COMPRES Grand Challenges for Experimental Study of Plastic Deformation
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2002,03/31/2008
* Pamela Burnley, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 03/31/2008
* USD 206,690.00

Burnley&lt;br/&gt;0136107&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantitative rheological
measurements on Earth materials have been conducted only under relatively low-
pressure conditions corresponding to the depth of ~60 km or less. The main
thrust of this project is to extend this limit, through technical developments,
at least to ~800 km covering not only the upper mantle but also the transition
zone and the lower mantle. We propose to establish a new inter-institutional
program coordinated with COMPRES (Consortium for Materials Property Research in
the Earth Sciences) by utilizing the infrastructure for operation of national
facilities and educational program, and we will expand the capabilities of these
facilities for the broader scientific community. Through inter-institutional
collaboration, we will develop two new types of apparatus (a modified cubic
apparatus (D-DIA) and a rotational Drickamer apparatus (RDA)) in addition to
further improvements to the well-established deformation techniques using a
multianvil apparatus (MA). Both D-DIA and RDA (as well as MA) can readily be
fitted to synchrotron radiation facilities to allow quantitative measurements of
stress and strain at high-pressure and temperature conditions. D-DIA is suited
for quantitative rheology measurements including shear localization and
resultant instabilities while RDA has a unique capability of large strain
deformation experiments at high-pressures, an important feature for study of
lattice preferred orientation. These apparatus will be used to obtain the first
quantitative data set on rheological properties and deformation-induced
microstructures of Earth and planetary materials under high-pressure, high-
temperature conditions (to ~15-25 GPa, ~2000 K). The results of such
measurements will contribute to better understand (i) the radial and lateral
variation of rheological properties for whole mantle, (ii) the interaction of
rheological behavior with chemical reactions including phase transformations,
and (iii) the nature of deformation-induced microstructures such as lattice
preferred orientation (which causes seismic anisotropy). The unique facility
thus developed will be accessible to a large mineral and rock physics community
and will significantly enhance the contribution of mineral and rock physics
research to a wide range of solid Earth sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;