* 0136826
* Political Cues and Internet Use: Elite Communication Strategies and the Use of the Internet for Information Seeking and Political Participation.
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Nicholas Valentino, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 04/30/2006
* USD 299,965.00

The central question of this research program involves the changing relationship
between masses and elites in the information age. The investigation explores the
impact of exposure to political cues via traditional mass media, on the extent
and nature of on-line political participation, information seeking and learning.
Specifically, the investigators assess the impact of cognitive heuristics in
campaign advertising and news coverage on the information seeking and
participatory strategies citizens employ. Particular attention is paid to the
effects of threat cues in political communication, as an emerging body of
research suggests that these cues are especially effective at boosting
engagement. The researchers also revisit the selective exposure hypothesis that
was largely abandoned nearly four decades ago, to determine if exposure to
standard political communication boosts or diminishes the selection of
attitudinally consistent information via the web. A pilot study provides support
for these hypotheses. The central communication factors that are investigatee as
potential influences on Internet searching and behavior are advertising tone,
the motivation to use the web, the credibility of information on the web, and
various forms of threat cues. As the Internet evolves into an almost limitless
information medium, and with barriers to accessing disappearing, the mechanism
linking existing attitudes to information search strategies deserves renewed
attention. &lt;br/&gt;The research design builds upon the innovative methodology
employed in a pilot study. In this experiment, conducted in the fall of 2000,
adult subjects were shown political ads sponsored by candidates Bush and Gore
that were constructed in the Media Lab. In these ads, the researchers
manipulated the dimension used to organize the candidate's policy stands: one
version emphasized partisan conflicts while others highlighted ideological,
character, or group representation distinctions. After viewing the ads, subjects
were told they could visit either or both of the web pages of the presidential
candidates to learn &lt;br/&gt;any additional information that interested them.
The web pages were patterned after the candidates' actual web sites and were
standardized so that the information was organized similarly on each site.
Subjects' movements on the websites and the time spent on each link were tracked
electronically. This realistic yet unobtrusive measure of search behavior
represents a significant improvement over survey measures of self-reported
information seeking. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, scholarly evidence
for, and popular concern about, downward trends in civic engagement,
participation, and trust in government have been growing. At the same time,
there are those who predict that the landscape of political communication is
approaching a major transformation as the Internet rapidly extends its reach.
Some have argued these technological advances will reverse the downward spiral
in engagement, while others predict even more isolation and passivity. Mostly
absent from the debate thus far is the possibility that the political effects of
the Internet will be, at least in part, contingent on the behavior of elites.
Since communication strategies will certainly evolve to maximize the impact of
campaigns in the age of the Internet, researchers must begin to explore how
citizens react to those messages in terms of the vast interactive medium at
their fmgertips. &lt;br/&gt;Most observers would agree that as barriers to
acquiring information and participating on the Internet continue to drop, elite-
mass interactions will change significantly. The question that remains is how. A
rigorous and detailed study of these phenomena is not only warranted, but vital
for understanding public awareness and political behavior in the near future.
&lt;br/&gt;