* 0136171
* Collaborative Research:  Establishing the Stratigraphy of Glacigenic Bedforms on the Chukchi Borderland, Arctic Ocean, to Reconstruct the History of Pleistocene Arctic Ice Shelves
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2005
* Dennis Darby, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 02/28/2005
* USD 122,000.00

0136171&lt;br/&gt;Darby&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a collaborative proposal by
Principal Investigators at the Ohio State University and Old Dominion
University. The Principal Investigators will investigate sediment cores from the
Chukchi Borderland that were collected and curated by the U.S. Geological Survey
(USGS) in 1992. The core sites are located in an area that contains several
generations of glacigenic bedforms, which were mapped by the Science Ice
Exercise (SCICEX) survey in 1999. A preliminary lithostratigraphy for these
cores has been developed from their physical properties logs and core
descriptions. The Principal Investigators will verify and further develop this
stratigraphy based on lithological and paleontological (foraminiferal)
compositions and paleomagnetic measurements, reinforced by 14C dating and
coccolith studies. These approaches will allow them to put the Chukchi
Borderland cores into a stratigraphic context for the Amerasian Basin and to
correlate them with the Lomonosov Ridge sediment records. The results should
help to establish an improved Quaternary age model for the Arctic Ocean.
Investigation of glacigenic diamictons recovered by cores on the Chukchi
Borderland will aid our understanding of the processes involved in the grounding
of ice shelves on submarine rises. By using the composition of glacigenic clasts
in sediments as provenance tracers they identify glaciation centers that
sustained the ice shelves. This stratigraphically constrained information will
yield insights into the Pleistocene glaciation history of both the interior and
the periphery of the Arctic Ocean and will improve our&lt;br/&gt;understanding
of interactions between continental-based ice sheets and ice
shelves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;