* 0136879
* Establishing a Partnership Laboratory
* EHR,DGE
* 12/01/2001,09/30/2004
* Kimberly Tanner, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn L. Piper
* 09/30/2004
* USD 50,000.00

The goal of this PFSMETE Start-Up Grant proposal is to establish a Partnership
Laboratory within the framework of the UCSF SEP that will make discoveries and
build knowledge about how collaborations between the scientific and education
communities can improve and articulate K-20+ science education. This Partnership
Laboratory will not be a separate, independent entity, but rather a scholarly
research and evaluation effort integrated with SEP's existing professional
development and partnership programs in science education, thereby
institutionalizing partnership research efforts. The two major goals of
establishing a Partnership Laboratory are: To build knowledge of scientist-
teacher partnership by expanding and transforming PFSMETE-initiated partnership
research by I) analyzing the correlation between scientist- teacher partnership
outcomes and different programmatic models of partnership, 2) beginning an
investigation of K-12 student outcomes that result from scientist-teacher
partnerships, and 3) examining the influence of partnership experiences on the
career trajectories of scientists and teachers. To cultivate a partnership
research community by 1) founding a Partnership Collaborative Inquiry Group of
veteran SEP scientists and teachers who engage in on-going partnership action
research, 2) involving scholars and practitioners from the fields of science and
education research as Partnership Research Advisors, and 3) convening
Partnership Collaborative Inquiry Group members, Partnership Research Advisors,
and the SEP Staff semi- annually at Research Retreats to analyze research
questions, methodological strategies, data analysis, and interpretation of
fmdings. The effort will not only result in the establishment of a Partnership
Laboratory, but also begin to build an academic discipline ofK-20+ Education
Partnership, the study of collaboration between teachers and practitioners to
increase the quality and authenticity of subject area education for all
students. In addition, although the proposed efforts are focused on science
education partnerships specifically, they have the potential for informing and
promoting the development of partnerships in many disciplines. As such, these
studies of scientist-teacher partnership will be of national interest, and
documentation of these efforts and synthesis of fmdings will be disseminated
through presentation at scientific and educational conferences, with the
eventual goal of publication in journal articles and compilation into a
partnership handbook.