* 0136311
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: The Data Documentation Initiative (DDI) Version 1.1
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2003
* Richard Rockwell, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 02/28/2003
* USD 18,657.00

This collaborative project will extend, enhance, and promote the Data
Documentation Initiative (DDI) specification. The DDI is intended to be a
Publicly Available Standard for the content, presentation, transport, and
preservation of metadata about data sets in the social and behavioral sciences.
Written in XML, the lingua franca of the World Wide Web, Version 1.0 of the DDI
specification was published in March 2000. Among the changes and extensions
planned for Version 1.1 of the specification are more robust mechanisms for
describing aggregate/tabular data and complex file types, such as hierarchical
and relational files. In addition, the project will conduct training at meetings
of professional associations to familiarize researchers and others with the
project and to encourage them to adopt this method for documenting social
science datasets. The project also will focus on refining the instructions for
employing the standard and providing a set of best practices to demonstrate
optimal usage. Finally, project participants will explore a new approach to
documentation. This approach likely will have at its core a diagram that defines
the relationships among elements. It also will have attributes of a social
science codebook.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has the potential to improve
the conduct of social science research in several ways. First, the DDI model
provides a comprehensive set of codebook elements designed to incorporate all of
the information a potential data analyst must have to conduct analysis
accurately and efficiently. The proposed refinements will render the standard
applicable to all types of social science data. Training and outreach to the
research community will help to ensure that the content standard is widely
applied, and best practice activities will promote uniform element usage.
Second, the specification is structured in such a way that a single core
document can be adapted to produce several other documents, including data
definition statements for the major statistical software packages, bibliographic
records, study abstracts, etc. The documentation author need only make changes
in one place. Third, the project promotes data interoperability by creating a
Web-based nonproprietary documentation standard that permits seamless exchange
of files among data users and data providers. Finally, the shared specification
provides the necessary infrastructure for porting data into online analysis
systems, thus putting more social science data on the desktops of a wider
community of users.&lt;br/&gt;