* 0136894
* Collaborative Proposal: The Behavioral and Ecological Effects of Viral Disease in Caribbean Spiny Lobster
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Robert Ratzlaff, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/2004
* USD 270,064.00

Although the ecological consequences of viruses in marine systems are
potentially enormous, studies of their role as pathogens of metazoans and their
effects on host population ecology are in their infancy. A poorly explored area
of pathogen-host interactions is the effect of pathogens on the behavior of
uninfected members of the host population, and the consequences of such behavior
on host population dynamics. A lethal, pathogenic herpes-like virus that infects
Caribbean spiny lobster (Panulirus argus) has recently been discovered in the
Florida Keys. Preliminary studies indicate that this disease not only alters the
behavior of infected individuals, but also causes remarkable changes in the
social behavior of healthy individuals in response to diseased conspecifics.
Behavioral responses to disease have potentially far reaching repercussions for
the spatial structure, recruitment, and transmission of pathogens in lobster
populations. Traditional fishing practices may also contribute to the spread of
this pathogen. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to determine
the current incidence, mode of transmission, behavioral and ecological
consequences, and potential population-level impacts of this newly discovered
disease. Specifically, the investigators will: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) Expand
preliminary field surveys to document the current distribution and prevalence of
this disease in adult and juvenile lobsters, as well as in other potential viral
reservoirs in the Florida Keys. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) Determine through
laboratory experiments whether the pathogen is transmitted among lobsters by
contact, water-borne particles, or ingestion of infected tissue, and whether
transmission rates are affected by size (age), gender, condition, or injury.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(3) Use laboratory experiments and field mark-recapture
studies to test the effect of the disease on pivotal aspects of lobster
behavior, population dynamics, and spatial structure that may influence the
spread of the disease in this gregarious animal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(4)
Develop and implement a diagnostic immunological assay to identify infected
lobsters during the early stages of the disease. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(5)
Incorporate the information obtained in Objectives 1 - 3 into a spatially-
explicit, individual-based lobster recruitment model to determine if the
aversion of uninfected lobsters to infected conspecifics, or practices employed
in the lobster fishery, alter the spread of the disease.&lt;br/&gt;