* 0136047
* Collaborative Research: FABRIC AND TEXTURE CHARACTERISTICS OF MICRO-PHYSICAL PROCESSES IN ICE
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2007
* Edwin Waddington, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 02/28/2007
* USD 174,998.00

0136047&lt;br/&gt;Waddington&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a collaborative
proposal by Principal Investigators at the University of Washington and Ohio
University. Detailed knowledge about the interactions between micro-structure of
ice and its deformation is needed to assess the integrity of stratigraphic
layering and the depth-age relationship in ice cores, which is essential for
interpreting the paleoclimate record. The Principal Investigators will use
micro-structure to study fabric, the orientation distribution of crystal c-axes,
and texture, the size and shape of crystals. Numerical modeling of ice
deformation is a useful tool in understanding these interactions. Accurate
modeling of ice deformation is complicated by factors, such as the fabric, grain
size, dynamic recrystallization, stress level, and precise knowledge of initial
conditions. For example, ice fabric evolves as the ice is strained and the
deformation depends on the fabric. This complicated feedback mechanism must be
understood to correctly model ice deformation. In another example, the usual
assumption is that the initial fabric is isotropic or random, but there are
excellent examples of near-surface ice in the ice cores that are apparently not
isotropic. One must know the initial fabric to calculate the deformation rate in
ice sheets. Dr. Wilen will combine results of his new automatic fabric analyzer
(AFA) with predictions of detailed ice deformation models (Dr. Thorsteinsson) to
refine and better constrain such models. The AFA gives new information in thin
sections because the precision and number of measured c-axis orientations are
greatly improved. The Principal Investigators will analyze existing data and
collect new data on fabric and texture from ice cores to address questions
regarding near-surface fabric, deformation mechanisms, dynamic
recrystallization, and potential sources of layer disturbances. The data will be
used to constrain models of fabric evolution and recrystallization processes.
With the more refined models, scientists can address different questions and
important problems related to ice deformation and ice cores. For example, the
recent agreement between the climate records from the Greenland Ice Core Project
(GRIP) and Greenland Ice Sheet Project 2 (GISP2) ice cores of the upper-90%, and
the disagreement in the lower-10% emphasizes the need to understand and predict
the mechanisms and probable depths of disruption in these and future deep ice
cores. Evidence suggests that the stratigraphic disturbances arise from the
anisotropic nature of ice crystals at a variety of scales. To properly model the
deformation of anisotropic ice, the influence of fabric on deformation must be
well known.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;