* 0136210
* Effects of Dietary N and Lichen on Body Protein Conservation in Reproducing Rangifer
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2006
* Perry Barboza, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 03/31/2006
* USD 647,056.00

0136210&lt;br/&gt;Barboza&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Caribou and reindeer (Rangifer
tarandus) are the only ungulates to have successfully colonized both arctic and
boreal ecosystems in a circumpolar distribution. These large animals are central
to the cultural identity and sustenance of many indigenous peoples throughout
the north.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Across arctic and sub-arctic landscapes,
terrestrial lichens comprise a large proportion of the plant biomass. These
assemblages of fungi, algae and cyanobacteria not only contribute to hydrology,
nutrient cycling and atmospheric exchanges in the ecosystem, but are also
consumed by caribou and reindeer. Pollutants deposited on lichens are dispersed
via Rangifer into predators and humans and into soil and water systems along
their migration routes. Lichens support many Rangifer herds in the depth of
winter and in early spring before the majority of vascular plants resume growth.
Consequently, the distribution and abundance of lichens are related to
population dynamics and movements of Rangifer. Although lichens contain several
potentially toxic compounds, Rangifer and its gastrointestinal microbes can
adjust to utilizing the unusual structural carbohydrates in this forage.
Exclusive consumption of lichen by captive reindeer, however, can result in mass
loss and the net loss of nitrogen (N). Low concentrations of N in lichens may
prevent animals from attaining a positive N balance especially at low food
intakes. Inadequate dietary N compromises the maintenance of maternal tissues
and limits the production of new tissues for fetal growth in pregnancy and milk
for calves in spring. We propose a model of changes in body protein for northern
deer to relate energy and N balance to dietary supplies. The model predicts
changes in the concentration and isotopic enrichment of the catabolite urea in
relation to tissue proteins and their products (creatinine, hydroxy proline,
methyl histidine).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will define
mechanisms for conserving body N in Rangifer during pregnancy, and quantify a
predictive model of body protein loss. Two PhD students will participate in the
project. We propose two experiments with repeated measures of captive reindeer
fed formulated diets or lichens. The first experiment will determine the
dynamics of N through gestation; we will combine measures of food intake and
excretion to assess N balance using tracer techniques and isotopic enrichments,
with a validation of these methods in non- reproductive animals during spring.
The second experiment will focus on the digestive and metabolic responses to
lichens; we will determine intake, digestion, digesta flow and absorption, and
recycling of waste N. Indirect measures of body composition will be used
throughout to determine changes in body protein and fat in relation to diet and
season.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Describing the interrelationships between lichen
ranges and Rangifer populations requires long-term monitoring and management
because lichens grow so slowly, but accumulate biomass over many years. This
project will provide new data on metabolic responses of Rangifer to the
nutritional constraints of northern ecosystems and a tool for understanding the
importance of lichens to Rangifer populations. These data will provide a basis
for assessing the contribution of migrating herds to N and mineral cycling in
tundra systems. Such an increased understanding of herbivore dynamics in the
arctic also will have direct implications to other arctic ruminants (i.e. moose
and muskoxen) with similar adaptive physiological mechanisms for protein and
energy conservation.&lt;br/&gt;