* 0136990
* Symbolic Computational Algebra 2002 Conference
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2003
* Serkan Hosten, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* John Staudhammer
* 06/30/2003
* USD 35,000.00

We propose running a five day conference in July 2002 on the use of symbolic
computation in algebra, geometry, and analysis, preceded by a two day workshop
for graduate students and non-specialists. This will be a joint U.S. and
Canadian event and will take place at the University of Western Ontario, London,
Ontario, Canada. We request funds from the NSF to provide travel and support
costs for participants from the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;The conference is intended to
bring together researchers from a broad variety of areas within symbolic
computation. The topics included will be computational algebra (both commutative
and non-commutative) and algebraic geometry, solving polynomial equations,
differential algebra, coding theory and geometric invariant
theory.&lt;br/&gt;The conference will consist of approximately 10 one hour talks
and 20 half hour talks. The one hour talks will be designed for an audience of
nonspecialists, in particular, for students and researchers wishing to learn
about the area. The shorter talks will be designed to discuss current
developments in the field. In addition, the PIs plan to hold a two-day workshop
before the start of the conference featuring coding theory and geometric
invariant theory. The workshop will be aimed at graduate students and non-
specialists.&lt;br/&gt;The conference is modeled in its scope, program and
organization after the AMS-IMS-SIAM joint summer research conference Symbolic
Computation: Solving Equations in Algebra, Geometry, and Engineering that was
held at Mount Holyoke College in June 2000 and organized by the PIs. The Mount
Holyoke meeting in turn was inspired by the special semester on Symbolic
Computation in Algebra, Geometry and Analysis that was held at MSRI in the Fall
of 1998. The proposed conference will serve as a platform to present the most
exciting results obtained since the summer of 2000.&lt;br/&gt;We already have
approved funding from the Fields Institute, Ontario Research Center for
Computational Algebra (ORCCA), and the University of Western Ontario. The
organizers plan to make a special effort to attract graduate students and recent
Ph.Ds, as well as women working in the areas within the scope of the conference.
A substantial portion of the requested funds would be used for support of
graduate students and recent PH.Ds from the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;