* 0136103
* Collaborative Research:  Active Tectonics at the Aleutian-Kamchatka Corner:  A Lithospheric Perspective
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2004
* Nikolai Shapiro, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 04/30/2004
* USD 59,790.00

01-36103&lt;br/&gt;Ritzwoller&lt;br/&gt;This is a collaborative proposal between
Principal Investigators at the University of Colorado and Yale University.
Arctic tectonics is dominated by the interaction of the North American,
Eurasian,and Pacific plates. In oceanic areas, the boundaries between these
plates are relatively well known, but much of the North American-Eurasian plate
boundary is defined by a broad zone of intra-continental deformation. The
driving mechanisms for this deformation are poorly
understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Newly acquired seismic data makes it possible
to decipher plate motion at the Aleutian-Kamchatka junction. This junction
connects the strike-slip Bering fault along the western Aleutians with an active
subduction zone beneath southern Kamchatka, where plate convergence is
accompanied by vigorous arc-volcanics. The Okhotsk Sea lies in the back-arc
region of the Kamchatka subduction zone, and its unresolved deformation is
critical to understanding present-day North America-Eurasia plate interaction.
The evolution of the Kamchatka-Aleutian junction is a critical component of the
Cenozoic evolution of the Pacific-Eurasian plate boundary, and thus of Arctic
tectonics as a whole. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal goal of this project
to characterize the temperature and the texture of the lithosphere and the
asthenosphere near the Aleutian-Kamchatka junction region. Temperature is
related to seismic velocity anomalies, and deformation texture to seismic
anisotropy. Temperature and texture will reveal the role of the upper mantle in
the interplay between the plates, particularly 1) how mantle processes
facilitate the vigorous subduction-related volcanism near the Aleutian-Kamchatka
junction, and 2) whether and how past extensional tectonics in the Okhotsk Sea
have influenced the Cenozoic development of the North America-Eurasia boundary.
The Yale Principal Investigators acquired seismic data in Kamchatka by operating
a portable network of broadband seismometers in 1998 -1999. Recordings from this
network combined with data from permanent seismological stations will for the
primary data set for this study. They bring expertise in regional tectonics,
receiver function analysis, and characterizing lithospheric dynamics using
seismic anisotropy. The Colorado Principal Investigators are experts in surface
wave tomography inversion for models of the crust and the upper mantle and the
inference of mantle temperature from seismic models. This collaboration is
designed to generate accurate and more sharply focused images of isotropic and
anisotropic seismic features near the Kamchatka-Aleutian corner. From these
images the temperature and texture of the upper mantle that constrains
lithospheric dynamics will be inferred.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;