* 0136584
* Collaborative Research:  Isotopic Constraints on the Nitrogen Dynamics of the Bering Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2005
* Daniel McCorkle, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 03/31/2005
* USD 103,759.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0136449&lt;br/&gt;OCE-
0136584&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
consider the mechanisms of denitrification - the chemical reduction of dissolved
nutrient NO3- largely to inert N2 gas- in the polar oceans and specifically the
Bering Sea. Denitrification in the ocean, the loss of nutrient N essential for
biological processes, is conventionally thought to take place only in conditions
of relative dissolved oxygen deficiency ( [O2] &lt; 5-10mM). The northern Polar
ocean shows significant nitrate depletion relative to phosphate despite the
concentration of oxygen rarely falling below 15uM throughout much of the region.
It has been known for many years that the Bering Sea in particular exhibits a
sizeable nitrate deficit, but whether this arises in the water column or in the
sediments, or perhaps is even advected in from low-latitude oxygen minimum zones
in the Pacific remains unclear. Isotopic measurements of nitrate will be used to
assess the relative role of sedimentary vs. water column denitrification based
on observed distinct isotopic signatures accompanying these two processes. Using
a recently developed isotopic analytical method, the d 18O of oceanic nitrate
will also be developed as a tracer to complement the interpretation of d 15N
differences to study these aspects of the oceanic nitrogen cycle. A further line
of enquiry of the study is to consider the proposition that the modern polar
Pacific ocean operates as an analogue of the glacial Southern Ocean, a key
unknown in interpreting Holocene variations in atmospheric CO2 and thus
broadening our understanding of geologically recent climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;