* 0136935
* Risk communication and public participation during the investigation of cancer clusters
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Craig Trumbo, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2004
* USD 259,623.00

Every day in the United States, on average, three communities reach
a&lt;br/&gt;sufficient state of concern to contact their state health department
for the&lt;br/&gt;investigation of a suspected cancer cluste, ran unusual and
unexplained&lt;br/&gt;increase in the occurrence of cancer in space and time.
State health&lt;br/&gt;departments investigate about a third of these cases in
one way or another,&lt;br/&gt;but find that very few (about 1%) present suspect
cancer rates. However,&lt;br/&gt;these cases of community concern and health
department response present an&lt;br/&gt;effective circumstance in which to
investigate risk perception, risk&lt;br/&gt;communication, and public
participation in risk analysis. This project is&lt;br/&gt;the continuation and
expansion of an established research effort designed to&lt;br/&gt;examine the
social and psychological circumstances surrounding&lt;br/&gt;citizen-initiated
cancer cluster investigations, with an emphasis on two&lt;br/&gt;aspects: the
effects of state health department communications, and the&lt;br/&gt;experiences
of citizens and officials in public meetings held during these&lt;br/&gt;cases.
To meet the first goal, the project will integrate, and develop,
two&lt;br/&gt;primary theoretical models, one central to risk perception (the
Psychometric&lt;br/&gt;model) and one central to information processing and
decision making (the&lt;br/&gt;Heuristic-Systematic model). Previous work in
this effort has examined a&lt;br/&gt;series of five such cases. This expansion
will use mail and phone survey&lt;br/&gt;methods to look at a larger and more
diverse set of cluster investigations&lt;br/&gt;(about 50), enabling a
comparison across cases. The analysis will continue&lt;br/&gt;the refinement of
a model that describes the effects of information provided&lt;br/&gt;to
communities in these cases, and will also evaluate the effects of
the&lt;br/&gt;specific circumstances unique to theses cases (e.g., types of
cancer,&lt;br/&gt;suspected causes). The analysis will also focus on the
different&lt;br/&gt;communication techniques used by various state health
departments to convey&lt;br/&gt;the results of their epidemiological
investigations. To meet the second&lt;br/&gt;goal, a set of five cases will be
more deeply studied with an emphasis on&lt;br/&gt;the public meetings that are
almost always an important feature of these&lt;br/&gt;community experiences.
That effort will make further use of mail and phone&lt;br/&gt;survey methods,
and will also make use of extensive interviews and focus&lt;br/&gt;groups.
Overall, the project is expected to provide a detailed examination&lt;br/&gt;of
how information is conveyed in these cases, and how citizens make use
of&lt;br/&gt;information to reach, or modify, their orientation toward concerns
about&lt;br/&gt;cancer rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Relative to scientific
interests in risk perception, one of the most&lt;br/&gt;interesting aspects of
this investigation resides in the fact that cluster&lt;br/&gt;cases almost
always present a circumstance in which the scientific
evidence&lt;br/&gt;indicates little or no risk, yet that evaluation is couched
in the&lt;br/&gt;probabilistic language of cancer epidemiology. This
investigation will&lt;br/&gt;advance scientific understanding of how individuals
react to this form of&lt;br/&gt;information, a problem that has been a long-
standing concern in the fields&lt;br/&gt;of psychology, social-psychology, and
risk communication. In more practical&lt;br/&gt;terms, this project is also
designed to evaluate the methods by which this&lt;br/&gt;form of information is
provided to communities. The analysis will illuminate&lt;br/&gt;the more
effective means of communicating the results of
epidemiological&lt;br/&gt;studies and as such will provide important and useful
feed-back for those&lt;br/&gt;who are charged with that work. The project's
ultimate goal is that this&lt;br/&gt;kind of information will be communicated
more effectively and the&lt;br/&gt;communities involved in such cases will be
better served.