* 0136332
* Social Sharedness, Shared Task Representations and Group Decision Making
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2006
* R. Scott Tindale, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 02/28/2006
* USD 299,939.00

Small decision-making groups resolve many of the most important issues/questions
in organizations and society. Such groups bring more resources than any single
individual to the task at hand. There is also a fair amount of research support
for the superior decision-making capabilities of groups as compared to
individuals. However, recent work has shown that the same processes that make
groups superior decision-makers and problem-solvers can under certain
circumstances, lead them astray. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Groups perform better
than individuals in many situations because when a correct or optimal
alternative is proposed, groups have the ability to recognize the "correctness"
of the alternative. Our recent work has shown that a group's ability to do this
depends on an appropriate task representation shared by the group members. In
most situations, the group members share an appropriate representation. However,
we have shown that in situations where group members share a faulty task
representation, group often perform worse than individuals. The research
contained in the current proposal will attempt to further our understanding of
how such shared task representations affect group decision-making. In addition,
the research will address how competing shared representations - specifically
representations at different levels of generality - affect group decision
outcomes and processes. The overarching goals of the research are show how to
enable groups to use appropriate task representations when they exist, but to
learn how to prevent them from using faulty representations that are initially
shared among the group members.&lt;br/&gt;