* 0136847
* Collaborative Research: Remaking Bosnia: The International Community and the Returnee Policy Process in Three Bosnian Localities
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2005
* Carl Dahlman, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 05/31/2005
* USD 31,732.00

This research project investigates the refugee returnee process developed by the
international community to implement Annex 7 of the Dayton Peace Accords, the
peace treaty that brought the Bosnian war to an end in 1995. The central
research question is: how has the international community sought to reconstitute
multi-ethnic Bosnian places and how have local authorities mediated this
process? Field-research is grounded in three ethnically-cleansed Bosnian
localities - Bosnian Croat-controlled Jajce, Bosniak-controlled Travnik, and
Bosnian Serb-controlled Derventa - which were multi-ethnic places before the
war. The international community has been active in all three localities
promoting returns but with modest results so far. In answering the research
question, data are collected from three sources: policy decisions, reports, and
operational procedures generated by institutional actors involved in
implementing Annex 7 of the Dayton Peace Accords; semi-structured interviews
with key international, national, and local decision-makers in the returnee
policy process; and focus group sessions with returnees in the selected research
sites. Multiple methodological strategies will be used to study the data
gathered including mapping the geographies of displacement and return, charting
the reconstruction and return policy process, discourse analysis of policy-maker
and implementation storylines at various scales, and discourse analysis of the
perspectives of returnees themselves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
investigates a nascent contradiction in the Dayton Peace Accords, which, on the
one hand, pledged to reverse ethnic cleansing, but, on the other hand,
sanctioned a segregated Bosnia created by ethnic cleansing and ruled by local
authorities committed to ethnonationalism. This contradiction has given rise to
a struggle between the international community and local authorities to define
the ethnic and political geography of Bosnia. The study focuses on local
municipalities to analyze how the extensive efforts of the international
community to reverse ethnic cleansing in Bosnia impacted particular places. More
broadly, it develops a conceptual understanding of the problems associated with
the rebuilding of post-conflict states, especially the political geographic
aspects of ethnic identity. It offers insight into how post-conflict plans
conceived in international peace agreements are mediated and thereby transformed
by the local contexts of their implementation.&lt;br/&gt;