* 0136236
* Charging and Sentencing Decisions Under the Federal Sentencing Guidelines:  A Three-District Study
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2003
* Cassia Spohn, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* Christopher J. Zorn
* 12/31/2003
* USD 173,615.00

The enactment of the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984 and the subsequent
promulgation of sentencing guidelines by the United States Sentencing Commission
(USSC) transformed sentencing in the federal criminal justice system. The highly
discretionary and largely unregulated sentencing process of the pre-guidelines
era was replaced by a tightly structured system in which judicial discretion is
constrained by sentencing rules based largely on the seriousness of the offense
and the offender's prior criminal record. Moreover, prosecuting attorneys, who
played a fairly circumscribed role in the pre-guidelines era, have substantial
influence on sentencing under the guidelines; in many cases, their charging and
plea bargaining decisions determine the sentence that will be imposed by the
judge. Research designed to evaluate the impact of these "revolutionary" changes
in the federal sentencing process focus on sentencing decisions at the national
level. These studies assume, either explicitly or implicitly, that there is
little inter-district variation in case processing policies and procedures and
that findings regarding sentence outcomes at the national level therefore
reflect the reality of decision making in each of the U.S. District Courts. A
second issue is that prior researchers have focused almost exclusively on the
sentencing decision itself, rather than examining the prosecutor's charging and
plea bargaining decisions. This research will address these methodological
limitations by studying federal sentencing practices and outcomes at the
district level and by using quantitative and qualitative research techniques to
describe and analyze charging, plea bargaining, and sentencing policies,
practices, and outcomes. The research will study three U.S. District Courts: the
District of Nebraska, the District of Minnesota, and the Southern District of
Iowa. The primary objectives of this project are: (1) to test for inter-district
disparity in sentencing; (2) to describe charging and plea bargaining practices
and to identify the predictors of charging and plea bargaining decisions; and
(3) to examine the effect of offender and case characteristics on sentence
outcomes at the district level. The researchers will collect data on all cases
prosecuted in the three districts during fiscal years 1998, 1999, and 2000. They
will obtain detailed data on the offender, the case, and the sentence from the
USSC's Offender Datafile for each district for each year. They will supplement
these data with information contained in the Presentence Investigation Report,
the Sentencing Recommendation, the Order of Judgement, and other documents
provided by each U.S. District Court. The researchers also will interview
judges, attorneys, and probation officers in each district. The proposed study
will fill important gaps in our knowledge of the dynamics of the federal
sentencing process. It represents a first step toward understanding inter-
district variation in case processing procedures and outcomes, removing the
"cloak of secrecy that surrounds charging and plea bargaining in the federal
criminal justice system, and untangling the complex inter-relationships among
charging decisions, plea agreements, and sentence outcomes.