* 0136597
* Collaborative Research: Carbonate Dissolution in Shallow Water Tropical Sediments: The Role of Seagrasses
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2005
* Richard Zimmerman, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 01/31/2005
* USD 206,000.00

ABSTRACT

OCE-0136597

Recently, it has been suggested that oxygen transport into sediments via the
roots and rhizomes of seagrasses might resolve the observed discrepancy between
the amount of carbonate dissolved and the amount of acid produced from
remineralization of sediment organic matter. Combining field observations,
laboratory experiments and modeling analysis, a PI from Old Dominion University
will team up with a PI from San Jose State University to quantify the influence
of seagrass productivity on carbon flux and carbonate dissolution in shallow
waters of Lee Stocking Island, Bahamas, a tropical system. The PIs will compare
the sediment and porewater composition recovered from a variety of sample types
(bare ooid sands to densely vegetates regions with >70% seagrass cover) to
establish the relationship between carbonate dissolution in sediments and
seagrass density. Other studies to be carried out include incubation experiments
of individual seagrass shoots to determine the amount of O2 generated by the
roots and rhizomes under variable light and porewater O2 conditions.
Additionally, whole sediment core incubation experiments will determine the rate
of sediment organic matter degradation and carbonate dissolution. Lastly, Drs.
Burdige and Zimmerman plan to compare their data with those obtained via a model
of diagenetic processes in carbonate sediments. Results from this study will not
only provide basic information on ecological and biogeochemical processes in
tropical systems, but will help constrain budgets for carbonate cycling in
shallow water carbonate bank environments.

