* 0136927
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: The Importance of Relocations in U.S. Manufacturing
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2003
* Mark Bils, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 01/31/2003
* USD 17,655.00

Firms move operations to locations that are more favorable for their business.
Competition among state and local governments to lure businesses has attracted
considerable interest from economists, as well as legislators and policy makers,
regarding issues influencing relocation of firms' manufacturing activities. Only
a few studies have looked at how manufacturing firms geographically locate their
production, and most of them have looked at small samples from manufacturing or
small geographic regions. For an initial study, this dissertation research
summarizes the patterns of plant relocation and the post-move performance of
relocated plants in the U.S. manufacturing industries over the period 1972-1992
using non-publicly available plant and firm level data from the Longitudinal
Research Database (LRD) or the Census of Manufactures (CM). Focusing on an
individual firm's decision to relocate, this research tabulates and analyzes
information on the relocation of firm's manufacturing activities in the
following three subprojects. First, the research assesses the relative
importance of the relocation across industries and regions by constructing
industry level measures of entry, relocation, and exit. The study examines if
relocation shows different patterns in plant openings and closings compared to
de novo entry and permanent exit. Second, the research studies the
characteristics of relocated plants and the decision to relocate. To analyze
characteristics of individual firms' geographic shifts of production process,
the research focuses on new production facilities for existing firms to produce
a product in a new location. Estimation based on econometric models will
demonstrate how taxes, unionization, factor prices, ownership, and other
geographic and plant specific characteristics affect the relocation decision.
Third, the research investigates the impact of geographic shifts on the firms by
comparing the growth rates of output and productivity for newly relocated plants
to those for existing plants in the original location. The inverse growth-age
relation suggested by Jovanovic's (1982) firm-learning model is tested for
relocating plants to examine whether the inverse growth-age relation observed
among young firms holds also for the relocating plants that start over in a new
space. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;