* 0136117
* Development and Implementation of an Indicator Monitoring System for NSF's Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program [HBCU-UP]
* EHR,HRD
* 11/01/2001,10/31/2003
* Jason Kim, Systemic Research, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 10/31/2003
* USD 500,000.00

Systemic Research, Inc. proposes to develop and implement a progress indicator
monitoring system for the National Science Foundation's (NSF) Historically Black
Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP). Since the inception
of the program in 1998, HBCU-UP has provided a foundationfor sustainable
improvements of science, mathematics, engineering and technology (SMET)
instructional and outreach programs. Along with other ethnic diversity continuum
programs within NSF, the overarching goal of HBSU-UP is to increases the number
of underrepresented ethnic minorities well prepared for participation and
leadership in the SMET workforce. The program emphasized the implementation of
comprehensive institutional approaches to strengthen SMET teaching and learning
primarily focusing on improvement of access, retention, and graduation from
undergraduate programs, including the transition between high school and
college, 2- and 4- year colleges, undergraduate and graduate studies, and from
college to the workplace. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Government Performance and
Results Act (GPRA, 1993) mandates that Federal agencies account for program
results; the HBSU program has been classified as part of undergraduate support
for broadening participation with the primary goal of increasing the number of
baccalaureate recipients. The HBCU-UP program also directly aims at the goals
defined by the White House Initiative on Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (November 1, 1993) , "sustainable improvements of science,
mathematics, engineering and technology (SMET) instructional and outreach
programs at Historically Black Colleges and
Universities."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within the context of HBCU-UP goals and
relevant GPRA requirements, Systemic Research proposes to develop and implement
a HBCU-UP indicator monitoring system (IMS) based on HBCU-UP goals and
objectives, project activities and components, and self-evaluation and
assessment questions designed to assist in self-assessment of the individual
sites' progress, as well as overall program effectiveness. The first year will
be devoted to the design of the framework, development of prototype IMS
instruments, and field-testing with selected HBCU sites. Beginning in the second
year, the IMS instruments will be delivered to HBCUs during a workshop. The
workshop will also be designed for institutional data managers to share ideas in
indicator management and to enhance the integrity of collected data. The data
collected during the second year will be compiled into a two volume Fact
Book.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since 1995, Systemic Research has had extensive
experience working with minority serving institutions, including a few HBCU's,
through it's involvement in NSF's Model Institution for Excellence Program (MIE)
funded by NSF and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. Systemic
Research developed a progress indicator database, MSET (MIE Self-Evaluation
Template), based on a conceptual and operational framework for MIE program
effectiveness. The MIE program goal is very similar to that of HBCU-UP: to
strengthen the infrastructure of minority serving institutions (HBCUs, Hispanic
Serving Institutions, and Tribal Colleges and Universities) in SMET education
and undergraduate research, and to increase the number of students who pursue
advanced SMET degrees.&lt;br/&gt;Systemic Research will disseminate a two volume
HBCU Fact Book: one for overall progress, and the other for individual sites'
progress. The published reports will be available in three formats: hard copy,
CD-ROM, and web version. Systemic Research will also host a web site to promote
communications and&lt;br/&gt;networking among the participating
HBCUs.&lt;br/&gt;