* 0136791
* Measuring the Impact of Corporate Governance
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Andrew Metrick, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 03/31/2006
* USD 324,354.00

The separation of ownership from control in the modern corporation introduces an
agency problem between owners and managers. How do owners of modern corporations
exercise effective control over managers (agents) when managers usually know
much more about the day-to-day operation of the firms than the owners. The
implications and mitigation of this agency problem have long been central issues
in the economics literature. Nevertheless, there is little research on the exact
quantification of these costs, and many holes remain in our understanding of the
empirical details of this agency conflict. Many of the difficulties with this
important area of empirical research stem from the use of measures of corporate
governance that suffer from endogeneity problems or that capture only limited
aspects of a firm's complex governance structure. The project uses a measure
that accounts for the complexity of firm-specific corporate governance in a
novel way. Taking advantage of the variation in state- and firm-level governance
structures that arose in response to the takeover wave of the 1980s, the
investigators have constructed a "Governance Index" to proxy for the balance of
power between shareholders and managers. The project uses this index as the
basis for analysis of the effects of corporate governance. The investigators
have begun research on the implications of governance for firm value and have
found effects that are statistically significant and economically large. They
find that the addition of governance provisions that add to managerial power
(i.e., reduce shareholder rights) is consistently associated with lower levels
of firm value. While the causality of this relationship is not yet established,
there are several reasons to believe that the direction of causality runs from
governance to value. Furthermore, the magnitude of this empirical relationship
defines the large economic value at stake and motivates a detailed further
investigation. The primary benefit of this research lies in its potential to
further scientific understanding about the source and magnitude of agency
problems in organizations. Furthermore, the results are expected to yield
concrete policy implications regarding the effects of governance rules on
corporate value and performance. These results will not only be relevant on the
level of investor-management relations, but they should also contribute to the
economic foundation of the debate on takeover regulation in local and national
legislatures, both in the U.S. and abroad. Finally, this work develops a novel
measure of governance that should be a useful input in many other studies. A
preliminary version of the index has already been released to other researchers,
and all of the data will be made available as soon as possible.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the planned work includes a series of
four integrated projects. First, the investigators continue their research into
the relationship between governance and firm value and refine their previous
results. Second, they study the origins of variation in governance structures
and search for an instrument to allow for truly causal inference. Third, they
investigate the microfoundations of the costs of poor governance by studying its
effects on investment, managerial turnover, wages, employment, and productivity.
Fourth, the investigators study the relationship between the governance
structures summarized in the index and other corporate governance mechanisms
including executive compensation contracts, board independence, and ownership
structure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;