* 0136020
* Mitigating the Vulnerability of Critical Infrastructures to Catastrophic Failures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2002
* Leonard Ferrari, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 08/31/2002
* USD 10,000.00

Workshop on Mitigating the Vulnerability of Critical Infrastructures to
Catastrophic Failures&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Critical infrastructures form the
backbone of the economies of both the developed and the developing countries
throughout the world. They include electric power networks, fuel networks, water
networks, transportation networks, telecommunications networks, and computer
networks to cite a few. Assessing and mitigating their vulnerability to
catastrophic failures call for the development of a new body of knowledge that
integrates in a unified manner and builds on concepts and methodologies
pertaining to many engineering and scientific fields.
&lt;br/&gt;Interdependencies between critical infrastructures were addressed by
the OSTP/NSF workshop held in June 2001, which was entitled "Critical
Infrastructures: Needs in Interdisciplinary Research and Graduate Training."
While this workshop highlighted the need of multi-disciplinary research work in
critical infrastructure protection, major failures in electric power systems,
telecommunications networks, and computer networks were not discussed and
analyzed. &lt;br/&gt;This is the focus of the workshop that will be held at the
Lyceum, in Alexandria, Virginia, on September 10-11, 2001, under the joint
patronage of the National Science Foundation (NSF), the International Institute
for Critical National Infrastructures (CRIS), the World Institute for Disaster
Risk Management (DRM), and the International Institute for Information
Technology (IIIT). This workshop will bring together about forty experts in
critical infrastructures and disaster risk management from North America,
Europe, and Asia. It will give them the opportunity to discuss various emerging
concepts such as hidden failure, vulnerability, cascading failure,
interdependency, risk assessment, and self-healing, among others, and identify
research topics aimed at laying out the foundation of a new field of expertise
dealing with the vulnerability of interdependent critical infrastructures. Key
speakers will be invited to give presentations and to submit position papers.
Proceedings will be issued in an electronic form and posted on several web sites
that are popular among researchers and engineers of the critical infrastructure
and disaster risk management communities. &lt;br/&gt;