* 0136866
* Collaborative Research:  The Political Economy of Exchange Rate Regimes:  Managing the Middle in an Era of Global Capital
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* David Leblang, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 12/31/2005
* USD 87,280.00

While many factors contributed to the rash of international currency crises over
the past decade, many economists point to the use of pegged exchange rates as
one of the most important. Such compromises between genuinely fixed and flexible
exchange rates were one of the hallmarks of the post war international monetary
system established at Bretton Woods, but as international capital mobility has
grown pegged rates have become increasingly difficult for governments to defend.
&lt;br/&gt;This has given rise to the "hollowing out" or "unstable middle"
hypothesis -that exchange rate regimes will continually be driven towards
"corner solutions" -arrangements comprised of either relatively free floats or
hard fixed rates such as currency boards, currency unions, and dollarization.
There are two versions of this hypothesis, however. One, accepted by most
economists, is simply that countries will be driven away from dead center -the
Bretton Woods type narrow band adjustable peg. The other, more controversial,
version is that to avoid crises, countries must go all the way to one extreme or
the other. Dissenters argue that smaller movements such as to crawling bands
would be viable. Advocates can point to examples where such regimes have worked
well while critics can point to others where they haven't. &lt;br/&gt;What is
missing from the extant literature is a large-scale study of the relationships
between different types of intermediate exchange rate regimes and currency
crises. This is particularly important because there are good reasons to believe
that many countries will try to avoid corner solutions. An important and under
appreciated implication of the theory of optimum currency areas is that only a
minority of countries are likely to be good candidates for firmly fixed or
highly flexible exchange rates. For very large countries flexible rates tend to
be preferable and for very small ones fixed rates are usually superior. There is
a broad middle range of countries, however, where neither is likely to be
optimal. &lt;br/&gt;This project will pay special attention to the role of
politics and political institutions when it comes to managing middle exchange
rate regimes. From this point of view macroeconomic policy more often than not
reflects the desires of policymakers and not the equilibrium solution of
economic models. In a world of increasing capital mobility, policymakers have to
choose a mixture of exchange rate rigidity and monetary policy autonomy.
Intermediate exchange rate regimes thus constitute a middle ground where
policymakers can have some exchange rate flexibility and some monetary policy
autonomy. However, if the two policies are not related to each other in a
consistent manner then currency crises are likely to result. The economic
literature correctly stresses how high capital mobility makes such management
more difficult. We will develop a political economy analysis that shows how
political considerations also add importantly to the difficulty of managing such
intermediate exchange rate regimes. &lt;br/&gt;In this project we will examine
the extent to which different types of exchange rate regimes are crisis prone
and investigate how a number of economic, political, and institutional
considerations interact with regime choice to increase or reduce the likelihood
of crisis. We will undertake a large-N Statistical study of (i) the exchange
rate regime types and their connection with currency crises, (ii) the degree to
which regimes have to move away from to middle to decrease the likelihood of
crisis, and (iii) the policies required to effectively "manage" the middle. We
will pay considerable attention to the classification of various types of
intermediate exchange rate regimes and will develop a new behavioral measure to
compare with institutionally based classifications.&lt;br/&gt;