* 0136644
* Collaborative Research:  General Purpose Tool for Acoustic Remote Sensing and Mapping of Hydrothermal Flow
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2006
* Peter Rona, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 03/31/2006
* USD 49,197.00

Proposal - 0136768&lt;br/&gt; 0136644&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
proposal is to develop and fabricate an acoustic remote sensing and mapping tool
dedicated to studying hydrothermal flow at the seafloor. The new system will be
deployable on a variety of ROVs, deep towed platforms, and stationary seafloor
observatory networks for the study and detection of high and low temperature
hydrothermal flow regimes. The sensor will implement two new acoustic methods
that will enable detection and quantitative mapping of diffuse hydrothermal flow
at the seafloor using acoustic scintillation thermography (AST) and volumetric
studies of plume particle distributions and flow above the seafloor. These
methods have been demonstrated using a commercial sonar system mounted on the
ROV Jason during three previous experiments. The proposed sensor will improve
upon the operational and technical limitations of the commercial system and
enable long time scale experiments and larger-scale surveys using a variety of
platforms. In addition, the sensor proposed will enable high quality scientific
data collection and analysis thus providing a flexible test bed for new acoustic
methods and applications of remote sensing to hydrothermal flow. The system will
be compatible with available and proposed seafloor observatories, enabling
interactive operation via the Internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is
the product of an ongoing collaboration between groups at Rutgers (Rona et al.)
and the Applied Physics Laboratory of the University of Washington (APL-UW,
Jones et al.) and arises from our experience in using commercial sonars for
hydrothermal observations. The proposed instrumentation development is central
to the goal of the PIs to observe focused and diffuse hydrothermal flow over
long time periods. Design, fabrication, and local testing will be the
responsibility of APL-UW whereas, the Rutgers group will contribute to the
process of developing system specifications from scientific measurement
requirements and will conduct the field tests, including analysis of test
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new remote sensing tool will enable measurements
of plume flow variability at long time scales (of order 1 year). Such scales are
important in studies on the response of hydrothermal flow regimes to tidal
forcing as well as to volcanic and tectonic events. The sensor will enable the
implementation of new acoustic detection and mapping techniques for
characterizing diffuse flow over large regions (10s of km2) of interest. It is
proposed that this instrument will also enable studies of net heat flux from
hydrothermal systems and its relation to geophysical, oceanographic, and
biological processes.&lt;br/&gt;