* 0136367
* Factors Influencing the Rates and Mechanisms of Phytoplankton-Mediated Hydrogen Sulfide Production in Contrasting Oceanic Regimes
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2006
* Gregory Cutter, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 02/28/2006
* USD 400,742.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0136367&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
marine chemistry of trace metals, their complexation with ligands, and their
interactions with phytoplankton are intimately linked with the cycling of
sulfur. In particular trace metal speciation may be profoundly influenced by
various forms of reduced sulfur (sulfides), even in the oxygen-rich surface
ocean. While sulfides may be produced by the microbial reduction of dissolved
sulfate, there is also abundant evidence that some species of phytoplankton may
also produce both dissolved and particulate sulfide. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this study, researchers at Old Dominion University will conduct a thorough
examination of the rates and mechanisms of hydrogen sulfide production by marine
phytoplankton using an iterative laboratory- and field-based approach. They will
measure the rates of production of dissolved and particulate sulfide by a number
of coastal and oceanic species in continuous culture and examine the influence
of variable light, nutrient, and trace metal levels. Additionally they will
assess the utility of sulfur isotope measurements in the quantification of
biotic and abiotic production of hydrogen sulfide. The laboratory studies will
be compared to field measurements. The research team expects to elucidate and
quantify the principal mechanisms of production of both dissolved and
particulate sulfide and to assess the implications for the cycling of trace
metals in surface waters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;