* 0136127
* Oxidative Stress and G6PDH Expression
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Susan Stapleton, Western Michigan University
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 05/31/2006
* USD 294,380.00

Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are produced inside the cell during normal
oxidative metabolism. Tight control of this process is crucial for numerous
biological events to occur, including enzyme activation, cell cycle regulation
and programmed cell death. Abnormal production of ROS can lead to an imbalance
in redox homeostasis known as oxidative stress. Often times exposure to
environmental agents, including, UV irradiation, ozone, herbicides, pesticides
and metals can produce additional ROS that lead to this
imbalance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Upon exposure to these agents, this elevated
level of ROS can cause damage to proteins, nucleic acids and lipids, as well as,
alter physiological responses such as signal transduction and gene expression.
Long term consequences of oxidative stress have also been associated with the
pathogenesis of a variety of toxicities and diseases. Under some circumstances,
cells can utilize an antioxidant defense system in order to cope with the excess
ROS produced during oxidative stress. However, the mechanism by which some key
components in the antioxidant defense system work is not completely known. For
example, NADPH is a critical biological cofactor that helps to maintain a
balance between the prooxidant and antioxidant status of the cell. The pentose
phosphate pathway through the activities of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
(G6PDH) and 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase generates most of the NADPH needed
by the cell. G6PDH is the key rate-limiting enzyme in this pathway and thus not
only regulates the flow of carbon through this pathway, but also the production
of NADPH. Since NADPH is necessary for maintaining the cell's redox balance and
G6PDH is important for its production then it seems reasonable to conclude that
the redox state of the cell would influence the expression of this important
enzyme. Indeed, studies from this laboratory and others have suggested that
expression of the gene for G6PDH is regulated by the oxidative status of the
cell. However, the mechanism by which this regulation occurs is unknown.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Therefore, this research is aimed at testing the
hypothesis that the environmental contaminant cadmium, which influences the
oxidative state of a cell by decreasing levels of glutathione, regulates the
expression of G6PDH through a redox sensitive transcriptional event. Cadmium is
generating a great deal of environmental concern due to its accumulation from
such industrial practices as production of plastics, materials, batteries,
tobacco, electroplating, welding and smelting. Organisms are easily exposed to
cadmium due to its relatively high vapor pressure, which accounts for its high
solubility in water. The studies will be done in primary rat hepatocytes in
culture. The liver is the major target organ for acute inorganic Cd exposure.
Additionally, hepatocytes are attractive to use as a model since the metabolic
responses to hormones, nutrients or environmental agents consistently mimic
those observed in vivo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These studies would represent the
first of this kind and add significantly to our understanding of the role of the
oxidative state of the cell on the expression of enzymes involved in major
biochemical pathways such as the pentose phosphate pathway. These studies would
also add valuable information about how a cell protects itself from damage
induced from environmental agents such as metals. A team learning environment
will facilitate the completion of the work by the PI and students.&lt;br/&gt;