* 0136023
* Genetic Conflicts of Interest, Fluctuating Asymmetry, and the MHC
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2008
* Mark Flinn, University of New Mexico
* Continuing grant
* Amber L. Story
* 01/31/2008
* USD 340,883.00

Recent research indicates that women's mating preferences change across the
menstrual cycle. Women's preference for the scent of men who exhibit
developmental instability, as revealed by low fluctuating asymmetry, is enhanced
in the days leading to ovulation, as is women's preference for masculine male
faces. A working interpretation of the findings is that women experience
heightened attraction to indicators of benefits that could be heritably passed
on to their offspring when they are fertile. Traits that indicate such benefits
could be ones that may be generally associated with health (e.g., low
fluctuating asymmetry), complement a female's set of genes (e.g., complementary
major histocompatibility complex [MHC] alleles), or diversify offspring (e.g.,
diverse MHC alleles). The research is designed to test four hypotheses: 1) If
women's preferences shift during the fertile period toward indicators of
heritable benefits, which in-pair partners may not possess, women should
experience greater attraction to men other than their primary partners during
these days. Overall, women should not experience the same increase in attraction
to their primary partners during this period. 2) Men may have evolved to be more
attentive of their partners during these times. 3 & 4) Women's greater interest
in men other than a primary partner and men's increased attention to their
partners may be conditional; it may depend on whether a primary partner
possesses heritable benefits (e.g., low fluctuating asymmetry, complementary MHC
alleles, diverse MHC alleles). Six studies will assess these predictions in two
cultures. One set of studies will assess changes in a sample of 200 romantically
involved U.S. college students. The other set will examine the changes in a
remote village on the Caribbean island of Dominica. The latter study will also
examine whether female or male partner cortisol or the male partner's
testosterone change across women's cycle. The aim of this program of research is
to increase our understanding of the factors that affect partner choice, the
dynamics and stability of relationships, and fertility.