* 0136835
* Zinc Biogeochemistry and its Relationship to Cobalt, Phosphate and Phytoplankton Community Structure
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2005
* James Moffett, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 02/28/2005
* USD 343,928.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0136835&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A trace metal
chemist and a molecular biologist from Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution will
join forces to determine the speciation and distribution of zinc and cobalt in
the marine environment to assess the role these metals play as an essential
micronutrient for phytoplankton. The PIs also will determine what the
relationship of zinc is to the geochemistry of cobalt and phosphorus and its
influence on the composition of phytoplankton assemblages. During cruises to the
North Pacific and the Bering Sea, the PIs will measure the speciation of Zn and
Co, as well as alkaline phosphatase activity. Deckboard incubation experiments
using freshly collected samples and added Zn, Co phosphate and organic P will be
used to determine changes in alkaline phosphatase activity via ELF assay.
Observed differences in these experiments will be compared with changes in
specific growth rates for alkenone producers and the drawdown of nutrients
obtained by scientists from the University of Hawaii. Similar measurements will
be made during a cruise to the North Atlantic. In the laboratory, culture
experiments will be used to ascertain the following: (1) effect of phosphate
limitation on the requirements and growth limiting concentrations of Zn and Co
and vice versa for cultures of E. huxleyi and Thallassiosira weissflogii by
measuring growth rates and alkaline phosphatase activity; (2) whether E. huxleyi
can use organically complexed Co; and (3) whether Trichodesmium has an absolute
requirement for Co or Zn and the effect of these metals on alkaline phosphatase.
From a methodology standpoint, the PIs plan to improve upon current methods
available for making Zn speciation measurements, resolve existing discrepancies
and lower the limit on free Zn concentrations. They also will develop a new
solvent extractions speciation/isotope tracer technique to extend detection
limits for Zn and evaluate lability of ambient Zn complexes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;