* 0136339
* The Distribution of Obligations
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Paul Kingston, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2006
* USD 200,000.00

SES-0136339&lt;br/&gt;Steven L. Nock&lt;br/&gt;Paul W.
Kingston&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers have made little progress in
systematically specifying how obligations-- duties or responsibilities that
people have to others--are established. This project examines how Americans
understand their obligations to others. That is, who is considered morally
responsible for whom, under what circumstances, and to what extent? Also, why
are some concerns treated as private troubles, whole others are viewed as public
issues? The research is based on quantitative survey research and qualitative
interviewers. Specifically, a sample of adults will be asked to respond to
hypothetical problems that imply a need for help from some source. In these
hypothetical dilemmas, basic features of the situation will be systematically
varied, including the relationship between the person in need and the helper,
the type of problem, the culpability of the person in need, and the detailed
history of giving and receiving assistance from others. Finally, a series of
qualitative interviews will focus on motives for offering assistance and making
particular distinctions between private and public
obligations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The PIs will use a theoretical
model that integrates social capital and life-course perspectives to guide the
research. This model proposes to explain how and why people assume
responsibility for others in some cases, but not in others. It will show how
obligations are influenced by the specific nature of the situation calling for
assistance, the relationship (kinship or otherwise) between an individual and
the person in need, and numerous characteristics of the potential helper. The
project has practical significance in light of the growth of dependent
populations who require care. It could potentially advance scientific
understanding of the factors that influence beliefs about responsibility and
deservingness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;