* 0136789
* Inference for Average Treatment Effects
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Guido Imbens, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 03/31/2006
* USD 230,498.00

&lt;br/&gt;Estimation of causal effects of policy interventions such as job
training programs is an&lt;br/&gt;important goal of much applied economic
research. Often a reasonable starting point is the&lt;br/&gt;assume that
assignment to the treatment is random given on sufficiently detailed
observed&lt;br/&gt;pretreatment variables. Under that assumption one can
identify the population average&lt;br/&gt;effect. This research will contribute
to the literature on inference for average treatments effects
under&lt;br/&gt;these assumptions in three parts. First, the research will
develop&lt;br/&gt;large sample theory for matching estimators. By matching
estimators we mean estimators&lt;br/&gt;where each treated unit is matched to
one or a fixed number of controls, and each control&lt;br/&gt;is matched to one
or a fixed number of treated units. Such pure matching estimators
have&lt;br/&gt;considerable intuitive appeal and have been used widely in
practice, without their large&lt;br/&gt;sample theory having been established
other than for special cases. The result should be&lt;br/&gt;an asymptotic
theory for such matching estimators that allows researchers to use
these&lt;br/&gt;estimators in practice. In a second part, the research will
investigate higher order properties&lt;br/&gt;of some of the estimators for
average treatment effects that have been proposed. Many&lt;br/&gt;of these
estimators have a nonparametric component. However, most of the literature
is&lt;br/&gt;silent regarding the actual choice of smoothing parameters, beyond
rate conditions. This&lt;br/&gt;makes it di .cult for practitioners to actually
implement thse estimators. Here the plan is to&lt;br/&gt;develop a mean-squared-
error based criterion to derive an explicit data-driven criterion
for&lt;br/&gt;the smoothing parameter. In the third part, the research will
compare a number of the&lt;br/&gt;estimators for average treatment effects. So
far a number of estimators have been proposed,&lt;br/&gt;often with a small
simulation study to investigate their properties. What this research
accomplishes is&lt;br/&gt;a systematic comparison of various
estimators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In many studies of social programs such as job
training programs observational data&lt;br/&gt;are used to evaluate these
programs. Statistical methods for such evaluations often rely
on&lt;br/&gt;matching type methods that match trainees to similar controls, that
is individuals who&lt;br/&gt;received the training to individuals who did not
receive the training with similar background&lt;br/&gt;characteristics and labor
market histories. A variety of such methods are currently used,
with&lt;br/&gt;often the properties and reliability of such methods unknown.
This research investigates the&lt;br/&gt;formal properties of such methods. In
addition the research will develop automated procedures
for&lt;br/&gt;implementing some of these methods. Currently these methods often
require the researcher&lt;br/&gt;to make a number of choices in the
implementation that potentially affect the final
results&lt;br/&gt;substantially, without much guidance available to guide these
choices. This should make&lt;br/&gt;these methods more transparent and easier to
implement. Finally, the research will compare a number&lt;br/&gt;of these
methods in settings where the correct answers are known so as to evaluate
their&lt;br/&gt;performance and reach recommendations to inform the future use
of such methods.