* 0136749
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Creating Property Rights Over the King's Highway -- Institutional Change and the Development of Road Infrastructure in Early Modern England.
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/2002,06/30/2003
* Jean-Laurent Rosenthal, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 06/30/2003
* USD 7,000.00

This dissertation research examines the implications of infrastructure
privatization from a historical perspective. It investigates an institutional
change that took place in eighteenth century England, in which responsibility
for providing road investment was transferred from local units of government to
private organizations known as turnpike trusts. The trustees of these
organizations funded road improvements by levying a regulated schedule of tolls
on the users of the road, while their counterparts in local government funded
improvements with local taxes. The first part of the dissertation will determine
whether this form of privatization increased the level of road expenditure in
eighteenth century England. It will use the funds provided by this grant to
collect data on the investment behavior of turnpike trusts and local
governments. Then it will use this data to compare the expenditure levels of
local government with the corresponding turnpike trust after a privatization
occurs. The dissertation research also develops and tests a theory that explains
why privatization increased the level of infrastructure investment in the
context of eighteenth century England. It emphasizes the externalities created
by inter-jurisdictional traffic and suggests that these externalities limited
investment under the decentralized system. It then argues that the levying of
tolls resulted in the internalization of the costs and benefits of road
improvement and ultimately encouraged more investment. Besides focusing on
externalities, the theory also emphasizes the transfer of 'control-rights' to
private actors with a concentrated interest in infrastructure improvement. It
argues that landowners and industrialists lobbied for the right to establish
turnpike trusts so that they could ensure that complimentary transportation
investments were undertaken. The second part of the dissertation will estimate
the contribution of transportation infrastructure investment to economic growth
in England during the eighteenth century. Data on transportation costs will be
collected for several different highways, which will contribute to an estimate
of productivity growth in the road transportation sector. The project will then
econometrically estimate the relationship between road investment and
productivity growth in this sector. Next, it will broaden the analysis and show
that there is a correlation between the formation of turnpike trusts and other
local investments, including land improvements and the adoption of factories and
steam engines. This will lend support to the hypothesis that there is a
complimentary relationship between infrastructure investment and capital
investment. Finally, the project will investigate the econometric relationship
between transportation investment and growth in land rents and wages during the
eighteenth century, providing yet another assessment of the economic value of
these investments in the context of the British economy in this period.

.

