* 0136960
* Heterogeneity of Ion Channels in Isolated Hippocampal Astrocytes
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2002,10/31/2003
* Harold Kimelberg, Albany Medical College of Union University
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 10/31/2003
* USD 330,000.00

LAY SUMMARY; ION CHANNELS in HIPPOCAMPAL ASTROCYTES. Harold K. Kimelberg and Min
Zhou &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Voltage gated ion channels for the small cations
sodium (Na+ ) and potassium (K+ ) are responsible for the wave of depolarization
that travels down the neuronal axon and excites other neurons to which it is
linked by synapses, where the depolarization releases neurotransmitters which
rapidly diffuse across the synaptic cleft to stimulate the next neuron, and so
on,. The formation of circuits by such connected neurons are thought to underlie
how the brain works. The properties of the Na+ and K+ ion channels in neurons
have been extensively studied. The other major type of brain cells are called
glia and they are not excitable. Current studies have now shown that these cells
can contain the same type of voltage sensitive sodium and potassium channels as
are found in neurons, and also voltage dependant chloride channels. This is
surprising as the function of these channels is thought to be to modulate
neuronal excitability and the glia are unexcitable. &lt;br/&gt;This project will
use a freshly isolated preparation of one of the main kinds of glial cells the
astroglia to identify what ion channels are present in these cells and to help
understand their functions. Our work to date shows that this preparation can be
divided into two different classes of astroglia based on a different repertoire
of channels. Knowledge of the detailed properties of these channels will give us
important clues as to their functions. We will test one hypothesis that one type
of astrocyte but not the other has K+ channels and Cl- channels designed to
allow it take up K+ plus Cl- when K+ is released via the outward rectifying K+
channel on neurons during impulse conduction. (293 words).&lt;br/&gt;