* 0136161
* Estimating Recent Climatic Change via Historical Air-Temperature Frequency Distributions
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Scott Robeson, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 04/30/2005
* USD 93,867.00

Annual and monthly mean air temperatures are the standard parameters used to
estimate recent climatic change. The traditional focus on mean air temperature
has ignored the additional probabilistic information that can be derived from
historical data on daily temperatures. Recent climatic change can be manifest in
frequency distributions through a variety of changes to central tendency,
variance, and other shape measures. This project will develop a comprehensive
procedure for the simultaneous detection of trends in all portions of air-
temperature frequency distributions. The project will use spatially extensive
daily air-temperature data for 1,062 stations over the 48 contiguous states to
develop the use of time-varying percentiles and other parameters that can
estimate recent climatic change in innovative ways. Flexible procedures that
estimate percentiles and parameters within moving windows will be developed, and
the robustness of these procedures will be evaluated. Changes detected in the
temperature data will be related to simultaneous changes in humidity and cloud
cover as well as change in the shape of the diurnal cycle of air temperature.
Monitoring these synergistic interactions will provide a climate-change
perspective that is a substantial extension of the traditional focus on central
tendency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop methods to detect
trends that are not apparent when one examines only mean temperatures. For
example, trends in air temperature may show an increase in the mean while the
lower portion of the frequency distribution shows substantial warming and the
upper portion shows no change. These changes would indicate not only a warming
climate but also one where there is reduced variability with little change in
extremely warm air temperatures. As a general approach, this research will
develop new methods for detecting changes in frequency distributions that can be
applied to any environmental variable that is observed at relatively high
temporal resolution. Considering that ecological, economic, and social systems
tend to be more sensitive to changes in variability and extreme environmental
events, this research has wide applicability. The changes identified will be of
value for evaluating the economic, social, ecological dimensions of climate
change. The examination of time-varying percentiles, in particular, provides a
flexible and robust approach for environmental change research.&lt;br/&gt;