* 0136631
* Beyond the Mineral Sorptive Protection Hypothesis: Protein Preservation in Marine Systems via Formation of High-Molecular Mass Aggregates
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2006
* Patrick Hatcher, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 03/31/2006
* USD 300,862.00

ABSTRACT

OCE-0136631

The focus of this research is a better understanding the mechanisms of the
preservation of high molecular weight (~ 106 D) nitrogen rich macromolecular
proteinaceous material in marine sediments and in the water column. Some of
these molecules persist in sediments that are thousands of years old. Proteins,
as energy rich biochemical substrates, are normally rapidly degraded in the
environment by a range of high affinity bacterial proteases and enzyme systems,
so the persistence of protein-like macromolecules for long periods of time in
substrate (N) poor sediments remains inadequately explained. Preservation
through selective sorptive protection in inaccessible sediment mesopores,
structural modification such as glucosylation, condensation or complexation,
aggregation and encapsulation in biochemically resistant materials such as
membrane or cell wall components are some of the suggested mechanisms. Possibly
all of these may operate to some extent. This study sets out to investigate
range of non-covalent interactions entered into by polypeptides on mineral
surfaces and or encapsulation of representative proteins into refractive
biopolymers as potential important controlling factors resulting in preservation
of such molecules. A series of laboratory manipulation experiments and protein
characterization techniques, using a wide range of analytical tools, and applied
to sedimentary and particulate associated organic matter will be used to examine
support for these preservation mechanisms. The rates of turnover of carbon
compounds in the shallow and deep seas is of importance to our understanding of
the ocean's carbon cycle.

