* 0136362
* Osmoregulation and Contractile Vacuole Dynamics
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Richard Allen, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 03/31/2006
* USD 376,000.00

Contractile vacuoles (CVs), as cellular organelles of protozoa, have been known
for 200 years but how they function is only now being discovered. Recent work on
Paramecium from this laboratory shows that the CVs contain a hypertonic solution
of osmolytes of which K+ and Cl- ions are the most abundant. Being hypertonic to
the cytosol, excess water can enter the CV by osmosis from the cytoplasm. It has
also been shown that the CV is a unique organelle that undergoes periodic
rounding and relaxing cycles, apparently without the aid of a contractile
cytoskeletal system. The membrane of the CV contains an innate timing mechanism
that triggers CV rounding that is accompanied by a 35- to 50-fold increase in
membrane tension. During this rounding excess CV membrane is topographically
transformed into 40-nm diameter tubes that remain continuous with the CV. This
research will attempt to (1) develop a microcapillary osmometer to measure the
total intracellular and intraorganellar osmolarities, (2) determine how K+ and
Cl- ions cross the CV membrane into the CV lumen to set up this hypertonic
gradient, (3) see how the proton-translocating V-ATPases are used to energize
this organelle and (4) determine how the CV can increase its membrane tension so
dramatically. To carry on these studies the biochemistry of the CV membrane will
be compared with other membranes in Paramecium to determine how this membrane
differs from those membranes that are incapable of rounding and tension
development. Patch-clamp electrophysiology will than be used to characterize the
types of ion channels, water channels and electrogenic pumps present in the CV
membranes that can be detected with this technique. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
study of the function of contractile vacuoles, osmoregulatory organelles of
protozoa and algae, will be continued. Osmoregulation is the process of
balancing water and salts between cells and their environments. Patch clamp
electrophysiology and biochemical studies will help us understand how fresh
water protozoa have solved the problem of life in an environment where water
continuously enters the cell's cytoplasm. Understanding water regulation in
"primitive" cells is likely to provide clues on water regulation in much more
advanced organisms. &lt;br/&gt;