* 0136459
* Natural Radionuclides as Tracers of the Cycling and Fate of Particulate Organic Carbon on the Mackenzie Shelf:  Participation in the Canadian Arctic Shelf Exchange Study(CASES)
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2006
* J. Kirk Cochran, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 01/31/2006
* USD 338,083.00

0136459&lt;br/&gt;Cochran&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Of all the world oceans, the
Arctic is unique in its persistent cover of sea ice, broad continental shelves
that are loci for carbon cycling and strong annual variations in light
intensity. Moreover the Arctic is perhaps the ocean most susceptible to showing
the early effects of global warming. Although changes such as thinning ice cover
may have natural causes, for example related to variations in the gradient of
atmospheric pressure in the Arctic, they may also be related to changes in
climate brought about by human activities. Climate warming may alter the cycling
of carbon on arctic shelves through permanent reductions in ice cover and
increases in riverine discharge. In turn these changes may lead to enhanced
export of carbon to the slope and deep arctic basins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One
of the most distinguishing features of the Arctic is its extensive shelf area,
comprising about 30% of the basin area and receiving about 10% of the world
river discharge. River discharge in the Arctic is dominated by the great
Siberian rivers - the Yenisei, Lena and Ob. The Mackenzie River is fourth in
importance after these, but is first in rank in terms of annual discharge of
sediment. Moreover, it is the only North American analog of the large Siberian
rivers, and in practical terms is the most readily
studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential importance of the river-dominated
shelves to biogeochemical cycling in the Arctic has lead to an international
effort --the Canadian Arctic Shelf Exchange Study (CASES)--organized by Canada
to understand the consequences of sea- ice variability on the Mackenzie shelf.
Based on prior involvement in Canadian-organized arctic programs in the
Northeast and North Water Polynyas, the PI has been invited to participate in
the CASES program. The research proposed here for the Mackenzie Shelf will build
on the PI's prior efforts in the Arctic and elsewhere to use natural
radionuclides as tracers for fluxes of particulate organic carbon and
particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CASES includes three month-long process cruises
(in August 2002, 2003 and 2004) on the Mackenzie Shelf and a year-long period
between the August 2003 and 2004 cruises during which the research icebreaker
will over-winter. This research will be structured to take advantage of the
possibility to sample the full annual cycle of productivity on the Mackenzie
Shelf. Focus will be on the three distinct zones (an early season inner shelf
pool of freshwater dubbed 'Lake Mackenzie' separated by an ice dam from a flaw-
lead polynya and the arctic pack ice) that develop in the system, and employ
natural radionuclides as tracers for the transport of particles and particulate
organic carbon within and between the zones. We hypothesize that significant
exchanges between the zones will occur in the spring through summer as the
Mackenzie River freshet begins, the ice retreats offshore and productivity
increases. We will test this hypothesis through the use of natural radionuclides
to determine the presence of freshly input riverine sediments to the inner
shelf, the rate of export of POC from the euphotic zone, and through mass
balances, as indicators of the transport of particulate material through the
zones. The radionuclides we will use include cosmogenic radionuclides (Be-7 and
C-14) produced in the atmosphere from the interactions of cosmic rays with
atmospheric gases, and radionuclides of the naturally occurring U-238 decay
series (Th-234, Pb-210). &lt;br/&gt;