* 0136818
* Aggregation Issues in Activity-Based Travel Demand Models: Exploration, Understanding and Solutions
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Darren Scott, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 12/31/2005
* USD 54,249.00

The Urban Transportation Modeling System (UTMS) remains the dominant approach to
urban travel demand modeling within the transportation planning profession
despite concerns that have been raised regarding its ability to meet the
challenges of contemporary and future transportation planning. These concerns
have not addressed through the development of new forms of activity-based travel
demand models, which have the potential to remedy the deficiencies of UTMS by
providing transportation planners with policy-sensitive forecasts. The
reliability of these forecasts depends on sound model development, however, and
many issues have yet to be addressed on this front. This project seeks answers
to two questions relating to the development of activity-based travel demand
models. First, what spatial resolution is appropriate for such modeling? Second,
what activities are to be modeled? To address these questions, a systematic
research program will be undertaken with three objectives: (1) to evaluate the
effects of the modifiable areal unit problem (MAUP) on spatial choice sets,
consisting of urban opportunities (i.e. potential destinations), and on the
parameters of and outcomes from spatial choice models; (2) to develop an optimal
zoning system that minimizes MAUP effects in activity-based travel demand
models; and (3) to evaluate the effects of aggregating non-work, out-of -home
activities on the attributes of those activities and on model parameters
estimated for specific attributes. Data will be drawn from two sources. First,
information on non-work, out-of -home activities will be obtained from a
household travel survey that was conducted in the Louisville, Kentucky, MSA in
the fall of 2000. Second, details concerning all urban opportunities in the
region will be taken from a database obtained from ReferenceUSA. The geo-
processing capabilities of GIS will be used to obtain specific data for many of
the empirical analyses. Descriptive statistics and statistical models (i.e.
hazard models, multinomial logit models, and ordered probit models) will be used
to analyze the data.

The priorities of urban transportation planning have changed considerably in
recent years, largely due to government legislation such as the Clean Air Act
Amendments of 1991. Instead of building roads to meet a growing demand for
travel, transportation planning today seeks to better manage existing
infrastructure. For this task, policy-sensitive tools like activity-based travel
demand models are required. The results of this research will shed considerable
light on two issues that have yet to be addressed concerning the development of
such models, spatial aggregation and activity aggregation. Potential errors
associated with these issues will be reduced, thereby increasing the reliability
of forecasts and their usefulness for decision making.