* 0136022
* Applications of Fourier Analysis to Banach Space Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Alexander Koldobsky, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2006
* USD 74,994.00

The PI plans to study finite dimensional normed spaces and convex
bodies&lt;br/&gt;using methods of Fourier analysis. The idea is to express
different&lt;br/&gt;properties of convex bodies in terms of the Fourier
transform and then&lt;br/&gt;solve geometric problems using Fourier analytic
methods.&lt;br/&gt;This approach has already led to several results including
a&lt;br/&gt;complete analytic solution to the Busemann-Petty problem on
sections&lt;br/&gt;of convex bodies. The PI plans to develop new connections
between&lt;br/&gt;the Fourier transform, spherical harmonics and parallel
section functions&lt;br/&gt;(X-rays) of convex bodies that will lead to new
results on critical sections&lt;br/&gt;of convex bodies, intersection and
projection bodies and to new results&lt;br/&gt;of Busemann-Petty type. A
significant part of the work will be related to&lt;br/&gt;several open problems
of the local theory of Banach spaces. This includes&lt;br/&gt;several possible
Fourier analytic approaches to the slicing problem and&lt;br/&gt;the study of
the central limit properties of convex
bodies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important direction of the geometry
of normed spaces is the study of&lt;br/&gt;geometric properties of convex bodies
based on the properties of sections&lt;br/&gt;and projections of these bodies.
This direction has already found&lt;br/&gt;numerous applications to engineering
and medicine, starting with the&lt;br/&gt;classical theory of X-rays and
geometric tomography. The goal of this&lt;br/&gt;project is to develop a new
approach to the study of sections and&lt;br/&gt;projections of convex bodies
based on methods of Fourier analysis.&lt;br/&gt;New connections between sections
of convex bodies and the Fourier transform&lt;br/&gt;have been recently found by
the PI and have already led to an analytic&lt;br/&gt;solution to the Busemann-
Petty problem of whether smaller bodies can have&lt;br/&gt;uniformly larger
central sections. The connections with Fourier analysis&lt;br/&gt;and geometric
tomography will further relate methods and results of the&lt;br/&gt;Banach space
theory to different areas of mathematics, engineering and&lt;br/&gt;medicine.
New techniques for computing the Fourier transform will
have&lt;br/&gt;independent value and can also be applied to signal processing
and statistics.