* 0136278
* Molecular Organization of Yeast Chromosome I - Control of Meiotic Pairing and Recombination
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2002,12/31/2005
* David Kaback, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-New Jersey Med
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 12/31/2005
* USD 475,000.00

SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; Reciprocal recombination (crossing over) between homologous
chromosomes (homologues) appears to be required for proper meiosis I
segregation. The mechanisms that control recombination so that each pair of
homologues undergoes crossing over are not known. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae
and humans, small chromosomes have higher meiotic reciprocal recombination rates
(cM/kb) than large chromosomes and in S. cerevisiae rates of reciprocal
recombination have been shown to respond directly to chromosome size. The
increased rates of recombination on small chromosomes appear to ensure crossing
over and have been proposed to be due to crossover interference. Interference is
defined by the apparent inhibition of additional meiotic reciprocal
recombination events observed near the site of a crossover. The molecular
mechanism of interference and how it might respond to chromosome size are not
known. It was recently suggested that the density of meiotic recombination-
inducing double-strand break (DSB) sites is greater on small chromosomes
compared to large chromosomes suggesting chromosome size dependent control of
recombination and perhaps interference might act by controlling DSB formation.
To test this idea, we propose to analyze DSB formation on different size
chromosome I constructs that were constructed in our laboratory. It has also
been suggested that the meiotic synaptonemal complex (SC) is involved in
mediating interference. Accordingly, a better understanding of the mechanism of
interference might be gained by investigating the S. cerevisiae SC. Using a
functional, fluorescent ZIP1-GFP fusion protein constructed in our laboratory,
we have shown that SCs undergo dynamic changes in their distribution in early
and late pachytene. We now propose to examine the dynamics of SC movements using
ZIP1-GFP in mutant yeast in order to determine the genes required to produce
this reorganization. We also propose to address the relationship of this
reorganization to crossover interference. The structure and dynamics of the
fluorescent SC will be examined using optical sections and fluorescent cinema-
microscopy and will be enhanced by the construction of additional
ZIP1-fluorocent protein fusions. These studies should provide new insight into
the molecular mechanisms controlling recombination and chromosome synapsis,
processes that lead to proper meiotic chromosome segregation.&lt;br/&gt;