* 0136029
* Ionically Conductive Polyelectrolyte Multilayers for Microbattery Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2005
* Paula Hammond, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 03/31/2005
* USD 270,000.00

The alternating adsorption of polyelectrolytes and other multivalent organic
and&lt;br/&gt;inorganic species has evolved in the past decade into a quickly
developing new field of&lt;br/&gt;materials science. The multilayer assembly
technique, which involves the alternating&lt;br/&gt;adsorption of oppositely
charged species from dilute aqueous or mixed solvent solutions,&lt;br/&gt;has
been used to create a number of systems with electrical, optical, dielectric
and&lt;br/&gt;electrochemical functionality. Ultrathin films with high
uniformity are can be created&lt;br/&gt;using layer-by-layer assembly
techniques. The ease of fabrication, ability to control film&lt;br/&gt;structure
on a nanometer length scale, and the tunability of the final properties of the
film&lt;br/&gt;make polyelectrolyte multilayer approaches interesting as
components in micron scale&lt;br/&gt;battery applications. Recent work from the
Hammond research group has resulted in a&lt;br/&gt;number of microfabrication
techniques that allow the incorporation of functional
polymer&lt;br/&gt;multilayers into micron scale devices. New work in this group
has also led to orders of&lt;br/&gt;magnitude increases in the solid state ionic
conductivity of polyelectrolyte multilayer&lt;br/&gt;films through the use of
highly acidic polyions such as perfluorosulfonated ionomers, and&lt;br/&gt;the
incorporation of polyethylene oxide. The goals of this work are to develop
new&lt;br/&gt;polyelectrolyte multilayer systems with ionic conductivities
suitable for thin film battery&lt;br/&gt;applications, to take advantage of the
nanometer scale control that multilayer assembly&lt;br/&gt;processes provide to
develop electrolyte films with gradient electronic conductivities
for&lt;br/&gt;battery electrode components, and to apply nonlithographic
microfabrication techniques&lt;br/&gt;developed in this group to create cheap,
easily manufactured multilayer battery devices&lt;br/&gt;on plastic, glass or
paper substrates for plastic and paper thin film
electronics&lt;br/&gt;applications.&lt;br/&gt;