* 0136403
* Doppler Turbulence Techniques for Ocean Observatories:   An Interactive Approach using In Situ Measurements and LES Models
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2009
* John Klinck, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 03/31/2009
* USD 819,734.00

0136403 Gargett&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at developing new and
promising techniques based on acoustic Doppler technology for continuous
estimation of important turbulence variables at ocean observatories. Addition of
a 5th vertical beam (VADCP) allows estimates of all three components of
turbulent kinetic energy as well as its dissipation rate. This project will
assess their potential to provide time series measurements of turbulent as well
as mean flow properties at remotely operated ocean observatories. The major
technical challenges are provision of a stable platform, and sufficient power
and data transmission for the fast sample rates needed to resolve the large-eddy
structure of turbulent velocity fields. The major scientific challenges are the
design of sampling protocols appropriate to the particular mix of processes
generating turbulence at a given time, and the separation of surface wave and
turbulent velocities. A final question is how to verify that the results are
"correct", i.e., consistent with what is known of various forms of turbulence in
the ocean. To address these sets of problems simultaneously, exploratory coastal
deployments of a VADCP, in both wave-protected and wave-exposed locations, will
be combined with development and use of a large-eddy simulation (LES) model
suitable for the coastal ocean. LES velocity fields will be "sampled" with
different VADCP protocols (choices of time/space resolution), and the results
used to estimate the reliability with which turbulent quantities can be
estimated from the 5-beam Doppler data under various combinations of turbulence
forcing and surface wave contamination. In addition, the numerical results will
be used to define requirements for statistical significance of future
comparisons between time-continuous, spatially localized VADCP measurements, and
time- and space-intermittent results from more traditional turbulence sensors
carried on standard vertical profilers and/or autonomous vehicles. The
observational results may in turn be used to examine the oceanic validity of
assumptions underlying commonly used LES sub-grid parameterizations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;