* 0136607
* Foundations of Computational Mathematics Conference, August 5 - 14, 2002
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2003
* Peter Olver, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2003
* USD 30,000.00

The investigator and his colleagues organize the third&lt;br/&gt;Conference on
Foundations of Computational Mathematics at the&lt;br/&gt;Institute for
Mathematics and its Applications (IMA), University&lt;br/&gt;of Minnesota on
5-14 August 2002. Deepening the understanding of&lt;br/&gt;the mathematical
processes that underlie fast computation and&lt;br/&gt;computer simulation is
the principal goal of the meeting. The&lt;br/&gt;mathematical content covers
fields of research at the interface&lt;br/&gt;of engineering, computer science,
and pure mathematics, but&lt;br/&gt;focused on computation. The program includes
18 3-day workshops&lt;br/&gt;and 18 plenary speakers. The plenary talks and
workshops span&lt;br/&gt;subjects of vital interest to the nation's
infrastructure,&lt;br/&gt;economy, and defense. The project supports
participation by&lt;br/&gt;postdocs, graduate students, junior participants,
women and&lt;br/&gt;minorities as well as plenary and semi-plenary speakers
and&lt;br/&gt;workshop organizers.&lt;br/&gt; Large-scale computation and the
implementation of&lt;br/&gt;mathematical models for complex physical and
societal phenomena&lt;br/&gt;are of fundamental importance to the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;Computation is also the backbone of the sciences supporting
the&lt;br/&gt;nation's defense. Large-scale computation is the engine
of&lt;br/&gt;numerical models for complex physical phenomena occurring at
many&lt;br/&gt;scales. Fast computation and processing of the ever-
increasing&lt;br/&gt;data sets obtained from various sensors is critical to the
new&lt;br/&gt;military. The purpose of this major meeting, held only
every&lt;br/&gt;three years, is to further the understanding of the
deep&lt;br/&gt;relationships between mathematical theory: analysis,
topology,&lt;br/&gt;geometry and algebra, and computational processes as they
are&lt;br/&gt;evolving in tandem with the modern computer. The topics to
be&lt;br/&gt;addressed include large scale computation and high
performance&lt;br/&gt;computing as occurs in atmospheric and groundwater
modeling,&lt;br/&gt;computer aided design and animation, data, image and
signal&lt;br/&gt;processing, modeling network traffic, quantum computing,
learning&lt;br/&gt;theory, optimization and control. Sustaining the
nation's&lt;br/&gt;advantage in these vital areas relies on understanding
the&lt;br/&gt;foundations of computational science. The meeting
involves&lt;br/&gt;350-500 researchers in 18 workshops over a 10-day period,
with&lt;br/&gt;special plenary sessions attended by everyone. A large
contingent&lt;br/&gt;of graduate students and other young scientists
are&lt;br/&gt;participating, and the program is designed to promote
intensive&lt;br/&gt;interaction among the participants. Several panels are
devoted to&lt;br/&gt;identifying the most promising directions for future
research.&lt;br/&gt;Published proceedings, web-based materials, and the
conference&lt;br/&gt;sessions themselves serve as launching pads for focus and
special&lt;br/&gt;interest groups for future interactions in a range of subjects
at&lt;br/&gt;the interface of mathematics and computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;