* 0136186
* Molecular Electronic Structure Theory:  Methods and Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2005
* Henry Schaefer III, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Raima Larter
* 01/31/2005
* USD 417,000.00

Henry F. Schaefer III of the University of Georgia is supported by the
Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to continue his research in
computational chemistry methodology and applications. The development, testing,
and calibration of new methods for the approximate solution of the quantum
mechanical Schrodinger equation will be carried out. These and other
methodological outcomes will be used to explore a variety of important
prototypical chemical problems. The long-range projects focus on the following
topics: (1) multireference coupled cluster theory, (2) the SN2 reaction paradigm
from gas phase to microsolvation and solution phase phenomena, and (3)
theoretical design of precursors for stoichiometry-controlled chemical vapor
deposition of optoelectronic materials. Outcomes are expected to enable new
understanding of the fundamental manner in which atoms and molecules interact
and react. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first principles description of molecular
species begins with a theoretical examination of the appropriate electronic
energy surface(s). Such potential energy surfaces are critical to even
qualitatively understand how chemical reactions occur. The exploration of a
variety of prototypical chemical reaction systems may ultimately make possible
the complete computer modeling of entire classes of important chemical problems.