* 0136850
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Explaining the Political News Product
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2003
* Michael MacKuen, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 01/31/2003
* USD 3,600.00

&lt;br/&gt;The news media play a vital role in many of the political processes
of most interest to scholars. Accordingly, any political science subfield that
uses news content as an independent or intervening variable will benefit from a
systematic, theoretically driven accounting of the process by which the
political world is filtered and condensed into a news product. This Doctoral
Dissertation Research project embeds theories of the news production process in
the empirical-test-friendly research designs of aggregate policy system
analysis, in order to answer the question: what drives systematic variation in
the political news product over a variety of substantive issue areas? National
newspapers and evening newscasts from the past 20 years are examined.
&lt;br/&gt;In all three studies, the dependent variable -news content -is
measured by content analyses utilizing independent coders. The stories are
gathered from Lexis-Nexis Academic Universe and the Vanderbilt Archives.
Independent variables come from a variety of &lt;br/&gt;sources, the two most
important being the Pennsylvania State University Correlates of War Project, and
the University of Washington Policy Agendas data set. &lt;br/&gt;The three
separate studies apply the primary research question to three facets of the
political process: I) What explains variation in economic news over time? 2)
What explains variation in the quantity of coverage allotted by the American
press to foreign conflicts? 3) What explains variation in the quality and
quantity of coverage given to congressional hearings? &lt;br/&gt;F or each model
of variation in political news, four competing classes of independent variables
are tested for their relative explanatory power. First, it is argued that the
normative implications of mass mediation are most fruitfully understood by
calibrating coverage to a reality baseline: the tangible, measurable aspect of
the given political domain that an objective press is expected to report as
faithfully as possible, and that the veracious reporting of which renders the
press mere information carriers in the political process. Next, the extent to
which elites' deliberate attempts to shape the news product are successful in a
given context is the extent to which the media are falling short in their
watchdog role. Thus much can be learned from assessing the impact on news
formation of independent variables that indicate a conscious attempt by elites
to shape the news. Also, the use of dynamic models enables a statistically sound
assessment of whether prior public opinion moves subsequent news, controlling
for the more conventional effect of news on opinion. Such an effect suggests a
previously overlooked element of democratic responsiveness in the policy
process. Finally, variation in seemingly arbitrary qualities of the political
world wield a powerful influence over news content on account of their
conformance with the norms and constraints of professional news organizations.
Such variables -known as media power variables -indicate a significant non-
spurious effect of the news media on the political process.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;