* 0136700
* A Random Field Framework for Boundary Conditions in Numerical Models of Coastal and Ocean Circulation
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Arthur Mariano, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 07/31/2006
* USD 362,407.00

0136700/Chin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project introduces a novel approach to
representing boundary conditions in ocean models. The idea is, absent the
ability to follow small-scale physical processes in detail, to represent the
influence of these small-scale processes on the larger-scale dynamics resolved
by the model by a stochastic process. The project will try several different
auto-regressive representations of the boundary conditions and examine how the
large-scale structure of the flow reacts to these. The model results will be
compared with data from observations near the Florida Current made with HF
radar. Using inverse techniques, based on a Markov random field approach, the
values of parameters in the stochastic models of boundary conditions will be
estimated. The sensitivity of these inversions will also be determined. In
larger domains, dynamically similar to the North Atlantic, the question of
whether stochastic boundary conditions along the eastern boundary can lead to
internal jets (beta plumes) will be studied. Initially, the numerical
circulation model will be a reduced-gravity, quasigeostrophic model in idealized
geometries. The most effective approaches to stochastic boundary conditions will
then be transferred to a primitive-equation OGCM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;