* 0136905
* Refining Mg/Ca paleothermometry in foraminifera: Overcoming the dissolution problem with a flow-through leaching procedure
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2005
* Alan Mix, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Rodey Batiza
* 01/31/2005
* USD 384,731.00

The proponents will further test and develop a flow through analytical technique
for the determination of Mg/Ca in planktonic forams, a proxy for sea surface
temperature (SST). A problem with measured Mg/Ca in bulk dissolved samples of
forams, is that dissolution can fractionate Mg/Ca. In addition, later
calcification and contaminant phases can complicate the Mg/Ca signal. The flow
through cleaning technique, using the ICPMS and time-resolved analysis (TRA),
will allow monitoring of the Mg/Ca signal as the forams are slowly dissolved and
analyzed. This technique is similar in principle to stepwise heating used for
40Ar/39Ar dating and is expected to distinguish between the early calcite formed
nearest the surface and other unwanted signals. A pilot study of samples from
two cores taken at ~900m and ~2000 at the Cocos Ridge show promising early
results. TRA analysis of prepared samples of G. ruber, and G. sacculifer show
high initial values of Mg/Ca thought to be the initially formed calcite. More
calibration of the technique will be done for other samples, with comparisons to
Mn contents and d18O. Finally, the new technique will be used to analyze SST in
map and time-series back to the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) in cores from the
tropical and subtropical Pacific to resolve controversy about the role of the
tropics in climate change.