* 0136830
* The Energy and Pollution Intensity of Investment in the Cement Industry
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2002,03/31/2004
* David Angel, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 03/31/2004
* USD 105,718.00

The newly industrializing economies of East Asia have demonstrated that rapid
economic growth and integration into the global economy can occur with
substantial declines in the incidence of poverty and low inequality in incomes.
Unfortunately, the shared growth "miracles" experienced by these economies have
occurred with substantial deterioration in urban environments. Because these
development and environment outcomes occurred in the context of increased
openness to trade and investment, they have given rise to concerns that openness
to trade and investment contributes to pollution havens or the movement of
"dirty" industries from countries with stringent environmental regulations to
those with weak regulations. The predictable result is more trade and investment
(more globalization) and dirtier environments. To date, there is limited
empirical support for the pollution haven hypothesis. Moreover, there is some
evidence that openness to trade and investment can increase access to newer
leading-edge plants and equipment that are less polluting because they newer and
are imported from developed countries. This provides an important opportunity
for significantly less-polluting development. While previous research has
theoretically modeled both of these outcomes, there has been little empirical
research on pollution havens. Moreover, most of this empirical research is based
on highly aggregated data where the unit of analysis is the country rather than
the firm or plants where the most important environmental decisions are made.
This research project will empirically analyzing the impacts of globalization
and environmental regulations on the environmental performance of manufacturing
plants in one particularly dirty, rapidly growing, export-oriented industry, the
cement industries of China, Malaysia, and Thailand. Research methods will
include a statistical analysis of survey data collected from about 125 large and
medium sized cement plants in these countries. Multiple regression analysis will
be used to address three key questions: To what extent is increasing openness to
trade and foreign investment associated with the adoption of technologies and
production practices that are less energy, materials and pollution intensive?
Are the impacts of openness on environmental performance contingent on the
strength of regulatory enforcement and community pressure faced by these plants?
Are the impacts of openness limited to changes in technology and production
processes that improve both economic and environmental performance?

Answers to these questions are important to both the international community and
developing countries. If openness to trade and investment contributes to
improved plant level environmental performance, the international community can
be less concerned about pollution haven affects in trade and investment
agreements. If, on the other hand, openness contributes to pollution haven
effects, environmental considerations may have to become part of international
trade and investment agreements. Moreover, if openness to trade and investment
contributes to improved environmental performance, governments in developing
countries would have additional policy options for insuring that rapid urban-
industrial growth is less energy, materials, and pollution intensive. It would
also provide opportunities to sustain high growth rates while improving ambient
environmental quality. But if pollution haven effects are significant, this
would suggest that governments in developing countries must redouble their
efforts to increase the stringency of environmental regulations. It also
suggests that there may be significant tradeoffs between growth, globalization,
and the environment.