* 0136992
* Protein Structure, 1934-1984, as an International Dialogue: From theoretical debates to Interdisciplinary races
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2003
* PNINA ABIR-AM, ABIRAM                  PNINA          G
* Fixed Amount Award
* Keith R. Benson
* 03/31/2003
* USD 25,000.00

Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt;SES 0136992&lt;br/&gt;Protein Structure, 1934-1984 As
An International Dialogue:&lt;br/&gt;From Theoretical Debates To
Interdisciplinary Races.&lt;br/&gt;Pnina Abiram&lt;br/&gt;Independent Scholar
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project traces the history of research on
protein structure in the period between 1930-1980, as a major scientific problem
in the 20 th Century, underlying not only the structural origins of molecular
biology but also key aspects of biotechnology, most notably its most recent
frontier in proteomics. The project documents in extensive archival detail three
key stages of the international quest for protein structure:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. The theoretical debates of the 1930s which cast the
scientific problem of protein structure in the context of historical movements,
most notably British socialism, communism, and anti-fascism; the intellectual
migration forced by Nazism and totalitarianism in central Europe; and American
philanthropy's efforts to contain social unrest during the Great Depression. The
novel aspect of this phase pertains to its documentation of the crucial process
of arbitration, conducted by a dozen scientists from US, UK, Scandinavia,
Holland, France, Switzerland. The project explains the arbitrator's failure to
contain the debate or accomplish a "sociopolitical partition of truth" among the
three main contenders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. The competition over models in
the early 1950s, culminating with the British model 1950 and the American model
of 1951, the latter known as the alpha-helix. This competition captures the
post-WW2 shift of political scenery (especially the Cold War atmosphere which
led to denial of visas to key protein researchers to visit the US or the UK. The
project further explains why this stage had major consequences for the
subsequent overshadowing of protein structure by DNA structure as the hot topic
in the rise of molecular biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. The empirical races
over full molecular solutions in the 1960s and 1970s (e.g. lysozyme solved in
1965 by a team at the Royal Institution; and ribonuclease, solved by teams at
the Brooklyn Polytech and Birkbeck College, London. The project explains the
role of large scale government funding and team research in molecular biology in
the 1960s, as a prelude to current day scaling up into
proteomics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides a better understanding of
international cooperation and competition over half a century, especially over
the complex period divided by WW2. It also illuminates interdisciplinary
research, a major feature of 20th Century science. Last, it explains proteomics,
a current scientific frontier that goes beyond genomics into systematic research
on the rational design of complex, megamolecular drugs.&lt;br/&gt;