* 0136896
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Bargaining, Uncertainty and the Shadow of the Future in North Atlantic Fisheries
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Robert Keohane, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 07/31/2003
* USD 4,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of uncertainty on
behavior has long captivated the political science discipline. Political
theories addressing uncertainty's influence on bargaining and cooperation
underpin the understanding of regime development and inform efforts to devise
institutions that deal with societies most pressing problems. In surveying the
theoretical literature, however, contradictory claims appear with respect to the
causal mechanisms through which uncertainty supposedly exerts its influence. A
number of prominent scholars have identified the salutary effects uncertainty
should have on integrative bargaining and agreement on permanent rules while
other scholars have offered equally plausible arguments suggesting that
uncertainty inhibits such bargaining and impedes such agreements. &lt;br/&gt;As
a means of testing countervailing claims regarding the relationship between
uncertainty and institutional bargaining, this Doctoral Dissertation Research
Support focuses on the North Atlantic in the wake of oceans enclosure. The
formation of 200-mile exclusive economic zones (EEZs) provides a unique
opportunity for evaluating countervailing expectations about bargaining behavior
and associated outcomes as a set of new regimes are established. This project
examines institutional bargaining through a research design that identifies
variation in uncertainty across a rich set of comparable fisheries cases. The
project examines the affect of this variation on the relative degree of
integrative vs. distributive bargaining and the content of duration of
regulatory agreements -agreements that usually take the form of property rights
arrangements. Three theoretically plausible causal mechanisms are identified
generating a number of contradictory propositions with respect to the influence
of uncertainty on institutional bargaining. The project specifies
the&lt;br/&gt;observable implications of these competing mechanisms and
investigate the conditions under which they operate. &lt;br/&gt;The results of
this project will illuminate our theoretical understanding of how competing
bargaining incentives are reconciled under uncertain conditions, particularly in
times of crisis. With respect to institutional design, this research offers
insights into the sequence of issues negotiators might be best advised to
address under specific conditions of uncertainty. A better understanding of the
relationship between uncertainty and actual behavior can improve the probability
of forging agreement on contemporary problems of environment and development
that seek to balance equity, efficiency and sustainability concerns.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;