* 0136260
* A Nation of States: Mapping the Impact of National Political Forces Through State Electoral Institutions, 1840-1940
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Samuel Kernell, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* James S. Granato
* 12/31/2004
* USD 149,062.00

The proposed project will focus on the study of political party systems, with an
emphasis on the number of parties in a system, and on the sustainability of
regional parties. The Investigator plans to build on previous theoretical and
empirical results to understand party systems in a variety of countries.
Currently he has data on Canada and Great Britain, and will get access to data
on Russia, Germany, South Korea, Botswana, Ghana, and Zimbabwe, and possibly
more countries. The fundamental question motivating the study is how and why
some parties become national in scope and sustain a nationwide presence, and how
and why some parties have only regional appeal. Results from this research
should be widely applicable to party systems in many other democracies.
&lt;br/&gt;At the core of the project is the theoretical argument, first
proposed in Chhibber and Kollman (1998A, 1998B), that the degree of government
centralization is an important factor in explaining both the number of parties
in a system and the survival of regional or local parties. &lt;br/&gt;The
literature on party systems is vast and diverse. Yet most theories of party
systems are static. Explanations of the number of parties based on electoral
institutions, national culture, the heterogeneity of national populations, or
presidentialism have been quite successful at capturing cross-national
differences. However, these explanations cannot help us to understand the
dynamics of party systems. As the number of parties in many systems fluctuates,
explaining the patterns requires attention on variables that change over time.
One such variable that has been strongly correlated with party politics in the
United States and India is the centralization of national government authority.
&lt;br/&gt;The project will entail both empirical and theoretical components. On
the empirical side, the data sets gathered will contain constituency-level
election results for a variety of countries. Currently, the Investigator has
data from Canada and Great Britain, two countries with single member, simple
plurality electoral systems to their lower houses, similar to those in India and
the United States. Other single member simple plurality countries, South Korea,
Botswana, Ghana, and Zimbabwe have available data, and the Investigator will
gather these data as well. The Investigator will also gather data from countries
that have mixed electoral systems (elements of proportional representation and
plurality), beginning with Germany and Russia. &lt;br/&gt;The formal component
contains a rigorous theoretical models that can offer insights into the process
of party formation and party aggregation across electoral districts. As a base,
the Investigator will extend rational choice models of Duverger's Law to
incorporate national politics. Then using these insights, the Investigator will
explore multidimensional political competition in a similar environment, but
including multiple levels of government as in a federation, and legislative
parties. &lt;br/&gt;