* 0136143
* RUI: A Dynamical Study of Chemical and Biochemical Mechanisms
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2005
* Enrique Peacock-Lopez, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Raima Larter
* 01/31/2005
* USD 155,000.00

Enrique Peacock-Lopez of Williams College is supported by the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry Program to carry out research in the area of chemical
and biochemical reactions in solutions and on surfaces using analytical methods
and simulations. The effort will expand proposed minimal models and consider
several systems that are relevant to nonlinear chemical kinetics and biochemical
mechanisms in cell and human physiology. Specifically, cell surface ligand-
receptor interactions and lateral diffusion on phospholipid bilayers will be
studied. As well, cascade mechanisms responding to ligand-receptor binding and
specific biochemical mechanisms related to biochemical response will be
explored. Applications will enable insights to be gained into biochemical
systems including self-replicating structures and their implication on triple-
stranded DNA, prion kinetics, pulsitile secretion, regulation of pituitary
hormones, and glucose metabolism in liver cells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Temporal
and spatial pattern formation in biological systems is an interesting and
challenging problem in theoretical biophysical chemistry. In this project, the
molecular basis of different physiological mechanisms will be explored, with the
aim of understanding the response to initial macromolecule-surface protein
"signals" at the molecular level. Undergraduate participation is an integral
part of this effort, with students expected to gain valuable research experience
and benefit from complementary interactions with experimentalists. &lt;br/&gt;