* 0136284
* U.S.-Italy Cooperative Research: Comparative International Research on Agricultural Land-Use History and Forest Management Practices in Italy and the United States
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/2002,08/31/2004
* Gil Latz, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne E. Hudson
* 08/31/2004
* USD 6,345.00

0132684&lt;br/&gt;Latz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This two-year award for US-Italy
collaboration on comparative research on agricultural land-use history and
forest management involves Gil Latz of Portland State University and Mauro
Agnoletti of the University of Florence, Italy. The research will include
comparative study of policies and legal instruments for conserving sites, and
evaluation of opportunities and master planning for sustainable forestry and
agriculture. In particular, the research will focus on Geographic Information
System (GIS) techniques for construction of a multipurpose land-use map of the
Spanocchia estate and its comparison to the Marsh-Billings-Rockefeller (MBR)
National Historical Park, and on proposals for possible conservation options.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The US researcher brings to this collaboration expertise
in sustainable management of forest parks, focusing on historic land-use
patterns and forest management practices that have been restored. This is
complemented by Italian expertise in the creation of a topographic database and
a digital model of the territory, digitization of the Tuscan Cadastre of 1832
and aerial and remote sensing information, and field work to check aerial
interpretations. The results of this research are expected to contribute to
contemporary forest certification policy, by gauging the impact of historical
information. These results are expected to be particularly useful to subsequent
analysis, comparison, and dissemination of strategies for sustainable forest
management to a broad public of policy managers and landowners throughout the
world.&lt;br/&gt;