* 0136536
* CD8 NK/T Cells and the Phylogeny of Cellular Immunity
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Jacques Robert, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 04/30/2006
* USD 532,821.00

CD8 cytotoxic T-lymphocytes (CTL) recognize and kill targets that express
antigenic peptides in the context of major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
class I molecules. As such, CTL are crucially involved in the generation of
adaptive immunity against viruses and tumors. Natural killer (NK) cells play an
active role in innate immunity by detecting and killing virally-infected or
tumor cells that have down-regulated their surface MHC class I molecules thereby
escaping surveillance by the adaptive immune system. Growing evidence suggests
that some immune responses are mediated by CTL expressing NK-associated
molecules (CD8/NK T-cells). The biology and physiological significance of the
complexity and heterogeneity of NK-associated molecules and their expression by
different effectors (e.g. CTL) is unclear. Since it is now well established in
several species, including frogs, that certain heat shock proteins (e.g. gp96 or
hsp70) elicit both adaptive CD8 T-cell mediated responses against the antigenic
peptides they chaperone, and innate immune responses, it will be of significance
to explore, for the first time, the extent to which this putative ancestral
system of hsp-generated immunity may involve CTL that express NK-associated
molecules. In addition, an unequivocal characterization of NK/T-cells in an
amphibian that occupies a pivotal position in the evolution of vertebrates would
support the hypothesis that CD8 NK/T-cells represent an important evolutionary
step that bridges the innate and adaptive immune systems. This finding would
also attest of the importance of this cell type in immunity of mammals. Finally,
a better knowledge of cell-mediated cytotoxicity in Xenopus may have crucial
implication with respect to understanding putative defects in the immune defense
systems used against those viral pathogens that are causing world-wide declines
of amphibian populations. The overall goal of this project is to take advantage
of our Xenopus model to assess, from an evolutionary perspective, the role of
CD8 NK/T cells, both in vitro and in vivo, in innate and adaptive immune
responses to tumor, viral, and minor histocompatibility antigens as well as to
explore the idea that T-cells co-expressing CD8 and NK markers (CD8 NK/T-cells)
are phylogenetically early mediators of cellular immunity.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Natural killer and cytotoxic T-lymphocytes are two important types of
immune cells involved in defense against virus infections and tumor. Recent
studies suggest the existence of a novel cell type with intermediate
characteristics. The goal of the research program is to use the frog Xenopus
rather than mice as a model system to better understand the role of this new
type of immune cell in immune defense against cancer and virus infections from
an evolutionary perspective.&lt;br/&gt;