* 0136885
* Asset Market Frictions in Quantitative International Business Cycle Models
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2002,09/30/2010
* Patrick Kehoe, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 09/30/2010
* USD 387,940.00

The central puzzle in international business cycles is that real exchange rates
are volatile, persistent, and not closely related to macroeconomic aggregates.
These exchange rate fluctuations are explained by the interaction of monetary
shocks and sticky prices. However, researchers have not yet developed
quantitative general equilibrium models that support this explanation. The first
generation of quantitative equilibrium models of international fluctuations from
over a decade ago document that complete market models with technology shocks
have a hard time generating the observed patterns of exchange rates. This
project consists of three parts which model specific frictions discussed in the
literature and assesses their ability to better account for the observations.
The first part considers simple frictions such as incomplete markets. The second
part considers the friction due to the difficulty of enforcing contracts between
sovereign nations. These contracts involve large transfers of resources, which
are only backed by promises to pay later. In the third part frictions are due to
fixed cost to access the asset markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically,
this project introduces sticky prices, monetary shocks and monopolists who price
to market internationally into a quantitative equilibrium model of international
fluctuations. This model can generate volatile and persistent real exchange
rates, as in the data. The main discrepancy between the model and the data is
the high correlation between real exchange rates and relative consumptions while
the data shows no clear pattern between these variables. This anomaly will occur
in any model with frictionless asset markets because in such a model the real
exchange rate is tightly linked to the marginal utilities of consumption of
domestic and foreign agents. The theoretical research shows that friction due to
incomplete markets, international loans that can be enforced only by the threat
of exclusion from future borrowing, and fixed costs to exchange bonds and money
in international markets break the tight link between real exchange rates and
relative consumptions present in frictionless models by introducing a stochastic
wedge between the real exchange rate and the ratio of marginal utilities. The
project investigates the quantitative significance of the different types of
frictions. Preliminary results suggest that these frictions can go a long way in
resolving the consumption-real exchange rate anomaly and at the same time
generate other observed characteristics of the data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;