* 0136934
* Climate Variability in Ocean Surface Turbulent Fluxes
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2008
* James OBrien, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 04/30/2008
* USD 721,000.00

0136934 O'Brien&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ocean surface turbulent fluxes will be
examined for climate-related variability. SSTs, winds, and pressures are
typically examined in such studies. The observed changes in winds (speed and
direction) and SSTs alter turbulent surface fluxes, which have a far-reaching
influence on regional climatologies. It is expected that surface turbulent
fluxes (stress, sensible heat, and latent heat) are more directly linked to
climate-related changes than winds and pressures. Similar approaches will be
applied to two overlapping periods. We will objectively derive a high quality
set of monthly surface fluxes (and related fields), covering 1950 to 2005, for
the global oceans north of ~30 degrees S to examine variability on a wide range
of spatial and temporal scales (seasonal to decadal). We will also create
similar daily fields (including surface radiative fluxes) from July 22, 1999
through 2005, with greater spatial resolution. Our goal is to produce the most
accurate flux fields available. Variability on many time scales will be
identified by applying traditional techniques such as Empirical Orthogonal
Functions to appropriate regions. The location and time scale of the variability
in turbulent fluxes, surface winds, and SSTs will be associated with known
climate related oscillations. These objective analyses will provide insight into
the processes through which surface fluxes, winds and SSTs are connected to
climate change. The surface flux data set will also facilitate a wide range of
studies relating ocean surface flux variability to regional climate change. In
order to reduce the know biases in reanalysis surface fields, in-situ (ship and
buoy) and satellite observations will be objectively combined to create a better
turbulent-flux product. The surface flux fields developed though this study can
be used to help validate flux fields created with couple ocean-atmospheric
models. The satellite-related surface flux fields used in this study will be
indirectly validated in-house by forcing a high resolution ocean model for the
Gulf of Mexico, and our monthly products will be validated externally by long-
time collaborators. Our in-situ based monthly products will be compared to the
satellite products. All of the objective fields will be made publicly
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;