* 0136928
* Experimental and Theoretical Investigations of Auctions
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Dan Levin, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 03/31/2006
* USD 439,849.00

Auctions are of growing practical and theoretical importance in economics.
Recent applications of auctions to sales of government assets have had
spectacular success: Led by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), the U.
S. government has conducted a number of sales of air wave rights raising a total
of $23.9 billion in selling over 10,000 licenses between July 1994 and July
2000. Even more spectacular, in an auction ending in April 2000, the British
government raised 22.5 billion pounds ($35.53 billion) from the sale of "third
generation" mobile phone licenses. Thus, auctions promise to both increase
seller revenue and lead to more efficient allocation of assets (delivering
assets to the buyers who value them the most). Further, auctions play a
prominent role in the theory of exchange as they remain one of the simplest and
most familiar means of price determination in the absence of intermediate market
makers. And they serve as valuable illustrations, and one of the most prominent
applications, of the theory of games (strategic interactions) in cases where
agents possess private information (i.e., information which rival agents are not
privy to).

In spite of these successes there remain a number of open questions regarding
optimal auction design. The research will involve both theoretical and
experimental studies of a number of open questions in auction design. These
include: 1. Comparing the efficiency of alternative forms of the multi-object
Vickrey auction, an auction structure which, in theory at least, can deliver
100% efficiency when alternative auction structures fail to do so. What past
research has shown is that the details of the auction design canmake it easier
for bidders to approach the 100% efficiency goal. We will continue our study of
these issues. 2. Investigating alternative auction forms for cases where one or
more bidders place a somewhat higher value on the objects for sale than do rival
bidders. In cases such as these there is a tendency for the advantaged bidder
(even when this advantage is very small) to scare off rivals, which can lead to
unnecessarily low selling prices for the objects in question. Alternative
auction forms promise to help alleviate this problem. 3. Investigating multi-
unit demand auctions in which there exist synergies, or complementarities,
between the items up for auction. Such auctions create numerous problems in
achieving efficient auction outcomes. 4. Understanding the effects of bidding in
teams, as opposed to individual bidders. Most past auction experiments have
focused on the latter, whereas in many real world setting bidding is done in
teams.