* 0136401
* Formation and Structure-Property Relationships of Molecular Surface Architectures
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2006
* Janice Reutt-Robey, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 02/28/2006
* USD 455,000.00

This research project, in the laboratory of Professor Janice Reutt-Robey at the
University of Maryland-College Park, investigates the structure and reactivity
of molecular scale architectures formed on well characterized metal surfaces.
With the support of the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, the detailed
structure and motion of alane oligomers formed on the Al(111) surface are being
examined using scanning tunneling microscopy. A similar approach is used to
examine the structure and reactivity of ordered architectures formed by the
adsorption of N-heteroaromatic carboxylic acids on the silver surface.
Information obtained from these studies is fundamental to our understanding of
the growth and operation of nano-scale electronic
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using scanning tunneling microscopy and other
surface sensitive tools, Professor Reutt-Robey and her coworkers at the
University of Maryland are probing the adsorption and reaction of a range of
interesting chemical systems with connections to the formation of nano-scale
devices. The interaction of atomic hydrogen with aluminum surfaces to form
ordered oligomers on the surface is being examined. Also, the adsorption and
interaction of strongly hydrogen bonding nitrogen containing aromatic acids is
being examined. The information gained from these studies will provide important
underpinning for the synthesis and manipulation of nano-scale architectures on
surfaces. &lt;br/&gt;