* 0136848
* Expectations, Learning and Economic Policy
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* George Evans, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 05/31/2005
* USD 185,217.00

A central feature of modem economic theory is the forward-looking decisions made
by firms and households. Expectations of economic agents are therefore a key
component of macroeconomic theories of consumption, investment, inflation and
the business cycle. The RE (rational expectations) methodology has provided an
elegant benchmark theory of expectation formation: expectations are assumed to
be rational in the sense that agents do not make any systematic errors, given
the available information. Two fundamental issues for this (now standard)
approach concern the attainability of RE, i.e. whether boundedly rational agents
can arrive at RE through a learning process, and the possibility of
indeterminacy or multiplicity of RE equilibria. A related question is how the
central messages of rational expectations are modified by the recognition that
realistic decision-makers are likely to use misspecified models, and to be aware
of this limitation. These interconnected issues, which have implications for
economic policy and business cycle modeling, are pursued by this project on
several fronts. A common theme throughout the project is the role that learning
plays in the evolution of expectations.

The first part focuses on monetary and fiscal policy. Recent work based on "new
Phillips curve" models has obtained (under the RE assumption) interest rate
feedback rules designed to implement optimal policy. The proposed research shows
that if policy rules are formulated entirely in terms of responses to
fundamental shocks, as might appear natural, the equilibrium will be unstable if
private agents follow adaptive learning rules. The project then shows that
stability can be achieved, and optimal discretionary policy implemented, if the
interest rate rule depends in the right way on both the fundamental shocks and
observed private expectations. This project extends the analysis to cases in
which the monetary authorities can commit themselves to a fixed rule. Other
extensions take up the interaction of monetary and fiscal policy and study the
implications of adaptive learning for interest rate rules that may be subject to
liquidity traps.

The focus of the second part is business cycle fluctuations. Extensions of the
Real Business Cycle framework to incorporate monopolistic competition have shown
that multiplicities can arise, taking the form of expectation driven
fluctuations around an indeterminate steady state. This possibility is known
also to arise in some standard monetary models. Recent work on expectational
stability and adaptive learning has provided convenient tools to determine
whether these "endogenous fluctuations" can arise as outcomes of adaptive
learning rules. Preliminary results show that a subclass of "resonant frequency"
solutions is stable under learning for a range of parameters. This project
computes the parameter regions for which stable endogenous fluctuations occur
and investigates whether macroeconomic policy can be used to prevent endogenous
fluctuations from arising.

A third line of research looks at the implications of underparameterization for
the "Lucas Critique" of economic policy, one of the dramatic implications of RE.
Private agents that recognize their misspecification will respond by using
"constant gain" learning rules that trade off tracking and filtering. A simple
example is adaptive expectations with an optimally tuned coefficient. This
project shows that for much of the parameter space monetary policy remains
subject to the Lucas Critique. However, there are also regions in which the
expectation rule is invariant and the Lucas Critique does not apply. Related
work examines (i) the stability under learning of the high inflation
equilibrium, in the seignorage model, to the assumption that some agents do not
possess current information, (ii) the role of structural heterogeneity in
facilitating or impeding coordination on a RE equilibrium, and (iii) the
possibility that underparameterized learning may generate heterogeneity of
expectations.