* 0136094
* Molecular Origins of Specificity in Protein-Nucleic Acid Interactions
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Jannette Carey, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/28/2006
* USD 432,226.00

The molecular mechanisms by which small-molecule allosteric effectors activate
gene-regulatory proteins for specific DNA binding are largely unknown.
Understanding these mechanisms should provide general insights into molecular
recognition, and inform our understanding of the biology of the molecules
involved in these processes. The overall goal of the present work is to achieve
an understanding of allosteric activation that accounts for both structural and
energetic features of ligand binding and explains DNA specificity in the
arginine repressor system of E. coli, ArgR. A combined biochemical and
biophysical approach will be used to establish the quantitative foundations for
a comprehensive understanding of the molecular and biological significance of
ArgR-ligand interactions. The cornerstone of this approach is careful
measurement of ligand-binding equilibria including determination of affinity,
stoichiometry, and cooperativity. The goal in making these measurements is to
define the ligand-occupancy states of the protein as a function of ligand
concentration. This information is then used to set the conditions for studies
of protein function and structure over the range of relevant ligand-occupancy
states. This project has four aims. 1. Quantitative analysis of L-arg binding to
ArgR using isothermal titration, analytical ultracentrifugation, and NMR. 2.
Analysis of the effects of ligand-occupancy state on ArgR function in
transcription and recombination. 3. Evaluation of changes in structure and
dynamics as a function of ligand-occupancy state, using proteolytic cleavage and
NMR. 4. Examination of ATP binding to evaluate whether this ligand confers
functional or structural consequences for ArgR. These biochemical and
biophysical experiments should provide the quantitative foundations for
understanding the molecular and biological mechanisms of ArgR function, and
should help to bring the functional and structural pictures of ArgR allosteric
activation into a common focus. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biomolecules have
difficult jobs to do. Many of them must recognize one ligand from an
intracellular sea of similar ligands, and respond in a physiologically
appropriate way. The range of molecular strategies used to execute complex
cellular functions is probably very broad, but few examples have been fully
characterized. An in-depth understanding of molecular strategies is fundamental
to many areas of chemistry and biology. This research is aimed at expanding our
general understanding of the mechanisms used by proteins to recognize and
respond to small ligands that can potentiate their function. &lt;br/&gt;