* 0136055
* Some Macroeconomic Implications of the Second Industrial Revolution
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Jeremy Greenwood, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2006
* USD 282,071.00

The Second Industrial Revolution is a major cusp on the chart of economic
progress. It saw the rise of electricity, the internal combustion engine, steel,
and the petrochemical industry. A massive transformation occurred in industry as
steam, water, and horse-drawn power were supplanted by electricity and gas. A
revolution just as great was taking place in the household sector of the
economy. This research focuses on the household revolution. The idea is that
technological progress can have profound implications in the microeconomy of the
household that in turn can have enormous consequences for the macroeconomy of
the nation. The Second Industrial Revolution is a major event in American
economic history. There is little work in modern macroeconomics that addresses
it. Understanding this period better is a worthy goal in its own right. But, it
may have lessons for today. In many poor countries female labor-force
participation is still low. Fertility is high and children still work. Most
people live on farms. Maybe these countries resemble the US at the turn of the
last century? As society moves into the information age, technological progress
may lead to another shift in work patterns. Some speculate that it may favor
working at home and outside of cities. Understanding how technological progress
affected life in the past may aid in predicting how it will affect life in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A revolution in consumer durables was associated
with the Second Industrial Revolution. Life at the turn of the last century was
primitive. Most households didn't have electricity, central heating, or running
water. This changed with the Second Industrial Revolution. It ushered in clothes
dryers, electric irons, refrigerators, vacuum cleaners, and washing machines. A
fruit of this technological advance was a dramatic decline in the time required
for housework. Along with the spread of new appliances, there was a tremendous
rise in female labor-force participation over the last century. Was the durable
goods revolution responsible for the rise in female labor-force participation?
How did this affect economic welfare? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Second
Industrial Revolution transformed everyday life in other ways. It witnessed a
spectacular decline in fertility. It also unshackled children from serfdom. The
percentage of children that were gainfully employed dropped precipitously with
the dawning of the Second Industrial Revolution. Almost no children worked by
the Revolution's end. Could it be that before the Second Industrial Revolution
children were needed for farm and housework? Labor- saving technological
progress lifted this requirement. Children could now attend more school. The
consequence was a fall in fertility, the end of child labor, and a rise in
educational attainment. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Before the Second Industrial
Revolution most Americans lived on a farm. Technological advance meant that less
labor was required on the farm. Technological progress meant that new types of
consumer goods could be produced for two reasons. First, it reduced the cost of
producing these goods. Second, the rising incomes associated with technological
progress in other areas of the economy increased the demand for new consumer
goods. Thus, while less labor was needed on the farm, more labor was being
demanded in manufacturing to produce these new goods. This project analyzes the
wave of migration that occurred during the Second Industrial Revolution as
people moved from rural to urban areas. It studies urbanization. &lt;br/&gt;