* 0136431
* Algebraic and Stochastic Models of Structures Arising in Utility Theory and Psychophysics
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2006
* R. Duncan Luce, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 02/28/2006
* USD 210,000.00

This research continues and extends earlier theoretical work of the investigator
and of collaborator A. A. J. Marley on the measurement of psychological
attributes such as the utility of goods and the subjective intensity of physical
signals such as lights or sounds. The research will describe the underlying
structure of independent variables that affect the attribute in such algebraic
terms as (1) the ordering by "subjectively greater than," (2) operations like
being presented with two goods or stimuli at once or in quick succession, (3)
treatments of stimuli as deviations from the status quo in utility or from
threshold in psychophysics, and (4) use of judgements of "ratios of intervals"
similar to those found in magnitude production methods. This project will
account for violations of dominance, such as the utility of gambling per se,
peculiarities of mixed gambles of gains and losses, and various principles to
extend the theory from binary gambles to general ones. The project also will
attempt to generalize some of the algebraic theories to probabilistic
versions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Utility models are extensively used in providing
advice to decision makers and subjective expected utility also is a key part of
Bayesian statistical methods. Sensory measurement is used widely in a variety of
industrial settings. Yet these applications are based primarily on empirical
generalizations whose theoretical basis has recently been brought into doubt.
This project will advance theory and methods in many application areas. It also
will further the development of a probabilistic version of fundamental
measurement theory, thereby expanding the value of this approach for many social
and behavioral science inquiries.&lt;br/&gt;