* 0136432
* Investigation of Sea Level Rise in the Arctic Ocean
* GEO,OPP
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2005
* Andrey Proshutinsky, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 01/31/2005
* USD 545,679.00

0136432&lt;br/&gt;Proshutinsky&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sea level rise in the
Arctic anticipated to result from global warming is important because of the
influence that sea level changes will exert on shoreline erosion, sediment
transport, navigation conditions, and oil and gas operations. This research will
attempt to describe and model the current rate of sea level rise in the Arctic
Ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sea level is a natural integrating indicator of
climate change, reflecting changes in practically all dynamic and thermodynamic
terrestrial, oceanic, atmospheric, and cryospheric processes. However, using
estimates of eustatic sea level rise as an indicator of climate change incurs
the difficulty that sea level change is the net result of many components, some
of which can offset one another. This effort will identify the role of each of
the factors that contribute to Arctic Ocean sea level
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on analysis of existing, but previously
unavailable, time series of sea level heights from Russian archives, along with
atmospheric, cryospheric, terrestrial, and oceanic data sets and results of
numerical modeling and data reconstruction, we will (1) identify links among sea
level variability and atmospheric, hydrologic, cryospheric and oceanic
processes, (2) quantify the regional and temporal variability of relevant
processes in terms of sea level response, and (3) determine the relative
importance of each factor influencing sea level change under global warming
conditions. The observed sea level variability, which acts to integrate the
complex contributions of these factors, will serve as the primary indicator of
the ocean's response to climate change. Based on this analysis, the impact of
linkages between hydrography, atmospheric circulation, hydrologic conditions,
and the sea ice regime over the Arctic Ocean will be assessed in a conceptual
model of sea level change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is an international
effort with a research team of scientists from the USA, United Kingdom, and
Norway. The proposed research and results of this project will have direct
influence on several US National Science Foundation and European programs and
regional climatic impact assessments.&lt;br/&gt;