* 0136132
* Source, Trophic Opportunities and Fate of Billfish Larvae in the Diverse Pelagic Habitats of the Straits of Florida
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Kevin Leaman, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 07/31/2006
* USD 1,981,353.00

Billfishes are a complex of large pelagic fishes that occur in the tropical and
subtropical waters of the world's oceans. They are top predators in the pelagic
food web and, simultaneously, the most sought-after fishes for saltwater
anglers. These oceanic "giants" support a multi-million dollar sportfishing
industry and comprise a significant bycatch of tuna longline efforts.
Unfortunately, human activities have led to significant declines in billfish
stocks; blue marlin are thought to be at less than 40% of that necessary to
sustain fishing at maximum sustainable yields. Despite their critical ecological
status, the biological information available on these organisms is extremely
limited.&lt;br/&gt; Focusing on the early life history stages of billfishes is a
tractable means of obtaining valuable biological data. For example, collection
of early larval stages can be used, in conjunction with data on circulation, as
a means of determining when and where spawning occurs. Investigation of the
pelagic habitat variables associated with the occurrence of billfish larvae may
provide insight into environmental conditions required for spawning and early
survival. Even in their early life history, billfishes are likely important
constituents of the pelagic food chain, especially as predators on zooplankton
and larval fishes. &lt;br/&gt; The overall objective of this study is a
seasonally resolved understanding of the annual cycle of billfish spawning,
larval growth, feeding, and transport within the complex environment of the
Straits of Florida. As top predators, billfishes play a critical yet undefined
role in the pelagic food web. Here we examine the early life history of
billfishes within the oceanographic context of the Straits of Florida (SSF). The
SSF is a complex system of discrete, interacting water masses and pelagic
environments. Preliminary data suggest that billfish larvae occur predictably in
three distinct patches across the SSF. The project is designed to 1) identify
the sources of the three distinct larval billfish patches within the SSF; 2)
determine how the these patches differ in terms of the trophic and growth
environment of the billfish larvae; and 3) investigate the transport fates of
larval billfishes from these different patches.&lt;br/&gt; The fieldwork is
divided into three separate study components: The first study will address the
temporal qualities of cross-Strait features (i.e., water mass distribution,
larval billfish patches, and zooplankton community structure). Monthly sampling
(consisting of ichthyoplankton and zooplankton tows, CTD, fluorometry, and ADCP
measurements) over two years will be linked via otolith aging studies and
circulation patterns to estimates of spawning locations. Further otolith work on
larval growth rates will be coupled to zooplankton work on community composition
and dynamics to identify trophodynamic differences among patches. The second
study will expand the spatial scale of our efforts to examine the along-Strait
dynamics relating to the formation, maintenance, and fate of larval billfish
patches. A single cruise will be made during the second year and will include
the same suite of measurements as above as well as ARGOS-tracked drifter
measurements. The third study during year 3 will incorporate Lagrangian
techniques to track larval billfishes from hypothesized spawning sites through
the Straits of Florida system to link these trajectories to the observed cross-
Strait spatial patchiness and ultimate fate of the discrete patches. Sampling
will consist of a similar set of measurements conducted at stations normal to
the track of a group of drifters. &lt;br/&gt; Results of the proposed study will
provide critical new information regarding the early life history and ecology of
these important pelagic predators as well as the interaction between different
water masses and the trophodynamics of pelagic food webs. A further
understanding of the formation, maintenance and fate of particular chl.
a/zooplankton/larval fish patches also will provide insights into understanding
the role of upwelling and water mass exchange across frontal boundaries and
shallow banks.&lt;br/&gt;