* 0136195
* Spectroscopy and Dynamics of Radicals and Clusters by Tunable-Laser Dissociative Photodetachment
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2006
* Robert Continetti, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 01/31/2006
* USD 398,660.00

In this project funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Continetti will use a tunable laser to study the
dissociative photodetachment (DPD) and photodetachment dynamics of radicals and
clusters. In these experiments, photoelectron-photofragment coincidence (PPC)
spectroscopy combined with tunable laser photodetachment/threshold photoelectron
spectroscopy will be used to carry out high-resolution studies on organic
radicals as well as the wavelength-dependent DPD dynamics of cluster anions.
These studies will focus on the spectroscopy and dissociation dynamics of alkoxy
radicals important in atmospheric chemistry. Electronic structure and
unimolecular dissociation calculations will be carried out to aid in the
interpretation of the observed energetics and dissociation dynamics. Studying
the wavelength dependence of the photodetachment dynamics of cluster anions and
other transient species provides important information on the electronic
structure of these systems and problems in electron-molecule interactions that
are at the forefront of modern electronic structure theory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports the application of spectroscopic
techniques to the study of short-lived, reactive molecules important in
atmospheric and combustion chemistry. An important focus of the research will be
on a class of molecules known as alkoxy radicals. They play an important role in
aspects of urban air pollution chemistry, but in spite of their importance,
basic information about their stability and reactions are not known. This
research project will help to fill in these gaps in our understanding of these
important species, providing a solid empirical foundation for efforts to improve
the modeling of atmospheric pollution phenomena. Graduate and undergraduate
students will participate in experiments involving state-of-the-art lasers and
detection techniques, computer modeling and prediction of chemical properties.
They will thereby receive training in forefront methods of chemical research in
preparation for advanced studies or entry into the scientific/technical
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;