* 0136141
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Velocity Field, Force Budget, and Basal Conditions of a Soft-Bedded Glacier, Breidamerkurjokull, Iceland
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2005
* Slawek Tulaczyk, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 02/28/2005
* USD 69,674.00

0136141 Tulaczyk

This is a collaborative proposal between Principal Investigators at the
Universities of Washington and California-Santa Cruz. Scientists from the Jet
Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) will be involved. Other participants are scientists
from the University of Iceland and Eidgenossische Technische Hochschule (ETH).
The Principal Investigators will address the glacier-scale physics of soft-
bedded ice motion by testing the hypothesis that the force balance and the rate
of motion of Breidamerkurjokull on the Vatnajokull ice cap, Iceland is
controlled by the underlying till bed and not by other factors such as sticky
spots, longitudinal stretching/compression, marginal shear) Understanding the
physics that govern ice motion is needed to make predictions on the future
behavior of mountain glaciers and ice sheets in the context of the ongoing
climate change and sea-level rise. Breidamerkurjokull, an outlet glacier
draining, has played a significant role in developing a new paradigm of glacier
motion, in which the ice itself rides passively on top of a deforming till bed.
This innovative mechanism has been used to explain a wide array of glaciological
phenomena such as fast ice motion and high rates of glacial sediment transport.
Much of what is known about subglacial till deformation is derived from borehole
and laboratory experiments where the process is studied at short length scales
of ~0.1 to ~ 1 meters (m). However, to improve models of soft-bedded glaciers,
an understanding of the physical factors controlling the ice-flow rate over much
longer spatial scales of ~100 to ~1000 m is required This one-year project will
involve collection of new data on ice surface velocity and topography (spatial
resolution of <100 m) and bed topography (spatial resolution of several hundred
meters). The fieldwork will include surveys with ice-penetrating and ground
penetrating radar and Global Positioning System. Additional data will be
generated from satellite imagery using Synthetic Aperture Radar Interferometry.
The data will be used to calculate the spatial distribution of basal shear
stress and basal resistance beneath Breidamerkurjokull employing the force-
balance and transfer-function inversions, respectively. This research should
improve the current understanding of ice-till interactions and of their control
over flow of ice masses and may help predict whether modern ice masses will harm
local or global societal interests through, for instance, changes in the global
sea level or surges of mountain glaciers.