* 0136923
* Collaborative Research: Topics in Factor Analysis of Large Dimensions
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2002,09/30/2003
* Serena Ng, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 09/30/2003
* USD 140,840.00

An inevitable outcome as we move forward in calendar time and as information
technology advances is an increase in the volume of data available. Methods
previously developed for handling a few variables are not adequate for analyzing
hundreds of variables. This research is motivated by the need for empirical
tools that can synthesize the data concisely and in ways that facilitate
economic analysis. The focus of this research is on factor models. In a factor
framework, components that have explanatory power in a large number of series
are distinguished from the idiosyncratic ones that do not have pervasive effects
on the data. This common-idiosyncratic decomposition provides an effective way
of compressing a large volume of data to a manageable number of factors.
Statistical results currently available for factor analysis assume either the
time or the cross-section dimension of the panel is small. This research
develops tools for factor analysis when both dimensions of the data panel are
large. We show how the common and idiosyncratic components, although unobserved,
can be consistently estimated from the data by the method of principal
components whether or not the data are stationary. We will develop statistical
criteria for determining the unknown number of factors from the data. We will
also develop tests to determine whether non-stationarity in the observed data is
of the common or idiosyncratic type. We will establish statistical properties of
the principal components estimator. Different methods of estimating the common
factors will also be considered.

Many issues in macro and financial economics can be studied within a factor
framework. For example, business cycles are characterized by the co-movement of
a large number of economic time series. Asset returns have been shown to have a
factor structure, with idiosyncratic variations being diversifiable, while
systematic ones are not. Notions such as global trends and worldwide economic
downturns are used frequently. The factor framework provides a formal treatment
of these concepts. By providing the statistical foundation for factor analysis
of large dimensions, our results enable researchers to use hundreds of series
over decades, thousands of asset returns over years, and hundreds of country
level series over centuries, to estimate the factors and conduct inference. The
results of this research will make it possible to make maximum use of
information available without having to choose subjectively which series are to
be analyzed.