* 0136378
* Timing, Size, and Impact of Snow Avalanches
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2002,02/29/2008
* Howard Conway, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/29/2008
* USD 195,000.00

There is a need to improve predictions of the timing of avalanche release,
impact pressures, and run-out distances to reduce the impact of avalanches on
human society. This project will investigate the timing, size and impact of snow
avalanches using a combined experimental and theoretical approach. Specific
objectives are to: (i) track the evolution of snow slope stability in order to
improve predictions of the timing and size of avalanche release; (ii) couple
output from a model of avalanche release to a dynamic flow model in order
estimate impact pressures and run-out distances along paths of specified
geometry; (iii) couple the input of the slope stability model to output from a
predictive meso-scale climate model and develop tools for forecasting avalanches
on a regional scale. Model development and verification will be done using
results from field observations and existing archived databases of past weather
and avalanche activity. Physical models of avalanche initiation and subsequent
flow require detailed knowledge of transients as well as a three-dimensional
description of the evolving mechanical properties of snow, which requires
extraordinary input data that are not generally available. Simplifying
assumptions are necessary to develop models that are not only realistic but also
sufficiently tractable so that they can be used for operational forecasting.
Guiding constraints for model development are that only valid approximations and
minimal data inputs are acceptable. Results from models of decreasing complexity
will be compared with observations to identify the simplest workable models that
adequately simulate avalanche behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Snow avalanches
directly affect people by causing injury or death, restricting transportation,
destroying structures and villages, limiting access to areas of activity and
altering the natural environment. Although the frequency of avalanches has not
changed significantly over the past century, the hazard has increased as more
people live, work and travel in mountain regions. Indirect costs to society such
as those associated with mitigation, litigation, insurance, and loss of both
travel and business opportunities are also high. The overall goal of this
research is to increase public safety and reduce costs associated with snow
avalanches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;