* 0136064
* Microbial Genome Sequencing: Genome Sequence of Magnaporthe Grisea
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Ralph Dean, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 08/31/2003
* USD 700,000.00

Rice blast disease, caused by the fungal pathogen Magnaporthe grisea, is a major
threat to food security worldwide. Decades of intense investigation have proven
the fungus to be eminently suitable for genetic and molecular genetic
manipulation, making it the primary model for elucidating the basis of
phytopathogenesis, including infection related morphogenesis and cultivar/host
range specificity. The Magnaporthe research community has established an
international consortium with the goal of obtaining a complete genome sequence
of the fungus. The community has also developed numerous biological resources
and tools to take immediate advantage of the sequence. This project represents a
partnership between North Carolina State University and the Whitehead Institute-
Center for Genome Research to generate and assemble the entire genome using a
whole genome shotgun approach and to perform automated annotation. The rapid
availability of this sequence in an annotated form will immediately provide new
opportunities for integrating research and education of students. The data will
promote the discovery of genes and potential anti-fungal targets, permit
reconstruction of pathways, provide sequence-anchored clone paths for use in
genetic and functional studies, and enable comparative genomic approaches to
commence. Moreover, the data will provide the foundation for the discovery and
design of novel environmentally sound strategies to more effectively manage this
and other fungal diseases. This is a Microbial Genome Sequencing Award funded
through a collaborative activity between the National Science Foundation and the
Department of Agriculture Initiative for Future Agriculture and Food Systems.
This award represents one portion of the Magnaporthe grisea genome sequencing
project. The other portion is being funded by the USDA.