* 0136351
* Macroeconomics and Inequality
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2005
* Per Krusell, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 03/31/2005
* USD 218,525.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The United States economy is one of the richest in the
world, both in terms of per capita wealth and in terms of per capita output, but
it is also an economy with very sharp contrasts between rich and poor. What is
the source of this inequality, and should it concern economists and policy
makers? Is it perhaps a natural, or even necessary, aspect of being the richest
in the world, or does it reflect a failure that can be addressed with economic
policy? And even if inequality per se is not a cause for concern, does it
influence aggregate economic activity? Although much progress has been made,
academic economists are not yet able to address the above issues in a
quantitatively satisfactory way. First, few natural experiments are available to
speak directly to the issues using purely empirical methods. Second, adequate
economic theory is largely missing. This research addresses the second point: it
aims to continue the development of the theory and numerical tools needed for a
quantitative study of the sources of inequality and its interrelation with
macroeconomics. The present project, in particular, is a continuation of an
earlier project (NSF grant #9807760) by this investigator with
collaborators.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The work proceeds along several fronts, but
the common theme is to both develop and apply methods that are of general use in
quantitative-theoretical studies of macroeconomics and inequality. The central
questions are rather basic ones: What determines how different people save, both
in human and physical capital? How does technological change influence wage
inequality? How does economic policy influence, and how is it influenced by,
inequality? The project has specific applications, but most of the work is on
questions of quite broad applicability. The subprojects are as follows:
&lt;br/&gt;I. Origins of inequality: &lt;br/&gt;a. Savings: Why do households
differ so much in their propensities to save? This project continues earlier
work on the role of initial wealth differences and labor market luck, but also
goes further: what determines "discount factors?" The approach here is one of
psychology and economics; the psychology literature reports that many consumers
seem to face "urges" to consume, and whether they do or not, and how they deal
with the urges, seems to vary widely. &lt;br/&gt;b. Earnings: How are wage and
human capital inequality influenced by technological change that is embodied in
capital? Arguably, the bulk of the present and recent improve- ments in
productivity take this form, and the existing work on the topic is quite
limited. Here, the focus is on how frictions in the labor markets impact both
accumulation of physical and human capital, and on how economic policy interacts
with these frictions. &lt;br/&gt;II. Interactions between inequality and
aggregates: &lt;br/&gt;a. Does the wealth distribution matter for macro? A
further investigation of channels through which inequality-via the differences
in propensities to save and work in the population-influences aggregates is
undertaken here. &lt;br/&gt;b. The policy channel: How does economic policy
affect inequality, and vice versa? This work includes (i) a political-economy
study of redistribution and social insurance and (ii) a study of dynamic policy
determination when policy makers are restricted by a lack of commitment.
&lt;br/&gt;