* 0136467
* New Immigrants: Science & Engineering in the United States
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Roli Varma, University of New Mexico
* Continuing grant
* Ronald Rainger
* 05/31/2005
* USD 85,766.00

Project Abstract SES 0136467 New Immigrants: Science & Engineering in the United
States Roli Varma School of Public Administration University of New Mexico,
Albuquerque

Debates over the new immigration, or immigration from non-European sources, of
scientists/engineers to the U.S. focus on the extent to which new immigrants
take highly skilled jobs away from U.S. citizens or whether high-tech companies
lay off native workers to hire foreigners in order to maximize profits.
Recently, some scholars have focused on the existence of a "glass ceiling" that
impedes upward career mobility for new immigrants in science and engineering
(S&E). Most studies have yet to explore the complexities/contradictions
associated with the presence and experiences of new immigrants in S&E
occupations.

This project is a qualitative-quantitative study on the situation and
experiences of foreign-born scientists/engineers from India in the United
States. It focuses on the extent to which they are professionally successful
and/or face institutional barriers with respect to reward, recognition, and
promotion in S&E organizations. Attention to foreign-born scientists/engineers
from India makes sense for many reasons. First, they are increasingly present in
the S&E workforce of the U.S.. Second, there is little scholarly work on the
experiences and impacts of Indian scientists/engineers in the U.S.. Third,
foreign-born Indians have made vast strides in education and employment in
comparison to other ethnic minorities in the U.S. Fourth, many cultural
arguments (such as occupational preferences and linguistic abilities) for the
lack of mobility in positions of authority and decision-making are not clear-cut
for Indian scientists/engineers. And fifth, many structural arguments for facing
the glass ceiling, such as racial prejudice, may overlook other factors such as
the existence of a "good old boy" network in S&E organizations.

Research methods include in-depth interviews to acquire primary data on the
subject; collection of quantitative data; examination of relevant literature.
Attention is focused on two sets of subjects: foreign-born Indians holding
master and doctorate degrees in S&E disciplines and their American colleagues,
department chairs, and managers. Subjects are drawn from two industrial labs,
two national labs, and three academic institutions.

The findings of this project help illuminate the potential contributions of
Indian scientists/engineers in the future, as well as efforts to manage
diversity, fairness and equality issues. The project aims to develop a theory
about the behavior of scientists and engineers from India, as well as to help
shape future policies. Research findings are likely to raise questions and
foster discussion about the purported objectivity in evaluation and promotion.