* 0136925
* Economic Analysis of Data from Laboratory Experiments: Endogeniety, Attrition, Subject Heterogeniety, and Interdependencies
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* John Ham, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 03/31/2006
* USD 285,399.00

This proposal addresses a number of issues involved in the statistical analysis
of data from laboratory experiments in economics. Experimental work in economics
is of growing importance to the field, but the statistical analysis of data from
these experiments is still relatively primitive compared to the opportunities
available and the research issues posed. The purpose of our investigations is
both methodological and substantive: Methodological in the sense of
demonstrating applications of modern statistical (econometric) techniques to
data analysis issues of central concern to experimenters, and refining
applications of these techniques to the special questions (and opportunities)
that laboratory experimental data pose. Substantive in that a number of the
particular issues addressed have been of concern in the literature, so that the
new experiments proposed here, and the corresponding data analysis, should
provide new insights into the issues at hand.

Work is proposed on a number of issues. (1) In common value (or mineral rights)
auction experiments there is a significant self-selection effect as bidders who
fall prey to the winner's curse lose money, often go bankrupt, and end the
experiment with very little money. As a consequence they tend to self-select out
of returning for subsequent experimental sessions which can lead to important
biases in the conclusions reached regarding the behavior of more experienced
bidders. The plan is to both measure the bias and to explore different ways of
dealing with it, both statistically and in terms of experimental design. (2) One
common method in economic experiments is to provide repeated trials with payoffs
within a given experimental session to provide subjects with experience with the
economic contingencies involved. This leads to subjects accumulating earnings
from the experiment over time whose effect is typically ignored, or when studied
fails to account for the endogeneity of changes in these earnings. This in turn
can lead to important biases in the analysis of auction outcomes. We plan to
determine why agents are subject to such effects when economic theory suggests
that they will not be, and to extend the experimental methodology developed to
study the impact of earnings on cash balance effects in mineral rights auction
experiments. (3) Economists have long suspected that performance in economic
experiments reflects, at least in part, the experiences of subjects outside the
lab as well as their demographic characteristics. We will study this
systematically by collecting relevant demographic and experiential data on
subjects borrowing methods developed in the statistical analysis of field data.
(4) In many economic experiments there are potential interdependencies between
individual subject observations associated with repeated observations of a group
of subjects within a given experimental session. We plan to explore this issue
in a number of different settings and to devise ways for dealing with it. (5)
Often when statistically evaluating behavior in economic experiments
investigators assume that all, or most, response coefficients are constant
across subjects. This is likely to be incorrect in a number of cases. We plan to
study ways of accounting for this response heterogeneity across individuals in
such cases.