* 0136194
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science Program:  The Physical and Chemical Properties of Nanosized Metal Clusters on Oxide Surfaces
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2008
* David Goodman, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 03/31/2008
* USD 20,910.00

0136194&lt;br/&gt;Goodman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a two-year
collaborative research project between Professor David Goodman at Texas A&amp;M
University and Professor Yasuhiro Iwasawa of the University of Tokyo in Japan.
The researchers will undertake a study of the physical and chemical properties
of nanosized metal clusters on oxide surfaces. The collaborators will correlate
those physical and chemical properties measured for Au and Rh clusters of
varying size with their catalytic properties. They will stress the strengths of
each group, namely, the synthesis capabilities of the Texas group and the unique
characterization facilities of the Tokyo group, specifically for atomic force
microscopy. These studies are essential to understanding the unique properties
of nanosized metal clusters for catalytic applications, and a key to
establishing a methodology for predicting new systems and new reactions to be
addressed by this exciting class of materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will facilitate the collaboration between two strong surface chemical
groups with complementary expertise and capabilities, allowing an important
technical problem to be addressed with a broad array of modern surface methods.
The project will offer a good opportunity to join efforts between the two
countries. Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will
broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and
cooperation. The project advances international human resources through the
participation of graduate students. The researchers plan to publish results of
the research in scientific journals and report on the findings at scientific
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;