* 0136034
* Molecular Regulation and Transport of Sterols in Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Joseph Chappell, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 06/30/2006
* USD 347,960.00

Plant sterols represent a complex array of chemical compounds that
are&lt;br/&gt;essential for many facets of plant growth and development, and are
of&lt;br/&gt;considerable importance for their nutritional contributions to
animals and&lt;br/&gt;man. Hence, it is not surprising that the biochemistry and
molecular&lt;br/&gt;biology of the sterol biosynthetic pathway has been
intensively studied.&lt;br/&gt;Nonetheless, very little is actually known about
the regulation of this&lt;br/&gt;biochemical pathway in plants. One goal of our
long-term research in sterol&lt;br/&gt;metabolism has been focussed on the
regulation of squalene synthase, a key&lt;br/&gt;enzyme in sterol biosynthetic
enzyme. Our recent results suggest that&lt;br/&gt;squalene synthase gene
expression and enzyme activity are localized to&lt;br/&gt;shoot meristems. In
attempting to reconcile these results with those&lt;br/&gt;already reported in
the literature, the most logical interpretation is that&lt;br/&gt;sterol
biosynthesis itself is localized to this tissue. This
interpretation&lt;br/&gt;implies that regulation of sterol biosynthesis occurs
in the shoot&lt;br/&gt;meristem, a tissue that has not been evaluated as such
before, and that a&lt;br/&gt;sterol transport system for the movement of sterol
from the apical meristem&lt;br/&gt;throughout the plant must exist. Experiments
to test these predictions are&lt;br/&gt;proposed and include: 1, an evaluation
if sterol biosynthesis localized to&lt;br/&gt;the shoot meristem is regulated;
2, the development of a test for long&lt;br/&gt;distance transport of sterol
within plants; and 3, a determination if NPC1,&lt;br/&gt;a highly conserved
protein involved in cholesterol uptake and intracellular&lt;br/&gt;trafficking,
plays a similar role in plants as in animals. The proposed&lt;br/&gt;work, which
will involve undergraduate and graduate students and a&lt;br/&gt;postdoctoral
associate, should provide important insights into how this&lt;br/&gt;pathway
might be engineered for enhanced value using emerging
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;