* 0136041
* Molecular Architecture Workshop
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Peter Kogge, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Yavuz A. Oruc
* 08/31/2002
* USD 31,507.00

The primary objective of this workshop was to bring together some of the leading
experts in complex silicon-level microsystems with key leaders from the
molecular devices community to provide some initial thoughts on how to develop
future answers to the following questions: &lt;br/&gt;- How can molecular level
interactions driving such systems be expressed in more abstract ways, how can
these abstractions be translated into "primitive" building blocks, and how
should modeling and design tools be built to emphasize such interactions?
&lt;br/&gt;- How does one develop new design strategies for combining such
primitive building blocks into larger functional subsystems and then scale into
even larger molecular systems, what might some of these design strategies
entail, and what might be lifted from our experiences with silicon? &lt;br/&gt;-
What needs to surround a new technology to allow it to scale into complete,
designable, complex sys-tems that can communicate with the outside, including
legacy technologies such as silicon? &lt;br/&gt;- What are long term potentials
for such technologies, as seen by complex system architects? &lt;br/&gt;- Where
can they help solve bottlenecks that exist in current silicon technology
microsystems?&lt;br/&gt;- Are there new models of computation or system design
for which these new technologies are particu-larly well suited?&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Given that the bulk of the attendees were primarily architects of
computational silicon microsystems, a second objective of the workshop was to
re-energize the computer architecture community to develop alter-native or mixed
models of computation, new microarchitectural techniques, design tools and
approaches for both the new technologies, mixes of old and new, and even port
back into silicon. A final objective was to help both the system architecture
and the new technology communities begin to develop the dialogs necessary to
advance such technologies in a timely manner, and maximize the Government's
investments in new programs such as NSF's Molecular Architecture Initiative.
&lt;br/&gt;