* 0136764
* Video Traces:  Create, Disseminate, Analyze
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2002,12/31/2006
* Martin Reisslein, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Wu
* 12/31/2006
* USD 733,308.00

Encoded video is expected to account for a large portion of the traffic in the
Internet of the future&lt;br/&gt;and next generation wireless networks. The
video carried over future networks is expected to be (1)&lt;br/&gt;coded using
heterogeneous encoding schemes, (2) coded at a range of quality levels, and (3)
to a large extent scalable encoded (e.g., into several layers) to enable
scalable multimedia services over highly heterogeneous networks. To date the
traffic characteristics of these heterogeneous and scalable encoded videos are
largely unexplored (only a few initial observations based on a small number of
short video sequences have been made). Even less is known about the implications
of these traffic characteristics for the network transport of heterogeneous and
scalable encoded video. Therefore, the researcher proposes a comprehensive large
scale study of the traffic characteristics and the network transport of
heterogeneous and scalable encoded video. The researcher will
investigate&lt;br/&gt;1. the traffic characteristics (i.e., statistical
properties) in conjunction with the video quality and&lt;br/&gt;the content
features, and&lt;br/&gt;2. the network capacity, i.e., the number of video
streams that a given network can support&lt;br/&gt;(multiplexing performance)
subject to given quality of service (QoS) constraints&lt;br/&gt;both
for&lt;br/&gt;(a) non scalable video encoded at a range of quality levels using
diffierent encoding schemes, and&lt;br/&gt;(b) scalable encoded
video.&lt;br/&gt;These traffic and networking studies are traditionally based on
traces of real video traffic. The&lt;br/&gt;existing video trace libraries,
however, provide only frame size traces of a limited number of
single&lt;br/&gt;layer MPEG 1 encoded videos. Hence, the existing trace
libraries are inadequate for this study&lt;br/&gt;(and also for other
researchers studying scalable multimedia services over networks). Therefore, the
researcher proposes to create an extensive publicly available trace library of
heterogeneous and&lt;br/&gt;scalable encoded video as the basis for the proposed
study. The researchers will &lt;br/&gt;(1) encode over 100 di.erent videos,
spanning a wide range of video genres and lengths and&lt;br/&gt;including
diverse texture and motion characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;(2) encode each video into
a single layer (non scalable) at a range of quality levels using
di.erent&lt;br/&gt;encoding schemes.&lt;br/&gt;(3) encode each video into
several quality layers, using the temporal, spatial, SNR, and
data&lt;br/&gt;partitioning scalability modes, as well as the object based
scalability mode of MPEG 4.&lt;br/&gt;(4) broaden the notion of video traces by
capturing the video traffic, the video content features,&lt;br/&gt;and the video
quality in traces.&lt;br/&gt;(5) disseminate the created video trace library
through publicly available web sites.&lt;br/&gt;The trace library will stimulate
research on protocols and mechanisms for scalable multimedia&lt;br/&gt;services
in heterogeneous wireline and wireless networks. To date, the research in this
area has been hampered by the lack of representative traces of scalable encoded
video. In fact, the lack of realistic traffic data for scalable video may have
prevented the development of e.cient and reliable protocols for heterogeneous
multimedia services.&lt;br/&gt;As part of the seed work for the proposed
project, the researchers have created a preliminary publicly available library
of traces of non scalable MPEG 4 and H.263en coded video
(http://www.eas.asu.edu/trace) and studied the statistical properties of the
traces in the library. This library is a first attempt at providing MPEG 4 and
H.263 video traces. These traces are already widely used by networking
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;The PIs complement each other in their competencies.
Martin Reisslein brings to the project&lt;br/&gt;his expertise in developing and
evaluating traffic management schemes for video traffic in high&lt;br/&gt;speed
wireline networks and wireless networks. Sethuraman Panchanathan brings to the
project his&lt;br/&gt;expertise in video compression, scalable video coding,
video content analysis, and MPEG 4.