* 0136980
* Doctoral Dissertation Research In Political Science: Politics and Protest in New Democracies
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Steven Solnick, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2004
* USD 12,184.00

Analysis of the development of democracy in the advanced industrialized world
has repeatedly pointed to the role of social protest and civic organization in
expanding the franchise and consolidating the liberal rights associated with
democracy. Consequently, the extent and nature of protest in post-authoritarian
states might be expected to have an important impact on the development of
democracy there. Yet so far there has been little research that gives us a
systematic understanding of either how much, or what kind of protest has
accompanied economic reforms and democratization in the East. As a result, the
theory of the causes of protest and passivity, and their impact on
democratization has been slow to develop. This Doctoral Dissertation research
addresses the problem in two ways. First, it develops and makes available to
other researchers a searchable database of strikes, hunger-strikes,
demonstrations and other forms of protest that took place across the 89 regions
of the Russian Federation between 1997 and 2000. This original dataset will
considerably enhance the scholarly community's ability to analyze in detail
political protest in one of the largest post- authoritarian states. Second, it
develops a theory of protest and passivity that integrates elite politics into
the model. Protest mobilization is hypothesized to be a function of bargaining
between central and regional elites and of political competition among elites at
the regional level. These hypotheses are tested quantitatively using the
database and qualitatively using a series of case studies. If support is found
for the theory that intra-elite politics is driving mass politics, scholars will
have gained insight into the top-down rather than bottom-up nature of much of
mass politics in post-authoritarian societies and will need to reassess the
relationship between political protest and democratization in light of this
finding Funding from the NSF contributes to the research by supporting travel to
and around Russia that is essential both to the development of the database and
to the testing of hypotheses about mobilization. The database is being developed
with a collaborator in Moscow. On-going collaboration is essential to ensure the
reliability and accuracy of the data and will require meetings in Moscow. In
testing hypotheses, the statistical research based on this dataset is combined
with a series of qualitative case studies that permit analysis of the causal
mechanisms at work. The case studies require visits to three regional research
sites in Russia. NSF funding