* 0136833
* Tracking the Causes and Consequences of Racial Disparities in Imprisonment
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2003
* Pamela Oliver, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 05/31/2003
* USD 48,361.00

SES-0136833 Pamela Oliver University of Wisconsin, Madison

This pilot project will examine the feasibility of creating a database that will
allow the PI to study both the overall trend of rising imprisonment and rising
racial disparities in imprisonment, and geographical and temporal differences in
these trends. The PI will use official data sets on arrests, imprisonment merged
with social, economic, and demographic factors to create the new longitudinal
data set that allow one to control for current and previous reported crimes and
race-specific arrest rates as well as social factors in predicting imprisonment
rates. Cross-sectionally, the most serious crime is found to account for very
little of the racial disparity in prison admissions; differential arrest rates
and differential prison/arrest ratios in drug offenses and property crimes
account for the majority of imprisonment disparity. The research seeks to
determine the factors that lead to high enforcement levels against African
Americans for drug offenses and lower-level offenses. A range of hypotheses will
be tested, i.e., this enforcement arises as a reaction to prior elevated levels
of serious violent crimes, to increasing in-migration or integration of
minorities and whites, to exogenous macroeconomic or political factors that
affect crime or policing, or to "shocks" such as drug panics. Secondly, it seeks
to identify the consequences of high rates of imprisonment of African Americans,
testing the hypothesis that, net of controls, black imprisonment rates adversely
affects black economic well-being and family stability in a manner that
indirectly contribute to increasing crime rates

Existing official data sets will be processed to create this new longitudinal
data set containing county-level data on race-and offense-specific arrest and
incarceration rates, along with a wide variety of social, economic and legal
indicators. The data set will be constructed for the time period of 1983-1997
and completed by merging data from the National Corrections Reporting Program
and the Uniform Crime Reports, along with other data on law enforcement,
corrections, social, economic and demographic factors from the Census Bureau,
the Bureau of Justice Statistics and other sources.