* 0136684
* Charitable Giving:   A Field Test of Rebates and Matching Subsidies
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2008
* Philip Grossman, St. Cloud State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 05/31/2008
* USD 333,030.00

Economic theory suggests that an individual's charitable giving would be the
same under appropriately paired rebate and match subsidy rates. For example, a
20 percent rebate subsidy and a 25 percent match subsidy both result in an
effective price of $0.80 to give $1 to a charity. With equal prices of giving,
and assuming other determinants of giving are the same, the level of giving
should not differ with the subsidy type. Contrary to theory, results from
research conducted in a laboratory setting indicate that giving differs
significantly across the two types of subsidies. This project is a field
experiment examining subsidized giving to four diverse nonprofit institutions
designed to test the validity of the laboratory results. The lab experiment has
a number of weaknesses that can best be overcome with a field study. In a
laboratory setting, a subject plays with money provided by the experimenter;
i.e. "house money." When playing with house money subjects may make choices that
are different from those they would make when allocating their own money. In the
field study, subjects will be making decisions affecting their own money and
choices made should be a more accurate measure of their true preference. The
subject pool available for lab experiments is highly constrained -- with respect
to age, income, marital status, and experience -- relative to the general
population. A field study permits a more representative sample of potential
donors and more statistically reliable results. The importance of this research
is evidenced both by the frequent proposals to reform the United States federal
personal income tax, and by the number of matching gift programs operated by
corporations in both the United States and Canada. Two tax reform proposals that
have received attention are a flat-rate income tax and a consumption tax; both
proposals include the elimination of many, if not all, currently allowed
deductions. The current Bush reform involves a reduction in marginal tax rates
at higher income levels, reducing the effective subsidy to charitable giving.
Any of these reforms is likely to leave such organizations with lower levels of
funding. Assuming public sentiment favors the continued support of nonprofit and
charitable organizations, alternative methods of subsidizing charitable giving
should be explored. In addition, if these results are confirmed, they suggest
that replacing the current system of tax rebate with an equivalently-costly
matching subsidy system could increase contributions to charitable
organizations. The impact of corporate matching gifts programs on giving to
nonprofits and charitable organizations also has not been carefully examined.
This is especially true in light of the fact that matching gift programs are
becoming increasingly common features of corporate philanthropy.