* 0136842
* Union Dynamics at the Establishment Level
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2006
* Thomas Holmes, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/2006
* USD 254,610.00

The share of workers covered by union contracts has plummeted dramatically in
recent years. This research project studies this union decline in three new
ways. First, it takes a new viewing angle to observe the process. Previous work
looks at the process at the industry level or at the regional level. In
contrast, this project studies union dynamics at the establishment level.
Second, the project collects and creates new data sets. In particular it will
recover discarded data on union local organizations (the Labor Organization and
Reporting System) spanning 1960 to the present and it will publicly archive this
new data. Third, the project focuses on a new issue, the role of neighborhood or
spillover effects. A neighborhood effect exists when it is easier for a union to
organize an establishment when neighboring establishments are organized. The
issue of neighborhood effects is important, because when these effects are
present, small changes in the underlying economic environment can lead to large
changes in the extent of unionism. The project will quantify the extent to which
neighborhood effects can account for why unions collapsed in the early 1980s,
and why unions are weak in the South, but are still strong the upper Midwest and
Northeast.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the process of union decline is of
direct interest in itself. But in addition, this process has been intertwined
with numerous other major trends in the economy. These trends include: the rise
in the wage differentiable between skilled and unskilled workers, the movement
towards the use of temporary workers and the rise of outsourcing, and the major
shift in manufacturing from the union North to the nonunion South. The research
in this project increases our understanding of all of these issues. The research
also contributes to the general economics literature by making progress in
identifying neighborhood effects. Neighborhood effects are thought to arise in
many economic contexts including technology adoption, education, and even crime.
The procedures developed in this research project have the potential to be
applied to these other issues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;