* 0136193
* Collaborative Research:  Spatially Additive and Discrete-Choice Spatial Models
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Kelley Pace, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 05/31/2004
* USD 129,657.00

The continued growth in the availability and use of spatial data on a broad
range of phenomena have fueled a drive to develop more effective and
statistically sound approaches for the analysis of those data. Because spatial
data have distinctive characteristics that do not enable the immediate
application of many statistical approaches because fundamental assumptions that
underlie the use of those approaches, focused inquiries are required into the
development of new spatial statistical approaches and careful adaptation in the
use of extant statistical methods for spatial analysis. These awards support
collaborative research by two spatial econometricians on two different kinds of
spatial analytic modeling approaches. The first of these approaches deals with
spatially additive models. Traditionally, the two main methods for analyzing
spatial data have been (1) to model the conditional mean of the dependent
variable and (2) to focus on specification of spatial dependence among
observation. The spatially additive model is designed to combine the
specification of the conditional mean with the specification of spatial
dependence among observations. The proposed development of spatially additive
models in this project will be based on recent innovations that allow
generalized additive models to be extended to spatial analysis. First, sparse
specification of spatial dependence, quadratic log-determinant approximations
and bounds, and computational advances have increased both the speed with which
spatial estimation can be accomplished and the size of practical problems that
can be solved. Second, quadratic bounds and approximations to the log-
determinant can lead to a standard sequential quadratic programming solution
that permit quick computation and robust optimization. These advances also allow
simultaneous parameter estimation and model selection. The second major line of
inquiry for this collaborative project consists of the development of
multinomial probit estimation methods for regional science modeling problems
where the sample data exhibit spatial dependence. Multinomial probit models can
be applied to problems where the variable of interest represents a choice
between two or more alternatives. Estimation methods and algorithms that are
generally applicable are not currently available for the case when the
polychotomous dependent variable disturbance process in the relationship
exhibits spatial dependence. The methods to be developed through this project
will address this issue and have application to location decisions involving
spatial data. Theoretical issues relating to use of multinomial probit models
and three alternative estimation strategies will be evaluated. The strategies
are maximum likelihood estimation, Bayesian estimators based on Markov Chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) estimation, and a hybrid strategy based on MCMC methods and
Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outcomes from the
project are expected to include theoretical development of spatial multinomial
probit model specification and estimation as well as algorithms and code that
will be of value in the toolkit of methods available to spatial econometricians,
regional scientists, and geographers. The new statistical approaches to be
developed through this project will complement the approaches developed by these
investigators and other leading spatial statisticians, thereby further enhancing
the range of tools that researchers can use to effectively analyze a broad range
of spatial databases. Because the investigators will make their results
available through user-friendly software and documentation, this work should
foster continued methodological development as well as enhanced capabilities for
geographic and spatial econometric inquiry.&lt;br/&gt;