* 0136922
* Vintage-Capital, Distortions and Development
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Rafael Rob, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2006
* USD 264,493.00

This project improves our understanding of how economic factors affect income
differences across countries. The focus of the research will be on the adoption
of new technology in a "vintage capital" context. Vintage capital is a scenario
whereby new technology can be implemented only if new machines that embody it
are brought on line. This is different from the scenario of homogeneous capital,
where technological progress can be exploited without the purchase of new
machines. Vintage capital is quite a bit harder to deal with, which is the
reason that many analyses have focused on homogenous capital. The thesis of this
research is that models of vintage capital can be made manageable and
empirically operational, and that they perform much better than models of
homogenous capital. In particular they can explain income gaps and the
particular mechanisms that lead to such gaps much better. Of late there have
been suggestions in the economic literature that cultural and other non-economic
factors explain a great deal of income differences across countries. The thesis
of this project is that a carefully crafted economic model will do quite well
without having to resort to such non-economic explanations.

More specifically, this project analyzes models of embodied technological
progress and vintage capital. The objective is to determine the extent to which
distortions to the adoption of new technology can block economic growth.
Distortions are broadly understood: They could be taxes and tariffs on the
purchase of machines, bureaucratic impediments to the construction of structures
and production facilities, delays, corruption, red tape, etc. The project
constructs a quantitative model, capable of delivering numerical results
concerning the effects of such distortions: To what extent distortions stifle
investments, the capital stock of a country, the adoption decisions of
manufacturers, wages of workers, and the GDP of a country. The project pursues a
three-pronged approach. First, a theoretical model of the adoption of new
technology by individual firms is constructed. Considering many such firms the
model will then be aggregated to yield the theoretical counterparts of National
Income statistics. Second, the model's parameters are calabrated using U.S.
National Income data. The investigator also estimates econometrically the
model's production function, using international data. These two steps provide a
quantitative model, which is designed to predict the extent to which distortions
can stifle the growth of an economy. Third, the project considers different
countries as having different distortions and then determine what the model
predicts will happen to their GDP. The investigator performs development
decomposition exercises, determining how distortions, educational levels and
efficiencies account for GDP differences across countries.

