* 0136035
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grants: Relocating Indigenous Identity: Transnational Advocacy, Knowledge and Video in Oaxaca, Mexico
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2002
* John Jones, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 12/31/2002
* USD 11,976.00

In southern Mexico, indigenous organizations struggle for autonomy by working
with transnational non-governmental organizations (NGOs) concerned with
environmental problems, resource use, human rights, and socioeconomic
inequalities. New information and communication technologies (NICTs) are
essential to these networks of advocacy. Greater access to NICTs provides
indigenous organizations with&lt;br/&gt;the means for self-representation, and
thus changes the production of indigenous knowledge and identity. This
dissertation project studies one such network in Oaxaca, Mexico with an
examination of a grassroots support organization, Ojo de Agua Comunicacion, that
endeavors to put new information and communication
technology,&lt;br/&gt;especially video equipment, at the disposal of indigenous
communities. This research asks what are the organizational practices of video-
mediated indigenous knowledge production? Who is accessing video technology and
how is this access mediated by networks of advocacy? How is this video
technology used to produce indigenous self-representations and challenge
dominant constructions of cultural identity?&lt;br/&gt;There are two specific
research tasks supported by this grant: 1. an organizational ethnography of Ojo
de Agua Comunicacion aimed at understanding its acquisition and use of NICTs in
the process of assisting indigenous self-representation; and 2. an interpretive
analysis of video-mediated self-representations of indigenous knowledge that
this organization enables. For the first task, the everyday strategies of action
of Ojo de Agua are studied&lt;br/&gt;through participant-observation and in-
depth interviews. The second task draws upon geographic methods of analyzing the
spaces of representation in terms of cultural politics and the production of
knowledge to provide an interpretive analysis of indigenous videos made possible
with the assistance of Ojo de Agua. This dissertation research is important for
three reasons. First, there is an explosion of transnational NGO activity and
this study provides ethnographic insight into the practices of advocacy. Second,
the use of NICTs drastically alters the ways that indigenous knowledge is
produced and this investigation reveals the impact of these changes in Oaxaca,
Mexico. Although this is a case study by virtue of method and research
questions, these relocations in authorial agency are happening all over Latin
America and throughout the global south, and it is crucial to understand how
technoscience contributes to them. Focusing on video-mediated indigenous
knowledge, this project will demonstrate how technoscience empowers
authoritative self-representations of indigenous identity.&lt;br/&gt;