* 0136703
* Interpreting Geographies of Poverty: Rural Gentrification and White Poverty in the American Northwest
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Lucy Jarosz, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 06/30/2007
* USD 177,438.00

This research project will examine the recursive relationships between the
socio-economic forces producing rural poverty and the cultural processes through
which the poor and rural poverty are identified by diverse residents of rapidly
gentrifying areas in the rural American Northwest. The research will also
explore how people understand class and gender differences in the context of
high in-migration and rapid development and change in areas of persistent rural
poverty. The research project will be conducted over a three-year period and
will use both quantitative and qualitative methods. It will investigate the
patterns of white poverty and economic restructuring across non-metropolitan
counties and rural census tracts in Washington, Idaho and Montana. Economically
booming and more stagnant places characterized by either high levels of white
poverty or inequality will be compared in order to probe the ways in which
social and cultural tensions over rural restructuring and poverty are being
worked out in the Northwest. Initially, a quantitative typology of non-metro
counties will be constructed to characterize restructuring patterns. The
specific mechanisms by which class difference is represented and reproduced will
then be investigated using in-depth interviews and focus group techniques. The
research will combine several elements of studies of rural poverty. First, it
will engage the literatures on regional economic and demographic change
processes. Second, it will describe the political economy of rural restructuring
and link these analytic descriptions to the cultural dimensions of rural change.
The theoretical goal is to extend political-economy research through the
incorporation of cultural and ideological processes in order to build a richer
understanding of how poverty and socio-cultural differences are co-produced.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project makes empirical, theoretical and
applied contributions. The research focuses on places where a large portion of
those in poverty are white and so poverty cannot be racialized as a non-white
issue. In these contexts, the project will examine how poverty is understood in
the context of economic restructuring and migration in the Northwest. As the
urban/rural divide becomes increasingly more porous and contested as urbanites
move to rural spaces, it becomes ever more important to understand the ways in
which marginalized populations are defined. The project also extends a research
agenda on the recursive relationships between political-economic restructuring
and the socio-cultural construction of class difference. The geographically
specific analyses of restructuring and poverty will contribute to the goal of
bringing cultural and ideological analysis into creative tension with political-
economy approaches, thereby incorporating cultural considerations and meanings
into the politics and economics, which define rural poverty. Finally, this
research will be informative to community members and policy makers as they work
to address the problems of poverty and to create inclusive communities in the
face of rapid change.&lt;br/&gt;