* 0136861
* Identification and Characterization of Genes Implicated in Saxitoxin Biosynthesis in Dinoflagellates
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2007
* Donald Anderson, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 04/30/2007
* USD 612,008.00

"Blooms" of toxic dinoflagellates from several different genera result in
outbreaks of paralytic shellfish poisoning (PSP), one of the more serious of the
global marine phenomena collectively termed harmful algal blooms (HABs). The
economic, public health, and ecosystem impacts of PSP outbreaks take a variety
of forms, and include human intoxications and death from contaminated shellfish
or fish, alterations of marine trophic structure, and death of marine mammals,
fish, and seabirds. These impacts are caused by saxitoxins (STXs), a family of
neurotoxins produced by some dinoflagellates (and cyanobacteria) that are
accumulated in zooplankton, shellfish, or fish during feeding. The chemical
structure and activity of the saxitoxins have been well characterized, but their
metabolic role within the dinoflagellate remains unknown. Likewise, the factors
that cause variability in toxicity between isolates or in a single isolate under
different growth conditions are poorly understood. These issues are best
addressed through the study of saxitoxin production at a molecular or genetic
level, but that approach faces several major hurdles, in particular a lack of
mutant strains that are identical to toxic forms except for their ability to
produce toxins. This project will identify and characterize genes associated
with STX production in dinoflagellates, continuing directly from significant
results obtained in previous studies. In the initial project a powerful
technique called Representational Difference Analysis (RDA), a method for
finding differences between complex genomes that was developed in the search for
genetic abnormalities in human cancer cells, was used to generate two gene
fragments (called RDA1 and RDA2) that are expressed in a toxic Alexandrium
isolate but not in a non-toxic strain. One of these fragments was screened
against mRNA from 15 cultures and correctly hybridized to the only six organisms
that produce STXs, even though these represent five different species from two
dinoflagellate genera, as well as a freshwater cyanobacterium. This strongly
suggests that RDA1 is associated with saxitoxin production or regulation. In the
present project this exciting and productive line of research, the ultimate
objectives of which are to identify and characterize the gene(s)involved in
saxitoxin biosynthesis in dinoflagellates and to study their regulation under
changing environmental conditions, will be continued. Specific project
objectives are to: 1) utilize rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE) and
genomic cloning to obtain full sequences of the putative toxin-specific gene
fragments, RDA1 and RDA2; 2) identify and characterize the genes encoded by RDA1
and RDA2; 3) conduct inter-and intraspecific screening of toxic and non-toxic
dinoflagellates with the RDA1 and RDA2 genes from Alexandrium; 4) conduct
physiological experiments to study the genetic regulation of RDA1 and RDA2; 5)
perform additional Representational Difference Analysis on toxic and non-toxic
Gymnodinium catenatum and Alexandrium isolates, if necessary; and 6)develop and
test molecular probes which can distinguish toxic from non-toxic
dinoflagellates. The methodological groundwork has been established to allow
this project to proceed with a high probability of success. It is expected that
the project will isolate and identify genes required for STX production, but any
marker that can differentiate toxic from non-toxic strains is of great
scientific and practical value. With either result, probes can be designed that
unequivocally identify only toxic cells in a complex natural assemblage of
plankton, and these are of use in academic field research as well as in
commercial and governmental shellfish toxicity monitoring programs.