* 0136747
* The Effects of Legitimacy on Responses to Injustice
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Karen Hegtvedt, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 05/31/2007
* USD 140,638.00

SES-0136747&lt;br/&gt;Karen Hegtvedt&lt;br/&gt;Cathryn Johnson&lt;br/&gt;Emory
University &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will conduct two experiments
that provide a novel combination of the justice and legitimacy areas in group
processes research. Generally, missing from the justice literature is the notion
of justice as a collective process, albeit one dependent on individual
perceptions. This research will augment current understanding of reactions to
injustice in task groups by incorporating collective sources of legitimacy. It
also will have implications for understanding issues of injustice in concrete
instances such as wage disputes, environmental conflict, and organizational
budget decisions. Specifically, the objective of this research is to address two
general questions: 1) how does the legitimacy of an outcome distribution affect
an individual's emotional and behavioral reactions to perceived injustice? and
2) how does the legitimacy of an allocator and his or her use of fair or unfair
procedures affect an individual's emotional and behavioral responses to
perceived injustice? Legitimacy takes two collective forms: authorization refers
to support by individuals who occupy higher positions within a group than the
focal person and endorsement refers to similar support from people of equal or
lower status than the focal person. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hypotheses pertaining
to the two questions above are derived from tenets of justice and legitimacy
theories. To test the effects of legitimacy and other factors on perceptions of
and reactions to injustice, two computerized experiments are created. Experiment
One addresses the effects of legitimacy of the outcome distribution and group
identification on perceptions of and reactions to an unjust (from the subject's
point of view) outcome distribution. The design of Experiment One is a 2 x 2 x 2
factorial experiment that includes: authorization of outcome distribution
(low/high), endorsement of outcome distribution (low/high), and group identity
(salience of identity with peers/salience of identity with authorities). The
dependent variables are perceptions of the justness of the outcome distribution,
emotional expressions, and cognitive and behavioral responses to perceptions of
injustice. Experiment Two examines the effects of legitimacy of the allocator
and procedural justice on reactions to an unjust outcome distribution.
Experiment Two is also a 2 x 2 x 2 factorial experiment involving authorization
of the allocator, endorsement of the allocator, and procedural justice
(fair/unfair procedures). Computer programs will be developed for each
experiment to create independent variable manipulations. Approximately 160
subjects are required for each experiment (n=20 subjects in each cell).
&lt;br/&gt;