* 0136005
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: A Glaciochemical Record of Natural and Anthropengic Environmental Change in the Northwestern North American Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Karl Kreutz, University of Maine
* Continuing grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 04/30/2006
* USD 138,805.00

0136005 Kreutz This is a collaborative proposal between the Universities of New
Hampshire and Maine and the Geological Survey of Canada. This Office of
International Science and Engineering is contributing to this award. The
Principal Investigators will recover two ice cores the Eclipse Icefield (3100
meters) in the St. Elias Mountains, Yukon Territory, Canada in cooperation with
the Geological Survey of Canada in 2002. The core will be analyzed for stable
isotopes, major ions, trace elements, rare earth elements and persistent organic
pollutants. The Eclipse record will provide, for the first time, detailed
depositional histories of a wide variety of pollutants during the last 200 years
in the remote northwest North American Arctic. Through the use of unique
chemical tracers, the Principal Investigators will be able to identify source
regions for these pollutants, changes in source regions with time, and the role
of atmospheric circulation in controlling contaminant distributions in the
northwest North American Arctic. The detailed multi-parameter record of natural
and anthropogenic change will result in a greatly improved record of climate and
environmental change for a region in which very few records currently exist.