* 0136900
* Collaborative Research:   Dye Tracer and Modeling Investigations of Cross-Shelf Circulation during Coastal Upwelling
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Murray Levine, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 02/28/2006
* USD 306,425.00

Dale 0136900

Field and simulation studies will be used to determine where upwelled water
originates, i.e. solely from the bottom boundary layer (BBL) or from a thicker
region of the lower layer fluid, and where the displaced surface water goes,
e.g. offshore in the the surface layer or, through subduction, to intermediate
layers. Five dye studies, using fluorescene and rhodamine-WT, are proposed for
the upwelling region over the Oregon shelf. Releases will occur in three
different locations - beneath and inshore of the upwelling jet, in the BBL
beneath the jet where onshore movement is expected, and inshore of the jet, just
beneath the mixed layer but still in the Ekman layer, where offshore movement
and possible subduction is expected. Dye will be tracked for 72 hours. The
background environment will be defined by GLOBEC cruises, at least during the
first field year. Three releases from the R/V Elakha will be traced during the
first year. The second year will involve two larger releases from the R/V
Wecoma. A version of the Princeton Ocean Model, configured for the region, will
be run for comparison. Particle tracing techniques will be used to model the
initial, small-scale dispersion. Both idealized situations and realistic
modeling will be attempted. A 2-D ocean-going model will be used, in conjunction
with buoyed GPS drifters, to track the subsurface dye patch after release. The
results of the study will be a set of Lagrangian observations of cross-shelf
transport pathways during upwelling. These will lead to improved understanding
of circulation and mixing.