* 0136119
* STS Fellowships: Science Consultants, Fictional Films, and the Scientific Process
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2002,09/30/2003
* Bruce Lewenstein, Cornell University
* Fellowship Award
* Keith R. Benson
* 09/30/2003
* USD 42,000.00

Project Abstract SES Proposal 0136119 Bruce Lewenstein/David Kirby, Science
Consultants, Fictional Films, and the Scientific Process Cornell University

This project is a postdoctoral fellowship. David Kirby, the fellowship holder,
is pursuing a combined educational and research program focused on the role of
science consultants in the production of mainstream entertainment films. The
primary goals are to: 1) learn the theory of science studies; 2) learn methods
for researching issues of science communication through the media, including
interview methods and historical analysis; 3) begin the transition from a career
in basic science to a research and teaching career in science studies; and 4)
broaden the domain of "Public Understanding of Science" to include science
presented in entertainment media. Kirby is trained as an evolutionary and
molecular geneticist and seeks preparation for a career as an academic
researcher unsing a multi-disciplinary approach to address the ways science and
technology are communicated through media.

The postdoctoral training component of the project consists of taking core
theory and methods courses, participating in the vibrant intellectual life of
Cornell's Department of Science & Technology Studies, and working closely with
specific faculty members. In addition, the fellowship holder will serve as an
assistant editor for the journal "Public Understanding of Science."

The research activities include literature searches, archival research, document
collection, film viewing, and analysis related to mainstream films with science
themes. The primary case study is the Jurassic Park series, and will include
oral interviews. A related research element concerns the commidification of
scientific information. Here attention is given to one individual entrepreneur,
Donna Cline, and a science consulting company, Takeoff Technologies.