* 0136375
* Evolution of a Channel/Floodplain System: Waipaoa River, New Zealand
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Basil Gomez, Indiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2006
* USD 87,796.00

Although rivers and the flood plains they occupy have long been the focus of
scholarly attention, many aspects of their dynamic evolution are not fully
understood. Vertical accretion and channel narrowing due to suspended sediment
deposition have been documented by geomorphologists over long time scales in
qualitative or semi-quantitative terms, but complementary data on the
contemporary rates at which these interrelated processes operate are lacking.
This research project will assemble a comprehensive, quantitative geomorphic
history for a channel-floodplain system along the Waipaoa River on the eastern
side of the North Island of New Zealand. Previous research has shown that the
floodplain is characterized by rapid growth through vertical accretion, which
has a measurable lateral component at the decadal time scale. This will be
achieved by analyzing cross-section survey data, obtained since 1948 at 0.8-km
(0.5-mile) intervals within a 40-km long reach. These analyses will ascertain
the controls on in-channel sedimentation and will determine the extent to which
the observed changes in cross-section geometry compliment the previously
documented process of vertical accretion on the Waipaoa River floodplain.

By considering complementary data for both the channel and floodplain, this
research will shed light on the manner in which a river adjusts it hydraulics
and morphology following a well-documented disturbance to the catchment
environment (clearance of the native forest in the nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries). By correlating patterns of overbank deposition and the
complimentary process of in-channel deposition that promotes channel narrowing,
the project will show how the coupled channel-floodplain system has responded to
human-induced change in the historic period. The project therefore will afford a
unique perspective on a suite of processes that has long been surmised from
stratigraphic studies and is recognized to represent a fundamental adjustment of
the fluvial system to human-related disturbance. This research also will provide
the direct observational experience necessary to test relevant width adjustment
and floodplain growth models which provide a mechanistic explanation for the
tendency of a gravel-bed channel, like the Waipaoa River, that is subject to an
increase in the supply of fine sediment load, to evolve into a narrower, deeper
river with fine banks and a coarse bed.

