* 0136404
* Control and Observation of Mixing and Fluid Flow
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Gilead Tadmor, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2006
* USD 180,000.00

The objective of the proposed research is to develop generic methods for active
feedback control of complex, non-equilibrium fluid flow. While active control of
fluid flow has been studied, the use of feedback in non-equilibrium flows is
largely a new territory.

A main hindrance to applying off-the-shelf control methods is the absence of
appropriate models. Existing models tend to either be simplistic steady models
or, on the other extreme, complex computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulation
models, whose mere size and the lack of an invariant concept of state space are
prohibitive in feedback design. The modeling challenge goes hand in hand with
the development of practical design tools, tailored to the needs of fluid flow
applications, and utilizing their ``redeeming factors". Such factors include the
formation of few, large coherent structures, periodicity of some reference
orbits, and useful concepts of Hamiltonian energy.

A focus on periodic characteristics of coherent structures, such as the period
itself, extrema of relevant indices over a period, and, indeed, leading Fourier
coefficients (phasors), reduces the model to manageable size and incorporates
intrinsic filtering. That filtering (both spatially and temporally) is expected
to reduce effects of chaotic and stochastic dynamics, that feasible control
methods are likely to be unable to address. Under typical, periodic and low gain
actuation, periodic characteristics of both the controlled structure and sensor
signals are expected to be slowly varying. In its simplest form, an observer
model would be that of fixed period and phasors. Identified algebraic and / or
(slow) dynamic relationships between periodic characteristics of the sensor
signal, the actuation signal and those of the controlled structure, together
will comprise the control-oriented system model and will be used for control
design. That is, feedback control will translate observed slow variations in the
periodic characteristics of the system into slow variations in the periodic
characteristics of the actuation signal. Energy storage expressions for the
lumped model can be used for feasible control design, such as in regulating the
total stored energy, or the periodic energy exchange between relevant
Hamiltonians.



