* 0136671
* Deployable in Situ Electrochemical Analyzer (ISEA) for Remote and Automatic Analysis of O2, H2S and Sulfur Species in Hydrothermal Vent Environments
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2005
* George Luther, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 02/28/2005
* USD 367,145.00

P.I. Luther&lt;br/&gt; 0136671&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes to
purchase an in situ electrochemical analyzer (ISEA) that can be deployed at any
ocean depth on landers, moorings and CTD type profilers for remote aquatic
experiments in waters and porewaters. With this instrument, many redox species
can be determined simultaneously by voltammetry at a gold-amalgam solid-state
electrode during one potential scan. These species include dissolved oxygen,
sulfide, thiosulfate, polysulfides, iodide, Fe(II), Mn(II), and FeS. Oxygen can
be measured with high precision and sensitivity as can total dissolved sulfide.
No chemical manipulations are necessary for measurement and up to four working
electrodes can be mounted at different depths and locations to obtain chemical
information in the water column. This analyzer is ideal for monitoring important
redox regimes such as the development of seasonal anoxia in nearshore and shelf
environments, the changes in sulfur chemistry at hydrothermal vents and the
profiles of redox species in sediments, stagnant bays, estuaries and basins. In
a previous submission, these areas of study were targeted for making
measurements but the reviewers indicated that this was too ambitious and only
one should be selected for further work. In this proposal, the focus is on
hydrothermal vent research. A major concern at vents is; what are the changes in
vent and diffuse flow chemistry that affect the way organisms colonize different
sites? Recent work has shown that different biological organisms reside in
different chemical niches. Thus, in situ sensors that can measure a variety of
redox species would be ideal for improving our understanding of biogeochemical
studies of water chemistry on temporal and spatial scales in these
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A prototype in situ electrochemical analyzer
has been successfully used on the DSV Alvin and is now commercially available
from Analytical Instrument Systems, Inc. This system was designed to use DC
power from DSV Alvin with electrodes deployed at given vent locations by the
submarine's manipulators controlled by an operator in the submersible. The next
step in development of this technology is to add remote or automatic capability
to the system to monitor temporal changes in a variety of systems. Although the
ISEA is a single system, it will have four Au/Hg working electrodes with four
temperature and pH sensors integrated with each of the working electrodes. In
essence, the ISEA is four separate instrument packages for voltammetry,
temperature and pH in one analyzer, which permits analysis of four separate
locations/depths. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of this proposal the gold-
amalgam (Au/Hg) electrodes will be tested for long-term deployment. The testing
will include long-term deployment in estuarine waters at the University of
Delaware's harbor and at hydrothermal vent waters. &lt;br/&gt;