* 0136720
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Dynamics of Technological Innovation:  Incumbents' Adaptation and Capability Building on the Internet
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Gerardine DeSanctis, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 02/29/2004
* USD 7,660.00

This research examines how established firms adapt to technological innovations,
such as the Internet, as well as the performance implications of such
innovations. The specific research questions are: How strongly do current
innovative efforts, relative to past experience, influence a firm's speed of
technology adoption, the comprehensiveness of its technological adoption, and
the returns to innovation? How can later adopters, disadvantaged by past
innovation experience, catch up by increasing their innovative efforts? Although
there has been strong theoretical emphasis on dynamic capabilities as critical
to the adaptability of organizations, most empirical research has viewed
organizations as evolving along paths and within boundaries determined by past
experience. This study adds the new dimension of emerging capabilities to that
of past-accumulated experience as widely studied in the literature. Emerging
capabilities capture how firms organize for innovation once the decision for
adoption has been made. This research views innovation as a dynamic process
evolving over time and assesses the degree to which firms can directly influence
their innovation process versus the degree to which past experience (initial
capabilities) determines the path and direction of innovation. The dynamic
capabilities perspective is used to reveal how firm capabilities emerge,
develop, and change over time, as well as how firms integrate and reconfigure
internal and external competencies to respond to technological and environmental
change. Interviews with e-business managers and reviews of archival data
sources, such as press releases and trade journals, will shed light on firms'
adoption processes. Additionally, the project includes a large-scale survey of
senior executives in charge of Internet activities/e-business operations at more
than 600 U.S. financial institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although promising at
the outset, many innovations never pay off but rather consume enormous
resources. This study thus offers important new insights into the way in which
firms create value through collaboration and/or integration of existing with
newly-developed capabilities, and through internal versus external innovation-
related capability development. Moreover, ways in which later adopters manage to
catch up during the innovation implementation process will be examined. This
research analyzes firms' various adaptation strategies and innovation outcomes
in the context of the Internet. The study will assess the importance of Internet
implementation decisions relative to prior experience and timing of adoption,
proposing that how an innovation is implemented matters more than when it is
adopted. The findings from this research will ultimately provide organizations
with a better understanding of how to develop innovation-related capabilities
that improve innovation performance, and how to avoid implementation strategies
that reduce the likelihood of yielding benefits from innovation.