* 0136858
* Sequential Voting in Collegial Courts: An Experimental Design
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Kenneth Williams, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Isaac Unah
* 05/31/2005
* USD 150,000.00

Sequential voting among collegial courts during deliberations is a phenomenon
that is fairly consistent among different types of court systems. However, the
method of sequential voting varies widely from court to court. The U.S. Supreme
Court uses a seniority sequential voting system during the certiorari vote and
the original votes of merits, in which the most senior justice votes first, and
so on to the least senior member. U. S. state courts use a multitude of
sequential voting mechanisms which range from the seniority system described
above, to a reverse seniority system (in which the least tenured justice votes
first and so on to the most tenured justice voting last), to a rotation or
random seniority system (in which the order of voting is determined randomly).
Sequential voting processes affect the level of uncertainty judges confront when
they cast their vote on a case. The amount of uncertainty that judges confront
when they cast their vote is relevant because this influences a judge's ability
to vote strategically. Specifically, it may influence a judge's decision to join
the majority coalition. Being in the majority has two benefits for judges: an
individual-level benefit and a collective benefit. Individually, in certain
judicial systems, a judge who is in the majority has he opportunity to draft the
initial opinion where bargaining occurs. Collectively, the formation of
supermajorities is attractive since the legitimacy of the court's judgment is
heightened when there is consensus about a legal issue. To test the effect of
voting sequence, the researchers propose a series of laboratory experiments.
Laboratory experiments also allow control for relevant parameters, such as the
type of voting system, risk aversion of the judges, size of the court, the level
of uncertainty, and the saliency of the issue under consideration. This research
will provide evidence about which judge is more likely to vote strategically
given his or her position in the voting queue, and the rate of strategic voting
that should occur in each of the court systems. The experiments should also
provide some useful results about the social welfare properties of each system.