* 0136844
* RUI:  Mono- and Multi-layered Coatings Made with Metal Alkyls and Alkane Thiols on Hydroxylated Oxides
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2006
* Wilfred Tysoe, University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 04/30/2006
* USD 308,000.00

With the support of the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, Professor
Gutow at the University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh, is studying the modification of
hydroxylated oxide surfaces. Using a novel wet-chemical zinc alkyl treatment, he
and his undergraduate students are exploring the quality and kinetics of
formation of thin films formed using this approach. In collaboration with
Professor Tysoe at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, these films are
characterized using infrared spectroscopy, quartz crystal microbalance
measurements, and ultra-high vacuum surface analytical methods. Strategies for
the growth of well-characterized monolayer, multilayer, and composite films are
being developed. In addition, this research program serves as an important
training ground for undergraduate scientists at this primarily undergraduate
institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Effective routes to the formation of robust
coatings on oxide surfaces are needed for technological applications in
electronic materials chemistry and heterogeneous catalysis. With support from
the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, Professor Gutow and his
collaborators are examining novel zinc alkyl methods for forming these coatings.
Synthetic methods, film characterization, and undergraduate training in state of
the art research methods will result from this work. &lt;br/&gt;