* 0136221
* Symposium DD:  Polymer Interfaces and Thin Films; MRS Fall Meeting; Boston, MA; November 26-30, 2001
* MPS,DMR
* 10/15/2001,09/30/2002
* Robert Pachavis, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 09/30/2002
* USD 3,000.00

This symposium, to be held at the Materials Research Society Meeting November
26-30, focuses on polymer interfaces and thin
films.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;Polymer interfaces are critical for many
technological and industrial applications in thin films such as found in
electronic packaging, lithographic applications, sensor technology, or in bulk
systems such as adhesives or polymer blends. The structure and architecture of
interfaces in thin films and bulk polymeric systems involving applications can
be exceedingly complex. In thin films, the technological drive to diminish film
thickness while simultaneously enhancing homogeneity, stability and adhesion is
a challenging task driving research in newer areas of nanofilled and controlled
nanostructured and nanopatterned films. Tailoring of surface and interfacial
properties are equally important for new developments in traditional fields of
bulk polymer blends, reactive and compatibilized systems, etc. Since empirical
approaches to R&amp;D can be time-consuming and costly, the need also exists for
concurrent development of theory and modeling, and simulations of polymer
interfaces with predictive capability of ultimate structure-property
relationship. Novel methodologies and measurement techniques also play an
important role in the future development of the field, especially with the
advent of combinatorial methods to thin film coatings for material science. A
joint symposium with "Combinatorial Approach to Polymers" is planned.&lt;br/&gt;