* 0136348
* SGER: Flexible Index Structure for Relevance Feedback Content-Based Retrieval in Large Image Databases
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/2001,11/30/2002
* Jing Peng, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 11/30/2002
* USD 50,000.00

The objective of this project is to design efficient indexing strategies that
support flexible retrieval metric through relevance feedback learning. However,
trying to satisfy both goals (efficiency and flexibility) at the same time leads
to a conflict. A novel approach is explored to capture the inherent interplay
between flexible metrics and indexing that has the potential to resolve the
conflict. It is hypothesized that the interplay can be exploited to create
effective content-based retrieval systems that meet performance and
computational challenges encountered in practical image database applications.
This exploratory project seeks to establish the proof of concept of an approach
that trades off accuracy for efficiency, and that can avoid exhaustive search in
large-scale image databases. The methods to be explored are based on bump-
hunting in high-dimensional data for inducing a set of (possibly overlapping)
boxes that capture the local data distributions. The induced boxes effectively
cover the feature space, thereby providing an index to the image database. The
flexibility and efficiency of the novel indexing technique will be tested in
heterogeneous image databases that support a variety of query types, ranging
from query-by-image to query-by-region. If successful, the results of this
project will enable the use of flexible metric learning in large scale image
databases, which will have a significant impact in content-based image retrieval
in broad areas such as health-care, scientific images, education, or art.