* 0136957
* Collaborative Research:  Top-down Analysis of Forest Ecosystem Structure and Functioning
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2006
* Gregory Asner, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Martyn M. Caldwell
* 09/30/2006
* USD 437,116.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Asner&lt;br/&gt;0108338&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will use advances in technology, theory, and vegetation-radiation
models to determine the structural and chemical properties of tropical forest
canopies from aircraft and spacecraft vantage points. The research will be
carried out in forests of the Hawaiian Islands, that include unique species
diversity, broad ranges of climates and soil types, and intensive ongoing
biogeochemical research. Measurements of canopy structure and chemistry will be
carried out at multiple ecological scales and across a range of Hawaiian forests
conditions. Remote sensing measurements will then be obtained from a helicopter
hovering above the canopy, from the aircraft-based AVIRIS instrument at 20 km
altitude, and from the spaceborne Hyperion sensor. Forest structure and
chemistry in a broader set of ecosystems will also be evaluated with the
aircraft and satellite sensors, and checked with intensive ground and helicopter
measurements. This approach offers the possibility of assessing spatial
variation in canopy characteristics and ecosystem properties from the top down.
Rather than being limited to a few discrete sites, it should be possible to use
these new remote sensing observations to identify the magnitude and structure of
spatial variation in biogeochemical properties of ecosystems. This research also
will contribute to integration of remote sensing, biophysical modeling, and
ecosystem ecology, and to the education of students. The results are expected to
improve understanding of how forest canopies can be studied at large spatial
scales, and how the measurements can be used to assess the contribution of
different forest canopy conditions to ecosystem services in the region.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vitousek&lt;br/&
gt;0108492&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will use advances in technology,
theory, and vegetation-radiation models to determine the structural and chemical
properties of tropical forest canopies from aircraft and spacecraft vantage
points. The research will be carried out in forests of the Hawaiian Islands,
that include unique species diversity, broad ranges of climates and soil types,
and intensive ongoing biogeochemical research. Measurements of canopy structure
and chemistry will be carried out at multiple ecological scales and across a
range of Hawaiian forests conditions. Remote sensing measurements will then be
obtained from a helicopter hovering above the canopy, from the aircraft-based
AVIRIS instrument at 20 km altitude, and from the spaceborne Hyperion sensor.
Forest structure and chemistry in a broader set of ecosystems will also be
evaluated with the aircraft and satellite sensors, and checked with intensive
ground and helicopter measurements. This approach offers the possibility of
assessing spatial variation in canopy characteristics and ecosystem properties
from the top down. Rather than being limited to a few discrete sites, it should
be possible to use these new remote sensing observations to identify the
magnitude and structure of spatial variation in biogeochemical properties of
ecosystems. This research also will contribute to integration of remote sensing,
biophysical modeling, and ecosystem ecology, and to the education of students.
The results are expected to improve understanding of how forest canopies can be
studied at large spatial scales, and how the measurements can be used to assess
the contribution of different forest canopy conditions to ecosystem services in
the region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;