* 0136526
* Cleaning ICPSR's State Legislative Election Returns Data and an Application to the Study of Repeat Challengers
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2002,04/30/2004
* William Berry, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 04/30/2004
* USD 69,186.00

&lt;br/&gt;Research on American legislative elections focuses predominantly on
Congress, with far less attention given to state legislatures. This is
unfortunate because the large number of state legislative elections, the
variation across states in the character of legislative bodies and election
rules, and the increased importance of states and state legislatures in policy
making in the U.S. make state legislative elections especially well suited for
testing theories about the nature of elections. Probably the greatest impediment
to such research is the lack of readily accessible data about elections in the
fifty states. &lt;br/&gt;The ICPSR data set, State Legislative Election Returns
in the United States, 1968-1989 (Study #8907) would seem to overcome this
obstacle, as it contains information about all state legislative general
elections in the United States over a two decade period, as well as primary
elections in sixteen southern and border states, and runoff elections in eight
states. Part I of this data set includes an &lt;br/&gt;observation (N = 173,811)
for each candidate running in any election during the period, and shows among
other variables, the candidate's party affiliation, the number of votes (s)he
-and other candidates -receive, whether (s)he is an incumbent, and the type of
district in which the election is held. However, scholars have been unable to
fully exploit these enormously valuable data because of significant problems in
the way candidate names are recorded. For candidates for whom there are multiple
observations, the name recorded frequently varies across observations (e.g.,
with and without a middle initial, with and without nicknames), a problem
compounded by typographical errors. These errors make it impossible to reliably
trace a particular legislator from one election to the next, thereby greatly
limiting the utility of the information in the data set. &lt;br/&gt;Berry,
Berkman and Schneiderman (2000) estimated that among incumbents running in
general elections for whom there were more than one observation included in this
data set, only 65% were identified by an identical name across all observations;
35% had at least one case in which their name was recorded differently. The
authors developed various computer algorithms for identifying when two similar
but different names likely indicate the same person. Relying on these algorithms
and visual inspection of a listing of legislators' names, names were adjusted to
achieve greater consistency, reducing the error rate from 35% to 6%.
&lt;br/&gt;This project to extends the "cleaning" of names in Part I of the
State Legislative Election Returns data set in several ways. The initial
cleaning by Berry, Berkman and Schneiderman was restricted to incumbents running
in general elections, which constitute only 25 percent of the observations in
the data set; the new project includes all observations in the data set, i.e.,
candidates (winners and losers) competing in general, primary and runoff
elections. Also, more sophisticated error detection algorithms -expected to
lower the error rate from 6% to less than 2% -are employed. The ICPSR has agreed
to release a new version of Part I of the Election Returns data set adding both
an "adjusted name" variable and a dummy variable that identifies those
observations for which the revised name differs from the original. To enhance
the value of this data set to scholars, a companion data set reporting the
values of numerous state-level variables for 1968-1989 is also created; it
includes institutional characteristics of legislatures, election returns, and
other political, socio-economic and demographic characteristics of states.
&lt;br/&gt;Several election and state politics scholars have already expressed
interest in doing research using the enhanced State Legislative Election Returns
data set. Indeed, when this data set is successfully cleaned, it will permit
students of state legislative elections to conduct research on a diverse range
of topics, such the consequences of redistricting, partisan realignment in the
South, the behavior and impact of minor party candidates, the determinants of
electoral success of incumbents over the course of their careers, and the
linkage between elections and the public policy choices of
politicians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project promises to enhance substantially
our understanding of the topic and produce a dataset of value to numerous other
scholars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;