* 0136979
* The Anatomy of Real Exchange Rates
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Chris Telmer, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 05/31/2005
* USD 226,715.00

A time immemorial question in international economics asks what determines the
relative price of a good, or a basket of goods, in one country vis-a-vis
another. The first generation of empirical work, utilizing primarily consumer
price indices, has documented large and persistent deviations from 'purchasing
power parity' (PPP). The outcome has been more one of raising additional
questions than providing answers. The research agenda proposed here follows a
second generation of work taking the next logical step: examining panel data on
local currency prices of literally thousands of individual goods and services
across many different countries. This project blends theoretical and empirical
analysis to better understand how relative prices of individual goods evolve
over time, how this relates to the behavior of aggregate relative prices, and
what this tells us about nominal exchange rates. This project consists of three
related parts. The essence of each is new data on many goods and services across
many countries and time periods. An important goal of the project is to make
these data available publicly. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first part focuses on
the European Union, studying good-by-good deviations from the Law-of-One-Price
for over 5,000 goods and services for the years 1975, 1980, 1985 and 1990. It
finds that between most countries there are roughly as many overpriced goods as
there are underpriced goods. This phenomenon is stable across time, in spite of
relatively large swings in nominal exchange rates. Equally weighted averages of
Law-of-One-Price deviations are small, especially after controlling for national
income levels. CPI-weighted averages are also small, indicating that deviations
from Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) are small. Cross-sectional dispersion, in
contrast, is large, but it is related to economically meaningful characteristics
of goods such as international tradability, tradability of factors of production
and the competitive structure of the markets in which the goods are sold.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second part extends the work to 122 cities across 79
countries. Compared to Europe, we find both similarities and differences. We
find, as others have, that price levels are lower in relatively poor countries.
When we distinguish between traded and non-traded goods we find that the latter
play a dominant role in explaining the behavior of aggregate international
relative prices. A decrease in the overall level of price dispersion between
1990 and 2000, for instance, is primarily attributable to convergence in the
prices of non-traded goods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The third project models the
dynamics of microeconomic prices. Preliminary results find that &lt;br/&gt;the
half-lives of deviations from the Law-of-One-Price are less than 1 year for most
goods. This differs from previous work based on aggregate price indices, which
has produced estimates between 3 and 5 years. Further dynamic reconciliation of
our data, both across time and data sets, remains work-in-progress. Once
complete, this reconciliation will open up many new lines of inquiry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;