* 0136293
* RUI:  International Taxation and the International Trade of Multinational Firms
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Kimberly Clausing, Reed College
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2006
* USD 140,280.00

This research investigates the relationship between the international taxation
of corporate income and the international trade of multinational firms. About 40
percent of all U.S. international trade is intrafirm trade, or international
trade that occurs between two affiliates of a multinational firm. Preliminary
evidence suggests that multinational firms alter the prices on their intrafirm
trade transactions in order to minimize their worldwide tax burden. For example,
by underpricing goods sold to affiliates in low tax countries and overpricing
goods purchased from affiliates in low-tax countries, a multinational firm can
shift income to more lightly taxed locations. The opposite strategy applies to
transactions with high tax countries.&lt;br/&gt; The first goal of the research
is to examine the magnitude of such income shifting, analyzing the pattern of
such behavior in different industries. The empirical analysis will consider the
relationship between intrafirm trade prices and the tax rate of the partner
country, employing detailed data on intrafirm trade prices from the Bureau of
Labor Statistics. The second goal of the proposed research will be to consider
the consequences of this behavior for (a) the volumes of U.S. international
trade with different countries and (b) U.S. federal government revenue
collections. This analysis will rely in part on data from the Bureau of Economic
Analysis on the operations of U.S. multinational firms. Third, this research
will consider an alternative international taxation system, formula
apportionment. Under this system, U.S. multinational firms would be taxed based
on the share of their worldwide activity (measured by sales, payroll, or assets)
located in the United States, rather than based on the income they incur in the
United States. The revenue consequences of this system will be
explored.&lt;br/&gt; This research will be informative for those scholars and
policy makers who are interested in tax policy as well as those interested in
trade patterns. For example, the extent to which multinational firms avoid
taxation by shifting their income to low-tax countries affects our assessment of
the fairness and efficiency of the current international tax system. By directly
comparing the current system with an alternative, formula apportionment, more
can be learned about the costs and benefits of these two options. Further, the
tax minimizing behavior of multinational firms also affects the pattern of U.S.
international trade in ways that trade economists have neglected. &lt;br/&gt; A
final goal of the research will be to positively impact the research and
educational environment of Reed College. This will be done by strengthening the
principal investigator's abilities as a researcher, by working closely with
undergraduate students on the proposed research, and by sharing data and
research findings with students and researchers both at Reed and
elsewhere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;