* 0136630
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: What Works for Me? Arrest Decisions as Adaptive Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2003
* Warren Benton, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Christopher J. Zorn
* 12/31/2003
* USD 8,593.00

The research on arrest discretion has rarely recognized the marked influence of
officers concerns outside their police identity, such as overtime need, personal
commitments, and the aversiveness of arrest-processing itself. Moreover, the
literature on police work's impact on the officer's private life has seldom
explored the converse effect of off-duty roles interfering with official duties.
To address this gap, an anonymous survey of 300 New York Police Department
patrol officers will examine such issues as: What personal concerns give rise to
arrest-related needs for overtime money, schedule-control, or avoidance of
arrest-processing difficult? How are these needs related to various arrest-
seeking and arrest-avoiding behaviors? To what extent are on-site arrest
decisions predicted by prior arrest preference, patrol style, and method of
intervention? When do adaptive responses develop? What arrest-related attitudes
accompany adaptive behaviors? How are the responses related to officer tour,
gender and other traits? Finally, how are adaptive arrest behaviors influenced
by management? The study's objectives are to describe and quantify adaptive
arrest behavior, and to explore ways both to minimize the potential harms of
self-serving arrest motives and reduce the conflict between officers' personal
and professional commitments.