* 0136529
* Collaborative Research:   Dye Tracer and Modeling Investigations of Cross-Shelf Circulation during Coastal Upwelling
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2002,01/31/2006
* Jay Austin, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 01/31/2006
* USD 106,634.00

&lt;br/&gt;Austin&lt;br/&gt;0136529&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Field and simulation
studies will be used to determine where upwelled water originates, i.e. solely
from the bottom boundary layer (BBL) or from a thicker region of the lower layer
fluid, and where the displaced surface water goes, e.g. offshore in the the
surface layer or, through subduction, to intermediate layers. Five dye studies,
using fluorescene and rhodamine-WT, are proposed for the upwelling region over
the Oregon shelf. Releases will occur in three different locations - beneath and
inshore of the upwelling jet, in the BBL beneath the jet where onshore movement
is expected, and inshore of the jet, just beneath the mixed layer but still in
the Ekman layer, where offshore movement and possible subduction is expected.
Dye will be tracked for 72 hours. The background environment will be defined by
GLOBEC cruises, at least during the first field year. Three releases from the
R/V Elakha will be traced during the first year. The second year will involve
two larger releases from the R/V Wecoma. A version of the Princeton Ocean Model,
configured for the region, will be run for comparison. Particle tracing
techniques will be used to model the initial, small-scale dispersion. Both
idealized situations and realistic modeling will be attempted. A 2-D ocean-going
model will be used, in conjunction with buoyed GPS drifters, to track the
subsurface dye patch after release. The results of the study will be a set of
Lagrangian observations of cross-shelf transport pathways during upwelling.
These will lead to improved understanding of circulation and mixing. &lt;br/&gt;