* 0136082
* Cohomology and Representation Theory: Reductive Algebraic Groups and Related Structures
* MPS,DMS
* 10/15/2001,06/30/2005
* Daniel Nakano, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2005
* USD 100,955.00

The principal investigator will investigate problems &lt;br/&gt;involving the
representation theory of reductive algebraic &lt;br/&gt;groups. The structures
related to reductive groups include &lt;br/&gt;Lie algebras, Chevalley groups,
Weyl groups and centralizer &lt;br/&gt;algebras. The methods and constructions
involved in the study will be &lt;br/&gt;algebraic as well as geometric. The
underlying theme will be &lt;br/&gt;to establish connections between the
cohomology and representations &lt;br/&gt;of the objects in order to prove new
and interesting results &lt;br/&gt;about these structures. Establishing such
relationships also &lt;br/&gt;lends itself to providing concrete calculations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The algebraic objects known as "groups," "rings" and "Lie
algebras" &lt;br/&gt;arise in many different physical applications in biology,
&lt;br/&gt;chemistry and physics. These algebraic objects &lt;br/&gt;in general
have complex internal structures and symmetries. &lt;br/&gt;Extracting
information about these structures can provide &lt;br/&gt;vital information
which can be used in a range of applications&lt;br/&gt;such as those mentioned
above. This project is in the area&lt;br/&gt;of representation theory, which is
now a central area of &lt;br/&gt;mathematics because it provides a systematic
method for studying &lt;br/&gt;complicated algebraic structures. Roughly
speaking, representations &lt;br/&gt;can be thought of as ``snapshots'' of some
algebraic object from&lt;br/&gt;different viewing angles. These snapshots are
provided via &lt;br/&gt;explicitly described matrices. By putting together
&lt;br/&gt;the information from the representations, many questions
&lt;br/&gt;surrounding these complicated algebraic systems can be answered.