* 0136986
* Novel Extreme Composite Materials due to Constituents of Negative Stiffness
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Roderic Lakes, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Ken Chong
* 08/31/2007
* USD 818,966.00

Novel extreme composite materials due to constituents of negative
stiffness&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;R. S. Lakes, R. W. Carpick, R. F. Cooper*, W. J.
Drugan&lt;br/&gt;Department of Engineering Physics and *Department of Materials
Science&lt;br/&gt;University of Wisconsin-Madison&lt;br/&gt;Madison, WI
53706&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The proposed research is directed toward the
attainment of extreme&lt;br/&gt;material properties by relaxing some of the
assumptions commonly held about&lt;br/&gt;constituent behavior in a composite
material. A composite material&lt;br/&gt;combines two or more constituent phases
of different material properties to&lt;br/&gt;achieve a new material with
enhanced mechanical/transport properties.&lt;br/&gt;Effective mechanical
properties of composites are determined primarily by&lt;br/&gt;the properties of
the materials being combined, the interface behavior, and&lt;br/&gt;the spatial
arrangement of the phases in the composite. Traditionally, the&lt;br/&gt;design
variables associated with composites include (i) the choice
of&lt;br/&gt;constituent materials, (ii) the volume fraction of the
constituents, and&lt;br/&gt;(iii) the geometry of the phases.&lt;br/&gt;
Recently, one of the writers (Lakes) and co-workers showed
that&lt;br/&gt;several classes of composites can exhibit extreme behavior if
one&lt;br/&gt;constituent has negative stiffness. An analysis of the
possibilities in&lt;br/&gt;viscoelastic composite systems was reported in
Physical Review Letters.&lt;br/&gt;Peak damping and large stiffness anomalies
are possible even with a dilute&lt;br/&gt;concentration of inclusions, provided
matrix damping is small. An&lt;br/&gt;experimental illustration of the behavior
of a lumped unit cell was&lt;br/&gt;reported in Philosophical Magazine Letters.
It disclosed singular&lt;br/&gt;mechanical damping tan(delta) [where tan(delta)
is the tangent of the phase&lt;br/&gt;angle between stress and strain] in a
system containing post-buckled tubes.&lt;br/&gt;A further experimental
illustration of extreme behavior in a particulate&lt;br/&gt;composite was
reported in Nature. Composites prepared with a dilute&lt;br/&gt;concentration of
ferroelastic inclusions exhibited large peaks in&lt;br/&gt;tan(delta). The
inclusions are more effective than diamond in increasing&lt;br/&gt;the composite
stiffness at selected temperatures. These results point to&lt;br/&gt;the
possibility of achieving extreme behavior in designed composites,
and&lt;br/&gt;exceeding conventional bounds based on the assumption of
positive&lt;br/&gt;constituent stiffness.&lt;br/&gt; The goal of this research
is to explore the effects of constituents&lt;br/&gt;of negative stiffness in
composite materials. We hypothesize on the basis&lt;br/&gt;of some initial
theoretical analyses and experiments that if one phase has&lt;br/&gt;negative
stiffness, the overall stiffness of the composite can be made&lt;br/&gt;large.
Moreover, we hypothesize that extreme mechanical damping effects
can&lt;br/&gt;occur if one phase has negative stiffness.&lt;br/&gt; Multiple
methods of achieving inclusion negative stiffness are to&lt;br/&gt;be examined.
Also, the question of stability of materials and composites&lt;br/&gt;is to be
examined in new theoretical developments. For a composite
with&lt;br/&gt;extremely high stiffness to be useful, it must be
stable.&lt;br/&gt; Composites with inclusions of negative stiffness are of
scientific&lt;br/&gt;interest in that current understanding of heterogeneous
media is predicated&lt;br/&gt;on an assumption of each phase to have positive
stiffness. Our preliminary&lt;br/&gt;theoretical and experimental results
indicate extreme effects in stiffness&lt;br/&gt;and damping when that assumption
is relaxed, so we anticipate that the&lt;br/&gt;present work will facilitate the
development of new classes of materials&lt;br/&gt;with extreme properties, even
materials stiffer than diamond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;