* 0136938
* Assessing the Impacts of Global Financial Integration
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Karen Lewis, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 03/31/2006
* USD 232,129.00

The trend toward international financial market integration has accelerated over
the past decade. The effects of global market integration on asset prices is
obviously an important issue for both policy-making and research reasons. Are
equity prices being priced more as an asset in a single world market or are they
still priced according to benchmarks from their own domestic country? And if
equity markets are evolving towards a common integrated market, what do the
effects on asset prices imply about traditional assumptions about the
diversification potential of foreign assets? These general questions are the
focus of a large literature spanning both macroeconomic and financial research.
This project intends to take a different approach to these questions, however.
It is commonly argued that the higher costs of foreign stocks interfere with
global market integration. These costs are usually argued to be one of two
kinds: (1) direct transactions costs of going to foreign markets and paying
possibly higher taxes and fees; or (2) informational costs of learning about a
foreign firm and its growth potential. This project examines a set of foreign
stocks that are largely devoid of significantly higher costs along these two
dimensions. The investigator builds a unique data set with information about
foreign companies that cross-list their stocks in the U.S. through so-called ADR
(American Depositary Receipt) programs. Acquiring these foreign stocks is no
more costly than acquiring domestic stocks. Moreover, foreign firms that list
these stocks on the NYSE must go through the same disclosure requirements as a
domestic US firm, including following the same accounting standards. Therefore,
these foreign stocks on domestic markets provide a unique opportunity to
directly study the effects of global market integration on asset pricing and on
the potentials for gains from international diversification. The data set is
unique because it provides a full time series for the price of the foreign
companies both at home and in the U.S.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
consists of three parts. The first part of the project focuses upon the effects
of financial integration on asset pricing relationships. The issue of foreign
stocks in the US market has been associated with a casual empirical observation:
the stock price of the parent company tends to covary more positively with the
US market after cross-listing. If these anecdotal stories are true, they are
important for understanding international equity pricing, and thereby bear on
most policy issues concerning international financial markets. This part of the
project examines the question of whether greater international financial
integration in the form of cross-listings of stocks has affected international
equity pricing. It also calculates the welfare gains for international equity
markets before and after integration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second part of
the project focuses more directly on the scope for diversification in the face
of greater integration. This question is important for policy issues ranging
from retirement and its associated social security questions to international
allocation of capital issues. The project uses a time series of about 2000
foreign firms' cross-listed stock price in the US and match these with their
counterparts on their own markets. This allows a comparison of asset pricing
behavior before and after cross-listing. A Bayesian approach is used that allows
the calculation of what investors would choose once these stocks are issued in
the U.S. and thereby address two different fundamental questions. First,
comparing the degree of integration between the US and a given foreign market
before and after cross-listing, what are the diversification gains from the
increased integration? This question is important because the existing
literature has generally compared gains only relative to perfect integration.
Second, would US investors who hold cross-listed foreign stocks still choose to
hold additional foreign stocks that are not cross-listed? Obviously, answering
this question is important for determining whether domestic investors really
need to hold assets obtained directly from foreign stock exchanges to be
optimally diversified. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The third part of the project asks:
Has global integration through cross-listing improved the domestic resident's
ability to hedge consumption risk? It addresses this issue by testing whether
the variability of consumption growth that is explained by these stocks is
significantly higher than the variability of the general foreign index.
Addressing these issues is important since studies of international
diversification from a macroeconomic viewpoint have focused upon the sharing of
consumption risks. To the extent that international portfolio allocation has
been considered, it has been to ask what assets would support the sharing of
consumption risks. No study to date has examined the direct effects of market
integration through cross-listing on the ability to insure consumption risk.
&lt;br/&gt;