* 0136761
* The Roots of Human Sociality:  An Ethno-Experimental Exploration of the Foundations of Economic Norms in 16 Small-Scale Societies
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2007
* Jean Ensminger, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 03/31/2007
* USD 476,050.00

0136761&lt;br/&gt;Ensminger &amp; Henrich&lt;br/&gt;In all human societies, a
wide range of social phenomena are governed by self-regulating institutions, or
sets of norms that prescribe appropriate behaviors and proper sanctions for
inappropriate behavior. Such norms influence an enormous range of human
activity, from marriage patterns and sexual inequality to political processes
and market exchange. Despite a fair amount of agreement that such institutions
exist, extant theories struggle to explain the genesis and maintenance of pro-
social norms (e.g., standards of fairness, or rules for punishing norm
violators) that form the bedrock of social interaction. Both experimental and
field data from across the social sciences indicate that neither assumptions of
narrow economic self-interest nor evolutionary models based on kinship or
reciprocity are sufficient to account for the observed patterns of human pro-
sociality. &lt;br/&gt;To probe the diversity of social norms and preferences
across the human spectrum, in 1998 the MacArthur Foundation invited twelve
experienced field anthropologists to pioneer the use of experimental economic
methods in small-scale societies. In this second phase of research, the
researchers will explore the foundations of social norms by experimentally
measuring individuals' preferences/tastes for altruism (or fairness), direct
punishment (willingness to punish norm violators), and third party punishment
(willingness of third-party observers to pay a price to punish unfairness)
across 16 small-scale societies. These field sites include foragers, slash and
burn horticulturalists, pastoral-nomads, small-scale agriculturalists, and urban
wage laborers on most continents of the world. One of the advantages of running
experiments in these contexts is that the social spectrum of subjects is
broadened from those typically found in U.S. university laboratories.
&lt;br/&gt;The overall objectives of this new research are to replicate the
earlier work (including the finding that altruistic behavior increases with the
level of market integration), to broaden the research by including nine new
sites and new experiments, to tighten the data collection methods across sites,
and to extend the research with new testable predictions. A core package of
three games (the Dictator, Ultimatum with Strategy Method, and Third-Party
Punishment Games) will be used at all 16 field sites. In addition, subsets of
the group will pursue four supplemental studies to examine: 1) the relationship
between social networks and trust, 2) framing effects created by manipulating
the presentation of the games in the local culture, 3) the effect of the
experimenter's knowledge of subjects' decisions in double-blind games, and 4)
the temporal, intra-individual replicability of game behavior, i.e. if the same
game is repeated with the same subjects, do preferences change? &lt;br/&gt;One
of the advantages of a large and diverse group of researchers is the variety of
theoretical traditions and interests brought to the table. The group contains
scholars who have done their major theoretical and empirical work in the fields
of evolutionary theory, psychological anthropology, rational choice, new
institutional economics, development, and network analysis. Previous experience
has shown that this theoretical diversity inspires novel ideas, innovative
empirical work, and theoretical development through the challenges that arise
from the clash of paradigms. This project should contribute to theoretical work
that explores the importance of social learning, institutions, cultural
evolution, and culture-gene co-evolution on human behavior.&lt;br/&gt;