* 0136139
* Spatial and Temporal Dynamics of Important Types of Geomagnetic Disturbance
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2007
* Lawrence Lyons, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 01/31/2007
* USD 572,765.00

0136139&lt;br/&gt;Lyons&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research over the past few years
has demonstrated for the first time that there are several fundamentally
different types of geomagnetic disturbances having time scales ranging from a
few minutes to a few hours and ground magnetic field perturbations ranging from
a few tens of nT to ~2000 nT. Each has unique characteristics, reflects
distinctly different physical processes occurring within the magnetosphere, and
contributes significantly to overall space weather activity that affects manmade
systems in space and on the ground. The general objective of the research
proposed here is to determine important aspects of the two- dimensional
structure and temporal dynamics of these different disturbances by using the
recently enhanced capabilities for Arctic ground-based observations (CANOPUS,
NORSTAR, SuperDARN) of currents, electric fields, and optical emissions within
the auroral ionosphere, in combination with appropriate spacecraft observations
(DMSP, POLAR, IMAGE, LANL, GOES, Geotail). Specific objectives related to the
following disturbances include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Poleward boundary
intensifications (PBIs: have an auroral signature that can extent equatorward
from the poleward boundary of the auroral oval and are associated with short-
time scale flow bursts in the magnetotail): Determine the two-dimensional
structure of PBIs, and when and where their different types of two-dimensional
structure occur. Relate the local two-dimensional structure to global auroral
structure. Investigate the possibility that PBIs are a manifestation of a global
magnetospheric oscillation by determining whether PBIs generally show large
power at auroral-zone ULF frequencies, if the same ULF frequencies seen in the
auroral oval are simultaneously seen in the nightside plasma sheet, and if
consistent phase speeds can be seen for PBI-related variations. Determine if
PBIs extending to low latitudes are of such large scale that they simultaneously
affect the nightside plasmasheet from x ~ -30 RE (or near the separatrix) to
synchronous orbit. Determine the two-dimensional relation between PBIs and
plasma flows in the auroral ionosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamic pressure
disturbances (large and rapid brightening, broadening, and poleward expansion of
the auroral oval caused by enhancements in solar wind dynamic pressure):
Determine (a) whether reconnection and the amount of open magnetic flux over the
polar caps is in general strongly controlled by the dynamic pressure of the
solar wind as recent observations suggest, (b) whether the strength of
ionospheric and region 1 currents are strongly controlled by solar wind dynamic
pressure, and (c) how convection electric fields and the cross-polar cap
potential drop depend upon dynamic pressure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Convection-
driven morningside auroral disturbances (auroral enhancements at midnight to
dawn MLTs that occur during prolonged periods of enhance convection): Identify
the current (ionospheric and field aligned), electric field, and precipitation
particle characteristics directly associated with these dawnside auroral
enhancements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Substorms: Obtain an answer to the critical
question of whether closer to 50% or closer to 100% of substorms are triggered
by IMF changes that lead to a reduction in large- scale convection. This will be
accomplished using the recently enhanced SuperDARN radar network to determine
whether reductions in the strength of polar-cap convection (which must be
related to appropriate IMF changes) are directly associated with substorm onset,
and whether, for a given amount of energy stored in the tail, the strength of a
substorm expansion phase is proportional to the amount of reduction in the
strength of convection.