* 0136048
* Collaborative Research on Till Deformation: Linking Microstructural Characteristics to Strain
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Thomas Hooyer, University of Wisconsin-Extension
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 07/31/2005
* USD 13,663.00

0136048 Hooyer

This is a collaborative proposal by Principal Investigators at Iowa State
University and the Wisconsin Geological Survey. Past glaciers, including the
Pleistocene ice sheets of the Northern Hemisphere, sometimes flowed unusually
fast, causing ice-mass fluctuations that resulted in severe climate change and
landscape modification. A leading hypothesis attributes this rapid flow to
deformation of the thawed glacier substrate. Structures preserved in the
sediment beds of past ice sheets can provide a time-integrated and spatially
extensive record of such deformation and can be used to test this hypothesis.
Microstructures are potentially the most useful indicators of deformation,
because they evolve systematically and are ubiquitous, even in massive till
units. Although microstructural characteristics of deformed glacier sediments
have been described extensively, there have been no methodical efforts to
correlate these characteristics to shear-strain magnitude. The result is that
the degree of bed deformation, and hence its role in ice-sheet motion, usually
cannot be inferred reliably from the geologic record. Support is being requested
to study the evolution of till microstructural characteristics as a function of
shear strain with a ring-shear device that deforms a large sediment specimen to
high strains. The experiments will be guided by related studies in structural
geology, geophysics, and soil mechanics, which indicate that shear-plane
orientations, clay-particle fabric, and anisotropy of magnetic susceptibility
(AMS) change systematically with sediment deformation. These microstructural
characteristics will be correlated with shear strain by conducting experiments
to various strains and measuring these characteristics after each test. Two
basal tills with different clay-mineral fractions will be tested and the
sensitivity of the results to initial consolidation and total normal stress will
be studied. Shear planes will be identified optically and the extent of Y-shear
development relative to shears at other orientations, an indicator of shear-
strain magnitude, will be quantified. Clay-particle fabrics will be measured
with an X-ray, pole-figure goniometer at the University of Michigan and
quantified by computing both eigenvalues and March strains. AMS will be measured
at the Institute for Rock Magnetism at the University of Minnesota and used to
compute AMS magnitudes, as well as strengths and directions of fabrics defined
by orientations of maximum susceptibility. These experiments will help improve
models of past ice sheets and interpretations of glacigenic sediments and
landforms. This research may also help solve related problems in structural
geology, geophysics, petroleum geology and geotechnical engineering, in which
deformation of granular media and consequent anisotropy are often central
issues.