* 0136423
* Phosphine Exchange in Metal Carbonyls
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Richard Keiter, Eastern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Luigi G. Marzilli
* 06/30/2007
* USD 159,000.00

Professor Richard L. Keiter, Department of Chemistry, Eastern Illinois
University, is supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic
Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division for mechanistic studies of
intramolecular exchange of bound and unbound phosphorus donor groups in
transition metal complexes containing multidentate phosphine ligands. In some
Group 6 transition metal carbonyl complexes that also containing both
coordinated and dangling phosphino groups the rate of phosphine exchange is much
faster than expected. The fact that a large through space carbon-phosphorus
spin-spin coupling constant occurs between dangling phosphino and cis-carbonyl
groups indicates that an electronic interaction may be an important factor in
the acceleration. By using a series of phosphine ligands containing substituents
with differing steric and electronic properties, a mechanistic model in which a
short dangling phosphine arm accelerates the exchange reaction by interacting
with the cis carbonyl groups of the complex will be tested. The study will then
be extended to known and new chiral ditertiary phosphines. The usefulness of
these in asymmetric hydrogenation will be evaluated. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;
Substitution reactions have been studied extensively for many years but very few
of these investigations have addressed phosphine substitution. The absence of
such exploration is surprising given the current interest in phosphine chemistry
that centers on ligand design for asymmetric synthesis, site-specific drug
delivery, and water-soluble phosphine. In addition, the kinetic stability of the
metal-phosphorus bond is highly important in catalysis and catalyst degradation.
This study will provide thermodynamic and kinetic insight into the factors that
control phosphine substitution in transition metal complexes. An additional,
very important aspect of the project is the education of undergraduate chemistry
majors and the opportunity it will provide both B.S. and M.S. students to engage
in cutting edge research.&lt;br/&gt;