* 0136116
* Experimental Investigation of Differential Diffusion in Low Buoyancy Reynolds Number Oceanic Regimes
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2007
* William Smyth, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 02/28/2007
* USD 413,937.00

0136116 Moum

A comprehensive set of measurements of scalar gradient spectra from the towed
microstructure instrument MARLIN, will be collected in regions of the abyssal
ocean where a large range of both turbulence and stratification regimes is
expected. The purpose of the study is to investigate the dependence of the ratio
of salt diffusivity to heat diffusivity on buoyancy Reynolds number. To
accomplish these objectives, two new sensors using well understood principles
will be built and deployed on MARLIN. The first is a combined
thermocouple/microscale conductivity probe. The second is an anisotropy probe
using multiple thermocouple pairs. A complementary purpose for analyzing
horizontal scalar fluctuations is to improve the interpretation of
microstructure measurements. Many assumptions are commonly made to infer mixing
and fluxes from one-dimensional, partially resolved scalar spectra, or to relate
scalar spectra to turbulent kinetic energy dissipation rates (such as the
assumption of isotropy, a universal spectral form for scalar gradients, and
associated .constants). Used in conjunction with the present catalog of existing
vertical spectra and spectra from turbulence simulations, these measurements
will permit improvements in the ability of the microstructure community to
reliably quantify the effects of small scale ocean processes.

