* 0137748
* Stress Induced Coral Mortality: The Role of Opportunistic Bacterial Infections
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2005
* Forest Rohwer, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/28/2005
* USD 391,715.00

Coral reefs have declined dramatically over the last three decades. Several
factors may have contributed to this process, including over-fishing, increasing
CO2 levels, changes in sea surface temperatures, eutrophication, sedimentation,
and pollutants. However the causal relationship between most of these stressors
and reef decline has yet to be established. There has also been an alarming
increase in coral disease incidence during the last two decades. The causes of
the majority of these diseases remain unknown yet the diseases continue to cause
massive die offs of corals. Of the 29 coral diseases that have been reported,
only two pathogens have been isolated which fulfill Koch's postulates. Are some
of the undiagnosed diseases caused by opportunistic, rather than specific,
pathogens? Coral disease incidences and human activity are correlated. Again,
the causal connection, if any, between these two observations is not known. Dr.
Rohwer and associates suggest that corals exposed to anthropogenic and
environmental stressors become susceptible to opportunistic infection resulting
in coral mortality and disease. In preliminary studies, they have found that the
microbial community normally living on corals consists of specific bacteria
growing at a controlled rate. For example, corals living on reefs as far apart
as Bermuda and Panama have characteristic microbiotas, that are specific to
individual coral species. They have also observed that bacterial numbers and
growth rates are very similar between healthy corals. The relationship between
the coral and its associated microbial community rapidly changes when the coral
is exposed to stressful environmental or anthropogenic conditions. In
experiments, additions of organic nutrients rapidly lead to coral death, which
was prevented by adding antibiotics. This strongly suggests that bacterial
overgrowth is responsible for the stressor-induced mortality. Other
investigators have shown that coral mortality caused by stressors, including
sedimentation, crude oil, and copper sulfate, could be prevented using
antibiotics. The investigators have also documented that both bacterial numbers
and production rates increase by over an order of magnitude on diseased, as
compared to healthy, corals. In this research, they will characterize the normal
range of microbial growth parameters and prokaryotic diversity on healthy,
unstressed M. franksi. They will then treat corals with a number of potential
stressors to determine which kill corals by causing microbial overgrowth.
Finally, they will monitor changes in bacterial growth and community composition
that occurs with opportunistic bacterial infection. This research will improve
our understanding of the relationship between a coral and its associated
bacterial community, and how this relationship changes with stress and disease.
This research will also provide a better understanding of the connection between
human activities and the incidence of coral disease, providing important data
for the conservation and management of coral reefs.