* 0137289
* Estimating Equilibrium Choice Models with Social Interactions and Network Effects: Theoretical Foundations and Emprical Applications
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Christopher Timmins, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 02/29/2004
* USD 175,856.00

In many economic and social settings, the behavior or welfare of an individual
is directly affected by the presence, characteristics, or behavior of other
individuals in an associated reference group. Children might be affected by
their classmates, home-owners by their neighbors, or commuters by their fellow
motorists, to give just a few examples. In many of these settings, individuals
are not randomly assigned to their reference groups but rather actively decide
which group to join. This non-random sorting of individuals into groups leads to
improper inferences about the influence of other group members both within the
group and in the initial choice of group. A community with great amenities, for
example, is likely to attract many high-income residents and have high housing
prices. If the amenities are not seen in the data, a naive analysis is likely to
attribute the high housing prices to the presence of high-income neighbors and
suggest that high-income individuals have strong preferences to live with one
another. This project develops a methodology for properly identifying the role
of social interactions in the sorting of individuals into reference groups. This
strategy draws on fact that each individual's choice of reference group is
affected by the nature of their alternative options (the set of available
neighborhoods in our earlier example). The research begins by developing a
methodology that uses this source of variation to identify pure congestion and
agglomeration interactions in sorting models. The methodology will then be
extended to models with more complex forms of social interactions in which
individuals are affected not only by the number but also the attributes of those
in the same reference group. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scope of the currently
identified applications of this methodology extends from urban, public, and
environmental economics to models of non-price competition in industrial
organization. Properly identifying social interactions in these settings is
extremely important for a wide variety of policy considerations. We demonstrate
the significance of this research with a series of empirical applications
designed to both demonstrate the methodology and illustrate its practical
importance. The first uses 1990 US Census data for the SF Bay Area to study
neighborhood sorting. This analysis provides a complete picture of how
households trade-off between important features of neighborhoods (location,
schools, crime, socio-demographics, housing, and price), as well as how these
trade-offs vary for households with different characteristics including income,
race, education, employment, and family structure. Having properly identified
the complex set of preferences that underlies the urban housing market, this
project conducts a number of simulations designed to uncover the underlying
causes of important aggregate urban phenomena such as racial segregation, crime
patterns, school compositions, commuting patterns, and the geographic
distribution of housing prices. This application will then be extended to focus
more specifically on a series of education policy questions. The second set of
applications address a very different policy issue: the consequences of global
climate change in developing countries. While techniques are well developed to
measure the marketed (agricultural) impacts of global warming, non-marketed
impacts, such as those on climate amenities, have not been satisfactorily
measured with traditional techniques owing to a lack of key data describing
inter-location variation in the prices of housing and other geographically non-
traded commodities. Specifying an equilibrium model for these commodities and
estimating it with observed settlement patterns and our identification strategy
yields a full measure of the amenity cost of global warming for Brazil, and its
implications for post-Kyoto negotiations over greenhouse gas abatement efforts
between Annex I countries and LDC's are discussed. This project will also fund
the collection of data for the extension of this analysis to other developing
countries in Central and South America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;