* 0137096
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Multi-Systems Violence Prevention Program for Girls
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2002
* Lisa Jordan, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Paul J. Wahlback
* 12/31/2002
* USD 4,840.00

Youth violence is a serious social health problem with physical, psychological,
and legal implications. The most robust predictors of youth violence are
frequent criminal acts and juvenile delinquency exhibited prior to or during
adolescence. Types of delinquent behaviors most often seen during early
adolescence include truancy, fighting, and minor, first-time offenses. The
negative impact of early delinquency on the legal system can be seen in terms of
high costs for court time, personnel, probation services, and residential
facilities. However, delinquency also affects the educational and mental health
fields as well. Since violent behavior is multi-determined, interventions that
identify and prevent the multiple causes that lead to violence are necessary at
this time. The present study is an empirical investigation of the efficacy of a
school-based violence prevention program for 6th grade girls at-risk for
violence due to signs of early delinquency and academic failure. Girls from low-
income, inner-city schools in Baltimore City will participate in an intensive
10-week program that focuses upon preventing violence through reducing behavior
problems, enhancing academic performance, and improving psychological
functioning. Evaluation of the violence prevention program will be based upon
indicators of delinquent behavior and academic status following completion of
the program.