* 0137601
* US-Turkey/Ukraine Cooperative Research:  Research in the Black Sea
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2005
* James Murray, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 02/28/2005
* USD 35,670.00

0137601&lt;br/&gt;Murray&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project supports
a cooperative research project by teams of scientists and graduate students
headed by Dr. James Murray, School of Oceanography, University of Washington
(UW), Seattle, Washington, Dr. Ilkay Salihoglu, Institute of Marine Sciences
(IMS), Middle East Technical University, Erdemli-Icel, Turkey, and Dr. Sergey
Konovalov, Marine Hydrophysical Institute (MHI), Ukraine National Academy of
Sciences, Sevastopol, Ukraine. This two-year project will take advantage of new
samples collected during the 2001 R/V Knorr research cruise in the Black Sea.
The research is divided into three projects: 1. Spatial variability in the
chemistry of oxygen, sulfide and nutrients in the upper layer of the anoxic zone
in the Black Sea due to ventilation from the Bosphorus Inflow conducted by Dr.
Murray and a UW graduate student, a Turkish scientist from IMS, and a Ukrainian
scientist from MHI. 2. Geochemistry of redox metals (including Mn, Fe, Cd, Mo,
U, V, and Re) in particulate matter across the oxic/suboxic/anoxic layers in the
water column of the Black Sea, conducted by Dr. Murray, a Turkish scientist, and
a Turkish graduate student from IMS. 3. Application of molecular genetic
techniques for understanding population genetic structure of Calanus sp.
conducted by two junior scientists from UW and a scientist and graduate student
from IMS. Two Turkish scientists and two Turkish graduate students will visit UW
between January and April 2002. Two US junior scientists from UW will visit IMS
in Turkey in June-July 2002. The Ukrainian scientist will travel to the US in
winter 2003. Murray and his graduate student will travel to Turkey and Ukraine
in April-May 2003, and a Turkish scientist will visit the US in August
2003.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: This project complements research dealing with
the Black Sea being carried out by the US PI under separate funding from the NSF
Division of Ocean Sciences. This project will provide graduate students and
scientists from Turkey a chance to use state of the art analytical techniques
available in the US, but not in Turkey. The collaboration will offer
opportunities for two US junior scientists and one female US graduate student to
participate in this international project. It will allow scientists from all
three countries to develop future international collaborations. The project
meets INT objectives of supporting projects of mutual benefit. Funding is
provided by the Office of International Science and Engineering and the Division
of Ocean Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;