* 0137857
* Dissertation Research:  The Rockets' Red Glare: State, Society, and Technological Innovation in the Soviet Union, 1917-1957
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2002,12/31/2003
* David Hounshell, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 12/31/2003
* USD 11,991.00

This dissertation project provides travel funds to gather data in the U.S. and
the Russia to examine the changing relationship between technology and Soviet
society using rocketry as an entry point. The case of missile technology
provides an excellent window into the relationship between technology and the
state. The project focuses on how engineers and scientists handled the tensions
between indigenous and appropriated technology on the one hand, and the
tradeoffs between incremental and radical innovation on the other. Through the
lens of Soviet rocketry, the project focuses on these two dichotomies within the
broader context of Soviet history, and explores the relationship between
technology (indigenous, appropriated, radical, incremental) and three elements
of the Soviet state: public discourse on the role of rocket technology in
modernization, the creation and evolution of institutions to develop rockets,
and state policy towards rocket technology. The project will trace these
relationships over a forty-year span from the emergence of the popular discourse
on rocketry in the 1920s to the galvanization of industrial power that led to
the launch of Sputnik in 1957. Finally, the project hopes to provide some final
thoughts on the nature of knowledge and its relationship to state, society, and
ideas. Four archives in Russia, and two in the U.S. will be visited under NSF
funding.