* 0137987
* ADVANCE Fellows Award
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Gwendolen Hines, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 05/31/2006
* USD 180,078.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DMS Award Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award #: 0137987
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Gwendolen Hines&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Nebraska, Lincoln &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: ADVANCE Fellows
Award&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gwendolen Hines will collaborate with Konstantin
Mischaikow on a mathematical model for the evolution of dispersal rates in a
population which experiences both spatial and temporal heterogeneity. Together,
they will analyze models with dispersal mechanisms other than simple diffusion,
specifically dispersal described by integral operators. They will search for the
existence of stable solutions for different combinations of spatial and temporal
homogeneity and heterogeneity. The global dynamics of the system will be
studied. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gwendolen Hines has been out of the full-time
academic mathematics workforce for several years to care for her young daughter.
She plans to reestablish her research career by spending a semester at Georgia
Tech's Center for Dynamical Systems and Nonlinear Studies to work on a problem
in evolutionary biology having to do with how natural selection is related to
dispersal rates. Upon returning to the University of Nebraska at Lincoln, she
will resume her full-time tenure-track position in mathematics. She will
continue to work on this research problem, intensifying the collaboration with
summer visits to Georgia Tech. At Nebraska, she will promote the interaction
between Mathematics and Biology departments, as part of the university's
initiative in Quantitative and Integrative Biology. Dr. Hines remains active in
outreach activities for girls and women in mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;