* 0137122
* Collaborative Research for WOCE-AIMS:   Global Velocity Estimation Project
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Steven Jayne, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 03/31/2006
* USD 828,583.00

0137122/0137077 Owens/McWilliams&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project
will try to estimate the large scale, three-dimensional velocity field for the
North Atlantic using velocity data from sub-surface floats, current meters, and
surface drifters, hydrographic profiles, and sea surface height measurements
taken prior to and during the field operations phase of the World Ocean
Circulation Experiment (WOCE). As new measurements, such as the gravimetry from
the GRACE mission, altimetry from the JASON mission, and velocities and T and S
profiles from the ARGO float program become available, they will be incorporated
into the analysis. The estimates of the velocities and their expected errors
will be made using generalized least-square error minimization based on a priori
specification of expected measurement errors and space-time covariances and/or
basis functions. A hierarchy of a priori statistics will be used. They will be
determined from general spectral shapes for stretched basin basis functions and
analyses of simulations from numerical general circulation models run for other
purposes, as well as statistical analyses from the measurements. The model
covariances and basis functions initially will exactly enforce geostrophic
dynamics, with additional ageostrophic processes added where necessary, such as
in the surface boundary layer and near the Equator. The use of slightly less
constrained covariances calculated directly from the simulations will also be
examined. The a posteriori statistics of the estimates will be compared with the
a priori ones to evaluate the estimation procedure and the validity of the
models. A sequence of estimations with expanding comprehensiveness will be made.
Initially these estimates will be obtained for the mean circulation in highly
sampled regions, i.e., the Atlantic Climate and Circulation Experiment and then
expanded to first basin then global maps. As we gain confidence in the
procedure, maps for temporally varying velocities will also be made. The
ultimate goal is to create a living estimation library and software system,
capable of user-chosen variants and re-estimation with new data. This project is
a contribution to WOCE&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;