* 0137986
* Sequential Degradation of Oligosaccharides from the Reducing End
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2005
* Brad Bendiak, University of Colorado at Denver
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 01/31/2005
* USD 270,000.00

The objective of this work is to develop a degradation method which will allow
monosaccharides to be sequentially removed from the reducing end of
oligosaccharides. Monosaccharides will first be removed from oligosaccharides
containing 4-7 sugars and experiments will be performed to understand the
mechanism of one of the key degradation reactions. The method will then be
extended to oligosaccharides which contain sugars with nitrogen substitutents
and protecting groups. The overall utility of the method is two fold: 1) it will
provide a technique for structural elucidations for unknown oligosaccharides and
2) it will provide a preparative method for the generation of new
oligosaccharides by the removal of one or more monosaccharide units from the
reducing end.

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting
the research of Dr. Brad K. Bendiak of the Department of Cellular and Structural
Biology at the University of Colorado Health Sciences Center. Dr. Bendiak will
develop a new chemical degradation method to be used primarily for determining
the structures of polysaccharides (sugars). However, the overall utility of the
method to be studied is two fold: 1) it will provide a technique for structural
elucidations for unknown polysaccharides and 2) it will provide a preparative
method for the generation of new polysaccharides by the sequential removal of
one or more monosaccharide units from the starting sugar. Students trained as a
result of working on this project will gain experience in bioorganic and
supramolecular organic chemistry, hence they will have skills needed by the
pharmaceutical and speciality chemicals industries.