* 0137050
* Gender-Related Trends in Educational Expectations
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,12/31/2003
* John Reynolds, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 12/31/2003
* USD 47,304.00

SES-0137050&lt;br/&gt;John Reynolds&lt;br/&gt;Florida State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The past thirty years have witnessed
considerable change in the gender norms surrounding men's and especially women's
work and family roles. More women work full-time than ever before, and even in
the most traditional families, two biological parents with young children, women
are more likely than not to work for pay. On many work-related dimensions women
still lag behind men, including lower median earnings, slimmer chances of being
promoted, and a higher average share of household duties. In the area of
education, however, women have surpassed men at many levels. Girls today are
more likely than boys to plan to attend college, to graduate from high school,
to attend college, and to complete a college degree. These trends suggest that
the basic processes underlying educational attainment have shifted within recent
decades. &lt;br/&gt;This research examines changes in girls' and boys' college
expectations from 1972 to 1997 in an attempt to identify the most important
forces behind women's advances in higher education. College expectations are
students' subjective assessments of the odds of completing a college degree in
the future, and they have been shown to be an important cognitive link between
family background, school performance, and eventual educational achievements. In
addition, college expectations among high school girls have risen faster than
boys since the 1970s, and girls today are significantly more likely to expect to
complete a college degree or plan to attend graduate or professional school. The
proposed research hypothesizes the faster rise in college expectations among
girls is due to changes in, and gender-specific effects of, parents'
achievements, family structure, and local job opportunities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data come from four national longitudinal surveys of
pre-college age youth: the 1972 National Longitudinal Survey, the 1980 High
School and Beyond Survey, the 1988 National Education Longitudinal Study, and
the 1997 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth. Probit models for each survey
estimate the effects of parents' achievements, family structure, and local job
opportunities on the probability that girls and boys expect to complete a
college degree. Characteristics of parents, families, and local job markets may
help explain the gender-related trends in college expectations if the factors
that have a more positive effect on girls' expectations become more positive
over time (e.g., mothers' educational attainments), or if the effects of these
characteristics become more positive for girls over time than for boys (e.g.,
job opportunities). The findings will suggest how changes in gender norms are
impacting a major institution in society, higher education, and they will
provide a much-needed update to our understanding of gender differences in the
process of educational attainment. The study will also contribute to the current
debate over whether girls or boys are more likely to underachieve relative to
their talents, a debate that has relevance for educational policy at the
secondary and post-secondary levels. &lt;br/&gt;