* 0137988
* Functional Significance of the Crocodilian Cardiopulmonary System
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Colleen Farmer, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 06/30/2007
* USD 255,648.00

The unique cardiopulmonary system of crocodilian reptiles has interested
biologists for hundreds of years. Yet the functional significance of many
features of this system remains a mystery. The research proposed herein seeks to
understand the functional significance of the dual aortas (left and right) and
cardiovascular shunt of crocodilians. Unlike mammals, that have only one aorta
that originates in the left ventricle and carries oxygen-rich blood from the
heart to the body, crocodilians have two aortas. One aorta originates from the
left cardiac ventricle and is analogous with the mammalian aorta. However,
crocodilians also have a second aorta that originates from the right cardiac
ventricle and terminates at the stomach. The crocodilian shunt refers to a blood
flow pattern where oxygen-poor systemic venous blood is directed into this aorta
to be sent to the stomach, rather than directed into the pulmonary artery to be
sent to the lungs. The research will test two hypotheses regarding this
cardiovascular system: (1) that the dual aorta system of crocodilians
facilitates digestion of food and (2) that this system functions to maintain
appropriate blood pH after exercise. It will consist of measurements of blood
flow using ultrasonic technology and measurements of blood gases and pH. A major
aim of this research is to contribute to our understanding of the evolution of
the vertebrate cardiovascular system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A leading
evolutionary biologist, Theodosius Dobzhansky, astutely said, "Nothing in
biology makes sense except in the light of evolution." Evolutionary theory is a
profound contribution of biology to knowledge. All aspects of biology have
benefited from the use of this theory, including clinically oriented biology. A
full understanding of the human cardiovascular system in health and in disease
is only possible if we understand the evolutionary history of the system.
Because the cardiovascular system is made up of soft tissues and does not
preserve well in the fossil record, most insight into the evolution of the
cardiovascular system comes from comparing cardiovascular features and functions
of different living vertebrates. The early ancestors of mammals almost certainly
had a cardiovascular system that was similar to that of a typical reptile, such
as is found in lizards and turtles. The crocodilian cardiovascular system is
unique because it shares numerous features with that of mammals (e.g., a
completely divided cardiac ventricle supported by a coronary circulation) but
has many other features that are typically reptilian (e.g., two aortas, the
ability to shut down blood flow to the lung and redirect that blood to the
body). Thus, the paradoxical assemblage of 'mammalian' and 'reptilian' features
found within the crocodilians provides scientists with an exceptional
opportunity to gain insight into how and why the mammalian system evolved from
the reptilian pattern. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;