* 0137370
* Conference on The Power of Comparative Physiology, to be held August 24-28, 2002 in San Diego, California
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2003
* Martin Frank, American Physiological Society
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 05/31/2003
* USD 24,240.00

This award supports an American Physiological Society conference entitled "The
Power Of Comparative Physiology: Evolution, Integration And Application,"
scheduled for August 24-28, 2002 in San Diego, California. The fundamental goal
of this conference is to bring together comparative biologists who utilize a
diversity of approaches including molecular, cellular, organ, and organismal
physiology/biochemistry, functional morphology, biomechanics and biophysics,
ecology and evolutionary biology to understand physiological processes and
traits. The meeting will highlight the accomplishments that have occurred since
the last large meeting on comparative physiology, and more importantly, will
provide a forum to showcase new directions and
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific aims of this proposal are to: 1)
Convene an internationally recognized interdisciplinary group of investigators
to explore the rapid changes that comparative physiology has undergone as a
result of the incorporation of a variety of new tools and technologies into the
discipline; 2) Promote widespread participation of young scientists with an
emphasis on women and under-represented minorities, through a travel award
program; and 3) Interest new investigators and students in pursuing research
using comparative approaches to understand physiological processes and
traits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;