* 0137035
* Four Projects about Macroeconomic Risk and Uncertainty:  An Accomplishment Based Renewal
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2008
* Thomas Sargent, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 05/31/2008
* USD 232,129.00

This project consists of four related lines of research. 1. Model drift and
stochastic volatility: The project uses computationally intensive Bayesian
methods to organize evidence about the sources of drift in vector
autoregressions of post WWII U.S. aggregate time series. It seeks to partition
drift into parts due to the systematic or autoregressive part, on the one hand,
and the conditional variances of innovations, on the other. There are some
influential studies in the literature that purport to affirm drift in the
systematic part of vector autoregressions, and other equally influential ones
that deny it in favor of drifting volatilities. Insights about continuous time
diffusions lead the investigator to suspect that it is much more difficult to
detect drift in the systematic part than in the volatilities. Partitioning drift
into these two parts is important for quantitatively evaluating monetary and
fiscal policy rules and their effects. The project interprets the evidence
assembled in the light of recent theoretical formulations of drifting
coefficient models that focus on the government's learning process. 2. Self-
confirming equilibria and monetary policy: A self-confirming equilibrium is a
form of rational expectations that permits agents' models to disagree on events
that occur with zero probability in equilibrium. Recent theories of agents'
learning deliver this form of rational expectations equilibrium as a limit
point. This project extends earlier work with self-confirming equilibria to an
empirically more ambitious one based on a version of a 'new synthesis' macro
model. It also studies escape routes, a new form of dynamics, and the lessons
that they carry for a possible threat to our current low-inflation regime. 3.
Robust control and filtering in macroeconomics: This project pursues
applications of dynamic models of robust filtering and control. The aim of this
work is to provide positive and normative models of decision making where the
decision-maker regards his model as an approximation. Robust decision theory
provides a model of caution. Robust control theory is applied to asset pricing
puzzles and the formulation of monetary and fiscal policies. 4. Macroeconomic
history: This project studies in depth two or three important stabilizations of
inflation and focuses on the conditions that contributed to high or low output
and unemployment costs of stabilization.