* 0137973
* An Enhanced Optical Coherence Microscope for the Study of Dynamic Processes in the Early Development of Plants and Animals
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Richard Haskell, Harvey Mudd College
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 470,684.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Richard Haskell at Harvey Mudd College to
construct an optical coherence microscope (OCM) to capture three-dimensional
images of dynamic processes in the early development of plants and animals. An
interdisciplinary team of scientists and engineers at Harvey Mudd will record
critical events that occur 300 to 500 mm below the surface of a developing
organism, too deep to be accessible to other light-based methods because of the
strong light-scattering property of embryonic tissue. The ability of the OCM
instrument to image non-invasively the development of an individual plant or
animal will provide a key tool for gaining a full understanding of the
relationship between gene expression and the structural changes that occur
during tissue development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The light source of the OCM
instrument will be an ultrafast laser operating in the near infrared (1300 nm)
to provide good depth penetration in biological tissue. The laser output will
have a broad spectrum that results in a depth resolution for the microscope of 5
mm. The lateral resolution is provided by the focused spot diameter, also 5 mm.
The laser system developed for the OCM will be marketed by a commercial vendor
so that it is available to other researchers. In addition, the instrument will
be capable of measuring scatter motion, for example Brownian motion, which in
preliminary experiments has been shown to provide effective intrinsic contrast
between different cell types. Measurements of the local variation in refractive
index will also serve as a source of intrinsic contrast.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new OCM instrument will be used to study the
development of frog embryos and the differentiation of tissue at the apex of
plant shoots. OCM images will be assembled to form time-lapse images of dynamic
processes, permitting the first direct tests of proposed models of cell motions
and differentiation. The research team will consist primarily of four faculty at
Harvey Mudd College plus collaborators at four research universities. Their
backgrounds span the disciplines of physics, biology, and engineering. An
estimated 30 undergraduate researchers, drawn from all 6 major programs at
Harvey Mudd, will make significant contributions to the program both during the
summer and the academic year. The multidisciplinary nature of the project
provides an unusual opportunity to integrate research and education resulting in
exceptional training for students and faculty alike. Participants are motivated
to develop careers in science and engineering, and to pursue significant
research problems that stretch across traditional disciplinary lines.&lt;br/&gt;