* 0137734
* SGER: Morphological CT Scan of Notropis megalepis for Phylogenetic and Evolutionary Studies
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2003
* Richard Mayden, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 12/31/2003
* USD 7,400.00

Historically, the stark contrast in diversity between North America's sunfish
and minnow and shiner species served as a fertile research area for studying
differential rates of evolution in two groups of equal age (based on fossil
record). Cladistic analyses of osteological characters revealed fundamental
flaws with previous studies of this nature and classifications of these fishes,
thus questioning the accuracy of prior evolutionary studies. Today, phylogenetic
relationships of species of Notropis (shiners) and relatives are relatively well
known due to recent morphological and molecular analyses by the PI and
collaborators as well as other researchers. Relationships of species of
Centrarchidae, also soon to be available using morphological and molecular data,
will provide the necessary information to begin comparative studies between the
sunfish and shiner groups as envisioned by earlier researchers - rate
heterogeneity in evolution. However, a notable problem remaining in advancing
this research is the phylogenetic placement of the species Notropis megalepis,
the species used to date the Notropis lineage, to a clade appropriate for
comparison. The PI proposes to conduct high-resolution CT scans of the fossil
Notropis megalepis from the Middle Pliocene of western Kansas using the recent
technology developed at The University of Texas NSF Multi-user facility
maintained by Dr. Tim Rowe. This fossil is fundamental in dating the age of the
North American shiner and minnow group to which it belongs and evaluating rate
heterogeneity in evolution for these two groups of fishes. Producing accurate
estimates of evolutionary relationships is necessary for the overall framework
for information retrieval and biological prediction. Uses of such information
and predictability include tracking the origins of disease, identifying
biological control agents for invasive species, and evaluating risk factors
associated with biological conservation.