* 0137304
* Taxation, Redistribution, and Provision of Public Services in a System of Jurisdictions with Mobile Citizens
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2007
* Thomas Romer, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 02/28/2007
* USD 227,418.00

It has long been recognized that actual and potential movement of households and
factors of production across jurisdictional boundaries may have a significant
impact on the politics and policy choices of subnational governments. Analysis
of public good provision is increasingly based on models that characterize self-
selection of citizens into municipalities and collective choice via majority
rule within municipalities. This project combines a theoretical framework of
interjurisdictional sorting with a newly-developed empirical strategy that takes
sorting effects into account. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theoretical model yields
strong predictions about the distribution of households by income within and
across jurisdictions. These distributions can be; matched with empirical income
distributions observed in a sample of communities. The key methodological
insight is that matching income distributions allows us to characterize boundary
indifference loci of adjacent communities, as well as loci of pivotal voters
within each community in locational equilibrium. The estimator proposed here
controls for both observed and unobserved heterogeneity among households,
observed and unobserved characteristics of communities, the potential
endogeneity of prices and expenditures and the self-selection of households into
communities of their choice. The structural parameters of the model are
estimated using data of the Boston Metropolitan Area and the project extends the
analysis to other settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The extent to which mobility
constrains the choices of a jurisdiction depends not only on actual mobility,
but also on how political actors or citizens perceive the impact of mobility on
their communities. The project formulates and tests various hypotheses about
voter behavior, with special focus on the extent to which voters in a community
take mobility by others into account when making political decisions. The
project also investigates the importance of clustering in communities by income
or other characteristics, such as race or ethnicity. &lt;br/&gt;