* 0137937
* ADVANCE Fellows Award:  Studies in Financial Institutions and Markets
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Caroline Fohlin, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Linda G. Lopez
* 12/31/2006
* USD 502,272.00

The primary focus of this ADVANCE Fellows award is on new research and
educational activities related to the development and influence of venture
capital (VC) institutions. The VC research will look back over the past fifty
years to pinpoint the functions of venture capitalists, explain the appearance
of specialized VC firms, and identify institutional sources of risk capital
before the advent of the VC industry. Using international comparisons, the
research will examine the influence of legal, political, and economic contests
on institutional design. The study will also explore further hypotheses about
the link between capital markets and venture capital provision. International
comparison will undoubtedly uncover a range of institutional structures and will
therefore raise the further question of the relative efficiency of different
forms of VC provision. The second component of the VC research project builds on
the first, and explore the impact of venture capital on the economy. The
fundamental question is whether there is more innovation or high-tech growth now
than there was before the advent of the VC industry, and if so, whether such
rapid growth truly stems from the burgeoning of VC finance. Critical to this
line of research is establishing rigorous ways to measure innovation and high-
tech growth as well as the impact of VC financing thereon. This project will
take a longer-run view than past studies and will compare the US with a range of
other countries, including some that have developed few or no specialized VC
firms. In addition to large-scale statistical analysis, the VC projects will
include case studies of specific countries, industries, and firms in order to
elaborate on the general phenomena uncovered by the econometric work.

The PI will also work on completing two book manuscripts related to banking
history. The PI will be engaged in a range of educational activities, including
teaching courses to graduates and undergraduates and advising students. Students
will also assist with the research projects. This award is supported through the
NSF ADVANCE Program. The overall mission of the ADVANCE Program is to increase
the participation of women in the scientific and engineering workforce through
the increased representation and advancement of women in academic science and
engineering careers.

