* 0137336
* RUI-Microbial Observatories: Diversity of Halophilic Bacteria and Geochemical Signatures in a Tropical Solar Saltern
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2006
* Pieter Visscher, University of Puerto Rico at Humacao
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 01/31/2006
* USD 587,182.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. Lilliam Casillas and Carmen Hernandez
(University of Puerto Rico-Humacao) and Pieter Visscher (University of
Connecticut) to establish a Microbial Observatory in the Cabo Rojo solar
salterns of Puerto Rico. The salterns provide an excellent setting for the study
of life under extreme conditions due to the intense solar radiation, high wind
velocity and salinity at the site. Using molecular tools different halophilic
(i.e. salt-loving) organisms present at the site during wet and dry periods will
be identified. Once such halophiles have been identified, some of their
metabolic activities such as photosynthesis, aerobic respiration, sulfate
reduction and nitrogen fixation will be studied. Using microelectrodes, in situ
activities of the halophiles in the cyanobacterial mats and their contributions
to the productivity of the site will be studied. At the same time, the chemical
and geological composition of the sediments of the mats and the water column of
the salt ponds will be identified. The main goal of this research is to
understand how the various biological, chemical and geological processes act in
concert to define the hypersaline ecosystems of Cabo Rojo.

These studies will provide a scenario, as complete as possible, of the chemical
and geological conditions in a Caribbean tropical saltern and establish the role
of microorganisms in this ecosystem. Studies of this nature in the Caribbean are
limited. While accessing the microbial diversity of the site it is anticipated
that new organisms with novel adaptations and/or physiologies will be isolated.
Special focus will be placed on the role of halophilic microorganisms in the
geochemical transformations required for life to flourish. As hypersaline
environments are known to have existed since Precambrian times, study of the
Cabo Rojo salterns should shed light on how microorganisms and their by products
could possibly have contributed in the past to establish present ecosystems.