* 0137662
* ADVANCE Fellow
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Dorothy Mundy, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 05/31/2006
* USD 349,998.00

Cellular cholesterol metabolism is a complex problem and in spite of tremendous
progress remains incompletely understood. A great deal is known about the
enzymes that synthesize cholesterol and about the processes that are involved in
the uptake of cholesterol from the diet and how it is transported through the
blood to be delivered to cells. The question of how cholesterol moves around
within the cell however, remains largely unknown. The goal of this research is
to determine if a protein called caveolin-1 is involved in this process. These
studies are possible because the movements of caveolin within live cells can be
monitored using a fluorescent tracer protein attached to the normal protein.
Caveolin binds cholesterol and is known to travel within the cell to
compartments where cholesterol is synthesized, used and stored. When completed
these studies will determine the role of caveolin in cholesterol homeostasis.

Cells absolutely require cholesterol to survive and strive to maintain the level
of intracellular cholesterol within tightly controlled parameters. Humans can
either obtain their cholesterol from the diet or they can synthesize it de novo.
Defects in the pathways that regulate the level of cholesterol have important
consequences and contribute to many human diseases. It is necessary to determine
what proteins are required for these intracellular cholesterol movements in
order to understand how defects result in disease.

