* 0137956
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Iron Age Archaeology in The Gambia
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Carla Sinopoli, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/29/2004
* USD 7,590.00

Under the direction of Dr. Carla Sinopoli, Ms. Lawson will carry out analyses of
archaeological materials recovered during fieldwork in The Gambia, West Africa.
Lawson's fieldwork in the Gambia Valley, conducted between 1998 and 2000,
represents one of the first attempts to systematically study the archaeology of
this region of West Africa. Long known for its mysterious stone circle and
tumulus monuments built in the first and early second millennia AD, very little
is understood about the people of the Gambia Valley responsible for building
these monuments, which often house human burials. In order to understand
prehistoric polities in the region more fully, Lawson conducted a survey of
archaeological sites located in the stone circle and tumulus zone. Over 60
village and associated iron-working sites were recovered, along with numerous
monumental sites. Archaeological excavations were conducted at three of the
village sites and at one iron-working site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;National
Science Foundation funds will be used 1) to conduct analyses of artifacts
recovered during excavation and 2) to obtain radiocarbon dates from charcoal
samples taken during excavation. Artifact analysis will concentrate on faunal
and botanical remains. The analysis of such remains will give us a much better
idea of the subsistence practices common in the Gambia Valley in the past. The
identification of species utilized by past inhabitants will also help to
reconstruct the natural environment at the time of site occupation; the
environment has been subject to rapid deforestation in recent decades and so is
different now than it was 500 or 1000 years ago. The attainment of radiocarbon
dates from the excavated sites will allow for the construction of a regional
chronology. Radiocarbon dating is one of the best dating techniques for
archaeological sites, which are more than 500 years old. Because the Gambia
Valley is so understudied, until Lawson's work only one radiocarbon date was
available for the entire country (from a stone circle monument). By obtaining
radiocarbon dates for each site excavated, it will be possible to study how
politics and society have changed over the last 1,500 years in the Gambia
Valley. Radiocarbon dating will also provide absolute dates for ceramic
assemblages; changes in ceramic style are often chronologically sensitive. With
the dates of ceramic assemblages firmly established, it will be possible to
estimate the date of archaeological sites from surface finds
alone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When the Portuguese first reached the Gambia River
in the 1450's, they found it to be part of a dynamic trading system and home to
many independent polities. Lawson's archaeological work in The Gambia will help
to flesh out our understanding of how these Gambian polities developed and the
changing roles they played in regional African trading systems, the trans-
Saharan trade, and the later Atlantic trade. Knowledge of Gambian prehistory
will add to the growing corpus of African archaeological data.&lt;br/&gt;