* 0137799
* ADVANCE Fellows Award: Investigating the Origins of Orbitally Forced Paleoclimates: The Interplay of Climate Response, Geodynamics, Astrodynamics and Earth Noise
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Linda Hinnov, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2007
* USD 400,707.00

Hinnov&lt;br/&gt;0137799&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This ADVANCE Fellows career-
development plan centers on an investigation of orbitally forced paleoclimate
signals as carriers of first order geodynamical and astrodynamical information.
Geodynamical theory predicts that the Earth's tidal dissipation and dynamical
ellipticity will perturb the Earth's axial precession rate and tilt. The
perturbations should appear in paleoclimatically recorded orbital modes as
phasing irregularities. Observation of these irregularities depends upon the
accuracy of the timescale assigned to the paleoclimate record. This typically
involves adjusting an interpreted orbital signal in the record to a "target"
curve based upon an assumed climate response to orbital forcing. If the target
is wrong, however, timing errors will corrupt the true phasing of the recorded
orbital modes. Until this source of error can be effectively managed, no firm
conclusions about the Earth's physical behavior should be drawn from the
paleoclimate record. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Astrodynamical theory indicates that
long-period amplitude and frequency modulations in the Earth's orbital modes
track planetary orbital motions; these should be detectable in very long
paleoclimate signals. Some planetary orbits resonate, e.g., Earth and Mars; in
the remote past, the orbits of Mars and Earth may have moved chaotically between
two resonance states. Verification of this behavior using the paleoclimate
record is therefore a top priority in astrodynamics. Complicating the extraction
of this information, however, is low frequency "Earth noise" that can interfere
with long paleoclimate signals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To unravel these problems,
a multi-task computer model will be developed that calculates insolation at any
geographical location over any timescale, and is linked to adjustable
rotational-orbital parameters that include effects from the Earth's tidal
dissipation and dynamical ellipticity. The model will be explored in a series of
sensitivity experiments, then evaluated against paleoclimate records using
advanced time series analysis.&lt;br/&gt;