* 0137421
* Macroeconomic Effects of Labor and Industrial Policies
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2002,04/30/2008
* Harold Cole, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 04/30/2008
* USD 250,866.00

This research continues work by the investigator on the macroeconomic effects of
labor and industrial policies. The prior research developed a multi-sector
dynamic general equilibrium insider/outsider model and used that model to
quantitatively evaluate the macroeconomic impact of President Roosevelt's
cartelization and labor market policies in the 1930s. The main finding of my
previous research is that these New Deal policies were a key factor in the
continuation of the Great Depression until World War II. The new research
broadens and extends this work in two significant ways and so in doing resolves
some key puzzles identified in the previous work. First, it develops a dynamic
general equilibrium insider/outsider model with "hold-up": the ability of
workers to grab rents from capital. This is a substantial theoretical innovation
over the model in the previous work, which abstracted from hold-up.
Theoretically, the model merges the earlier dynamic GE insider/outsider model
with a hold-up friction in that workers can grab rents from firm investments
made prior to the time that firms and workers bargain. The project shows how the
equilibrium can be characterized and how it can be computed even with the
additional complexity arising from industry-specific capital. This model has
substantive quantitative implications for historical episodes in which
government policies permitted labor to hold up capital. This model is used to
study the macroeconomic effects of the National Labor Relations Act (NLRA),
which gave labor a significant ability to hold up firms. The specification of
the model captures some key aspects of New Deal policies. The model with hold-up
helps resolve two key puzzles highlighted in my earlier work: (1) the further
deterioration of the economy after the NLRA was passed, and (2) the
extraordinary low level of investment. The hold-up model predicts a further drop
in output and employment and a further increase in the real wage after the NLRA
was adopted, which is consistent with the data. The model also predicts a much
lower level of investment than predicted by the earlier model without hold-up,
and thus brings the theory closer in line with data. This finding suggests that
"rent-grabbing" was a key factor that kept investment low during the New Deal.
The proposal also outlines the application of this model to Europe.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Second, past work is broadened by studying unemployment
insurance policies that affect labor supply. A dynamic general equilibrium model
is developed to study the macroeconomic implications of some historical
depressions in which countries have adopted very generous unemployment benefits
systems. This work indicated that Britain's unemployment insurance system -in
conjunction with large, negative sector-specific shocks - was a key contributing
factor to the depression. The new research develops a fully articulated model to
quantitatively evaluate the macroeconomic impact of unemployment benefits during
interwar Britain and during other historical episodes. This research differs
considerably from the large existing literature that has analyzed the interwar
British depression. It makes considerable use of dynamic general equilibrium
theory, and it does not exclusively focus on UI. In fact, the research discusses
how UI cannot be the whole story, because post-World War II employment was
considerably higher than interwar employment, despite comparable levels of
benefits. By focusing on the fact that Britain suffered large, negative sectoral
shocks after World War I, but not after World War II, the research suggests a
unified accounting of interwar and post-World War II. It develops a multi-sector
model that includes a search friction on employment and takes into account the
drop in human capital associated with sectoral shifts and spells of
unemployment. Such a model is capable of assessing the impact of the large
sectoral shocks on Britain's interwar unemployment given its generous VI system.
The model is used to study Europe in 1980s. A number of researchers have
suggested that the problems Europe experienced during this period arose from a
combination of generous unemployment benefits, high degrees of labor bargaining
power and large sectoral shocks. Finally, the project constructs a comprehensive
cross-country database on interwar economies to help foster additional research
on the interwar period. This will be the only fully documented, downloadable
database on this period available.&lt;br/&gt;