* 0137350
* Rare Earth Elements and Nd Isotopes in Hydrothermal Metalliferous Sediments: Pleistocene and Cenozoic Paleoceanography
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2005
* James Wright, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Rodey Batiza
* 02/28/2005
* USD 183,197.00

In this study, the PIs will test and develop a new paleoclimate proxy- Rare
Earth Element (REE) abundances of carbonate sediments that contain metalliferous
sediment originating from hydrothermal plumes. In combination, the PIs will use
Nd isotope values (?Nd) as a proxy to help unravel differences in weathering
rates and sources from variations in seawater REE abundances due to other
causes. The short residence times of the REE (&lt;1-4 Ka) mean that potentially,
these proxies could provide high resolution data. Preliminary data show that
metalliferous sediment records bottom water REE patterns and that the REE
patterns are virtually identical for the Atlantic and Pacific. The entire REE
pattern is reflected in differences in Nd/Er. Preliminary data for a core for
the last 135 Ka indicate that Nd/Er and ???O are well correlated, showing good
potential for the proxy. Additional preliminary data for a longer period (last
28Ma) show interesting patterns and large changes in ?Nd and Nd/Er for this
period, again arguing that these combined proxies have potential to identify
changing weathering inputs to the ocean. In order to further evaluate this
proxy, the PIs will analyze hydrothermal plume material from additional
hydrothermal vents in the northern and southern EPR, carry out lab experiments
of REE uptake in vitro, calibrate the Nd/Er proxy using Holocene core tops from
SEPR cores, evaluate possible diagenetic effects on the preservation of the
proxy signals using cores with known and diverse diagenetic histories, and
explore the behavior of both proxies on Ma to 10 Ka time scales for large
climatic variations in the Oligocene and Miocene.&lt;br/&gt;