* 0137451
* REU Site: Research Experience for Undergraduates: Chemical, Optical, Nonlinear, and Condensed Matter Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2007
* James Gole, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 02/28/2007
* USD 413,681.00

The Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Program will be continued in
the School of Physics of the Georgia Institute of Technology. The program will
encompass Chemical, Optical, Nonlinear, and Condensed Matter Physics but also
has been expanded to include projects in MEMS (Micro-electrical Mechanical
Systems), Biomedical Imaging, and Material Science- Microscopy. Twelve REU
students participate in the program (ten supported by NSF, two by Georgia Tech),
with the choice of participation in the research groups of 18 faculty
investigators. The considerable experience of the participating faculty in
undergraduate research training furnishes an ideal environment to pursue
undergraduate research training among the supportive cast including graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows. The closely monitored research environment is
supplemented by (1) weekly seminars presented by both participating faculty and
students, (2) faculty-student luncheons, (3) excursions to advanced technology
facilities including Lockheed Aircraft, (4) a reasonable but not intrusive
number of organized social events as students are encouraged to avail themselves
of several cultural opportunities in the Atlanta area dictated by their
individual interest. At the end of the summer session, each student presents the
results of their research endeavors in a REU Symposium run in the American
Physical Society format of 15-20- minute presentations.