* 0137162
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Knowledge of Rivals' Types and Its Effect on Auctions
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2005
* Yeon-Koo Che, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 02/28/2005
* USD 4,770.00

The purpose of the doctoral dissertation project is to experimentally test the
effect of bidders' information of their rivals' types in standard auctions.
Auctions are used widely for trading goods and services, ranging from artwork
and agricultural products to government assets such as PCS spectrum rights,
timber and mineral harvesting rights. While the existing studies on auctions
have made great strides, our understanding remains far from complete. In
particular, how bidders' knowledge of their rivals affects their bidding
behavior and the performance of various auctions is not well understood. The
existing work assumes that bidders have either no information or full
information about their rivals. In practice, however, bidders' knowledge about
their rivals tends to be asymmetric. For instance, in a procurement auction
contested by domestic firms and foreign firms, domestic firms are likely to be
better informed about the technical capabilities of their domestic rivals than
those of their foreign rivals. The current project will contribute to our
understanding of the impact bidders' information has on their behavior and on
the performance of standard auctions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bidders' asymmetric
knowledge about their rivals matters and it may affect both the bidders'
behavior and the performance of alternative auction forms. The first chapter of
my dissertation, written jointly with Yeon-Koo Che, has also established a
number of hypotheses regarding how the equilibrium bidding behavior and the
revenue performance of a given auction will change as bidders learn more about
their rivals' types. Testing our hypotheses requires controlling the information
flow of the bidders, which would be virtually impossible if one relied on the
traditional empirical method employing secondary data. A lab experiment is ideal
since the experiment designer can control the information flow precisely the way
it is modelled in the theory. We plan to conduct 6 sessions of lab experiments,
each of which will invite 32 subjects to participate in a series of auction
games. The research will feature some innovative techniques to improve the
empirical identification of the subjects' bidding behavior. While the main
purpose of the experiment will be to test the specific hypotheses of the theory
chapter, it will in the process contribute to the testing of the underlying Nash
hypothesis, by subjecting it to more comparative static restrictions. Further,
the test is expected to reveal the role bidders' risk aversion plays in auction
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;