* 0137772
* Elementary, Secondary, and Informal Education:  Advancing the Work of COMPASS:  A Secondary Mathematics Implementation Project
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2008
* John Maceli, Ithaca College
* Continuing Grant
* John S. Bradley
* 08/31/2008
* USD 3,599,861.00

The "Curricular Options Programs for All Secondary Students (COMPASS)" Center
focuses on issues related to the implementation of five national comprehensive
secondary school mathematics curriculum programs as a means of initiating
systemic change within a school district. The five programs are: Contemporary
Mathematics in Context; the Interactive Mathematics Program; MATH Connections;
Mathematics: Modeling Our World; and SIMMS Integrated Mathematics. The structure
of COMPASS includes a Central Site and five Satellite Sites, one for each
curriculum program. The primary functions of the Central Site are to inform
various constituencies about these curricula, to assist school districts in
developing the capacity for change by helping them formulate an implementation
plan, and to coordinate requests for additional information and assistance from
the Satellite Sites. The primary goals of the Satellite Sites are to provide
curriculum program-specific information and to assist school districts with
program-specific implementation strategies, including professional development
for teachers. The work of all six sites involves working with policy makers at
the school district, regional and state levels, as well as with parents,
businesses and community leaders as they seek to institute or understand the
kind of educational reform embodied in these curricula.