* 0137140
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: International Digital Library Annotation and Resource Discovery of Geographical Image Data
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2005
* David Mark, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 03/31/2005
* USD 20,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;0137140&lt;br/&gt;Zhang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the
participation of American scientists in a U.S.-Japan seminar on annotation and
resource discovery of geographical image data to be held in Karuizawa, Japan
from October 9-11, 2002. The co-organizers are Professor Aidong Zhang of the
State University of New York (SUNY) at Buffalo and Dr. Frederic Andres of the
National Institute of Informatics (NII) in Tokyo, Japan. This meeting will
discuss research results of a current U.S.-Japan project on metadata modeling,
resource discovery, and querying of large-scale geographical image datasets. The
seminar aims to demonstrate the current research achievement, clarify a variety
of questions, and identify promising areas for future joint work. The specific
topics include: 1) extracting semantic features of geographic images, 2)
detecting clusters of arbitrary shape of geographic images, 3) formulating the
metadata for the integrated system to direct a query to relevant databases, 4)
establishing a theoretical foundation of resource selection approaches based on
the metadata, and 5) query processing to support content-based retrieval of
geographic images.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher's current project
investigates novel approaches to supporting effective and efficient access to
various geographic image databases over the Internet. These approaches establish
a foundation for creating a meta-level system on top of geographic image
databases to support distributed geographic image retrieval. Through this
project a huge volume of geographic data (JIOMEDIA) is being collected and
classified based on the semantics. This asset will be accessible by users for
research and educational purposes. A set of software tools is being developed
and will be made available for use of establishing a metaserver environment
which manages large-scale geographic data resources. The seminar advances
international human resources through the participation of many postdocs and
graduate students with some of them presenting papers. Through the exchange of
ideas and technology, this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and
promote international understanding and cooperation. The researchers plan to
publish proceedings of the seminar on their Web pages. &lt;br/&gt;