* 0137045
* Asian Foreign Investment in the United States: A Firm-Level Study of Technology Acquisition and Transfer
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Alan MacPherson, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 04/30/2005
* USD 169,979.00

Existing theories of international technology transfer suggest that
industrializing nations usually acquire new technology through inward
investment, and from parent firms to subsidiaries. In contrast, this research is
concerned with a new model of technology transfer in which firms from
industrializing nations move to the technology source. By establishing
subsidiaries inside the U.S., Asian companies are hypothesized to reverse the
process of technology transfer through direct absorption of knowledge spillovers
from U.S. firms and institutions. Innovations that arise from these spillovers
can then be transmitted back to parent companies in Asia. This speeds up the
process of technology transfer. This research project will assess the extent to
which Asian companies obtain new technology via this model of outward foreign
direct investment to the United States. Two approaches will be used. First, a
large-scale postal survey of Asian branch facilities in the U.S. will be
conducted . Approximately 600 establishments will be contacted. The survey will
be restricted to subsidiaries from South Korea, Taiwan, Singapore, and Hong
Kong, which are four of the five largest sources of Asian investment in the
U.S.. The survey will focus upon the types of spillovers that are absorbed as
well as the transmission mechanisms that support technology transfer. Second,
personal interviews will be conducted with senior managers of the parent
companies in Asia. These interviews will supply qualitative insights regarding
the types of benefits that are obtained from direct investment in the U.S. Data
from the postal survey will be analyzed using cross-tabulation, correlation, and
conditional logit techniques. Data from the interviews will be explored via
content analysis.

This project will shed light on an emerging model of international technology
transfer in the global economy. This model delivers technological benefits to
Asian subsidiaries and their parent companies as well as employment and
production benefits to U.S. host regions. The role of local business conditions
in attracting particular types of inward investment will be explored via
statistical analysis. In addition, the transmission mechanisms that support
technology transfer will be assessed from both a local and international
standpoint. Overall, the project will contribute to social and regional science
by identifying the main factors that have led to the emergence of this new model
of local and international technology transfer.

