* 0137359
* Reactive Trace Chemicals in Ocean Surface Waters: Hydrogen Peroxide, Manganese and Gallium
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Alan Shiller, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2005
* USD 176,083.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0137359&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reactive trace
species such as Fe have an important effect on surface ocean chemistry and
biological productivity. However, other trace species that can influence primary
production, affect the chemical distribution of other elements or can be used as
tracers have received less attention. For this reason, two PIs from the
University of Southern Mississippi will participate in the 4th IOC cruise to the
Northwest Pacific to determine Mn, H2O2 and Ga in surface waters, vertical
profiles, rain samples, dust dissolution experiments and/or incubation
experiments. Determinations of H2O2 will be used for the following: (1) add
measurements to a growing dataset aimed at examining photochemical dissolution
of dust in surface waters; (2) determine whether it aids in the solubilization
of particulate Fe in the surface ocean; and (3) assess rates of photo-production
and dark decay. Values for Mn will be compared with Al and Ga to differentiate
dust from shelf inputs. In addition, given the longer residence time for Mn in
the surface ocean, the PI will attempt to use this metal to provide new insights
into Fe inputs to the upper ocean. Comparison of Mn with H2O2 will allow the PIs
to determine reductive dissolution of manganese oxides in seawater. Lastly, Ga
concentrations will be compared with Al to assess if the former may not be a
better proxy for dust inputs to the surface ocean, determine if any fraction is
anthropogenic and whether any of the Ga is complexed with organics creating
possible Ga-Fe competitive interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;