* 0137119
* Force Propagation and Friction in Granular Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2006
* Joshua Socolar, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 02/28/2006
* USD 389,411.00

This is a combined experiment and theory/modeling condensed matter physics
project. The objective is to understand force propagation in granular materials.
Granular materials have been the focus of an intensive and growing body of
research that also extends to a broader class of materials, such as glasses,
colloids, foams and others that exhibit jamming (frozen structures). New
techniques are being invented to deal with these materials, which cannot be
described in the context of conventional statistical mechanics. Thus, concepts
arising from this project have potential to impact a broad range of materials
handling problems, which arise with food grains, coal and ores and
pharmaceutical powders and other granular materials. In these materials, forces
are carried by an inhomogeneous network of so-called stress chains, which form
and reform, leading to strong spatio-temporal stress fluctuations. This project
will address at least four different systems that exhibit force propagation and
fluctuations. Theory/modeling aspects of this work focus on micro/mesoscopic
models of stress propagation, while Molecular Dynamics techniques are brought to
bear on force fluctuations. This project involves undergraduates, graduate
students and post-docs in an integrated program of training and development.
More senior students and post-docs train undergrads through appropriate research
projects. Graduate students and post-docs receive training in advanced research
techniques that prepare them for either academic or industrial
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on the behavior of
granular materials, which include a broad spectrum of technologically and
industrially relevant products ranging from food grains to coal and ores to
pharmaceutical powders. The value added to the US economy in the handling of
these materials is estimated to be as much as a trillion dollars a year.
However, our understanding of the basic physics of these materials is
incomplete, and this translates into a corresponding loss of productivity in
dealing with these materials. This project focuses on such basic physics issues
as how forces are carried in these materials and how the materials behave when
they are subject to applied forces, such as those that might be encountered in
handling devices. Important insights sought with this project should include
better predictability of materials properties, as well as insight into the
limits of this predictability. This project involves undergraduates, graduate
students and post-docs in an integrated program of training and development.
Grad students and post-docs will help undergrads through appropriate research
projects. Undergraduates learn key research techniques, and also training in
instrumentation development. Graduate students and post-docs receive training in
advanced research techniques that will prepare them for either academic or
industrial careers.&lt;br/&gt;