* 0137322
* Femtosecond Studies of Coupled Electron-Lattice Dynamics in Doped Perovskite Manganites
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2005
* Gunter Luepke, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 02/28/2005
* USD 196,060.00

This condensed matter physics project seeks to elucidate electron-lattice
coupling, soft mode dynamics, and spin-flip processes near the metal-insulator
phase transition in doped perovskite manganites. Femtosecond time-resolved
optical response techniques will be employed to measure the dynamics of the
various processes that dictate the unusual transport properties of the manganese
oxides. The primary objective is to study the coupled dynamics of the charge
carriers and that of the lattice deformations, which surround them. The
advantages of the time-domain approach to investigate these heavily damped
responses are clear, especially near structural phase changes where the soft
modes are characteristically heavily damped or over damped. Magneto-elastic
coupling is important to understand the low-temperature spin dynamics of
manganite. Information about the spin dynamics will be used to test various
theoretical approaches that sensitive to this parameter. A femtosecond-tunable
laser system will be employed for impulsive-stimulated Raman scattering (ISRS),
pump-probe transient reflectivity and magneto-optical Kerr-effect experiments.
Systematic studies of the natural frequency and damping of the soft optical
phonon modes by ISRS measurements will provide new information about electronic
and structural instabilities and phase changes of these strongly correlated
electron systems. The goal of our magnetic field-dependent studies is to
elucidate correlation effects of the mobile charge carriers and their dependence
on the magnetic structure of the doped manganese oxides. The students involved
in this project will be trained in an interdisciplinary field including modern
optics, material science, and computational
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interest in the manganese oxides as exceptional
candidates for magnetic sensors and detectors has been rekindled because of the
colossal magnetoresistance effect observed in these materials at room
temperature. Thin films open up new possibilities for applications in diverse
areas of technology such as magnetic random access memories and read heads for
hard disk drives. The goal of this research program is to elucidate the unusual
magneto-transport properties of doped manganese oxides by studying the coupled
dynamics of the charge carriers and that of the lattice deformations that
surround them. Femtosecond time-resolved optical response techniques will be
employed to measure the dynamics of the various processes that dictate the
unusual transport properties of the manganese oxides. The goal of the magnetic
field-dependent studies is to reveal correlation effects of the mobile charge
carriers and their dependence on the magnetic structure of the doped manganese
oxides. Experimental studies of the spin dynamics can be used to test various
theoretical approaches that are sensitive to this parameter. These fundamental
studies will provide new information about the mechanism that governs the large
spin-dependent transport in this strongly correlated material system. The
training that graduate and undergraduate students will receive while working on
this project will prepare them for attractive material science or optics related
careers in industry, academe, or government.&lt;br/&gt;