* 0137632
* Spin Polarized Tunneling Studies in Transition Metals, Alloys and Heavy Fermions
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Jagadeesh Moodera, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 12/31/2005
* USD 381,000.00

This project will explore electron spin properties, from both the fundamental
physics point of view and from the viewpoint of the technologically important
area of spintronics. The emphasis will be on surfaces and interfaces that form
the basis of spin transport phenomena. The intention is also to extend the
technique of spin-polarized tunneling into new areas: (1) Determination of its
relation to crystalline direction, barrier interface, and bulk magnetic moment,
(2) Analytical study of tunnel barriers. Though having been addressed for nearly
thirty years by many theoretical approaches, the origin and the magnitude of the
polarization values measured by tunneling remain an open question. This work
will investigate the poorly understood relation between spin polarization of
tunneling electrons on crystallographic orientation and surface band structure.
This includes spin-polarized tunneling from epitaxial ferromagnetic films,
interfacial-bonding effects and tunnel barrier properties. Fabrication
techniques will manipulate the interfaces and barriers in planar thin film
magnetic tunnel junctions in efforts to maximize the spin polarization values.
Spin tunneling is influenced by delta dopants (with or without magnetic moment)
in the tunnel barriers - mostly flipping the spins and, except for the case of
Fe dopants, even enhancing the spin tunneling probability. This area is yet to
be understood and will be well investigated. A state of the art MBE system makes
it feasible to engineer thin films with new types of interface materials leading
to unique electronic and magnetic properties. The theoretical support comes from
Prof. William H. Butler of Oak Ridge National Lab whose expertise is in band
structure calculations, interface effects as well as ferromagnetic tunnel
junction structures. Spin tunneling studies will possibly be initiated, a first
of its kind study in heavy Fermion systems, wherein temperature-induced changes
and pressure-induced changes of the magnetic transitions occur. Students of all
levels and postdocs will be involved in this investigation thus creating a pool
of technical experts particularly in the future field of information technology
- spintronics, and in general magnetism as well as thin film
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This condensed matter physics project broaden our
fundamental understanding of electron spin properties (a topic in magnetism) by
using the unique tool of spin polarized tunneling technique (a quantum
phenomenon). The results will contribute to the knowledge base needed for
possible future spin-based information technologies. The project will build on
earlier successful work in spin tunneling plus transport, and at a later stage
of the program will push toward the new frontiers by examining a new class of
magnetic materials, so-called heavy Fermion metals. A major goals is to expand a
new and promising interaction between theorists who are now working to analyze
the spin tunneling experiments. In addition, the fabrication methods, using
state of the art molecular beam epitaxy tools will manipulate the material
interfaces and tunnel barriers to create novel materials and to maximize the
spin polarization values. Measurements will be made in ambient as well as liquid
helium temperatures in the presence of a small or large magnetic field. Some of
the earlier results of this project have generated worldwide interest, both
experimentally and theoretically, with many major companies involved in
developing nonvolatile memory elements as well as sensors for ultrahigh-density
recording. The project integrates research with the education and training of
high-school students, undergraduate students, graduate students and post-
doctoral fellows. The training will be in spin transport and in specialized
areas such as nanotechnology. The highly educated and trained people will be
well prepared for careers as educators and workers in the area of spin-based
information storage technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;