* 0137487
* Mid-Atlantic Mathematical Logic Seminar (MAMLS)
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Arthur Apter, CUNY Baruch College
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 04/30/2006
* USD 35,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0137487&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Arthur Apter&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Mid-Atlantic Mathematical
Logic Seminar (MAMLS), formed in&lt;br/&gt;the fall of 1982 under the aegis of
Lee Stanley, has supported&lt;br/&gt;3-4 regional meetings per year of 1-2 days'
duration since then.&lt;br/&gt;These meetings are held at various locations and
cover a broad&lt;br/&gt;spectrum of mathematical logic with particular emphasis
on&lt;br/&gt;complexity theory, theoretical computer science, fragments
of&lt;br/&gt;arithmetic, pure and applied model theory, proof
theory,&lt;br/&gt;recursion theory, set theory, subsystems of analysis
in&lt;br/&gt;accordance with the program of H. Friedman and S. Simpson,
and&lt;br/&gt;topos theory. NSF support is provided for some of the
expenses&lt;br/&gt;of the speakers and attendees, in particular of the
graduate&lt;br/&gt;students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Via the meetings sponsored,
the MAMLS grant maintains the&lt;br/&gt;vitality of the field of mathematical
logic. Special emphasis is&lt;br/&gt;placed on enhancing the participation of
younger researchers and&lt;br/&gt;members of traditionally underrepresented
groups, especially&lt;br/&gt;women. This is done by providing an intellectual
forum in which&lt;br/&gt;all interested persons are invited to contribute and in
which&lt;br/&gt;there are lectures on current topics of research.&lt;br/&gt;The
Mid-Atlantic Mathematical Logic Seminar (MAMLS), formed in&lt;br/&gt;the fall of
1982 under the aegis of Lee Stanley, has supported&lt;br/&gt;3-4 regional
meetings per year of 1-2 days' duration since then.&lt;br/&gt;These meetings are
held at various locations and cover a broad&lt;br/&gt;spectrum of mathematical
logic with particular emphasis on&lt;br/&gt;complexity theory, theoretical
computer science, fragments of&lt;br/&gt;arithmetic, pure and applied model
theory, proof theory,&lt;br/&gt;recursion theory, set theory, subsystems of
analysis in&lt;br/&gt;accordance with the program of H. Friedman and S. Simpson,
and&lt;br/&gt;topos theory. NSF support is provided for some of the
expenses&lt;br/&gt;of the speakers and attendees, in particular of the
graduate&lt;br/&gt;students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Via the meetings sponsored,
the MAMLS grant maintains the&lt;br/&gt;vitality of the field of mathematical
logic. Special emphasis is&lt;br/&gt;placed on enhancing the participation of
younger researchers and&lt;br/&gt;members of traditionally underrepresented
groups, especially&lt;br/&gt;women. This is done by providing an intellectual
forum in which&lt;br/&gt;all interested persons are invited to contribute and in
which&lt;br/&gt;there are lectures on current topics of research.