* 0137335
* Mesoscale Airflow over Mountains: Modeling and Observational Analysis
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Dale Durran, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 04/30/2006
* USD 493,664.00

Mountains exert a profound influence on the weather and climate. This research
is aimed at investigating two important ways in which mountain-induced
circulations directly impact human activities: strong surface winds and violent
low-level rotors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Strong surface winds may be generated by
the interaction of the larger-scale flow with the topography through two
different mechanisms, gap winds and downslope winds. Significant weather hazards
and extensive property damage can occur during extreme gap-wind and downslope-
wind events. Gap winds are produced when air is forced through gaps in a
mountain barrier. The winds above mountain top level need not have a component
perpendicular to the ridge line while the gap winds are blowing. Downslope
winds, on the other hand, only occur if there is a significant cross-mountain
wind component at ridge-top level. Downslope winds attain their high velocities
as the flow descends from the mountain crest. In some cases there may be
synergistic interactions between the gap flow through a mountain pass and
downslope winds on the slopes adjacent to the pass. A goal of this research is
to better understand the dynamics of gap winds, to determine those conditions
under which a given large-scale flow is more suitable for the generation of gap
winds or downslope winds, and to ultimately improve the forecasting of high wind
events in mountainous regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Airflow over long ridges
often produces low-level vortices with horizontal axes parallel to the ridge
line. These horizontal vortices, known as rotors, pose a serious hazard to
commercial, military and civilian aviation. The rotor flow is often very
turbulent. Some aircraft have reported undergoing extreme rolling motions (with
roll angles approaching 90 degrees), and some aircraft have been lost under
conditions when strong rotors were believed to have been present. Recent work by
the Principal Investigator and collaborators has identified the basic source of
rotation within a typical rotor. Just as the tornadoes contain embedded regions
of high vorticity (suction vortices), terrain induced rotors also appear to
contain localized regions of very high vorticity. At present, almost nothing is
known about the maximum strength or the dynamics of these subrotors, yet they
may pose the most danger to aircraft. A goal of this proposal is to develop a
better understanding of the probable strength, frequency of occurrence, and the
dynamics of these subrotors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful completion of this
research can potentially lead to better forecasts of mountain-induced severe
wind hazards.