* 0137001
* The Informational Content of Advertising
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Simon Anderson, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 05/31/2007
* USD 147,469.00

A substantial literature in marketing is devoted to measuring the informative
content in advertising, and loosely confirms that messages contain limited
information. However, the economics literature has not addressed the issue of
what information firms wish to convey to potential customers. That is, the
literature on informative advertising has not studied the fact that firms choose
the content of advertising messages. The goal of this proposal is to develop
such a theory and to explore the firms' incentives regarding the amount and the
nature of the information they decide to provide in ads. Preliminary results
suggest that the firm has a substantial incentive to hold back product
information from the ad. When it does want to advertise, it wants to advertise
the product characteristics that are most important to consumers. Moreover, it
will advertise a greater range of features of the product the more costly it is
for consumers to find out this information for themselves (for example, for
goods that are infrequently purchased). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second part of
the project will check whether these theoretical predictions are upheld in the
data. Magazine and television ads will be analyzed for the amount and the type
of information that they contain. It will then be determined whether the
information in the ads conforms to the theoretical predictions. The project will
further investigate the role of product quality on advertising content and the
impact of competition on firms' advertising strategy.&lt;br/&gt;