* 0137813
* ADVANCE Fellows Award: Patterns of Biomineralization and Isotopic Variations in the Teeth and Bones of Modern Bison
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Kathryn Hoppe, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 04/30/2005
* USD 249,977.00

As interest grows in deciphering the factors that influence the Earth's climate,
researchers have developed several proxies useful for reconstructing ancient
environmental conditions. One of the most promising tools for reconstructing
short-term (seasonal to annual) environmental fluctuations is isotopic analysis
of vertebrate fossils. Analyses of fossil bison hold particular promise for such
research. However, the precision of paleoenvironmental reconstructions based on
analyses of fossil bison is currently limited because: (1) the rate of enamel
biomineralization within bison teeth has not been studied in detail, and (2) the
precise relationship between the d18O and d13C values of modern bison and local
environmental conditions has not been precisely quantified. &lt;br/&gt; The
purpose of this project is to quantify how precisely isotopic analyses of bison
can be used to reconstruct paleoenvionemtal conditions. The first part of this
study will document the patterns of biomineralization and isotope variations
preserved within bison tooth enamel in order to develop an optimal sampling
strategy. The second part of this study will quantify how well the d18O and d13C
values of modern Great Plains bison correlate with environmental changes
including: average temperature, seasonal temperature range, precipitation,
relative humidity, and grassland composition (i.e., C3/C4 ratio). This study
will thus quantify how precisely analyses of the d18O and d13C values of bison
can be used to reconstruct annual and seaonal variations in local environments.
It will produce a map of the isotope gradients in modern bison, which will serve
as a baseline for interpreting the isotope signals preserved in fossil bison as
well as other herbivores. This study will thus greatly increase the precision
and accuracy of paleoclimatic and paleovegetation reconstruction based on
isotope analyses of fossil herbivores.&lt;br/&gt;