* 0137422
* ADVANCE - Fellow
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2006
* Linda Bushnell, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Olufemi Olowolafe
* 05/31/2006
* USD 447,399.00

In this prepared ADVANCE Fellow award the PI plan to investigate the general
area of "networks and control," which can be broken down into two subareas. The
first subarea considers the control of communication networks, which falls into
the broader field of information technology. The second subarea is networked
control systems (NCS), where one or more control loops is closed via a serial
communication channel. The focus of this proposal is in the latter subarea. The
idea of NCS is to bring multiple-input, multiple-output control system
technology to application areas where the prohibitive cost of point-to-point
wiring had previously barred its use. The PI has worked for the past five years
on research that covers stability, encoding, estimation, perturbation and
application issues for NCS. Applications of this research include control and
communications of active, intelligent, dynamic networks; distributed sensor
systems; secure, reliable wireless communication; and control of multi-vehicle
formations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will work with two other robotics
professors at UW on a project with the goal of enabling groups of robots to work
effectively under unstructured conditions and with close coordination and
control by humans. There are many activities where it is desirable to substitute
robots for humans ("dull, dirty and/or dangerous" tasks). Teams of robots,
operating in an unknown and perhaps hostile environment can potentially
accomplish important missions&lt;br/&gt;such as surveillance, situation
awareness and understanding, damage assessment, search and rescue, and others.
However, command and control of such a team requires effective coupling between
the human supervisor and the robot teams. Furthermore, the sensory, motor and
planning capabilities of the human exceed those of foreseeable autonomous
robots. Therefore, an effective combination of the human and robot can
potentially produce higher performance than a team composed entirely of humans
or entirely of robots. Realizing this vision requires basic&lt;br/&gt;advances
in research in the fields of mobile robotic sensing planning and control, as
well as human interfaces to multiple robots. The PI's work on this project will
focus on multi-robot communication and control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI is
actively involved with community outreach at UW. During the past academic year,
the PI has hosted three outreach events. The first was a 3-hour long workshop on
mobile robotics for a group of Seattle YMCA teenagers. The second was three
hour-long workshops on mobile robotics for teenage girls through the Shoreline
Community College "Expanding Your Horizons Day" program. The PI also hosted a
two-day open house in the Mobile Robotics&lt;br/&gt;Laboratory for the annual EE
Department Open House.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This past academic year, the PI
developed three new senior-level capstone design courses on mobile robotics. The
PI plans to improve the courses and teach them again in the upcoming academic
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI plans to research the two areas listed above.
This will involve working with other professors and students in the UW
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science and Engineering departments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To meet the ADVANCE goal the PI plans to support a woman
graduate student each year. The PI is currently a graduate student mentor in the
UW Women in Science and Engineering (WiSE) program. The PI will also be an
advisor for independent study projects from women in the EE department. The UW
EE Department has most of the required infrastructure to support the PI and
graduate students to perform the research proposed.&lt;br/&gt;