* 0137652
* Theoretical and Computational Methods for Long-Distance Electron Tunneling in Biological Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Alexei Stuchebrukhov, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* raima larter
* 03/31/2006
* USD 375,000.00

In this project funded jointly by the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, the Computational Mathematics Program of the
Division of Mathematical Sciences, and the Molecular Biophysics Program in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, Stuchebrukhov will develop
theoretical and computational methods to study long-distance electron tunneling
in biological systems. The Tunneling Currents Method, developed earlier by
Stuchebrukhov, will be further tested and applied to specific experimental
systems. Among the issues this work will focus on are refining the computational
approach to make it useful for calculating very small tunneling interactions and
incorporating the inelastic effects that are due to protein nuclear dynamics.
The work will examine a number of issues that are important to experimentalists,
such as how protein dynamics affect the rates of long-distance electron
transfer, whether electron-transfer pathways are real or not, and the problem of
coupling proton-transfers with electron transfer steps over long distances.

This project focuses on improving the accuracy of calculating electron transfer
rates in biological systems, an important problem at the interface of chemistry
and biology. The issues examined relate to understanding the function and
dynamics of a number of important systems whose molecular structures have
recently become known, such as photosynthetic reaction centers, allowing a
comparison between theory and experiment. Ultimately this work is valuable in
understanding how to utilize new technologies, including nanoscale science and
biotechnology, as well as in training undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
students in the applications of theoretical and computational chemistry to
important problems in contemporary science.