* 0137019
* 2000 U.S. Census Data Project
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2005
* Myron Gutmann, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 01/31/2005
* USD 344,962.00

The Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR) will
make data from the 2000 Census of Population and Housing of the United States
available to social and behavioral scientists at colleges and universities
throughout the country. In doing so, it will collect, preserve, enhance, and
distribute data developed by the U.S. Census Bureau. In addition, ICPSR will
provide training to data users and data librarians in the academic community in
order to ensure the most effective use of these data by the largest possible
number of users. The project will enable researchers to use these data
efficiently and economically for research and instructional purposes. This
project has six key activities: (1) Acquisition and long-term archiving of
substantially all data produced by the 2000 Censuses of Population and of
Housing; (2) Re-formatting census data to facilitate use in statistical analysis
programs; (3) Development of standardized documentation for census data that is
compliant with the Data Documentation Initiative (DDI) standard; (4) Development
of new data products, including special subsamples and special summary files,
that serve the needs of academic researchers; (5) Provision of web-based access
to the data that will include a data-finder and custom subsetting capabilities;
and (6) Provision of training and outreach activities to encourage use of the
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Census is a unique source of data for a wide
range of research topics about the United States. The 2000 Census of Population
and Housing will constitute the single most important starting point for basic
and applied social research during the decade of the 2000s. Census data have
value in many ways, but in brief they enable three basic research undertakings:
(1) By themselves they are the basic source for research about the attributes of
the U.S. population, housing stock, and economy, for the nation as a whole as
well as its regions. Only the Census permits comparable research in depth for
the entire country and its regions, and it includes detailed information for
minority and other special populations. (2) Census data will be needed to
provide contextual information for other types of investigations, such as
research on school, hospital, and administrative records. Census data also
provide denominators for calculating rates and proportions in many areas of
research, not to mention the traditional role in apportioning legislative
representation, and in the study of reapportionment. (3) The data will be vital
to the design of research, including as the most obvious example the drawing of
survey samples. This project will collect and preserve those data, add them to
ICPSR's large collection of data from earlier censuses, and widely distribute
those data and information about them.