* 0137323
* Dielectric and Calorimetric Properties of New Structurally-Predicted Ferroelectric Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Sidney Abrahams, Southern Oregon University
* Standard Grant
* David Nelson
* 09/30/2005
* USD 222,068.00

This project is integrates educational objectives with research in developing
two major criteria to predict ferroelectricity in polar crystals. Differential
scanning calorimetry and differential thermal analysis are used to determine the
presence of the predicted phase transitions in new ferroelectric materials,
followed by the measurements of the melting point, decomposition temperature,
and the nonlinear dielectric susceptibilities of the new materials. Presently,
300 pure materials are known that exhibit ferroelectricity. This project focuses
on 15 new potential ferroelectrics that have not been fully
characterized.&lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;Technological demand is strong for new
ferroelectrics with superior figures of merit that can be used in a wide range
of devices including piezoelectric transducers and actuators, pyroelectric
sensors, high-permittivity dielectrics, electrooptic and nonlinear optic
devices, nonvolatile dynamic random access memories, and positive temperature-
coefficient-of-resistivity devices. The integration of education with research
in this project will introduce undergraduate students to many chemical and
physical processes important in the evaluation of ferroelectrics for various
applications. This type of expertise will make these students very competitive
in the job market.&lt;br/&gt;