* 0137102
* New Directions in Accounting and Traffic Measurement
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2007
* George Varghese, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jie Wu
* 08/31/2007
* USD 649,754.00

Accurate network traffic measurement is required for accounting, bandwidth
provisioning, and detecting DOS attacks. However, keeping a counter to measure
the traffic sent by each of a million concurrent flows is too expensive (using
SRAM) or slow (using DRAM). The current state-of-the-art (e.g., Cisco NetFlow)
methods which log periodically sampled packets are slow, inaccurate, and memory-
intensive. This proposal introduces a paradigm shift by concentrating on the
problem of measuring only "heavy" flows | i.e., flows whose traffic is above
some threshold such as 1% of the link. After showing that a number of simple
solutions based on cached&lt;br/&gt;counters and classical sampling do not work,
the resarchers describe two novel and scalable schemes for this purpose which
take a constant number of memory references per packet and use a small amount of
memory. Further, unlike NetFlow estimates, we have provable bounds on the
accuracy of measured rates and the probability of false negatives. The
researchers propose to implement, evaluate, and fine-tune these new ideas. Using
these ideas as a basis, the researchers also propose to investigate the
following questions. First, they will investigate a new form of accounting
called threshold accounting in which only flows above threshold are charged by
usage while the rest are charged a fixed fee. Threshold accounting generalizes
the familiar notions of usage-based and duration based pricing. Second, they
propose to investigate a more general question: the computation of flow
statistics at very high speeds using very small amounts of high speed memory.
Examples of other potentially useful flow statistics include the number of
flows, the standard deviation of flow sizes, the average duration of a flow etc.
Naive algorithms to measure such quantities all scale linearly with the number
of flows. Finally, with colleagues at CAIDA, the researchers plan to deploy our
algorithms in real-time on 5 traffic monitors placed at strategic Internet sites
(AIX, the UCSD backbone, and possibly on Abilene). The potential impact of this
proposal is the development of novel and practical tools for accounting,
measurement, and security. These are three central problems as the Internet
transitions from a research network to a commercial enterprise.