* 0137074
* Merit Aid and Sorting: The Effects of HOPE-Style Scholarships on College Stratification by Ability, Race and Gender
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2005
* David Mustard, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 04/30/2005
* USD 176,080.00

Over the past decade, aid for post-secondary schooling has become increasingly
tied to merit. During this period, a number of state governments have committed
millions of dollars to merit aid, in most cases dropping means tests entirely.
The model for these state actions has been Georgia's HOPE ("Helping Outstanding
Pupils Educationally") Scholarship. Introduced in 1993, the HOPE Scholarship
covers tuition, fees, and book expenses for students attending Georgia public
colleges, and provides a subsidy of comparable value to students attending in-
state private colleges, without any income restrictions. Since its inception,
more than $1.2 billion of HOPE scholarship aid has been distributed to over
525,000 students. The relative price changes induced by HOPE-style aid influence
several important enrollment decisions: in-state versus out-of-state, 2-year
versus 4-year, labor-market versus 2-year (or 4-year). Student movements along
these margins raise important questions about the effects of merit aid on
student sorting. This study will examine the degree to which programs like HOPE
lead to college stratification by ability race and gender.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Individual sorting is a pervasive fact of life. Resources
early in life determine in large part the level and quality of a person's
postsecondary education. From the perspective of sorting, parental resources
determine where you live and where begin your schooling, which enhance a child's
college prospects. A college degree, in turn, improves labor and marriage market
opportunities. Thus, to the extent merit is correlated with household income,
programs like the HOPE Scholarship reinforce the effects of sorting patterns
established prior to the college enrollment decision. &lt;br/&gt;