* 0137273
* Electrolytes Near a Non-Planar Charged Interface. Effect of the Presence of Neutral Co-Solutes
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2002,05/31/2006
* Lutful Bhuiyan, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* raima larter
* 05/31/2006
* USD 145,900.00

In this project funded by the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program of
the Chemistry Division and the Western European and the Central and Eastern
European Programs of the Office of International Science and Engineering,
Bhuiyan will use numerical simulation and theoretical methods of statistical
mechanics to characterize the equilibrium behavior of charged fluids in the
neighborhood of non-planar, electrified interfaces in both open and confined
geometries. Particular emphasis will be placed on the study of the thermodynamic
non-ideality and structural changes in the solutions arising from the effects of
added co-solutes and/or confinement of the fluid in a capillary. Modified
Poisson-Boltzmann (MPB) theory, hypernetted-chain (HNC) theory, other integral
equation theories, and Monte Carlo simulations will be used to study charged
interfaces. Electrolytes will be described in terms of the primitive model and
primitive models with neutral co-solutes.

Electrolyte solutions are ubiquitous on earth in animate as well as inanimate
materials. This project involves applications of fundamental theories and
simulations to investigate electrolytes at interfaces. The theoretical
formulations used in this research, which have been very accurate in many
standard applications of electrolyte theory, are applied here to more complex
geometries and electrolyte models. The resulting applications are more
realistic, such as chemical catalysis, electrolytes in micropores, and reverse
micelles. The results of this research effort thus affect the fields of
materials science, biophysics, chemistry, and the environment.

In this research project Bhuiyan collaborates with Prof. Christopher W.
Outhwaite of the University of Sheffield in the United Kingdom and with Prof.
Vojko Vlachy of the University of Ljubljana in Slovenia. The senior
investigators will make reciprocal visits to each others' laboratories each
year, and a student from Professor Bhuiyan's group will also visit both European
laboratories. Such a trip exposes the student early in his or her scientific
career to international collaborations and helps broaden his/her educational
experience.