* 0137195
* Grandparents as Buffers of Family Disruption and Social Change
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2005
* Merril Silverstein, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 03/31/2005
* USD 150,989.00

SES-0137195&lt;br/&gt;Merril Silverstein&lt;br/&gt;University of Southern
California&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to investigate the
role that grandparents play in promoting the well-being of their grandchildren
who experience the marital disruption of their parents. Grandparents are
considered latent resources who help their grandchildren adapt to stressful
events such as divorce, single parenting, negative parental attachment styles,
and problematic environments. The aims of the research are to better understand
(1) how the investment of time, emotion, and support by grandparents buffers the
impact of family disruption and other family stressors on the psychological,
social, and material well-being of (a) pre- adolescent grandchildren as they
make the transition to adolescence, and (b) adolescent children as they make the
transition to adulthood and middle-age. Outcomes include self-esteem,
depression, anxiety, affect balance, teen-age childbearing, delinquency,
educational achievement, and occupational mobility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two
longitudinal data sets will be used. These include a long-term study of several
cohorts of adolescent grandchildren surveyed along with their parents and
grandparents over the last 30 years (the Longitudinal Study of Generations), and
a nationally representative five-year, soon to be fourteen year, longitudinal
study of pre-teen and adolescent grandchildren, and their parents (National
Survey of Families and Households). Longitudinal models predict change in
prospective outcomes as a function of the statistical interaction between
grandparent involvement and family stressors experienced by the grandchild.
Transitions over three, five, fourteen, and twenty-six years will be analyzed to
investigate the short-term and enduring contributions that grandparents make to
the well being of their grandchildren. Multiple regression, logistic regression
will be used to estimate the strength of these effects. This research will
extend our understanding of the value of extended family relations by
documenting how and with what effect grandparents buffer the impact of social
change on family systems. The knowledge gained through a rigorous investigation
into the role played by grandparents as a resource to grandchildren will help
expand the analytic lens of family sociology to include extended kinship
relationships. &lt;br/&gt;