* 0137948
* Computers in Cardiology Conference, September 22-25, 2002, Memphis, Tennessee
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2002
* Robert Malkin, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 12/31/2002
* USD 5,000.00

0137948&lt;br/&gt;de Jongh&lt;br/&gt;Funds are provided to support the
registration fees of the applicants and finalists of the young investigator
competition in the conference Computers in Cardiology, Memphis Cook Convention
Center, Memphis, Tennessee, September 22-25, 2002.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A
series of conferences on computers in cardiology was established 28 years ago in
recognition of the import role that computer technology would play in
cardiovascular research and in clinical patient care. The conferences also
facilitate important productive communication between engineers and clinicians
that stimulates relevant research and development. Participants have found the
meetings to be particularly helpful because of the manageable size, and the
commonality of interests of attendees that fosters interpersonal interaction
outside the formal sessions. Computers in Cardiology has proven to be a major
world forum for presentation of new research over a wide spectrum of computer
applications in cardiology. The conference serves as the prime site for
gestation and early nourishment of a number of fundamental technologies that
have led to major improvements in the practice of cardiology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results from this award are expected to have broad
impacts through the published Proceedings, which are to be produced by the IEEE
press, with copies distributed to the attendees and some 300 libraries. Of
special significance is the fostering of interdisciplinary research between
researchers in different fields including medicine, physics, engineering, and
computer science.