* 0137158
* RUI: Engineering the Imperative Mood: The Wartime Nexus of Economics, Statistics, and Control Engineering, 1940-1960
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Judy Klein, Mary Baldwin College
* Fixed Amount Award
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2004
* USD 98,000.00

Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt;SES Proposal 0137158&lt;br/&gt;RUI: Engineering the
Imperative Mood: The Wartime Nexus of Economics, Statistics, and Control
Engineering, 1940-1960&lt;br/&gt;Judy L. Klein, Mary Baldwin
College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates how scientists
drawing on three disciplines -- economics, statistics, and control engineering
-- shaped a new applied mathematics as researchers designed mechanisms for
warfare that controlled rather than simply recorded. Norbert Wiener described
the contrast in what these scientists sought as that between new mechanisms in
the "imperative mood" versus earlier devices that operated in the "indicative
mood." The significance of the shift is broad. In the course of designing
physical devices in the imperative mood, researchers constructed mathematical
models and algorithms that social scientists later appropriated. As they were
passed between engineering and economic applications, similar models took on
deterministic, stochastic or adaptive forms. The process of solving problems for
a military client, which &lt;br/&gt;involved reasoning with physical analogies
and tailoring the solution process to computational resources, changed the use
and construction of models in applied mathematics, and ultimately changed the
idea of what was a solution to an applied mathematical problem. By 1960, the
imperative mood had spread beyond the devices under initial study to the
analytical disciplines themselves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through cases of
specific mathematical protocol, Klein uses World War II and cold war documents
in the National Archives, the RAND Corporation Archives and the Economist Papers
at Duke University to investigate the transformation in economics, statistics
and control engineering to modeling optimal, multistage decision processes.
These protocols include sequential analysis, exponentially weighted moving
averages, optimal inventory control, dynamic programming, the Kalman filter, and
adaptive models in general. In addition to&lt;br/&gt;researching the material
origins of these model and algorithms, Klein examines the stages of formulation,
user needs, media, and government financing that stimulated their diffusion to
the managerial and social sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outcomes of the
research include a monograph, pedagogical examples for undergraduate courses in
applied statistics and economics, and a treatment, of the case of the
exponential smoothing circuit in lead gun sights, for consideration by the
Public Broadcasting Service.&lt;br/&gt;