* 0137007
* Reef Corals: Symbiotic Dinoflagellate/Host Combinations and their Physiological Response to Environmental Change
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2009
* William Fitt, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 02/28/2009
* USD 697,856.00

The growth, calcification, nutrition, reproduction, health and, in many cases,
morphological form of reef corals and related cnidarians is the result of their
mutualism with symbiotic dinoflagellates of the genus Symbiodinium, often
referred to as "zooxanthellae". Several different species of Symbiodinium, as
well as dozens of genetically different types within at least five molecular
"clades" have been described within the past 30 years, with at least a quarter
of coral species able to harbor more than one type of Symbiodinium within their
gastrodermal cells. New molecular techniques have enabled coral reef biologists
to make rapid progress in distinguishing genomic similarities and differences
among Symbiodinium symbionts, but research on differences in algal physiology
and its repercussions on host coral physiology (photosynthesis, growth rates,
reproduction, and general health of the host) lags far behind. Without such
information, it is impossible to project what benefits to the symbiosis (or
coral host) come from having which specific combinations of
Symbiodinium.&lt;br/&gt; Coral reefs comprise one of the world's most diverse
ecosystems, both in terms of number of species and complexity of interactions
among genera. Yet, coral reefs worldwide are deteriorating: the coral colonies
that provide reef framework and habitat to multitudes of fish and invertebrates
are decreasing in percent cover, experiencing unprecedented incidents of
disease, and showing obvious signs of stress largely in response to ocean
warming. Especially alarming is the increased occurrence of coral bleaching in
which symbionts are lost as the principal contributors of carbon (from
photosynthesis) for host growth, reproduction and development. Upon severe
bleaching, when the white skeleton shows through the animal tissue as symbiont
densities decline, coral tissue biomass and energy stores decrease, host growth
ceases, reproduction is impaired, and portions or entire colony may die. It is
also thought that stressed (i.e. bleached) corals are more susceptible to
disease.&lt;br/&gt; Understanding of the causative factors for the decline of
corals and the processes that might promote their recovery is very poor.
Particularly little is known the of the complexity and specificity of the
integration of the different types of Symbiodinium with their hosts, especially
which combinations of symbionts lead to greater host growth, reproduction and
survival and how such optimal combinations are established and
maintained.&lt;br/&gt; This research is designed to resolve the complexities of
the coral host/symbiont relationship, in terms of documenting the ability of
different symbionts: (1) to provide nutrition to their host (photosynthesis of
symbiont and translocation of photosynthate from alga to host), (2) to influence
growth of the host, (3) to stably inhabit (=infect) different hosts, (4) to
provide protection from ultra-violet light by the production of various 'sun
screens', (5) to survive periods of higher-than-normal temperatures, (6) to
photoadapt to different light conditions. The overall goal of the experiments is
to be able to model seasonal and long-term changes in symbiont-host
combinations, especially in regard to changes in the intact system in response
to environmental change that might lead to greater or diminished physiological
performance (including survival) of the intact association. The data will allow
us to predict which associations are capable of surviving conditions expected in
the world's tropical oceans over the next 50-100 years of global warming, and
whether "switching" to algal types with higher tolerance levels might be a
viable outcome.&lt;br/&gt;