* 0137020
* Collaborative Research: Patterns and Processes of Landscape Change in the Brazilian Amazon: A Longitudinal, Comparative Analysis of Smallholder Land Use Decision-Making
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Robert Walker, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 04/30/2005
* USD 78,420.00

Land use decisions by smallholders are an important influence on landscape
change in the Brazilian Amazon and are a major cause of forest clearance. This
research project will examine the factors that influence smallholder land use
decisions to enable a fuller understanding of the patterns and processes of
landscape change underway in this area. The 27-month project will begin with two
follow-up surveys for previous studies to provide a systematic, longitudinal and
comparative analysis of changing patterns of household land use in areas
undergoing intensive deforestation pressures. These studies will be a 10-year
follow-up survey of 240 rural households in Rondonia and a 5-year follow-up
survey of 261 rural households in Para. The panel data collected will then be
used to specify a dynamic behavioral model of landscape change. Using GIS
software, this predictive model will be used to simulate the landscape evolution
arising from the aggregated impacts of individual household land use decisions.
The model will be validated using remote sensing data, and adapted into a
visualization program to aid researchers and policy-makers in understanding the
landscape impacts of different factors affecting smallholder land use decisions.
Ultimately the research will explore new theoretical ground at the nexus of
neoclassical economic, demographic, and political ecology interpretations of
landscape change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rising rates of tropical deforestation in
the Amazon region, and elsewhere, raise concerns about loss of biological,
genetic, and cultural diversity, increasing carbon dioxide emissions and global
climate changes, and a host of regional impacts from soil erosion and river
contamination to disruptions in local meteorological regimes. Between 30% and
50% of the forest clearing in the Amazon is caused by small-scale commercial
shifting cultivators and ranchers. Although such "smallholders" have been the
subject of considerable field research, surprisingly little is known about the
dynamics of their farming systems and land use decision-making. With a few
exceptions, most of this research has focused on one-time case study "snap-
shots", in which long-term patterns are inferred from cross-sectional data. This
project will provide a genuine longitudinal analysis of data drawn from two
distant and different settlement frontiers in the Amazon, capturing the range of
diverse factors influencing the process of landscape change in this imperiled
rainforest region.&lt;br/&gt;