* 0137060
* Reshaping Civil Society: Islam, Democracy and Diversity in Istanbul
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2005
* Anna Secor, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2005
* USD 159,181.00

A global wave of democratization has transformed the political geography of
Latin America, Central and Eastern Europe, Asia and Africa, but the Middle East
has remained dominated by authoritarian regimes, with Turkey appearing as a
regional anomaly. However, Turkish democracy remains riddled by problems. This
research project will focus on civil society in Istanbul, Turkey's largest and
most diverse city, as a window into the problem of democratic consolidation in
Turkey. Civil society, most often defined as the realm of associational life
distinct from both family-life and the state, has been identified as an arena in
which values and attitudes that are conducive to democratic governance, such as
trust, cooperation and tolerance, are reproduced. In the Middle East, the
failure of democracy to take root has often been attributed to the presence of
"weak" or disorganized civil societies incapable of acting as countervailing
forces to strong states, and to the role of Islam in public life. The central
research questions of this study concern the form and extent of civil society in
Istanbul, the relationship between civil society and the consolidation of
democracy, the diversity of modes of participation in civil society across
neighborhood contexts and different groups (based on gender, class, ethnicity,
migrant status and religion), and the role of Islamist networks as an
alternative avenue of public participation. These research questions will be
addressed through a multi-method research design that includes both quantitative
and qualitative methods. Seventy-five Istanbul neighborhoods will be selected
based on the stratification of all municipal neighborhoods using rates of
population change (as an indicator of in-migration) and land-value (as an
indicator of class-status). A survey will be administered to a random sample
(proportionate to population within the sampled neighborhoods) of voting age
residents, for a total sample of 4,000 respondents. In the second stage of the
project, ten focus groups of population sub-groups (e.g. women, migrants, high
socio-economic status residents, Kurds, Alevis etc.) will be used to explore the
meaning and implications of differences across groups in their engagement in
civil society, their use of urban space, and their relative acceptance of
democratic values. Finally, a case study of Islamist networks in the city will
be conducted through interviews with Islamist leaders and activists. This final
research stage will provide greater insight into how the Islamist networks and
associations function in the city. While the survey data will be analyzed using
multi-level logistic modeling techniques, the focus groups and interviews will
be discursively analyzed to provide qualitative depth to questions of Islam and
difference in Istanbul.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will offer a new
understanding of the architecture of civil society, the variety of associations,
relationships, and local contexts that comprise it, and the relationships
between Islam, civil society and democracy in Turkey. Democracy in Turkey is of
critical human, geopolitical, and theoretical importance. From a Turkish
perspective, the consolidation of democracy has been an ongoing goal, not only
of the state but also of civil societal elements concerned with human rights and
free expression. Turkish democracy is also of international interest, with
Turkey's bid to join the European Union hinging on the country's democratic
consolidation. Further, as a secular democracy, Turkey is a model for the
Muslim-majority countries of the Middle East and Central Asia and. Based on what
has so far been established by the civil society literature, it is probable that
the future of Turkish democracy will pivot on whether or not democracy takes
root in the public sphere, in the values and attitudes of individuals and social
groups. This project will be able to offer a clear indication of the level of
civil societal activity, its geographical and social distribution, and the
relationship between civic engagement (in a range of arenas of civic engagement,
including Islamist associational life) and democratic values in Istanbul. This
project will contribute to empirical and comparative analyses of the forms and
intensity of civil society in different contexts, and to analyses of the
relationships between civic engagement, Islamist associational life, and the
creation of democratic values. In addition to these empirical contributions,
this project will enable the extension of current theories of civil society
beyond the historical limitations of Western models, not only by virtue of
exploring these relationships in a Muslim-majority society, but also by focusing
in the effects of locality, gender and diversity on civic participation and its
significance.&lt;br/&gt;