* 0137617
* ADVANCE Fellows Award
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Kristin Gunsalus, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 05/31/2005
* USD 309,500.00

The completion of several genome sequencing projects has resulted in a wealth of
new information that raises two major challenges: to discover the function of
all the DNA sequences, and to organize functional data so that all life
scientists can benefit from them. Different aspects of gene function are now
being characterized at a genomic scale in a number of organisms. New tools that
are widely accessible to the scientific community are needed to facilitate their
integration and analysis. Development of such tools, which will require close
collaboration between biologists and computer scientists, will help transform
the rapidly growing volume of "functional genomic" data from information into
knowledge that can be used to the broad benefit of both basic and applied
disciplines of science research.

The aim of this project is to develop new bioinformatics tools to help integrate
functional data from diverse genome-wide studies. The soil nematode C. elegans
has been used as an animal model system in genomic studies and provides an
exceptional platform for the development of integrative tools. The initial focus
will be development of a public database of gene knockout phenotypes generated
in C. elegans using a rapid method called "RNA interference (RNAi)". These data
will be used along with other genomic data, such as gene expression patterns and
protein-protein interaction maps, to develop modular bioinformatics tools
capable of addressing questions that combine these different "layers" of
functional information from C. elegans and other organisms. Finally, these tools
will be made accessible to non-programmers through development of a user-
friendly interface for the integrated analysis of functional genomic data.