* 0137609
* ADVANCE Fellows Award: Modularity of the Arthropod Body Plan: A Comparative Test
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2006
* Terri Williams, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 05/31/2006
* USD 406,000.00

Ants, spiders, and lobsters (arthropods) are built from repeated parts called
body segments. Typically each segment has one pair of limbs and these limbs
define the lifestyles of different arthropods: they can be used for walking,
swimming, feeding, etc. Comparisons of animals as different as crabs and flies,
show that segments and limbs can be very differently specialized in different
arthropod groups. However, it is still unknown whether segments can evolve such
specializations independently. Are segments along the body axis free to evolve
on their own or do evolutionary specializations of one segment cause neighboring
segments to change? This question will be tested in selected groups of
crustaceans by comparing changes to limb and segment structure in closely
related species. From these data, the evolutionary pattern of segment evolution
can be reconstructed to determine the degree to which segments can evolve
independently. This evolutionary analysis will be coupled to a series of
experiments on crustacean embryos to evaluate how evolutionary patterns of
segmentation are linked to mechanisms that generate segments during
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The major groups of animals are distinct in
the ways their bodies are built, that is, they show distinct body plans.
Understanding how body plans are organized provides a tool for interpreting how
they evolve. This works addresses a fundamental question about the evolution of
arthropod body plans: do arthropods have a modular design? This work will then
explicitly link the modularity shown in evolution to modularity in
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;