* 0137145
* Macro Variables and Term Structure Models
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2002,08/31/2007
* Andrew Ang, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/2007
* USD 145,155.00

Two distinct areas of economics use linear tractable frameworks for modeling tem
structure. The first area, financial asset pricing, uses no-arbitrage latent
factor models for bond pricing, derivatives pricing and for risk management.
These affine models forecast poorly out of sample, do not incorporate non-
linearities and the latent factors are given no economic interpretation. The
second area of empirical macroeconomics uses Vector Auto Regression (VARs) to
identify and compute the effects of monetary policy on inflation, economic
growth and the behavior of the term structure. The VARs say little about how
yields not included in the VAR may move, do not rule out arbitrage in the
dynamics of the yield curve, and do not efficiently use forward-looking
financial information. The goal of this proposal is to develop a framework that
uses the best of the asset pricing and macroeconomic fields. The research has
the following implications for macro and asset pricing term structure modeling.
First, the framework identifies the effects of monetary policy and shocks from
macro variables with priced time-varying factor risk. Second, incorporating
inflation and real activity directly gives economic content to the asset pricing
factor models. Third, imposing no-arbitrage provides greater efficiency, and
preliminary results from the first project show that no-arbitrage models
forecast better than unrestricted VARs, and incorporating macro variables
further improves forecasting ability. Finally, incorporating regime switches has
policy implications, as the impact of various shocks on the term structure may
be very dissimilar across the regimes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically,
the new framework is no-arbitrage, incorporates latent and observable macro
variables and introduces non-linearities. With time-varying risk premiums, the
full specification is consistent with deviations from the Expectations
Hypothesis, the Fisher Hypothesis, and in an international extension, Uncovered
Interest Rate Parity and Purchasing Power Parity. The project builds to the full
model by incorporating additional features in each individual project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first two projects, joint with Monika Piazzesi, build
a Gaussian no-arbitrage model with observable macro variables and latent
variables. The model is related to the Taylor (1993) rules of monetary policy,
where the surprise shocks to the short rate are identified by no-arbitrage
cross-equation restrictions. The first project assumes that macro and latent
variables are orthogonal, to focus on the ability of inflation and real activity
to forecast the dynamics of the yield curve, before resorting to latent
variables. The second project introduces feedback between the macro and latent
factors. It identifies monetary policy shocks implied by no-arbitrage
assumptions and investigates how shocks affect inflation, real activity, and
yield curve dynamics.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The third project, joint with Geert
Bekaert and Bob Hodrick, introduces non-linearities in interest rates by
incorporating regime switches. The model allows means, covariances and risk
premia to switch across the regimes. Impulse responses for yields from shocks to
macro factors, and impulse responses for macro variables from monetary policy
shocks, differ across the regimes. In an international extension, expected
currency depreciations and forward rates are affine functions of state
variables, conditional on the regime. &lt;br/&gt;