* 0137546
* Technician Support: Ohio State University, Radiogenic Isotopes Laboratory - Phase I
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2005
* Kenneth Foland, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 02/28/2005
* USD 162,049.00

0137546 Foland

This grant provides three years of partial salary support for technical
assistance in the Radiogenic Isotope Laboratory in the Department of Geological
Sciences at the Ohio State University. The Radiogenic Isotope Laboratory is a
modern facility with new, first-class physical facilities that house a clean
room and both thermal-ionization and noble-gas mass spectrometers, plus a full
array of ancillary equipment, to support the research measurements. The
laboratory conducts isotope geochemical and geochronologic research on diverse
and wide-ranging issues. The principal isotopic systems of current investigation
are Rb-Sr, Sm-Nd, U-Pb, K-Ca and also K-Ar especially with the 40Ar/39Ar
technique. Studies include both isotope tracer research, using the radiogenic
isotopes (e.g., Sr, Nd, and Pb), and geochronologic determinations (e.g.,
40Ar/39Ar and Rb-Sr). Overall, the research objectives range from the
fundamental and methodological to the applied and topical. In addition to the PI
and intramural colleagues and students, the laboratory is utilized by a large
number of extramural professionals and students, either as guest workers or by
sending specimens for analysis. Research activities of the PI and Ohio State
University colleagues as well as a number of external scientists with on-going
collaborative and cooperative projects are quite varied. The topics range from
geological and geochemical earth science to environmental and biomedical. ***