* 0137113
* Documenting the History of Physicists in Industry
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,12/31/2006
* R. Joseph Anderson, American Institute of Physics
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2006
* USD 130,759.00

Proposal Abstract SES Proposal 0137113 Documenting the History of Physicists in
Industry Joseph Anderson, American Institute of Physics

Corporate R&D represents a major segment of the American science establishment,
and our nation's prosperity rests in large part on a brilliant century of
industrial research and innovation. However, the history of industrial R&D is
one of the least documented segments of American society. The Center for History
of Physics of the American Institute of Physics (AIP) proposes to conduct a
three-year project to 1) create new sources of information through oral history
interviews, surveys, and site visits; 2) identify extant sources; and 3) study
how to preserve the history of industrial R&D on a continuing basis. The project
examines 15 of the 25 companies that employ more than half of the Ph.D.
physicists in American industry. With lead support from the Science and
Technology Studies program of the National Science Foundation to cover the
salary and fringe benefits of the project historian for the first two years of
the project, AIP provides funds for other project activities, with additional
support from other funding agencies.

The most important result of this undertaking is a new and original evaluation
of ways to preserve the history of industrial research. American industrial
growth has been based on knowledge and innovation, and these processes have
created vast amounts of records, anniversary and historical publications, and
other sources. Many of these materials have disappeared but some have survived.
In addition, recent developments, especially maturing electronic records systems
and more stringent contractual requirements for documenting R&D, offer
opportunities for creating new approaches to preserving the history of
industrial research on an ongoing basis. The project explores past and present
patterns and new developments. Products include findings and recommendations
based on an analysis of the records-creation patterns, information needs, and
extant historical records of some of the most important research- centered U.S.
corporations, as well as transcripts of the oral history interviews with
approximately 100 senior scientists and science administrators. This is the
first systematic oral history program to document industrial R&D. The oral
histories are to be made available to researchers at the conclusion of the
project, along with catalog of extant records identified during site visits and
interviews.

The immediate products of the project 1) give corporate scientists and managers
a variety of approaches to preserving their heritage, 2) make available to
historians new sources for studying the history of industrial R&D, and 3)
provide archivists and other information professionals with new approaches and
new tools to appraise and preserve records. Long-term products could include 1)
an increased attention on the part of the private sector to preserving their
heritage and 2) the integration of industrial research and development into
mainstream science and technology studies. The project builds on the History
Center's extensive experience in exploring neglected areas in the history of
science and creating strategies for documenting them. The design and methodology
are modeled on our successful ten-year Study of Multi-Institutional
Collaborations, and we expect the findings and recommendations of this project
to have an equally important impact in documenting the history of science. The
project staff is assisted by an Advisory Committee composed of distinguished
industrial scientists, leading corporate archivists, and historians who provide
advice and recommendations on the companies to be studied, the scientists to be
interviewed, the administrators to contact, and the questions to ask.