* 0137121
* Correlating Heterogeneous Measurement Data to Achieve System-Level Analysis of Internet Traffic Trends
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2002,02/28/2009
* David Moore, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Schopf
* 02/28/2009
* USD 1,675,891.00

NSF has invested heavily in high-performance Internet infrastructure and
development of&lt;br/&gt;distributed applications, resulting in burgeoning
demand for additional capacity and services.&lt;br/&gt;We propose a project that
1) takes advantage of existing traffic measurement
instrumentation,&lt;br/&gt;and 2) enhances availability and utility of existing
and planned distributed heterogeneous network&lt;br/&gt;measurement data
repositories.&lt;br/&gt; In today's 'cooperative Internet anarchy', competitive
providers, struggling to meet skyrocketing&lt;br/&gt;needs, do not significantly
invest in gathering or analyzing workload data on their networks. Rather,
Internet service providers (ISPs) match rising demand by increasing network
capacity as fast as possible; today's core backbone links are OC48 and will be
OC192c by 2002. This 'traditional' approach of per-link excess capacity is
typically based on brute force over-engineering (e.g., upgrade after you reach a
certain link utilization), rather than identification or understanding of
parameters describing how network capacity is actually utilized. Individual ISPs
also suffer from the fact that visibility of traffic trends is usually limited
to their local domain. In addition, there is as yet no instrumentation available
for gathering fine-grained workload information from any link above OC12
bandwidth; few such links are instrumented to do so, and most of these are
located at lightly used research sites. Larger providers have little incentive
to invest in measurement instrumentation, much less to risk political damage by
making any resulting data public. Exacerbating the situation is the lack of
rigorous analysis tools to support wide-area Internet data collection, and the
absence of baseline data against which to compare any independent results. The
lack of identified parameters for characterizing and managing network growth in
a cost-effective manner is a situation that shows little sign of changing
without substantial shift in attention to this task.&lt;br/&gt; One detrimental
side effect is that myths about Internet growth and performance
abound,&lt;br/&gt;and plans for provisioning are often made based on locally
attained data generalized to mythical&lt;br/&gt;proportions. One of the most
important contributions of our proposed research is to provide&lt;br/&gt;the
ability to base predictions of Internet traffic, performance, and growth on real
data rather&lt;br/&gt;than obsolete assumptions[1]. The community could make
better use of its collective intellectual&lt;br/&gt;resources if they could
validate ideas against a larger variety of empirical data sets
before&lt;br/&gt;investing research and development resources in further
studies.&lt;br/&gt; This proposal takes advantage of and integrates existing
NSF-sponsored technologies and&lt;br/&gt;tools to 1) more strategically
instrument the Internet to capture real data of interest to both
traf-&lt;br/&gt;fic engineers and Internet modelers, 2) create distributed
repositories of experimentally derived&lt;br/&gt;traffic trend parameters while
enabling access to heterogeneous network measurements, and&lt;br/&gt;3) develop
meaningful and timely analysis tools and reports. The research and tools
proposed&lt;br/&gt;under this effort can lead to empirically-based understanding
of the evolving Internet infrastructure,&lt;br/&gt;yielding results that benefit
all who depend on this increasingly critical global resource.&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project will also assist in the development of much-needed tools for
navigation,&lt;br/&gt;analysis, and correlated visualization of massive network
data sets. This work is critical to advancing both research and operational
efforts regarding the evolving commercial Internet, and&lt;br/&gt;has obvious
relevance to public policy and regulatory questions concerning the organization
and&lt;br/&gt;administration of Internet infrastructure.