* 0137348
* Eleventh International Symposium on Nondestructive Characterization of Materials; Berlin, Germany; June 24-28, 2002
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2003
* Robert Green, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 03/31/2003
* USD 7,500.00

This grant supports the Eleventh International Symposium on Nondestructive
Characterization of Materials to be held June 24-28, 2002, in Berlin, Germany.
This will be the latest in a series of international symposia that was first
held in 1983. The objective of these symposia is to provide a unique focus on
the science and technology of nondestructive evaluation applied to materials
characterization. The ultimate goal is to develop innovative, more sensitive and
more precise methods to characterize the properties of materials much earlier
than possible with current nondestructive testing techniques, so that any
material alterations detrimental to the desired application can be detected and
corrected well before macroscopic defects occur. Papers will include research
and applications for aging infrastructure, nondestructive characterization of
microstructures, on-line measurements for process control, precision and
accuracy of nondestructive characterization measurements, advances in computed
assisted tomography, non-contact ultrasonics, microwave advances and
applications, and advanced high resolution probing techniques. Of considerable
interest will be state-of-the-art developments and applications where the
complex nature of materials has been recognized. The recipients of funds will be
selected by the organizing committee with awareness of geographical distribution
and the desire to include as many women and minorities as possible.

The nondestructive characterization of materials has been of immense interest to
the materials community as well as practicing engineers concerned about the
quality and sensitivity of nondestructive examination of real structures. This
symposium functions to gather together both NDT technologists and NDE
researchers. Research, needs, and applications in the nondestructive testing and
evaluation of material characteristics such as yield strength, ductility,
elastic modulus, grain size, microstructure, texture, fiber placement, and
residual stress will be discussed. Several poster sessions will be held during
the course of the symposium so that many participants can present the results of
their research efforts, especially young scientists and graduate students. This
grant supports the travel and registration of selected participants based on
their need and expertise.