* 0137048
* Identification and Estimation of Industry Dynamic Models with Persistent and Hidden State Variables
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2007
* Jeffrey Campbell, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 03/31/2007
* USD 118,191.00

This research project focuses on the formulation and estimation of structural
models of producer entry, growth, and exit. The data source is new; a file of
alcohol tax returns that contains the date of birth, date of exit, and a
complete monthly history of the dollar value of alcohol sales for all licensed
restaurants and bars in Texas. In the model, a firm's sales is proportional to
its profits, but transitory cost shocks make it an imperfect indicator of
profitability's persistent component. Because of this imperfect observation, the
model's state variable is both persistent and hidden. The state variable's
persistence distinguishes this model from the many estimable models of dynamic
discrete choice that incorporate Rust's (1987) conditional independence
assumption. To disentangle the persistent and transitory components of
profitability, this project uses the fact that producers' exit decisions depend
only on the persistent component. In the model with normally distributed shocks,
the information in producers' exit decisions identifies the parameters
describing both the persistent and transitory components of profitability as
well as the producer's optimal exit threshold. An important component of this
research project is the extension of this identification proof to semi-
parametric and non parametric environments. The project's initial empirical
research focuses on distinguishing Gaussian models of entrepreneurial learning
similar to Jovanovic's (1982) from models with perfect entrepreneurial
information, such as Hopenhayn's (1992). Additional information in the data set
describing each restaurant or bar's location and the characteristics of its
parent firm suggest further generalizations of the model and estimation
technique.