* 0137589
* Lagrangian Balloon for Atmospheric Research
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Paul Voss, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Andrew G. Detwiler
* 03/31/2006
* USD 378,428.00

This grant supports the design, construction, and testing of a balloon for
atmospheric sounding that has an active buoyancy control to enable it to move
with the wind. By faithfully tracking the air motions, it provides a so-called
Lagrangian frame of reference for measurements of temperature, pressure,
humidity, ozone, and other trace gases. These measurements are needed to observe
the histories of air parcels as they undergo photochemical and cloud physical
processes in the high atmosphere. For example, important details in the
formation of polar stratospheric clouds are lacking because the temperature
histories of the air parcels in which these clouds form are not known with
sufficient accuracy. Moreover, uncertainties in air parcel motion in the tropics
mask the mechanism by which water vapor enters the stratosphere, confounding
attempts to predict how the ozone layer will respond to climate change. The
Lagrangian balloon is of "pumpkin" design, nine meters in diameter, equipped
with an interior servomechanism to change its volume in response to vertical air
motions relative to the balloon. The buoyancy is continually adjusted to
minimize the vertical air motion, so that the balloon tracks the air with a
relative velocity held as near to zero as possible. The balloon can carry a
light payload of instruments for measuring the vertical air velocity relative to
the balloon, thermodynamic variables, and a satellite modem for communicating
with the ground. Students from the University of Massachusetts and the Picker
Engineering Program at Smith College will participate in the project.