* 0137005
* Temporal Constraints on the Delivery of Terrestrial Organic Carbon to Marine Sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Konrad Hughen, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 04/30/2005
* USD 499,773.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0137005&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this project, researchers at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution will
attempt to quantify the residence times of terrestrial vascular plant biomarkers
between their synthesis on land and deposition in marine sediments. The approach
will involve ultra-high resolution sampling of anoxic, annually laminated
sediments and compound-specific AMS 14 C dating of leaf waxes and lignin
phenols. Above-ground nuclear weapons testing peaked in 1963, creating a large
and abrupt peak in atmospheric 14C concentration that is discernable well above
the uncertainty in compound- specific AMS 14 C measurements. The radiocarbon
"bomb spike" individual biomarker compounds (or compound classes) will be
identified with near-annual sampling resolution. The calendar age of the 14 C
peak identified in the biomarker compounds will be compared to the known 1963
age layer in annually laminated sediments from four different marine sites to
derive biomarker residence and transport times with precision as high as 1-2
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A modeling approach will be used to examine the
characteristics of the bomb spike curve, in order to distinguish between eolian
and riverine transport pathways, as well as periods of storage in reservoirs
(e.g., forest litter, soils, river beds, floodplains and lakes). In addition to
timing of the bomb spike, the high-resolution sampling will permit
identification of details of the magnitude and shape of the curves, key
diagnostics for reservoir storage time as well as contamination with ancient
organic compounds. The study locations will encompass a transect of climatic
zones from the tropical Cariaco Basin (Venezuela), across the temperate United
States (Pettaquamscutt River, RI; Santa Barbara Basin, CA; Eel River basin, CA),
up to the boreal Saanich Inlet (British Columbia, Canada). These study sites
vary according to drainage basin (area, topography), climate (mean annual
temperature, precipitation), vegetation cover (tropical rainforest, semi-arid
scrubland, temperate deciduous forest, boreal evergreen forest), and degree of
human land-use impact. This proposed work should provide insights into a wide
range of environmental and anthropogenic impacts on the residence times of
terrestrial organic carbon, allowing results to be scaled globally. In addition,
accurately quantifying terrestrial biomarker residence times will contribute
greatly to the development of these compounds as geochronological and
paleoclimatic proxies. &lt;br/&gt;