* 0137344
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Causes of Sexual Size Dimorphism in Primates
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2002,08/31/2003
* John Kappelman, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 08/31/2003
* USD 10,804.00

The purpose of this study is to investigate the causes of sexual size dimorphism
(SSD) in primates. SSD is the presence of differences in mean overall body size
between males and females. These differences are meaningful because they are
often related to social structures and group compositions present in primates,
and thus are useful in deducing the ways in which extinct primate species
organized themselves. It is important to understand the strength of the
correlation between SSD and these other factors when drawing inferences about
extinct populations.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study differs from earlier work in
which analyses across species of SSD indices and categorical data (e.g., mating
system, dietary type, substrate type) were compared to theoretical predictions.
Instead, a quantitative model is used to generate predictions for populations of
continuous data. Predictions are based on initial conditions that correspond to
mechanisms that can potentially produce SSD - mechanisms that predict high
correlation between SSD and certain social structures, and other mechanisms that
do not. Data from primate populations will be compared to model predictions
using analyses that take into account degree of relatedness between species to
determine which mechanisms produce SSD in those primates.&lt;br/&gt;This study
has multiple areas of significance. First, it tests the validity of an
alternative technique for determining body size of skeletal specimens. Second,
it introduces a new technique for testing the influence of particular forces on
SSD in primates. Third, it will identify the forces that affect SSD within
particular primate groups, as well as across the Order Primates. Finally,
reconstructed values of ancestral size and distribution parameters can be
compared with values of known fossils, furthering understanding of the
relationships between fossil primates, ancestral primates, and living
primates.&lt;br/&gt;