* 0137607
* SGER: Early Responses of an Experimental Marsh Ecosystem to Varied Topographic Heterogeneity
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2003
* Sharook Madon, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Susan Mazer
* 09/30/2003
* USD 50,038.00

Multi-scale, vertical, and horizontal topographic heterogeneity is a critical
property of wetland ecosystems. The lack of topographic heterogeneity in
restored systems could be a key constraint on their progress toward structural
and functional equivalency with undisturbed sites. This project will test the
role of heterogeneity in the progress of ecosystem restoration. We hypothesize
that topographic heterogeneity enhances the development of restored wetlands and
predict that ecosystem structure and function will develop much more rapidly
where topographic heterogeneity is added. We will test this hypothesis using an
8-ha "model marsh" in the Tijuana River National Estuarine Research Reserve in
San Diego County, CA. To maximize scientific benefits, the site was designed as
a large-scale, replicated experiment. This one-of-a-kind project has tremendous
potential to advance restoration science due to its state-of-the-art design,
replicated treatments, and large scale. Over time, the replicated cells are
expected to diverge in structure and function, as tidal creek morphology and
marsh surface elevations respond to erosion and sedimentation; colonization by
vegetation and invertebrates (including founder effects/chance establishments);
use by fish; and landscape position (distance along the tidal channel that feeds
all three creek networks). Chance establishments by plant seeds and
invertebrates brought into the system by tidal water could be particularly
important. We will collect critical baseline data as we document early
conditions at the model marsh, and assess changes in structure, function, and
variability during marsh development. Such early information will strengthen our
ability to predict and model the viability of other wetland restoration
projects.