* 0137340
* Femtosecond Studies of Chemical Reaction Dynamics in Liquids
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Charles Harris, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Joseph L. Templeton
* 03/31/2006
* USD 734,000.00

Charles Harris of the University of California, Berkeley is supported by the
Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program for research on
the kinetics (at the femto-second time scale) and the intimate mechanisms of
rather complex organometallic reactions. Using femtosecond infrared spectroscopy
coupled with high pressure techniques, the intimate mechanisms of a variety of
complex chemical reactions will be elucidated. Special attention will be paid to
the role of solvent molecules in these reactions. Initial interest will be
centered on the activation by transition metal complexes of selective C-H and
Si-H bond ruptures. A variety of more complex reactions, including alkyne
polymerization, will also be examined. Reaction dynamics will be interpreted
with the aid of stochastic dynamic simulations. Several theoretical methods,
including ab initio calculations and density functional methods, will be applied
to characterization of intermediates.

This research is extending the time range accessible in the study of the
intimate mechanisms of solution-phase inorganic reactions by several orders of
magnitude. The details of reactions that are instantaneous by other measures
will be brought under examination. Such heretofore inaccessible chemical changes
stand at critical points in networks of reactions that are of central importance
in many scientific and technological areas. Specific examples of topics where
this research may have great importance include studies of the mechanisms of
biological processes such as photosynthesis and respiration, and also
improvement of metal-catalyzed polymerizations that are of central importance in
the chemical industry.

