* 0137419
* ADVANCE Fellows Award: Environmental Effects on Variations in Jellyfish Population Size
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2006
* Jennifer Purcell, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 04/30/2006
* USD 439,730.00

This award provides funding for the PI to establish a long term research program
on the environmental effects (temperature, salinity, prey density) on the
population dynamics of jellyfish (including scyphomedusae, hydromedusae, and
ctenophores) in the waters of the Puget Sound basin. Jellyfish populations
exhibit dramatic interannual fluctuations, and the reasons for this are largely
unknown. The PI will conduct laboratory experiments to test the combined effects
of temperature, salinity and prey density in combination with in situ sampling
with a video system. The initial target species is Aurelia labiata, whose
congeners are among the most abundant large jelly fish worldwide. This research
is significant because jellyfish populations may be increasing around the world
due to the combined effects of human activities. Jellyfish are important
consumers of zooplankton, and are generally deleterious to fish populations and
commercial fisheries through direct predation on fish eggs and larvae, predator
competition, and interference with fish harvesting. It is important to
understand the factors that affect their population fluctuations in order to
understand the possible effects of changing ocean conditions.

This ADVANCE award will promote the career of a female scientist at a critical
point. This investment is likely to allow her to re-establish her career a new
university, where she will be an excellent role model for students. In addition,
the SPML has two strong programs focused on undergraduate research in which the
PI will participate as a mentor and instructor. The programs, Minorities in
Marine Science Undergraduate Program (MIMSUP) and an Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) site program will allow the PI to mentor numerous
undergraduate students.



