* 0137066
* US-India Cooperative Research:  Quantum Chromodynamics -A Light Front Hamiltonian Approach
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2005
* James Vary, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 02/28/2005
* USD 17,800.00

0137066&lt;br/&gt;Vary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award supports US-
India cooperative research entitled Quantum Chromo Dynamics (QCD) - A Light
Front Hamiltonian Approach. US investigator James Vary, Iowa State University
(ISU) and Indian scientist Avaroth Harindranath, Saha Institute of Nuclear
Physics (SINP), Calcutta will develop a new approach to solve for spectra and
other properties of the elementary particles, which features the union of two
major theoretical tools in physics. They will derive the Hamiltonian governing
the dynamics from the light-front quantized theory of the strong interactions,
QCD and then, they will solve for the wavefunctions of baryons and mesons
expressed as amplitudes of multi-quark multi-gluon configurations using their
newly developed methods of quantum many-body theory. The investigators expect to
resolve several outstanding problems in nuclear physics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: This activity has the potential to begin a strong
collaboration between ISU and SINP. ISU has developed strength in microscopic
nuclear theory and in the fundamental theory of strong interactions, as well as
strong expertise in computational physics. SINP has a very strong tradition of
basic research in physics; Harindranath has extensive experience in Light Front
Quantization and in Hamiltonian-based methods in quantum field theory, which are
central to this research. This award will greatly benefit US-Indo contacts and
will provide highly deserved support to a very talented Indian theorist. The
Office of International Science &amp; Engineering and the Division of Physics
are cofunders of this activity. On the Indian side, the Department of Science
and Technology (DST) supports this activity under the NSF/DST joint program.
&lt;br/&gt;