* 0137592
* Fractionation of Cd and P by Marine Phytoplankton
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2006
* Robert Sherrell, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 02/28/2006
* USD 298,898.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0137592&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this project, researchers at Rutgers University will continue their ongoing
studies of the dependence of cadmium uptake by coastal marine phytoplankton on
taxonomic affinity, growth rate, relative concentrations of other bioactive
metals, and the ambient dissolved concentration of carbon dioxide in seawater.
With this renewal funding, the focus will be on laboratory culture studies to
complement field work carried out over the last four years. Anticipating that
the implications of the study will be of general applicability, the
investigators have designed the study to quantify fundamental dependencies for
several classes of phytoplankton. Nevertheless, a strong impetus for the work is
the desire to understand cadmium/phosphorous fractionation in Southern Ocean
surface waters. The team hopes to develop ground rules for the robust estimation
of phosphorous utilization in past Southern Ocean surface waters from the Cd/Ca
ratio of fossil planktonic foraminifera. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three-year
project will address two major questions: (1) Does uptake of Cd depend strongly
on phytoplankton phylogeny, or are cell size, growth rate and availability of
other metals more important? (2) Is increased Cd uptake with decreased pCO2
found in all major phytoplankton groups, or just diatoms, and is it caused by a
physiological response to pCO2 or by pH-dependent changes in water chemistry? To
answer these questions the research team will conduct two sets of experiments.
First, they will determine Cd uptake in phytoplankton species from four major
taxonomic groups, and test the dependence of Cd uptake on availability of other
bioactive metals and on growth rate. Secondly, they will investigate the
mechanism and ubiquity of Cd uptake control by ambient dissolved CO2
concentration by measuring the effect of varying CO2 on species across a wide
phylogenetic spectrum of the phytoplankton. As part of the latter studies, they
will conduct experiments to distinguish a physiological role for Cd in carbon
acquisition from pH effects on availability of competing metals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;