* 0137063
* Topics in Macroeconomics
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2002,02/29/2008
* Sergio Rebelo, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 02/29/2008
* USD 231,629.00

This project seeks to improve our understanding of devaluation episodes. The
first project studies the behavior of inflation in the aftermath of large
contractionary devaluations. The second project investigates how the fiscal
costs of banking crises that associated with currency crises are financed by the
government. The third project characterizes the optimal time to abandon a fixed
exchange rate regime in response to an increase in government spending that
renders the peg unsustainable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first project uses new
data to understand how the prices of different goods behave in the aftermath of
large devaluations. It examines a variety of episodes employing disaggregated
Consumer Price Index (CPI) data together with new data obtained from a private
provider that measures prices in different countries for a fixed set of brands.
Some preliminary results suggest that there are two mechanisms important in
shaping the behavior of prices in the aftermath of a devaluation. The first is
the presence of distribution costs (transportation, wholesaling and retailing)
that drive a wedge between the retail prices of tradable goods in different
countries. The second mechanism is described as flight from quality in
consumption. The large devaluations are associated with sizable recessions. The
negative income effect associated with these recession induces agents to
substitute away from imported good towards inferior local substitutes. This
substitution can induce a significant downward bias in measured inflation rates.
In principle the CPI measures the cost of purchasing a fixed bundle of goods.
But in practice, in countries such as Korea and Thailand, the prices of imported
goods are replaced in recessions by the prices of cheaper, inferior local
alternatives in the CPl. This means that there is a sudden deterioration in the
quality of the CPI consumption basket that is ignored in measuring the rate of
inflation. The project documents the role played by flight from quality in
consumption in influencing the behavior of CPI inflation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second project explores the implications of different
strategies for financing the fiscal costs of twin crises for inflation and
depreciation rates. It uses a first-generation type model of speculative attacks
which has four key features: (i) the crisis is triggered by prospective
deficits; (ii) there exists outstanding non-indexed government debt issued prior
to the crises; (iii) a portion of the government's liabilities are not indexed
to inflation; and (iv) there are nontradable goods and costs of distributing
tradable goods, so that purchasing power parity does not hold. The project shows
that the model can account for the high rates of devaluation and moderate rates
of inflation often observed in the wake of currency crises. The model and
detailed fiscal and monetary data are used to interpret several twin
banking/currency crises. Preliminary results have been obtained so far for the
Korea 1997 and Mexico 1994 crises. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The third project
discusses the optimal time to abandon a fixed exchange rate regime in response
to an increase in government spending that renders the peg unsustainable. The
preliminary work considers two variants of an optimization-based first-
generation speculative attack model. In the first variant there are fiscal costs
of abandoning fixed exchange rates. These costs may represent a bailout of the
banking sector, loss of tax revenues, difficulties in refinancing public debt,
etc. The second variant incorporates a fiscal reform that makes the peg
sustainable and that arrives according to a Poisson process while the exchange
rate is fixed. In both cases it is shown that for moderate government
expenditure shocks it is optimal to abandon the peg when international reserves
hit a pre-specified lower bound. When the government expenditure shock is large
it is optimal to abandon the peg as soon as the shock materializes. &lt;br/&gt;