* 0137851
* ADVANCE Fellows:  Bilingual Processing and Acquisition in Multidisciplinary Environment
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2006
* Irina Sekerina, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Standard Grant
* Linda G. Lopez
* 04/30/2006
* USD 244,189.00

This project concentrates on broad aspects of bilingual research and has two
goals: 1) to investigate bilingual processing in a series of language
experiments and 2) to pilot the eye-tracking technology with bilinguals as a
special population. Bilinguals represent a special population group due to a
characteristic of their communicative abilities referred to as "performance
deficit." Four experiments will examine how general and language-specific
sources of information influence processing performance of bilingual Russian-
English adults and how on-line processing mechanisms are developed by bilingual
Russian-English children using free head-mounted eye-tracking technology. By
monitoring the eye movements during listening, much can be inferred about
language interpretation in processing and development. The benefits that this
technology can provide for research on very diverse classes of subjects, such as
special needs populations, foreign speakers, and minority groups with cultural
and language considerations will be explored. This research program will also
help train graduate students in the multi-disciplinary areas of linguistics,
neuroscience, and cognitive science.

This award is supported through the NSF ADVANCE Program. The overall mission of
the ADVANCE Program is to increase the participation of women in the scientific
and engineering workforce through the increased representation and advancement
of women in academic science and engineering careers.