* 0137141
* Collaborative Research: Extending a Multi-Country Database and Program of Research
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2002,04/30/2004
* C.Neal Tate, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Christopher J. Zorn
* 04/30/2004
* USD 134,528.00

The four collaborating principal investigators in this project (Stacia L.
Haynie, Reginald S. Sheehan, Donald R. Songer, and C. Neal Tate) will continue
and expand their efforts to develop for public use a systematic, replicable
database to support comparative analyses of courts, judges, and their behavior.
To further this objective, the principal investigators will extend and expand
the multi-country database they are creating with support from National Science
Foundation awards (9975180, 9975237, 9975315, 9975323). That database supports
descriptive and theoretical research by the whole scholarly community concerned
with courts and judges and their functions and behaviors across a number of
national/cultural boundaries. It also allows the principal investigators to
pursue an initial research agenda highlighting substantive areas that can be
fruitfully studied across many nations and many times. The development of this
database rests on a central proposition: Theory and data are intimately related.
As new data become available, new theories and hypotheses are created and
tested. For the overwhelming majority of the world's courts, social scientists
lack even the most basic descriptive data summarizing their institutional
characteristics, historical development, functional processes, or institutional
and individual behaviors. With little more than such simple, descriptive data,
scholars might be able to answer any number of theoretically interesting
questions. The database that has been compiled under the previous awards show
how even a simple analysis of those data provides impressive answers to
questions, such as "What Do Supreme Courts Do?" and how general is "Party
Capability Theory?" The initial project contains a sample of 100 reported
supreme court decisions (or the universe, whichever is smaller) per year for 15
years for a sample eight nations with Anglo-American legal systems. The
principal investigators will extend the temporal coverage of the database to
include the 34 most recent years of available data and to expand the national
and cultural coverage of the database by adding an important civil law, non-
English-using court, the Suprema Corte de la Justicia de la Nacion of Mexico.