* 0137954
* Constructing Supranational Political Spaces: The European Union, Eastern Enlargement and Women's Agency
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Joanna Regulska, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 05/31/2006
* USD 255,248.00

This research project will contribute to the understanding of the ways in which
political spaces are constructed and of the role that participation of groups
traditionally marginalized plays in this process. It argues that the recognition
of the existence of a new world order and of new political spaces, located
beyond the nation-state, requires us to see political actions as involving a
multi-layered web of interactions, originating and being articulated
simultaneously from different sites across a variety of scales. The research
will question the notion of politics as spatially bounded and political space
fixed and it will show that a more adequate notion of scale requires the
recognition of new forms of political action and an expansion of the meaning of
"political subject." The European Union (EU), as an institution operating at the
supranational scale, and the process of the EU's eastern enlargement will be
used to explore the ways in which women in two accession countries, the Czech
Republic and Poland, have engaged as political actors in the construction of
supranational political space. Particular attention will be given both to the
restrictions on what women can do (through an analysis of constraints such as
the lack of political culture, legacies of socialist uneven development, the
limitations of the EU's primarily economic focus, and institutional rhetorical
restrictions), and to what women do succeed in doing, as a result of the new
opportunities that have been created by globalizing tendencies and by the
post-1989 transformations. Through an empirical and institutional analysis of
processes, actions, and responses by women in the matter of the EU and of two
different states, this research will provide an account of the ways in which
women's political participation is mobilized and competing interests are
negotiated in the process of constructing political space. This cross-national
study will apply a multi-method approach and will be divided into four stages,
(to be carried out simultaneously in the two countries: 1) textual analysis of
documents reflecting preparation for the EU accession, with special attention to
a gender analysis of the EU discourses of eastern enlargement; 2) data
collection, through approximately 150 individual and 12 focus group interviews
with women's NGOs, national politicians and policy-makers in each of the study
countries, EU representatives and EU related women's NGOs in Brussels; 3)
textual analysis of empirical data using ATLAS ti, a computer program for the
qualitative analysis of non-numerical and unstructured data, and 4) final
comparative analysis and theory construction, based upon the findings of the
first three stages. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through an empirical and institutional
analysis of processes, actions, and responses by women in the matter of the EU
and of two different states, this research will provide an account of the ways
in which women's political participation is mobilized and competing interests
are negotiated in the process of constructing political space. In particular
this project will: 1) produce the first extensive examination of discourses on
eastern enlargement and gender and will provide an understanding of the ways in
which women activists, state politicians, and EU representatives use and rework
EU and gender discourse as a means of advancing their goals and formulating
political agendas across various scales (supranational, national, local,
individual); 2) develop an understanding of the ways in which women understand
politics and their political activities; of how they mobilize, voice their
interests, and construct their identities beyond the nation-state, and of how
these identities translate into the mobilizing practices across various scales,
and 3) have broader implications insofar as it reveals the intricacies of EU
negotiations. The results of the research will be publicly available, and this
research will in that way increase public awareness and stimulate gender debates
regarding the benefits and costs of the EU eastern enlargement for groups
socially and politically marginalized. &lt;br/&gt;