* 0137029
* Transportation and Land Use: A Comparative Analysis
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2002,12/31/2003
* Genevieve Giuliano, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Gregory H. Chu
* 12/31/2003
* USD 104,982.00

Contemporary U.S. metropolitan areas are characterized by decentralized or
dispersed patterns of land use, have generally low average densities, and are
dominated by private vehicle travel. Explanations for these trends in the U.S.
include an array of policy decisions that have promoted decentralization and
made the private vehicle easily accessible. Increasing rates of car ownership
and use is a world-wide phenomenon, however, suggesting that per capita income
growth and basic economic and social trends may be key explanatory factors. This
research project will investigate the relationship between mobility and urban
form using international comparative analysis. The project will develop and
estimate models of individual travel behavior and will test hypotheses regarding
the extent to which land use characteristics explain travel patterns. Using
person-level travel survey data from the U.S., Great Britain and the
Netherlands, individual mobility patterns will be examined. The following
questions will be addressed: To what extent to differences in metropolitan
spatial form explain differences in mobility? What local spatial characteristics
affect mobility, and do these differ across countries? To what extent do
differences in transportation supply characteristics explain differences in
mobility? How important are these factors relative to demographics and
socioeconomic factors? Do relationships differ by travel purpose? International
comparative analysis will permit examination across a wide variety of spatial
forms and transportation system characteristics as well as across very different
policy environments. This broader approach should lead to greater understanding
of the underlying processes that lead to observed travel
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mobility generates great benefits to individuals
and society, but it also generates significant costs. Many critics argue that
current trends are not sustainable and that coordinated policies must be
developed to reverse current land use and transportation patterns. Policies to
increase the density and mix of activities are proposed as effective strategies
for achieving sustainability goals, as increased accessibility should reduce
private vehicle use and increase use of transit and non-motorized modes.
However, rising per capita incomes, economic restructuring and globalization,
and changing demographics may make restrictive policies either less effective or
less acceptable. Thus it is not clear that efforts to change land use patterns
would lead to significantly different travel patterns. This project will provide
a careful and comprehensive empirical analysis that is necessary for
understanding the role of spatial form in travel behavior, thereby broadening
fundamental understandings of these interrelationships and helping to guide
future policy development.&lt;br/&gt;