* 0137381
* Building an Agenda for Integrated Developmental Ethnographic Research: Proposal for a Conference, winter 2002
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2002
* Sara Harkness, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Amy L. Sussman
* 08/31/2002
* USD 9,575.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building an Agenda for Integrated Developmental
Ethnographic Research:&lt;br/&gt;A Proposal for a
Conference&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sara Harkness &amp; Charles M.
Super&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; In recent years there has been a growing awareness
of the need for culturally grounded developmental research; yet, the integration
of ethnographic perspectives and methods in research on children's development
remains an unfulfilled agenda. The lack of integration of developmental and
ethnographic approaches to the study of children is evident across a wide
variety of academic contexts, including grant proposals, as well as published
work. Indeed, it appears that trends in graduate education in the social and
behavioral sciences over the past few decades have exacerbated the separation of
anthropological and developmental inquiry, to the detriment of both. Despite
these trends, however, there is currently high potential for a new level of
integration of developmental and ethnographic approaches in research on
children. In order to realize this potential in research, a small working
conference has been designed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The 2 -and one-half day
workshop is intended to bring together leading researchers in anthropology and
developmental science. Participants will include approximately fifteen scholars
from several disciplines, including social, demographic and psychological
anthropology; developmental, social, and cross-cultural psychology; linguistics;
sociology; and pediatrics to build an agenda for integrated developmental
ethnographic research on children in cultural contexts. Discussion will focus
around three related topics: 1) theoretical frameworks that are promising for
the integration of developmental and ethnographic research; 2) integration of
research methods so that both development and its context can be analyzed in
systematic fashion; and 3) overcoming the dichotomy between "qualitative" and
"quantitative" data. &lt;br/&gt;