* 0137255
* Epistemology and the Diversity of Cognitive Systems: an SGTR Proposal
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2002,09/30/2005
* Robert Cummins, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Ronald Rainger
* 09/30/2005
* USD 300,000.00

Proposal Abstract SES Proposal 0137255 Epistemology and the Diversity of
Cognitive Systems Robert Cummins, University of California-Davis

This focused research and education program falls under the heading of Small
Grants for Training and Research. The award supports graduate students and a
postdoctoral fellow engaged in the study of diversity in cognitive systems. The
basic assumption is that such diversity -- differences in architecture,
resources and goals -- runs far deeper than can be accommodated by traditional
epistemology. The PI holds that these differences provide a powerful prima facie
reason for supposing that the Rules of Right Reason will differ substantially
for systems of different types, in particular for the institution of science
(which we take to be a cognitive system in its own right), for individuals, and
for brains and their sub-systems. These Rules not only differ in what they
require, they also differ in the basic concepts employed to describe their
target systems and the norms appropriate to them. For example, it no longer
seems plausible to apply epistemological concepts and norms designed to describe
and evaluate the leisurely deliberations of adult human reflective consciousness
to the workings of sub-personal agencies of the brain, or to the institution of
science. Rather, different frameworks need be devised for cognitive systems
whose functions and goals, and whose computational and representational
constraints, differ widely and essentially. Our goal is to make a case for this
diversity, to describe it, and to begin to outline the conceptual frameworks
required to articulate the pluralistic epistemology it demands. The proposed
research aims to identify exactly which computational, representational and
architectural constraints are relevant to the characterization of brains,
individual cognition and science as (distinct) epistemological strata, and then
to use the insight gained into the nature of such systems to develop a
stratified epistemology capable of handling the diversity of cognitive systems.

This SGTR also supports a training component for several advanced graduate
students, who pursue dissertation projects related to the overall project as
part of a larger research group, including three faculty members and a post
doctoral fellow. The group meets a weekly to discuss current projects, determine
progress, and delegate responsibilities for the coming week. Everyone
participates by coming up with some bit of research (literature search, web
search, etc.) or writing (demonstration, explanation, argument, etc.).
Dissertation projects are woven into the general research program in a way that
produces a symbiotic relationship between the group research projects and
individual dissertations.

This model has real potential for accelerating and deepening graduate training
in certain cientifically-oriented areas in philosophy. Students mature rapidly,
and benefit greatly from access to post docs; learn to write grants, work as a
team, present results at conferences; and to prepare jointly-authored articles.
This "philosophy lab" has attracted attention from colleagues in other
universities, and serves as a promising alternative to traditional advanced
training in Philosophy. Thus, in addition to our scientific and philosophical
findings, we hope to pioneer an alternative model for graduate training in
philosophy that has proved successful in the sciences but has been difficult to
apply in the humanities.