* 0137409
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar:  Microbial and Plant Metabolism--Function through Genomics
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2003
* Louis Sherman, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 03/31/2003
* USD 20,000.00

0137409&lt;br/&gt;Sherman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the
participation of American scientists in a U.S.-Japan seminar on microbial and
plant metabolism--function through genomics to be held in Honolulu, Hawaii from
November 22-26, 2002. The co-organizers are Professor Louis Sherman of Purdue
University in Indiana and Professor Yuichiro Takahashi of Okayama University in
Japan. The meeting will cover the extraordinary progress that has been made in
the last two years in sequencing of the genomes of photosynthetic microbes,
especially cyanobacteria. Over one dozen strains will have been sequenced by the
meeting and this will lead to a wide array of new findings in many different
disciplines and also in our understanding of gene regulation. Two of the newly
sequenced organisms include Prochlorococcus strains that are of tremendous
importance in the open ocean and may be the most abundant photosynthetic
organisms on the planet. Two others are N2-fixing strains that will provide a
tremendous opportunity to analyze N2 fixation, heterocyst development and the
way in which these processes are regulated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
significance of the science to be discussed at this meeting is quite wide-
ranging. The cyanobacteria and the other photosynthetic phototrophs have become
among the most important of all model organisms and that a multitude of
important problems for the biosphere can be studied through these organisms.
This meeting will represent a timely opportunity for the major participants in
this broad field of genomics to discuss their results, discuss the successes and
the difficulties of recent work and focus on future directions. Younger members
of the community will be invited into the international collaboration and
hopefully maintain research collaborations throughout their careers. Most
importantly, cyanobacteria represent one of the best and most advanced model
systems for understanding the functionality of each protein in a cell. Results
obtained from this photosynthetic microbe will be of great value for the
Arabidopsis program aimed at the same goal. The cyanobacterial results will be
significant for an understanding of chloroplast function as well as providing
critical information on how a cell lives, replicates, and responds to its
environment. Proceedings of the seminar will be published on the Web.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;