* 0137624
* Phylogeny of Flea Beetles: Testing 3 Hypotheses of Relatedness Using 3 Different Data Sets: Larval and Adult Morphology and DNA Sequence Data
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Karl Kjer, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 07/31/2006
* USD 341,894.00

This study will produce a phylogeny (family tree) of the 38 flea beetle supra-
generic groups and 5 galerucine tribes, which will test three proposed
hypotheses of relationships, between the flea beetles and the galerucinae using
a comprehensive taxon set and an exhaustive character set from adult and larval
morphology and 3 gene fragments from the mitochondrial, nuclear and ribosomal
genomes. This phylogeny will also be used to test hypotheses of evolution of
jumping behavior, evolution of host- plant choice, Biogeography and geologic age
of the flea beetles, and evolution of larval leaf feeding which are of general
scientific interest.

The flea beetles (Chrysomelidae: Alticinae) together with their sister group,
the Galerucinae, are a huge group containing over 12,000 species; they are also
extremely damaging to agriculture. The flea beetles are renowned for making
"shot holes" in table crops such as potato, broccoli and grapes. The galerucines
are infamous for the multi-billion dollar damage to corn and beans.
Unfortunately, the taxonomic status of the flea beetles is so confusing that it
impedes proper research and pest management. Over 500 described genera of flea
beetles are divided into 38 supra-generic tribes, sub-tribes and sections and
there is no taxonomic or phylogenetic hypothesis of how these tribes and series
are related to one another. This lack of a trust -worthy phylogeny is especially
important to pest management, where assumptions about pesticide applications or
search for biological control agents are often made based on taxonomic position
and where money is often wasted if these assumptions are incorrect.

