* 0137639
* Production and Exchange at Cancuen: Reconstructing the Classic Maya Political Economy
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Arthur Demarest, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/29/2004
* USD 148,022.00

Dr. Demarest and his team will direct two seasons of NSF-sponsored
archaeological and ecological investigations in the Upper Pasion River valley of
the Peten rainforest of Guatemala. This multidisciplinary research will be the
first intensive study of this region, which is located at the interface of
Central America's largest rainforest zone and the mountainous volcanic highlands
to the south. Investigations will begin at the site of Cancuen, an area of
ruined elite and residential architecture that covers over five square
kilometers. Cancuen was located precisely at the "head of navigation" of the
Pasion/Usumacinta River system, the major trade and transport artery of the
ancient Maya world. Dr. Demarest hypothesizes that highland jade, pyrite,
obsidian, and other volcanic rock were transported by foot to Cancuen through
the highland passes to the south. From there these materials, or finished
products, were exchanged along the Pasion/Usumacinta River route to the rest of
the ancient Maya world. Preliminary research has uncovered evidence supporting
this hypothesis, including domestic workshops in jade, obsidian, pyrite, and
other hard stone surrounding Cancuen's monumental royal palace. We also
uncovered a protected formal river portage connected by causeways to the palace
and workshop zones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The 2002-2003 NSF field seasons will
investigate residences and activity areas throughout Cancuen, allowing
statistical assessment of economic activities and their correlation to status
levels and group affiliations, as determined by associated artifacts,
architectural features, proportions of exotic materials, and osteological
studies, including isotopic, micropathology, and paleopathology analyses of
nutrition and diet. Extensive horizontal excavations of activity areas will
explore workshops, and formal, statistical, and microwear study of recovered
artifacts will be used to assess production technologies and organization, as
well as the status and other activities of the artisans. In turn, these results
will be compared to studies throughout the urban zone to characterize the nature
of this ancient economy, including attached versus independent specialists,
degree of state control, and the economic strategies of the artisan/producers
themselves, as well as overall organizational structure and distribution of
finished products. Correlations with the subsistence economy of Cancuen will be
based on ecological analyses and reconstruction. Ceramic, lithic, and figurine
data will be subjected to a variety of chemical compositional analyses to
determine source areas and exchange systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The findings
will clarify the role that trade and production of goods played in the rise,
maintenance, and decline of Classic Maya civilization. In turn, the results
contribute to our understanding of the nature of ancient economies and the
impact of economic factors in the development and decline of complex societies.
&lt;br/&gt;