* 0137949
*  ADVANCE Fellow / Preservation and Change: The Social Context of Spatial Patterns in a Southern City, 1900-2000
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Regina Bures, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Bonney Sheahan
* 12/31/2004
* USD 447,044.00

This ADVANCE Fellows project studies social and spatial change in residential
and family patterns that occurred in Charleston, S.C., during the 20th century,
with a particular focus on segregation patterns from the city's historic
preservation movement. The main research questions to be addressed by this
project involve the relationship between racial and economic segregation and the
individual-level patterns of residential mobility resulting from changes in the
urban environment.

This project will combine historical census records with City Directories to
follow a sample of residents from 1900 to 1960. Patterns of spatial and social
change will be mapped, overlaying ecological change and political change in the
context of historic preservation. This will provide an overview of economic and
residential segregation patterns. One of the main innovations of this study is
that it will match individuals across multiple time periods. In addition, the
study will combine traditional sociological perspectives with recent
developments in spatial analysis.

This award is supported through the NSF ADVANCE Program. The overall mission of
the ADVANCE Program is to increase the participation of women in the scientific
and engineering workforce through the increased representation and advancement
of women in academic science and engineering careers.

