* 0137792
* When Threats Succeed:  A Formal Model of the Threat and Use of Economic Sanctions
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2005
* T. Clifton Morgan, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 01/31/2005
* USD 192,898.00

The conventional wisdom that economic sanctions are not an effective instrument
of foreign policy is based on the empirical analysis of numerous cases in which
sanctions were applied. This work may suffer from selection bias in that
instances in which sanctions would be effective may be characterized by the
absence of their imposition. That is, the target may be able to anticipate that
it would alter its policies as a result of sanctions and may choose to acquiesce
to the potential sanctioner's threat in order to avoid the cost of the economic
dislocation. A game-theoretic model designed to explore this possibility is
developed in this project. In equilibrium, any outcome of a sanctions episode is
possible with some non-zero probability; but, sanctions that would be effective
typically would bring about a change in the target's behavior at the threat
stage and would never be applied. Derivations from this model also suggest that
a rational, expected utility-maximizing sanctions strategy would produce more
cases in which applied sanctions would fail than cases in which applied
sanctions would succeed. The model produces expectations that are consistent
with empirical observation and provides explanations for some of the puzzles
regarding economic sanctions (such as why sanctions would continue to be imposed
in spite of strong evidence that they are usually ineffective). The model also
leads to a number of new hypotheses associating certain variables (such as the
cost of the sanctions and the value of the issue at stake) with the probability
that various outcomes would occur. The goals of this project are to continue the
theoretical devlopment of this model and to develop a data set with which the
hypotheses produced can be tested. Data on instances in which sanctions were
threatened, but not imposed, do not currently exist. Such data are gathered as
part of this project and are used to subject the theory to a rigorous, empirical
test. The research promises to enhance substantially our understanding of the
topic. 0137792