* 0137345
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar:  Lesson Study in Mathematics Teacher Education,  Workshop
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2002,09/30/2003
* Gail Burrill, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 09/30/2003
* USD 25,915.00

0137345&lt;br/&gt;Burrill&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the
participation of American scientists in a U.S.-Japan seminar on lesson study in
mathematics teacher education to be held in Park City Utah from July 12-18,
2002. The co-organizers are Dr. Gail Burrill of the Mathematical Sciences
Education Board at the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) and Professor
Toshiakira Fujii of Tokyo Gakugei University in Japan. The goal of the seminar
will be to discuss in detail how the concept of lesson study can be framed as a
medium for professional development, to identify common research priorities
related to lesson study, and to explore possible areas of joint research
cooperation. The meeting will focus on lesson design and classroom practice,
considering K-8 teachers in each country, and how lesson study might be adapted
for use at the secondary level. The framing of the seminar will be done jointly
by educators from both countries under the direction of a Steering Committee
representing the different constituencies and considering balance factors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The seminar will provide an opportunity for mathematics
educators from the United States to probe into the underpinnings of lesson
study, to learn how the Japanese think about mathematics and teaching
mathematics, how they orchestrate discussion among teachers, and how they
consider what is implicit in lesson study that helps teachers understand what it
takes to teach well. The results can serve as the focus of follow-up activities
in the U.S., stimulate teacher educators into thinking differently about their
practice, and lay the groundwork for research concerning questions about the
role of lesson study in professional development. Participants will be selected
to include both ethnic and geographic diversity considerations as well as women
and young researchers. The proceedings will be made available on the National
Academy of Sciences web site.&lt;br/&gt;