* 0137368
* ADVANCE Fellows Award:  Molecular Ecology Techniques Based on Ribosomal RNA Detection of Microbial Population
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2006
* Reyes Sierra-Alvarez, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Patrick L. Brezonik
* 04/30/2006
* USD 463,985.00

0137368 Sierra The objective of the research is to develop a biomineralization
process in high-rate sulfate reducing bioreactors applicable to the removal and
recovery of heavy metals from aqueous waste or process streams. Metal
immobilization will be stimulated by biogenic sulfides produced by sulfate
reducing bacteria. Copper (Cu) was chosen as model metal, since this contaminant
is present at high concentrations in many industrial effluents (e.g., mining,
semiconductor, metallurgical and metal-finishing industries) and is a
particularly toxic priority pollutant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be
initiated with continuous anaerobic bioreactors to determine the most suitable
electron donor for sulfide production in mesophilic and thermophilic systems.
The experiments will also assess the main factors controlling Cu removal from
synthetic effluents. Molecular methods based on rRNA detection, electron
microscopy and X-ray spectroscopy, will be used to evaluate the structure and
function of the microbial population and to determine the speciation and
distribution of the minerals in the anaerobic biofilm system. The knowledge
gained will be applied to elucidate the underlying mechanisms-and identify the
key microorganisms responsible for Cu removal in sulfidogenic bioreactors. In
addition, a chemical equilibrium model will be developed to simulate Cu
partitioning and removal in the bioreactors in order to facilitate process
optimization. In the final part of the project, the treatment of a Cu-
contaminated stream generated in semiconductor manufacturing (i.e., chemical
mechanical planarization (CMP)) will be investigated to determine the
efficiencies of Cu removal under practical conditions. CMP effluents were
selected because of their significance to the host institution's State and to
enhance collaboration with the NSF/SCR Center. It is anticipated that this
research will lead to improved scientific and technological understanding of the
potentials of sulfate reducing bioprocesses for metal
decontamination.&lt;br/&gt;