* 0137720
* ADVANCE Fellows Award:  Transcription System for Real-World Environments with Applications to Healthcare
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2005
* Deborah Grove, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 02/28/2005
* USD 300,000.00

EIA 0137720 &lt;br/&gt;Grove, Deborah&lt;br/&gt;Rutgers University New Brunswick
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Title: ADVANCE Fellows: Transcription System for Real
World Environments with Applications to Healthcare&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Amount
Rec: $ 300,000&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal, developing a hands-free meeting transcription system along with a
remote transcript browsing capability via telephone, will incorporate new
microphone array technology for audio capture of speech for high-quality speech
recognition. The capture will take place in a realistic office scenario, as
required for a transcription application. The research is geared towards
developing a patient-centered care system that would allow patients and family
members to access office visit information. The system will have a speech
interface to a computer for disease management feedback between patient and
physician. The main goal consists of developing a meeting transcription system
that incorporates microphone array algorithms for sound capture from multiple
talkers and speaker identification. The microphone array builds on the past
research by the PI for incorporating room response information into array
algorithms. The array output will be adaptively determined such that it is
robust in environmentally changing rooms and for talker positions not initially
calibrated. The transcription research, concerned with parsing dialog to
distinguish multiple talkers at a meeting (which may not be stored at the
database), will be tested using the physician's office dialog. Speaker
identification will involve incorporating phonetic knowledge along with keyword
content information and talker location to improve the tagging of multiple
talkers. Performance will be measured with respect to speech recognition
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;