* 0137730
* ADVANCE Fellows Award:Implementing Inquiry Pedagogy in Elementary and Middle School Science Classrooms
* EDU,DRL
* 04/15/2002,01/31/2003
* Jennifer Cartier, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 01/31/2003
* USD 308,977.00

In the current climate of nationwide education reform, a strong movement is
afoot to place inquiry at the&lt;br/&gt;center of science education. Nowhere is
this more apparent than in the National Science Education&lt;br/&gt;Standards
(National Research Council, 1996), which recommend that students be ieengaged in
inquiryld&lt;br/&gt;that involves combining ioprocesses and scientific knowledge
as they use scientific reasoning and critical&lt;br/&gt;thinking to develop
their understanding of scienceln (p. 105). Clearly, if teachers are to
promote&lt;br/&gt;meaningful learning as advocated by the Standards, some of
their instructional practices will have to&lt;br/&gt;change, and such changes
must be supported by strong, research-based professional
development&lt;br/&gt;programs. The proposed study will document the ways in
which specific professional development&lt;br/&gt;opportunities influence
science teachers beliefs and knowledge and, consequently, their
instructional&lt;br/&gt;practices.&lt;br/&gt;Several factors influence teachers
instructional decisions, including their beliefs about the nature
of&lt;br/&gt;science, their theories about teaching and learning, and their
knowledge of scientific concepts. Through a&lt;br/&gt;series of week-long summer
institutes, teams of elementary and middle school science teachers will
gain&lt;br/&gt;understanding of the nature of scientific inquiry, the role of
models in scientific inquiry, and various&lt;br/&gt;strategies for creating
robust inquiry opportunities in diverse classrooms. Ongoing monthly
meetings&lt;br/&gt;throughout the academic year will provide teacher teams with
opportunities to discuss issues related to&lt;br/&gt;implementing inquiry
pedagogy, share materials, and seek assistance with particular
concerns.&lt;br/&gt;A variety of professional development interventions will be
employed to help alter teachers beliefs and&lt;br/&gt;develop their knowledge
about scientific inquiry and conceptual models. These interventions
include:&lt;br/&gt;collaborative study of a theoretical framework describing
scientific inquiry;&lt;br/&gt;eflective writing;&lt;br/&gt;ongoing collegial
interactions; and&lt;br/&gt;quality curricular materials.&lt;br/&gt;The
analytical method employed for the study will be that of the collective case
study. One focus teacher&lt;br/&gt;from each teacher team will be the subject of
a case study. Collectively, the case studies will be&lt;br/&gt;formulated to
shed light on the processes that teachers undergo in their attempt to adopt
inquiry pedagogy&lt;br/&gt;and the types of professional development and support
that have positive influences on these processes.&lt;br/&gt;Qualitative data
such as interview transcripts, field notes, and teacher journals will be
examined using&lt;br/&gt;QSR NUD*IST, a theory-building qualitative analysis
tool.&lt;br/&gt;It is undeniable that national and statewide reform initiatives,
bolstered by renewed emphasis on&lt;br/&gt;standardized testing, are putting
pressure on teachers to adopt inquiry-based instructional
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;Unfortunately, utilizing inquiry-based curriculum
materials and providing hands-on learning experiences&lt;br/&gt;in classrooms
are not enough to enable students to ioengage in the same activities and
thinking&lt;br/&gt;processes [italics added] as scientists who are seeking to
expand human knowledge of the natural worldll&lt;br/&gt;(NRC, 2000, p. 1). To
accomplish this tall task, teachers will need support in developing
greater&lt;br/&gt;understanding about the nature of scientific inquiry and ways
of implementing inquiry instruction into&lt;br/&gt;their classrooms. The
proposed study will make an important contribution to our knowledge of
how&lt;br/&gt;specific professional development opportunities enable teachers to
adopt more inquiry-based practices.