* 0137700
* ADVANCE Fellows Award: Forensic Seismic Damage Modeling Using Virtual Reality
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Ann Sardo, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 08/31/2007
* USD 347,809.00

The recent collapse of a number of bridge structures has highlighted their
vulnerability to earthquakes. The societal impacts of bridge failures on
traffic, commerce, and public safety motivate the need to adequately evaluate
their performance and rehabilitation. Structural forensic techniques are
commonly used to examine the damage patterns, develop possible failure
scenarios, and select retrofit designs to be applied to similar bridges in an
effort to avoid future failures. This research will define appropriate seismic
damage indices that quantify the level of damage experienced by the bridge
structure during a seismic event. Performance-based criteria will be developed
that accounts for all deformation and damage accumulated during the earthquake
in order to facilitate optimal retrofit designs and remediation policies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Virtual reality provides a unique framework in which to
understand complex problems. It provides the ability to visualize and interact
with computer images using natural human interfaces. Through the use of display
technology, users can "enter" the computer world and move around complex three-
dimensional computer models. Thus, the solution of large-scale problems can be
better understood and more effectively communicated to a wide audience. This
research will employ the use of virtual reality technology to visualize the
dynamic performance of bridge structures during seismic events and perform
structural forensic analyses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An integrated process of
analysis and visualization that addresses the sequencing of damage, performance
levels, and interdependence of failure mechanisms will be developed in this
research. Complex analytical models of bridges will be created while a virtual
environment is used to display the results of the analysis and provide an
effective communication tool. This research will solve seismic infrastructure
problems using a systemic perspective and innovative information systems.
Virtual reality technology will be used to enhance the capabilities of pre-event
planning scenarios from an array of structural threats. The ability to
forensically recreate and understand structural failures, such as the 9/11
disaster, will be advanced through this unique merging of structural analysis
and virtual reality technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;