* 0137235
* An Ecosystem approach to Hominin Environments in the East African plio-Pleistocene
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Anna Behrensmeyer, Smithsonian Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 07/31/2004
* USD 148,232.00

The study of human adaptation and evolution is intimately tied to knowledge of
the environments in which humans evolved. These environments have space-time
dimensions that must be understood in order to answer key questions about how
environmental change affected early human evolution. According to one
hypothesis, global climatic change between 2 and 3 million years ago was
responsible for a major evolutionary radiation of mammals in Africa that
included our direct ancestors. It is likely that climate did affect human
evolution in some way, but exactly how and when this happened remains
controversial. Some researchers believe that empirical evidence has not yet
demonstrated the role of climate change in African mammal evolution.
Preservation biases in the fossil record, differing data-collection methods, and
varying levels of chronological and spatial resolution across fossil localities
in Africa must be carefully examined and controlled in order to rigorously test
the climate change hypothesis. This project will test the linkage between the
global climatic record and changes in mammal faunas from terrestrial ecosystems
in Africa between 5 and 1 million years ago. The focus will be on the Turkana
Basin of Kenya and Ethiopia and the Hadar-Dikika region of northern Ethiopia,
two of the major sources of fossils of human ancestors (hominins) as well as a
rich record of other mammals. The Turkana Basin Paleoecology Database will be
assembled from existing separate datasets, museum collections, and new field
initiatives that use standardized sampling of selected stratigraphic intervals.
Comparisons with the Hadar-Dikika region will draw from the existing Hadar
Faunal Database and new data collected in the field. The resulting information
will demonstrate what environments were inhabited by early hominins in East
Africa and how these environments changed through time, what mammal species
early hominins were most closely associated with, and how global climate records
correlate with terrestrial faunal and archeological change at different spatial
and temporal scales. Information and interpretations derived from this research
will be made available to the public via scientific journals, public science
education media, and the internet.