* 0137182
* The Impact of Stepfamilies on the Well-being of Children and Adolescents
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Megan Sweeney, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/2005
* USD 74,999.00

SES-0137182 Megan Sweeney University of California, Los Angeles

Although approximately one-fourth of all children born in the United States in
the early 1980s are expected to spend some time in a stepfamily, our
understanding of the implications of parental remarriage for the well being of
youth remains largely incomplete. In fact, a growing body of evidence suggests
that remarriage may reduce children's well-being, which is surprising given the
economic benefits of remarriage, the potential for increased supervision of
children, and the emotional support remarriage offers to a potentially over-
extended single parent. Most previous research on family structure, however, has
focused on the well being of youth in single-parent families. The more limited
body of research examining stepfamilies relies largely on cross-sectional
comparisons of children in various family structures at a particular point in
time, or on non-nationally representative longitudinal samples. The research
addresses the following questions: (1) How do youth in stepfamilies fare, and do
the effects of parental remarriage vary across child outcomes? (2) What
underlying processes produce observed relationships between remarriage and child
well being? Are these relationships causal or spuriously produced by the nature
of selection into stepfamilies? (3) Do the effects of stepfamilies on children,
and the processes producing these effects, vary across demographic groups
defined by race, age, gender, or socioeconomic status?

To investigate children's well being from middle childhood through late
adolescence, data are obtained from The National Longitudinal Survey of Youth-
Child Supplement and The National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health. The
analyses begin with a descriptive examination of the association between
remarriage and various domains of children's well-being, followed by the testing
of specific hypotheses about processes through which stepfamilies impact youth.
Attention will be paid to theoretically-relevant operationalizations of family
structure and to potential mediating mechanisms such as family income, parenting
style, family conflict, and extrafamilial social networks. Finally, because
children and parents in stepfamilies may be unlike individuals in other family
forms in many ways, models will be estimated that control both observed and
unobserved characteristics of parents and offspring. Analytical techniques used
in the analyses include OLS regression, logistic regression, Cox proportional
hazards and fixed-effects models.

The project has important implications for parents, clinicians, and members of
the research community. This research will provide useful information about
targeting interventions to help stepfamilies and the children living within
them. The emphasis on appropriate measurement and model specification in this
research will also be important for members of the social scientific community
interested in assessing the extent to which differences in children's well-being
result from variation in family structure histories, as opposed to other
potentially confounding factors. Finally, this research will improve our
conceptual understanding of how remarriage affects children by testing
relationships suggested broadly by the life course model and by dominant mid-
level perspectives emphasizing economic deprivation, socialization, stress and
instability, and community connections.