* 0137922
* ADVANCE Fellow: Microscopy of Nanomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2007
* Valerie Leppert, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 03/31/2007
* USD 448,833.00

The purpose of the proposed research is to develop a new characterization
technique for investigating the size-dependent magnetic, optical, and electronic
behavior of nanomaterials. An understanding of the origin of these new
properties is essential for their exploitation in a variety of technologies,
including high-density magnetic recording, high-speed optical computing, solar
energy, environmental toxicology, biomaterials, and biosensors. The technique
that will be developed is electron energy-loss spectroscopy (EELS) in the
transmission electron microscope (TEM). New developments in the energy-
resolution of EELS (<0.3 eV) will be used in concert with the high spatial-
resolution of TEM to correlate the electronic and optical properties of
individual nanoparticles to their size, shape, composition, and surface
morphology. Specific materials for initial investigation will be gallium nitride
and silicon nanoparticles, synthesized by the PI and her collaborators. The
electronic and optical properties of individual nanoparticles will be extracted
from the low energy-loss and fine structure portions of the EELS spectrum.
Results will be compared to information collected from X-ray absorption
spectroscopy (XAS) and optical spectroscopy, as well as modeling efforts. This
information will in turn be related to the physical morphology (size and shape)
of the individual nanoparticles, particular surface reconstructions present (via
phase-contrast microscopy), and elemental composition and distribution (e.g.
doping, core/shell structures). The potential impact of this work on
understanding the origins of size-dependent properties is expected to be
enormous, given that the capability of the proposed technique is unique in
permitting the study of individual nanoparticles, rather than ensembles of
nanoparticles.

Intense worldwide research over the last twenty years has been focused on
understanding the effect on the magnetic, optical, and electronic properties of
a bulk material when size is reduced to less than about 10 nanometers (less than
one in a hundred millionths of a meter). Investigation of the behavior and
origin of these size-dependent properties is critical for their full
exploitation in a broad range of technologies: high-density magnetic recording,
high-speed optical computing, solar energy, environmental toxicology (including
chemical and biological weapons detection), biomaterials (for example,
artificial organs), and biosensors for advanced medical testing. The small size
scale of the materials under investigation demands that new techniques be
developed for understanding their properties, since traditional characterization
techniques typically study millions of particles at a time, rather than single
particles alone. The goal of this project is to use new developments in electron
microscopy to correlate the magnetic, optical and electronic behavior of
individual nanoparticles to their specific size, shape, composition and surface
structure. This will be achieved by taking full advantage of the ability of
electron microscopy to image features less than 0.2 nm in size, as well as new
developments in spectroscopic methods in the electron microscope that will allow
optical and electronic data to be collected from individual nanoparticles. An
understanding of how the properties of nanomaterials are influenced by these
various factors will extend knowledge of the basic properties of matter, as well
as point to new synthesis strategies to optimize the performance of this
important class of materials.

This award is supported through the NSF ADVANCE Fellows Program. The overall
mission of the ADVANCE Program is to increase the participation of women in the
scientific and engineering workforce through the increased representation and
advancement of women in academic science and engineering careers.