* 0137725
* Risk Management and Juries: How Jurors React to Cost-Benefit Analyses
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2005
* Steven Penrod, CUNY John Jay College of Criminal Justice
* Standard Grant
* Isaac Unah
* 01/31/2005
* USD 260,000.00

When making a decision whether a company was negligent and therefore liable for
harm to the plaintiff, juries are frequently asked to second-guess people's and
companies' decisions. The goal of such a legal system is to compensate the
plaintiff for harm caused by another's wrongdoing or negligent behavior. Many
psychological and other researchers have investigated the workings of the civil
jury system, and frequently claim that its purposes are not being fulfilled.
However, this research has usually focused on a limited number of independent
variables or attitudinal variables at one time. In contrast, the first goal of
this proposal is to incorporate a variety of independent variables, moderating
and mediating variables, and jurors' attitudes and perceptions into a
comprehensive model of civil jury decision making. Also, the law of negligence
(and to a lesser degree the law of product liability) has integrated cost-
benefit analyses into the determination of whether a defendant should be held
liable. Although the concept of a cost-benefit analysis is so incorporated into
the law, how jurors perform cost-benefit analyses or how jurors respond to
defendants who perform such analyses has not received much attention. The second
goal of this proposal is to investigate variables associated with the claim that
a defendant's performance of a cost-benefit analysis actually outrages jurors
and leads to pro-plaintiff outcomes. This project uses products liability cases
in which a cost-benefit analysis is or is not performed as a background for
building a comprehensive model of civil jury decision making. Such cases include
elements relevant to many variables that have been previously investigated as
relevant to jury decision making, but which have been investigated usually in
isolation. The elements of such cases include the risk involved with the
product, the defendant's behavior in face of such a risk, jurors' attitudes and
perceptions of the case, and jurors' outrage. This project will analyze the data
from the proposed studies as a path model that includes the variables mentioned,
and others. The independent variables in the studies will investigate what
elements of the model are related to jurors' outrage toward cost-benefit
analyses, and how that outrage might be mitigated.