* 0137272
*  Collaborative Research: Biogeochemical Modeling of Carbon Partitioning in the Pacific: the Role of Si and Fe in Regulating Production by Siliceous and Calcifying Phytoplankton
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Fei Chai, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 03/31/2006
* USD 246,418.00

Physical and biological interactions play a complex role in the partitioning of
carbon between the atmosphere, upper ocean, deep ocean and sediments. At
present, interdisciplinary models offer the best means to test hypotheses about
how carbon partitioning is regulated in various oceanic regions on time scales
of years to centuries. A new interdisciplinary model will integrate advances in
several areas to test two related hypotheses: 1) that switches in community and
productivity dominance between diatoms and other phytoplankton groups (e.g.
non?siliceous picoplankton and calcifying phytoplankton) significantly affect
carbon partitioning, vary spatially and temporally and are regulated by a
combination of Si and Fe in combination; 2) that changes in Si trapping in the
Southern Ocean affect Si(OH)4 concentrations in the "mode" waters that feed
equatorial upwelling, and that Si and C uptake by equatorial phytoplankton
alters air?sea exchange of carbon dioxide at the
equator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An interdisciplinary science team of biological
and chemical oceanographers and modelers will address these issues via four
approaches. First, a calcifying phytoplankton component will be added to an
existing model and used to incorporate water column production and dissolution
of CaC03. Second, model experiments will be designed and executed to explore the
regulation of switching between siliceous (diatoms) and non?siliceous (pico and
calcifying) plankton. Third, an improved blogeochemical model developed for the
equatorial Pacific will be spatially expanded to include the Southern Ocean, and
used to conduct a series of simulation experiments on the processes that link
high latitude "mode" water regions with the source waters for equatorial
upwelling. Finally, iron?sensitive growth parameters of the phytoplankton
components of the model will be manipulated to test the ecosystem response to
iron enrichment in both the equatorial Pacific Ocean and the Southern Ocean.
These objectives represent a significant step in the development of coupled
physical biogeochemical models for exploring the response of marine
biogeochemical processes to climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;