* 0137240
* Novel Real Time Optics for Thin Film Materials Research
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2002,10/31/2005
* Robert Collins, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 10/31/2005
* USD 275,021.00

This research project seeks to advance the art and science of novel optical
probes of thin solid films. The project -emphasis is on spectroscopic probes
with sub-monolayer resolution that can be performed in real time during film
growth and modification. Such real time probes will lend new physical insights
into the mechanisms of film growth, the optical properties of solids and their
interfaces, and the relationships between film growth processes and the
resulting properties. The scientific studies will focus on the following three
themes: (i) phase evolution in thin films; (ii) optical models of nanoscale,
microscale, and macroscale structures; and (iii) the optical effects of
interfaces and anisotropy in thin films. Such efforts represent the continuation
of a long-term research program, starting with the development of two-parameter
multichannel ellipsometry over a decade ago and culminating with the recent
development of sixteen-parameter multichannel Mueller matrix spectroscopy. This
research endows undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral scholars with
interdisciplinary skills in condensed matter, materials, and optical physics
necessary for future positions in academia or industry. The project has great
potential for transfer of technology and skilled researchers to industries
developing thin film photovoltaics, optical and wear-resistant coatings, and
semiconductor metrological instruments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project is devoted to the development of thin films and their associated
measurement tools for applications in science and technology. Thin films are
applied onto the surfaces of materials in order to provide functionality at low
cost, and are used in numerous technologies from microelectronics to electrical
energy production. Research and development on thin films for such advanced
applications are expedited by measurement tools that can determine the film
thickness and other properties in real time, i.e., non-invasively during the
fabrication process. In this project, such tools will be developed and applied
to optimize thin film growth processes used by a variety of industries. These
efforts represent the continuation of a long-term research program that began
more than a decade ago and has provided new tools and optimum processes now
being used extensively in academia and industry. This research project will
educate undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral scholars from diverse
backgrounds who will acquire skills spanning a number of disciplines in
materials research. The project will have great potential for transfer of
technology and skilled researchers to industry, thereby enhancing the nation's
science and technology infrastructure. Industries developing optical, mechanical
and wear-resistant coatings, thin film solar cells, and semiconductor analysis
equipment will benefit.&lt;br/&gt;