* 0137689
* US-Jordan Cooperative Research:   Experimental and Modeling Studies of Surface Growth on TiO2 Particles
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2005
* Donald Feke, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 02/28/2005
* USD 44,750.00

0137689&lt;br/&gt;Morrison &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is for
support of a cooperative project by Professor Philip Morrison, Department of
Chemical Engineering, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio and Dr.
Lua'y Zeatoun, Department of Chemical Engineering, Jordan University of Science
and Technology (JUST), Irbid, Jordan. In recent work at Case Western, a piston
compression method was used to study high partial pressure kinetics of TiCl4
oxidation, and by analyzing the data a model was developed for predicting the
fractional conversion of TiCl4. This work does not take into account
heterogeneous reactions that will occur on the surfaces of the TiO2 particles as
they nucleate. In this research the collaborating scientists plan to study the
role of surface reactions in TiO2 formation by conducting experimental and
modeling research. Dr. Morrison's team at Case Western will measure
experimentally the surface reaction rate by seeding the reactive gas with TiO2
particles and performing compression experiments. Dr. Zeatoun's team at JUST
will perform numerical simulations of the diffusion-reaction process occurring
in both the gas phase and on the surface reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope:
The two collaborators plan to combine their expertise in experimental work and
in mathematical modeling in dealing with an interesting scientific problem. The
PI has considerable experience and has access to extensive facility at Case
Western. The Jordanian scientist has experience in modeling. This research
should improve our understanding of the process of formation of TiO2b particles
and should be especially useful in applications of nano-scale. The project meets
INT criteria for support of cooperative projects that are mutually beneficial.
Support for this project is provided by the Office of International Science and
Engineering and the Division of Chemical and Transport Systems. &lt;br/&gt;