* 0137358
* The Origins of Domesticated Sunflower (Helianthus annuus L.)
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2002,06/30/2002
* Robert Bye, New York Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2002
* USD 100,459.00

With funding provided by the National Science Foundation, Dr. David Lentz and
his associates will conduct fieldwork and laboratory experiments to determine
whether the modern domesticated sunflower (Helianthus annuus L.) is derived
from: 1) a wild progenitor from populations in eastern North America, as
previously hypothesized; 2) a wild population from Mexico; or 3) or the result
of two separate domestication events. The issue of domesticated sunflower
origins has been reopened because of recently discovered archaeobotanical
remains of fully domesticated H. annuus from deep deposits at the San Andres
site in the Gulf Coast region of Tabasco, Mexico. Radiocarbon age determinations
+- 50 B.P. These findings represent the earliest indisputable record of
domesticated sunflower. The San Andres sunflower seeds probably were imported
into Tabasco as full-fledged domesticates because Tabasco lies to the south of
the modern distribution of wild sunflowers. The precise location of sunflower
domestication is unknown at present, but Mexican regions north of Veracruz with
suitable habitat and wild populations of H. annuus now seem likely as possible
areas of origin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methodological approaches will include
a major fieldwork component followed by laboratory analyses. The fieldwork will
focus on collecting modern wild sunflower specimens from northern Mexico, the
southwestern U.S., and the midwestern U.S. These collections will provide raw
material for the taxonomic and molecular analyses that will enable the team to
identify wild progenitor populations of domesticated
sunflower.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous authors have argued for an eastern
North American origin for domesticated sunflower based on archaeobotanical data
from several sites in the Mississippi River Basin and the recognition of
sunflower as one of the keystone species in what eventually developed into the
Eastern Agricultural Complex (EAC) of North American cultigens. Interestingly,
sunflower was the only major cultigen that formerly was unchallenged as an
eastern North American domesticate; now that origin, at least as a unique
domestication event, appears in doubt. In addition to its anthropological
implications, locating ancestral wild populations has significant practical
applications for expanding the genetic base of a valuable resource; sunflower is
one of the world's major oilseed crops with an annual global production of over
26 million metric tons. Once located, these ancestral sunflower populations, as
valuable genetic reservoirs, will represent meaningful targets for
conservation.&lt;br/&gt;