* 0137716
* Mechanisms of Nucleic Acid Oxidation and Cross-linking
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2008
* Cynthia Burrows, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 01/31/2008
* USD 488,640.00

The objective of this work is to understand the chemistry involved in the
formation of DNA-protein cross links. One electron oxidation of DNA fragments
generates radical cations at a number of nucleosides which are then trapped by
protein nucleophiles. The protein-DNA adducts will then be characterized by a
number of spectroscopic techniques including NMR and LC-ESI-MS/MS. Lastly, a 40
mer DNA sequence, and its complement, will be synthesized. This sequence
contains a triple G track, a double G and several AT tracks which compliment GC
pairs. This strand will then be prepared using G precursors which have been
doped with 10% OG (oxidized G) leading to a random distribution of OG in all 10
G positions in the strand and an average of 1 OG/strand. Reactions of these
strands with amine and protein nucleophiles and characterization of the
subsequent adducts will be used to identify "hot spot" sequences which are most
susceptible to adduct formation following oxidative
damage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Dr. Cynthia J. Burrows of the
Department of Chemistry at the University of Utah. Dr. Burrows will explore the
reactions of proteins with DNA fragments which have been damaged by oxidative
chemical reactions. Uncovering the chemical reactions involved in oxidative DNA
damage is important to a fundamental molecular understanding of the chemical
processes involved in aging, cancer and a number of neurological disorders.
Students trained as a result of working on this project will gain experience in
mechanistic organic chemistry as well as biochemistry, hence they will have
skills needed by both the biotechnology and pharmaceutical
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;