* 0137197
* Coupled Physical Numerical Models of the Nonlinear Interaction between Coastal-Trapped Waves, Mean Current and Complex Topography
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2005
* Don Boyer, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 02/28/2005
* USD 375,012.00

0137197/Boyer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to understand how
coastally trapped waves (CTWs) interact with baroclinic currents and topography
(canyons and ridges). Potential regimes where such interactions may be important
are the Great Australian Bight and the Black Sea. Motivated by recent model
results that suggest that a barotropic shelf wave in a retrograde current can
generate strong mesoscale vortices and cross-shelf exchange after undergoing
topographic scattering, the project will use laboratory experiments to see if
scattering leads to strong mesoscale motion. Laboratory experiments will also be
used to look for subcritical and supercritical transitions in CTW propagation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main experimental tool will be laboratory experiments
in a rotating tank in homogeneous, two-layer, and linearly stratified
configurations. The tank will be fitted with both smooth shelf-slope topography,
and abrupt topography such as canyons and ridges. Background currents will be
introduced by impulsively varying the rotation rate or by introducing a source-
sink flow. The laboratory experiments will be complemented with numerical
modeling using modern coastal circulation models. Data from the laboratory
experiments will be used to validate the numerical models and then the numerical
models will be used to extend results to more oceanic regimes.&lt;br/&gt;