* 0137627
* Studies of Ionic Pericyclic Reactions in the Gas Phase
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Paul Wenthold, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 08/31/2005
* USD 270,000.00

With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program in the Chemistry Division,
Professor Paul Wenthold, of the Department of Chemistry at Purdue University,
will investigate pericyclic reactions of ions using flowing
afterglow/photoelectron spectroscopy. Among the reactions examined are radical
cationic and radical anionic Cope and Diels-Alder reactions. The goal of the
work will be to determine the products of the reaction, the mechanism by which
they are formed, and the catalytic role of ionization. Solvated ions will be
used to probe the role of solvent in determining reaction products. The proposal
outlines an extensive program of experimentation to characterize the structure
and reactivities of various ion radicals and related novel species, using the
specialized capabilities of advanced flowing afterglow instrumentation and a
negative ion photoelectron spectrometer now under construction at Purdue. While
theory-based calculations will play a role, the main emphasis is clearly on
defining structures and patterns of reactivity experimentally. The proposal
rests on the curiosity of a mechanistically concerned physical organic chemist
fully equipped with the more specialized technical repertoire of an experienced
gas-phase ion chemist. Much new information and non-trivial conceptual advances
should be gained.

Professor Paul Wenthold, of the Department of Chemistry at the Purdue
University, with the support of the Organic Dynamics Program, will also continue
to train students who will become an integral part of the research and
publications resulting from the work. The research results will provide a fresh
understanding of novel structures and chemical transformations while
demonstrating new applications of emerging technical/instrumental capabilities.