* 0137338
* Biochemical Mechanisms in Barnacle Adhesion
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2005
* David Kaplan, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas L. Vandergon
* 02/28/2005
* USD 346,418.00

Barnacles create major problems worldwide related to biofouling in marine
environments due to their growth on ships, docks and related structures. This
biofouling results in the loss and destruction of structures in marine
environments as well as loss of ship efficiency during transit due to increased
drag resistance. Current options to control this growth of barnacles are either
unsatisfactory or environmentally unacceptable. The mechanisms by which
barnacles respond in the environment to adhere to different substrates are
unknown. The goal of this project is to identify the key components in the
'glue' secreted by the barnacle, Balanus crenatus, in order to develop an
understanding of the mechanisms involved in their adhesion to environmental
surfaces in marine environments. The rationale for this study is that once we
understand the mechanisms of barnacle adhesion, we should be in a position to
design better strategies to control or prevent this process. In the long run,
this insight into mechanisms of barnacle glue curing should also serve as a
basis for the design and development of adhesives that cure in water, such as
for biomedical applications. Our preliminary data suggest that the mechanisms of
adhesion by barnacles are distinct from the mechanisms reported for mussels such
as Mytilus edulis, which has been well-studied. The approach planned for the
program is centered on isolating and characterizing the components of the glue
used by the barnacle to stick to surfaces. More specifically, we plan the
following steps in the process: (1) isolation and characterization of the
proteins present in the glue of the barnacle, B. crenatus, (2) cloning and
expression of genes from the barnacle that encode the proteins found in the
glue, and (3) characterization of the barnacle adhesion and cement curing
process by studying the proteins that are produced and their interactions. These
studies will provide the most comprehensive picture of the mechanisms of
barnacle adhesion and cement curing available to date and also provide insight
into how this marine animal responds to environmental substrate cues. Our
preliminary data illustrate the feasibility of the proposed plans since we have
gained important initial insight into: (a) some of the proteins present in the
adhesive plaques, (b) some of the genes encoding the proteins present in the
adhesive plaques, and (c) methods to assess changes in the proteins upon
addition of chemicals that influence changes in the adhesion environment and the
protein interactions involved (e.g., metals/chelation chemicals and changes in
oxidation-reduction state). This type of information and insight into adhesion
and curing mechanisms will be critical to identifying mechanisms used by the
barnacle to adhere to surfaces. With the plans to elucidate the mechanisms of
adhesion of barnacles to surfaces, control of these surface interactions will
then be feasible. This insight will be critical in order to identify long-term
solutions to barnacle substrate colonization which leads to excessive pier and
ship repairs and repainting, and the avoidance of the use of toxic compounds
such as copper-based chemicals in material coatings to prevent barnacle adhesion
in marine waters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;