* 0137634
* ADVANCE Fellows Award:  Thermomechanical Models of Martensitic Phase Transitions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Anna Vainchtein, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 06/30/2006
* USD 346,428.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DMS Award Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award #: 0137634
&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Vainchtein, Anna&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Pittsburgh&lt;br/&gt;NSF program:
Infrastructure&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: ADVANCE Fellows Award:
Thermomechanical models of martensitic phase
transitions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is concerned with physically-
motivated thermomechanical models of materials, such as shape memory alloys,
that undergo martensitic phase transitions. These materials are characterized by
a strong coupling between temperature and deformation fields and exhibit
markedly hysteretic behavior when subjected to cyclic mechanical loading. The
origin of hysteresis, kinetics of phase boundaries and thermomechanical
interactions are important open problems in modeling of martensitic phase
transitions. The proposal includes several continuum models that account for
both inertia and thermal effects. The important components of the models are
nonconvex elastic energy, latent heat of transformation and time-dependent
loading. The main goal is to develop a model capable of capturing the most
significant experimental observations, such as size and features of hysteresis
loops, volume fractions of material phases and details of interface dynamics.
Important phenomena such as serrated hysteresis, inner loops, thermal trapping
and evolution of twin microstructures will be
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the proposed work will be
important for the emerging applications of shape memory materials, such as
damage, vibration and acoustic transmission control in composite structures. By
advancing the scientific understanding of the dissipative properties of shape
memory alloys, this research will potentially contribute toward the development
of innovative seismic damping devices for buildings and bridges. The educational
component of the proposed work includes involving graduate and advanced
undergraduate students in the research program, developing new courses, creating
an outreach middle-school program and mentoring women graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;