* 0137085
* Coupling of Trace Metal Micronutrients and Phytoplankton Dynamics - A Focus on the Bering Sea and the Role of Iron
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Kenneth Bruland, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 09/30/2005
* USD 550,000.00

ABSTRACT

OCE-0137085

An exciting research frontier in ocean sciences involves the role of
micronutrient trace metals such as Fe, Mn, Zn, and Co in affecting the structure
and function of plankton communities. Certain bioactive trace metals - in
particular iron - can influence marine phytoplankton at the molecular, cellular,
community and ecosystem levels. Of particular importance is the critical role
trace metals such as iron play as biolimiting micronutrients, especially in
areas where macronutrients are provided to the surface waters by upwelling or
vertical mixing at high rates.

The focus of this project is a major month-long field effort to the Bering Sea
in July 2003 to investigate the role of micronutrient trace metals (with a focus
on Fe) in influencing phytoplankton communities. Researchers at the University
of California at Santa Cruz will study the major high-nutrient, low-chlorophyll
regions of the oceanic Bering Sea gyre and the western subarctic gyre - regions
that they believe are Fe-limited. They will also examine the Bering Sea Shelf -
a productive region that covers almost half of the Bering Sea. This is an
extremely wide continental shelf, ranging from 500 to over 800 km in width.
There has been mention of an "iron curtain" occurring over the inner shelf of
the Bering Sea, although there are no data available to confirm this idea. There
is a "Green Belt" of high chlorophyll and primary production that occurs
throughout the summer at the shelf break which must receive adequate Fe along
with macro-nutrients to sustain itself. An emphasis of this study will be to
examine the distribution of Fe (and other micronutrient trace metals) relative
to the macronutrient distributions in order to gain insight into the relative
supply and demand of micro- and macronutrient elements in the various regions of
the Bering Sea.

In addition to the major field effort in the Bering Sea, these researchers will
conduct a study to address the role of iron in influencing phytoplankton
communities in the central California upwelling system.

