* 0137210
* Microbial Observatories: Linking Microbial Community Structure and Function in Contaminated Aquifers
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Kate Scow, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2005
* USD 200,160.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. Kate Scow and Krassi Hristova of the University
of California at Davis to study the diversity of microbial communities in
uncontaminated and contaminated shallow groundwater aquifers.

Groundwater communities are surprisingly diverse, both taxonomically and
functionally, and reflect the considerable heterogeneity in geology, hydrology,
and geochemistry found below the surface. Aquifers are sources of a major
portion of the US drinking water supplies and aquifers directly connect with
surface water environments. Many aquifers in urban and agricultural areas are
polluted with organic and inorganic contaminants; their potential for recovery
in part depends on the diversity of its microbial communities. The objectives of
this study are to characterize community and discover new organisms in shallow
groundwater aquifers, measure how petroleum contamination (including the fuel
additive methyl tertiary butyl ether-MTBE) changes microbial diversity, and link
community composition with environmental factors and process rates. Approaches
used will include traditional culture-based methods, DNA fingerprinting coupled
with cloning and sequencing, lipid analysis and measurements of process rates.
Groundwater aquifers are important microbial habitats with potentially large
impacts on society and the environment; understanding of the microbial ecology
and diversity of these environments lags far behind that of soil and aquatic
ecosystems. From an evolutionary perspective, contaminated aquifers are
relatively new ecosystems and thus provide opportunities to study microbial
adaptation. In addition to discovering new microbial diversity in shallow
groundwater aquifers, other contributions of this study will include measuring
how diversity of microbial communities responds to contamination and developing
tools for linking ecosystem processes to specific groups of microorganisms. This
knowledge has broader significance because many of the earth's ecosystems are
perturbed by human activities. Understanding microbial adaptation to
contaminants and other stresses will help in the rehabilitation and restoration
of damaged ecosystems.