* 0137099
* Macroeconomic Implications of Cross-Sectional Variation
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Chris Telmer, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 05/31/2007
* USD 143,425.00

This project's agenda is organized around two main ideas. First, that the risks
associated with non-traded assets have an important impact on individual choices
and, therefore on how individuals value the risks associated with traded assets.
Second, that these non-traded risks have an important life-cycle component to
them. In most of the investigators' work-to-date the 'non-traded asset' has been
human capital: the value of all future labor income that an individual will
receive. Much of the ongoing work involves expanding what we mean by non-traded
assets to include housing and consumer durables. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human
capital is non-tradable in the sense that it is difficult for individuals to
borrow against future wage income and, just as importantly, to insure them
against the uncertainty of what this income will be. Human capital has a
fundamental life cycle component in that young people have more of it than old
people and, therefore, face more of the risks associated with it. The
investigators' work has shown that these factors can be important for many
outstanding issues in economics. For instance, their work on asset pricing
models shows that the life-cycle pattern in human-capital risk can inhibit the
intergenerational sharing of aggregate risks and thereby helps to resolve the
equity premium puzzle. Their work on consumption inequality exploits this life-
cycle pattern to deduce strong restrictions on how the cross-sectional variance
in income, consumption, and labor supply are related to one another. This
proposal describes new work along similar lines, including the incorporation of
cohort-specific risks and the intergenerational sharing of these risks, the
associated role played by social security, and the impact of demographic shocks
such as the Baby Boom. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Like human capital, most non-human
capital held by individuals is either non-tradable or is difficult to trade
without incurring substantial costs. Housing, for instance, accounts for roughly
one fourth of aggregate wealth and a much larger fraction of privately-held
wealth. The costs of adjusting one's housing stock are large. Also like human
capital, housing capital also has an important life-cycle component: young
households hold much more of their wealth as real estate than older households.
Unlike human capital the risks associated with housing are much more tangible
and easily measured. The investigators develop a model, which incorporates
housing into the existing framework, and they explore the implications. Where
the previous work has emphasized idiosyncratic shocks, they model shocks to
housing wealth as aggregate in nature, but non-uniformly distributed across the
population. They argue that this, in conjunction with life-cycle issues, has
important implications for asset pricing, portfolio choice, and various policy
questions. Along similar lines, we discuss the incorporation of durable goods
(more broadly defined than housing), and present some preliminary empirical
evidence from the Consumer Expenditure Survey. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
important part of this project has been, and will continue to be, the
incorporation of large- scale panel datasets on labor market activity,
consumption and wealth. The distinguishing feature of this work is restrictions
-motivated by our life-cycle models - that are related to age. They show, for
instance, that one can uncover much about how idiosyncratic and aggregate shocks
interact by conditioning on the particular macroeconomic history experienced by
each age-cohort in any panel dataset. They also show that age-dependent changes
in the cross-sectional variance of consumption can reveal a great deal about the
stochastic process that governs labor earnings. &lt;br/&gt;