* 0137458
* ADVANCE Fellows:  Marine-Protected Areas, Geographic Information Science, and Civil Society
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2002,10/31/2006
* Barbara Walker, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Linda G. Lopez
* 10/31/2006
* USD 383,141.00

This ADVANCE Fellows project examines the convergence of two relatively new and
increasingly popular trends in state-led environmental resource management:
marine protected areas (MPAs) and Geographic Information Science (GIS). It is
argued that the combination of state-mandated MPAs and GIS has fostered
political struggles and organized resistance among stakeholders (including
fishers, environmentalists, and the state) unlike any previous marine resource
regulations. While there has been a recent explosion of natural science
publications on various dimensions of MPAs, studies on the social dimensions of
MPAs are lacking. This project addresses these issues in a comparative study of
two recently designed MPAs in the lagoon of Moorea, French Polynesia, and the
Channel Islands National Marine Sanctuary, California. This comparison is useful
because the processes of designation MPAs in each locale were strikingly
similar, yet there are differences between the "First" and "Third Worlds," and
different scales which will afford compelling analyses. The current conjuncture
of the rising popularity of MPAs and the growing adoption of state-based GIS
decision-making and management makes this research timely and precedent-
setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported through the NSF ADVANCE
Program. The overall mission of the ADVANCE Program is to increase the
participation of women in the scientific and engineering workforce through the
increased representation and advancement of women in academic science and
engineering careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;