* 0137832
* ADVANCE Fellows Award: Continuing and Enhancing a Career in Arctic Ecology Research and Education
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2006
* Laura Gough, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 05/31/2006
* USD 449,478.00

&lt;br/&gt;0137832&lt;br/&gt;Gough&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Terrestrial arctic
research has tended to focus on plant populations or the entire ecosystem, with
community patterns and processes less well studied, generating a lack of
predictive ability of effects of climate change on different arctic plant
communities and potential biotic feedbacks to an altered environment. This
proposal seeks better understanding of vegetation patterns at the community
level as well as of how processes at the ecosystem level are influenced by plant
community composition. The PI currently has two NSF-funded research grants. One
project is examining two common arctic plant communities in northern Alaska,
moist acidic and moist non-acidic tundra. By monitoring plant responses to
nutrient and temperature manipulations in both communities, and conducting
experiments to examine germination and survival of important species, the PI is
determining how the communities are maintained and how they respond differently
to manipulations. The differences are being linked to ecosystem function through
collaboration with an ecosystem ecologist. The second NSF grant is examining
competition among seven clonal sedge species in southeastern Michigan calcareous
wetlands. Although clonal growth is the dominant method of production of new
individuals by plants in many ecosystems, including tundra, its effects on plant
community structure remain unclear. Using community and individual-level
experiments, the PI is examining both short- and long-term effects of
competition among species that differ in clonal growth form; the results of this
project are being used to generate new hypotheses to be tested in arctic plant
communities. From this work, the population-level processes that have been well
documented for some arctic plant species can be explicitly linked to the
community and the ecosystem, thus providing better understanding of patterns and
processes at all levels of organization, as well as predictions for biotic
feedbacks to the changing arctic environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
supported through the NSF ADVANCE Program. The overall mission of the ADVANCE
Program is to increase the participation of women in the scientific and
engineering workforce through the increased representation and advancement of
women in academic science and engineering careers.&lt;br/&gt;