* 0137759
* ADVANCE Fellows Award:  Designing Websites to Accommodate and Narrow the Knowledge/Skill Gaps Across the Digital Divide
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Marilyn Blackmon, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 06/30/2006
* USD 204,000.00

EIA-0137750&lt;br/&gt;Marilyn H. Blackman&lt;br/&gt;University of Colorado at
Boulder&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal, bridging the gap between what users
know and what they need to know, pursues the problems of extending, refining,
and validating a theory-based cognitive walkthrough for designing a complete
informational website and for assessing website usability, parameterizing the
walkthrough to validly simulate diverse user groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
walkthrough was developed to facilitate the design of applications with GUIs
that enable users to discover by exploration how to perform new tasks,
simulating user behavior step-by-step for a given task on a given walk-up-and-
use interface. Navigation is guided by the information scentific assigned a
stronger value to the desired goal toward the target web page in the cognitive
walkthrough of a website (CWW). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CWW relies on Latent
Semantic Analysis to objectively estimate the degree of semantic similarity
(information scent) between representative user goal statements and heading/link
texts on each web page, and to assess the probability that a particular user
group can effectively learn from texts they discovered by navigating the
website. A series of experiments will first parameterize the CWW for college-
educated users navigating informational/instructional websites and then
parameterize the CWW to validly simulate navigation behaviors of diverse user
groups, including users with 6th-, 9th-, and 12th-grade reading levels in
English.&lt;br/&gt;