* 0137103
* Collaborative Research:    A Hybrid Systems Approach to Resource Allocation for Multimedia Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Scott Jordan, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 08/31/2006
* USD 234,311.00

&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is the design of joint power control, rate
control, and base station assignment for multimedia wireless networks. Two key
aspects of the multimedia network will be considered that have been given short
shrift in the past: the requirements of data and system dynamics. The project
will consider 4th generation Direct-Sequence Code-Division Multiple-Access (DS-
CDMA) networks. The goal is to implement dynamic assignment of downlink transmit
power, data rate, and codes to each mobile in accordance with the ability of
each application to use the resulting QoS. The focus is on network-wide
behavior, and therefore network-wide performance measures will be considered,
jointly optimized between physical and networking layers. Three main thrusts
will be considered: &lt;br/&gt;(a) Use of multiple state automata hybrid systems
models as a novel tool to control wireless network dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;(b)
Design and analysis of resource allocation algorithms using novel pricing
theory. &lt;br/&gt;(c) Design and analysis of parameter estimation algorithms to
achieve robust network behavior. &lt;br/&gt;The first thrust is intended to
provide a powerful tool for generating control algorithms for systems with both
discrete and continuous parameters and switching costs. It will be used in this
project for controlling power, data rate, and handoffs. The research in this
area will extend the dimensionality of a previously studied hybrid systems
approach to handoff control. The second research thrust is the construction of
joint power control, data rate control, and base station assignment algorithms.
This research will be based on economic theory for resource allocation, and
implemented using hybrid systems. The final thrust will address the reliance of
many resource allocation schemes upon unknown communication parameters such as
received SINR. Three investigators will work together: an expert in hybrid
systems, an expert in resource allocation, and an expert in multiuser spread
spectrum wireless systems.&lt;br/&gt;