* 0137088
* The Dynamics of Political Attitude Formation in a Milieu of Multiple Weak Parties: A Context-Sensitive Analysis of Voting Behavior in Two Brazilian Cities
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2003
* Barry Ames, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* James S. Granato
* 12/31/2003
* USD 221,921.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research studies the determinants of electoral choice
in emerging democracies, where the number of parties is large, there is a low
degree of partisanship, and volatile electorates. In such environments, how do
citizens learn about issues and candidates? How do social background and
economic circumstance combine with partisan ties, ideological predispositions,
and media-delivered information to shape mass political behavior? What are the
effects of conversations with neighbors and political activists? Is there
accountability in electoral processes with these microfoundations?
&lt;br/&gt;This project tests a comprehensive model of political attitude
formation and change in Brazil, a country ideal for the study of mass behavior
under multiple parties and weak partisanship. With the nation about to embark on
its fourth presidential campaign since redemocratizing, the number of parties is
high but stable. Although a rough left-right continuum differentiates the major
parties and many voters, only a small minority of citizens expresses any
partisan identification. The media are politically and technologically
sophisticated, and civil society is increasingly mobilized. At the same time,
more Brazilians point to informal conversations with friends, family and
colleagues as their main source of political information than to any other
source. The result is that Brazil, like many countries with weak, multiple
parties, has very volatile and unpredictable election campaigns. Finally, Brazil
is also ideal for testing the institutional sources of mass political behavior
because it varies internally in terms of partisan alignments, individual party
strength and electoral rules. &lt;br/&gt;To capture these various influences on
mass political attitudes, this project proposes a context- sensitive panel study
during the elections of 2002 in two Brazilian cities: Juiz de Fora (Minas
Gerais) and Caxias do Sui (Rio Grande do SuI). Neighborhoods will be sampling
units: 100 adults, enough to establish aggregate neighborhood opinion, will be
interviewed in each of 20 neighborhoods in each city. The first wave will take
place before the campaign begins, in March. The second wave will be just before
the first round of the election, and the third wave will be after the second
round, in the middle of October. About 800 "discussion partners" of the main
respondents will also be interviewed. Concurrently, print media sources, TV
news, and party-controlled TV programs will be content analyzed. Finally,
members of the associations Iand political organizations that comprise each
neighborhood's "political context" will be interviewed. &lt;br/&gt;This project
will produce the first theoretically and empirically grounded model of vote
choice in a milieu of numerous weak parties; that is, the first model including
all the major factors potentially influencing electoral behavior. Because the
Brazilian environment is matched by many emerging democracies in Eastern Europe
and Latin America, our results will illuminate questions of democratic
accountability, media and campaign influence, and the effects of political and
social networks in many other settings as well.&lt;br/&gt;