* 0137538
* Collaborative Research:  Trace Gas Deposition Processes in the Arctic Boundary Layer
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2005
* Detlev Helmig, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 01/31/2005
* USD 117,770.00

This research is concerned with data analyses and modeling activities to gain
further insights on the processes governing atmospheric trace gas dynamics, in
particular ozone in the arctic boundary layer. The research activities will lead
to improvements in the predictive understanding of tropospheric ozone and other
trace gases, which can exert a critical influence in the arctic chemical and
radiative balance. Our studies are motivated to derive further understanding of
trace gas deposition rates and will achieve the following
objectives:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. to investigate the most appropriate methods
for estimating trace gas transport in the surface layer of the arctic
atmosphere,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. to evaluate the suitability of
electrochemical ozonesonde data for deriving ozone deposition
rates,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. to study and quantify ozone deposition rates at
selected Arctic sites based on ozonesonde routinely obtained at selected arctic
sites,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4. and to define the atmospheric conditions when
maximum ozone surface deposition rates take place in the arctic boundary
layer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These objectives will be addressed through a
combination of data analyses and modeling studies employing three data sets
deemed to be of high quality. During spring 2000, we obtained high frequency
data at Alert, Nunavut, Canada and Summit, Greenland, Denmark. These two data
sets, involving vertical meteorological and chemical profiles from towers and
tethered balloons, will be analyzed within the framework of investigating the
most appropriate methods to derive trace gas fluxes between the surface and
overlying atmosphere and/or vice versa. Additional scientific outputs of these
activities relate to the turbulent length scales associated with trace gas
fluxes in the arctic boundary layer. Knowledge of turbulent scales is critically
essential to understand the atmospheric layer impacted by trace gas emissions
from the Arctic snowpack. The third data set involves the archived data from
ozonesondes released at selected sites throughout the Arctic. We will employ
these extensive historical data to develop a one-dimensional model to derive
ozone deposition rates to the snowpack surface. Estimated deposition rates will
provide upper threshold values that can then be incorporated in regional and/or
global models to constrain ozone budgets in the arctic troposphere. The research
will lead to a simple modeling parameterization to routinely derive ozone
deposition rates based on the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) ozone
monitoring network, and thus provide critical information to decipher the
processes governing ozone temporal changes in the Arctic boundary layer.
Understanding of ozone dynamics is crucial to define the contribution of ozone
in the chemical and radiative balance of the Arctic. Given the recent discovery
that the arctic snowpack represents a substantial source of gases such as nitric
oxide, nitrogen dioxide, nitrous acid and formaldehyde, this project will also
yield methodologies to deduce fluxes of these important trace gases based on
ambient (profile) concentrations.&lt;br/&gt;