* 0137015
* Inequality, Growth and Trade Policy
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Abhijit Banerjee, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 02/28/2006
* USD 220,415.00

This project continues ongoing theoretical research with Andrew Newman on the
relation between capital markets, income distribution and the process of
development. A class of theoretical models of trade and growth and income
distribution are developed based on the premise that producers face imperfect
credit markets. This premise is widely supported by the available data from
developing countries. Moreover capital market imperfections are often cited as
one important reason why liberal trade policies may not promote growth. Finally,
capital market imperfections provide a natural basis for a dynamic theory of the
personal distribution of wealth, and therefore this framework is particularly
suited to analyze questions about the effect of liberalizing trade on
inequality.

More specifically, this project develops a simple Ricardian model of a small
open economy with a large number of goods, imperfect capital markets and price-
taking behavior in all markets. There is one final good that is produced using
all the other goods, which are intermediates. The final good is not traded but
all investment and consumption take place in the final good. Capital is the only
input used for production of the intermediate goods. The relative productivity
of different goods varies across countries, which provides the basis for trade.
In the first best, each country would only produce the good in which its
relative productivity is the highest and import the rest. As the technology of
production is linear and there are no non-reproducible inputs, the economy is
capable of long-run growth. Agents are long-lived and have standard forward-
looking preferences. They borrow and lend to each other, with the interest rate
moving to clear the capital market. The capital market imperfection is modeled
as stemming from ex post moral hazard (borrowers may try to avoid repaying
loans). This is shown to generate a limit on the extent to which a borrower can
be leveraged. Each agent in the economy is initially assumed to have a
particular skill that associates him with the production of a particular
commodity. In the closed economy all goods will be produced. The conjecture is
that in the steady state all sectors will be equally profitable, so it is
reasonable to assume that the population will be evenly spread out across the
sectors.

If this economy is opened to foreign trade, the growth rate goes up on impact
and continues to go up until the economy converges to its steady state growth
path. At that point the economy should be completely specialized in the
production of the good in which it has a comparative advantage. This slow
transition is because the capital market imperfection limits the amount of
capital that can flow into the most productive sector. The project examines the
proposition that the increase in the growth rate that comes from opening the
economy is always accompanied by an increase in inter-sectoral inequality and
this increase will continue over a period. Unless the sectors that gain from
trade were initially much poorer, this will translate into an increase in
inequality of the personal distribution of wealth and consumption. It is worth
emphasizing that in the first-best version of this economy, freeing trade would
not increase inequality. This unambiguous result relies on the absence of labor
inputs and other non-traded goods from the basic model. Once the model is
extended to introduce some non-traded goods or make labor an input, the effect
on inequality depends on the initial position of the workers and producers of
the non-traded goods, relative to the producers of the traded goods that are no
longer being produced. The effect on inequality will also be modified if people
choose their occupations. If only newborns can switch professions, the dynamic
process generated by the joint process of trade expansion and changes in the
occupational distribution appears to be relatively tractable. Countries that
have relatively good capital markets will follow a Kuznets (inverted-U) curve
after being opened to trade, but countries with less good capital markets will
follow an inverted-J curve (inequality will go up but will not come down in any
reasonable time-scale).

This framework is also used to study the impact of trade expansion (due, say, to
the WTO) on inter-country inequality. If multiple countries simultaneously
become more open, inter-country inequality is likely to go up in the short run,
because the richer countries tend to have better capital markets. Finally, the
framework is applied to questions of optimal trade policy. Since in this
framework the allocation of capital between sectors is not necessarily optimal
at any point of time, government policy can affect the growth rate by
accelerating or decelerating the process of reallocation of capital. The
conjecture is that an import tariff will always slow down growth but an export
subsidy may sometimes help to raise the growth rate. The difference stems from
the fact that import tariffs favor inefficient sectors while the subsidy favors
the strongest sectors in the economy. The project plans further examination of a
broader set of policies.