* 0138098
* I-TANGO: Intersections --- Topology, Accuracy and Numerics for Geometric Objects (in Computer Aided Design)
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Thomas Peters, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 04/30/2006
* USD 766,996.00

DMS-0138098&lt;br/&gt;Thomas J. Peters&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators
will define new representations for &lt;br/&gt;intersecting spline surfaces
within computer-aided design &lt;br/&gt;(CAD) geometric objects. They will also
create algorithms &lt;br/&gt;to compute error bounds for approximated
intersections &lt;br/&gt;representing topological boundaries. Many
modeling&lt;br/&gt;techniques for geometric design depend upon reliable
&lt;br/&gt;intersection algorithms. Intersection algorithms will be
&lt;br/&gt;designed to deliver spline-based CAD geometric models that
&lt;br/&gt;can be robustly used within a variety of engineering
&lt;br/&gt;calculations. These intersection representations and error
&lt;br/&gt;bounds will significantly improve robustness between engineering
&lt;br/&gt;design and computational applications for stress analysis,
&lt;br/&gt;fluid dynamics and electromagnetics. No single intersection
representation or method will be appropriate for all &lt;br/&gt;intersection
problems, similar to the mature view&lt;br/&gt;taken in computational linear
algebra relative to matrix &lt;br/&gt;inversion. There, a matrix is first
analyzed as to whether &lt;br/&gt;it is singular, ill-conditioned (as in the
case of a Hilbert &lt;br/&gt;matrix), positive-definite, etc. For these
approximated &lt;br/&gt;spline intersections, new guaranteed error bounds will
be &lt;br/&gt;developed, as well as corresponding new criteria
for&lt;br/&gt;semantic consistency of the intersection boundaries formed
&lt;br/&gt;within spline-based geometric models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For
example, the significant improvements to approximated &lt;br/&gt;spline models
from this project will provide clear benefits &lt;br/&gt;to science, industry,
and defense. The delivery of the &lt;br/&gt;Boeing 777 airplane has been hailed
in the popular press &lt;br/&gt;as the first production of a 'paperless'
airplane, meaning &lt;br/&gt;that computerized models supplanted the traditional
paper&lt;br/&gt;drawings of the engineering design room. While an
impressive&lt;br/&gt;milestone, the next ambitious step is to eliminate many of
&lt;br/&gt;the physical prototypes used for destructive testing&lt;br/&gt;and
engineering analyses prior to releasing an airplane. &lt;br/&gt;These tests on
physical prototypes are expensive. An &lt;br/&gt;appealing, cost-effective
alternative is to reliably &lt;br/&gt;simulate the complex behavior of
turbulence, stress and &lt;br/&gt;strain on computerized geometric models of
these aircraft. &lt;br/&gt;Progress towards that goal has been delayed by
inaccuracies &lt;br/&gt;introduced in the geometric input to these simulations,
&lt;br/&gt;specifically along intersection boundaries, and improvement
&lt;br/&gt;of such intersections is the primary focus of this project.
&lt;br/&gt;This project will ensure relevance to these contemporary
&lt;br/&gt;aeronautical design problems by the participation of&lt;br/&gt;Boeing
scientists and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;