* 0138605
* Improved Housing and Organization of the Herpetological Collection at the San Diego Natural History Museum
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2002,05/31/2005
* Paisley Cato, San Diego Society of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Richard M. McCourt
* 05/31/2005
* USD 162,839.00

Over the past four years, the San Diego Natural History Museum has been building
new facilities as part of a ten-year strategic plan and an ongoing $40 million
capital campaign. The construction project and building renovation has increased
the available space from 60,000 sq. ft. to 150,000 sq. ft., allowing for the
expansion of research, collections, exhibits and education. The amphibian and
reptile collection represents one of the Museum's highest priorities to correct
for housing and storage deficiencies. With 67,514 amphibian and reptile
specimens, collected primarily from the southwestern United States and
northwestern Mexico, the collection is a critical resource for biological
information in the region. However, outmoded housing, overcrowded conditions,
and outdated taxonomic organization have challenged the collection's
accessibility and long-term preservation. To correct for this, the Museum has
installed compactor shelving units in a new state-of-the-art room to house the
fluid-preserved specimens, but is still in need of cabinets to house the
skeletal material. Because the previous facility lacked room for expansion, over
one-third of the 8,100 jars are full to capacity, though the optimum is no more
than half full to minimize specimen damage. Lastly, specimen jar labels and
their corresponding taxonomic names in the computer database are outdated,
making retrieval of material burdensome and exceptionally time consuming. The
goals of this project are to rehouse the collection to modern storage
facilities, so specimens will be better preserved for future generations and
more accessible to researchers, students and the many others interested in the
reptiles and amphibians of the region. By purchasing 10 skeletal storage
cabinets, 3,000 jars and lids, and hiring a full-time collection management
assistant for two years (and summer undergraduate interns), the renovation of
the physical housing, overcrowded conditions, and outdated organization can be
achieved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Natural history collections serve as specimen
repositories to document regional biodiversity and to provide baseline material
for scientific research. The amphibian and reptile collection at the San Diego
Natural History Museum plays a significant role towards this by documenting the
region's rich diversity. Over the last century, these specimens have been the
basis for research in historical biogeography, systematics, functional
morphology, ecology, physiology, behavior, ethnozoology, and the introduction of
exotics. More and more, they are playing a role in the conservation drama that
is taking center stage in the coastal regions of southern California. For
example, San Diego County is currently implementing national models for
conservation plans to preserve lands and endangered species. The goals include
the protection of the region's biodiversity and quality of life, while still
allowing for economic development. Since the collection defines the historical
distribution of amphibians and reptiles in this region, and helps locate
biodiversity hotspots, it can help determine the effects of urbanization,
development and habitat management. The collection has provided material for
hundreds of scientific publications, numerous government studies, and dozens of
graduate student research projects. The rehousing of the collection to modern
storage facilities, without overcrowding, will ensure its accessibility to
researchers, students, and the interested public for generations to
come.&lt;br/&gt;