* 0138124
* RUI: L-Alanine Biosynthesis in Escherichia Coli
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2002,08/31/2006
* William Whalen, Xavier University of Louisiana
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 08/31/2006
* USD 320,493.00

The physiology and metabolism of Escherichia coli is perhaps the best understood
of any organism (1). Nearly all of the major metabolic pathways have been
elucidated, and much of the regulation of these pathways is well understood.
There is, however, one significant deficiency in our knowledge: the pathways of
L-alanine biosynthesis have not been fully elucidated (2). L-alanine is the
second most abundant amino acid found in E. coli protein, is a component of
peptidoglycan, is the precursor to another component of peptidoglycan,
D-alanine, and is a precursor to biotin.

With the availability of complete genomic sequences, it is now possible to make
strong predictions about an organism s physiology and metabolism solely from
analysis of its DNA sequence. A key to this analysis is having several model
organisms whose metabolism and physiology are well defined. E. coli is one such
model organism. Using whole genome comparisons, it has been possible to
reconstruct the biosynthetic pathways of all 20 amino acids in E. coli,
Haemophilus influenzae, and Bacillus subtilis. However, for L-alanine this
required assuming a wider specificity for the aspartate aminotransferase. While
this assumption is logical, it is not supported by experimental results (see
below). A more recent analysis does use some of the reported enzymes used in
L-alanine biosynthesis, but as outlined below, this information is incomplete
(4). The fundamental reason that the biosynthesis of L-alanine has not been
completely elucidated is that no strict L-alanine auxotroph has yet been
isolated. This stems from the fact that there are multiple pathways of L-alanine
biosynthesis. Clearly, understanding the synthesis of L-alanine and its
regulation is important for a comprehensive understanding of E. coli metabolism.
Moreover, understanding L-alanine biosynthesis in E. coli can then be used to
predict its biosynthetic pathways in other organisms whose genome has been
sequenced.

This project will employ a genetic approach to determine the pathways of
L-alanine biosynthesis in E. coli. Mutations that confer an L-alanine
requirement will be isolated by either counterselection and screening or by
directed mutagenesis of genes of unknown function that could potentially
function in L-alanine synthesis (e.g. aminotransferases). Once the genes have
been identified, the enzymes encoded by those genes will be purified and their
biochemical activities and allosteric regulators identified.

The regulation of the genes will be investigated using fusions of the promoter
regions to the lacZc reporter gene. Deletion analysis of the promoter regions
will be used to identify the important cis-acting regulatory sites.
Additionally, these fusions will be used to determine the involvement of trans-
acting factors in regulation. Since L-alanine is synthesized in large part from
pyruvate and affects nitrogen metabolism, particular attention will be paid to
several global regulatory factors that affect genes involved in carbon and
nitrogen metabolism. One gene that has been shown to be involved in L-alanine
biosynthesis is avtA, and it has been proposed that the global regulator, Lrp,
is involved in its regulation (2). Computer analysis of its promoter region
supports this hypothesis, and the influence of Lrp on avtA expression will be
thoroughly studied.

Xavier University of Louisiana is a historically black college and university
(HBCU). The Biology Department has approximately 1100 undergraduates. It has
been successful in training and placing students into medical school, and seeks
to build on this success in preparing students to pursue an academic career.
This project has been designed to allow undergraduates to be involved in
research on a daily basis using modern molecular biology techniques. In
particular, most of the strain construction can be performed in short segments
of time, allowing students to integrate their research into a demanding academic
schedule.