* 0138504
* Thermochemistry of Noncovalent Metal-Ligand Bonds of Biological Relevance
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2002,10/31/2005
* Mary Rodgers, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 10/31/2005
* USD 325,000.00

Dr. Mary T. Rodgers of Wayne State University is funded for her research on
thermochemistry of noncovalent metal-ligand bonds of biological relevance by a
grant in the Physical Chemistry program of the Chemistry Division. She will
advance her work in the areas of mass spectrometry, chemical reaction dynamics,
and gas-phase ion chemistry using the combined techniques of flow tube ion
generation coupled with guided ion beam tandem mass spectrometry (GIBMS). These
advances include: 1) development of an electrospray ionization (ESI) source
coupled with an ion funnel to enable production of nonvolatile and thermally
fragile ions in the gas phase and production of multiply charged species; 2)
construction of an upgrade of her neutral reactant inlets for both the flow tube
and the reaction region; 3) enhancement of computational resources. The proposed
research emphasizes three related areas: 1) the determination of absolute bond
energies for metal-ligand interactions of biological relevance; 2) development
of a thermochemical database of noncovalent metal-ligand interactions of
biological relevance; 3) development of threshold collision-induced dissociation
and related methods as means to measure accurate thermochemical data on
increasingly larger systems. Experimental studies will be supported and enhanced
by complementary theoretical work. A prime motivation for this program is to
make better correlations between the detailed information provided by gas-phase
studies with those of functional biological systems. The pedagogical approach
taken, i.e. starting with model systems and gradually increasing the complexity
of the systems under investigation was chosen to maximize the probability that
thermodynamic information on biological polymers can be obtained with accuracy
and precision. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metal ions are involved in all biological
processes that nucleic acids (DNA and RNA), the molecules of life participate
in. The effects of binding a metal ion to a nucleic acid vary from stabilization
of the molecular structure to cell death. This variation in effect results from
several possible sites where the metal ion can interact with the nucleic acid:
at the phosphate backbone, at the sugar moiety, or at the base. The work is
designed to provide fundamental information about the strength of the
interactions of metals with the constituents of nucleic acids to elucidate the
contributions of particular functional groups to bio-interactions. In this work,
a technique that has been specifically designed for the accurate determination
of reaction thermochemistry and known as guided ion beam tandem mass
spectrometry will be utilized to examine metal ion interactions with chemical
species of biological relevance. A coupling of experimental work with theory
provides additional insight and also enhances predictive capabilities.