* 0138026
* The Chemistry of Etching:  Understanding Kinetic Surface Morphologies on an Atomic Scale
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Melissa Hines, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 05/31/2006
* USD 331,000.00

This research project, supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry
Program, addresses the mechanism of etching of silicon surfaces. Using a
combination of scanning probe microscopy and kinetic Monte Carlo simulation
methods, Professor Hines and her colleagues in the Department of Chemistry at
Cornell University are investigating the effect of etching conditions on the
silicon surface morphology. Experiments are addressing the aqueous etching of
the Si(111) surface by KOH solution, as well as the anodic etching of silicon
surfaces used to create porous silicon materials. The effects of step
orientation, step density, and silicon dopant, as well as etchant composition
and concentration are being examined. Results of this work are important for the
design of nanomaterial technologies, as well as for the development of
electronic materials processing strategies.

Information about how chemical etchants remove material from the surface of a
silicon wafer is important for the design of processes to make micro-
electromechanical (MEMS) devices, and for the production of electronic and
photonic devices. The work of this research project is directed to developing an
understanding of the aqueous and electrochemical etching of silicon, with the
goal of developing a microscopic understanding of what controls the atomic and
nano-scale morphology of the etched surface. With the support of the Analytical
and Surface Chemistry Program, Professor Hines and her colleagues at Cornell,
are using a combination of microscopy and computer simulation to obtain this
information.