* 0138519
* Partial Differential Equations and Statistical Mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Joseph Conlon, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2006
* USD 165,500.00

PI: Joseph G. Conlon, University of
Michigan&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0138519&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; This project is concerned with elliptic and parabolic partial
differential &lt;br/&gt;equations and their applications in statistical
mechanics. The first part of the&lt;br/&gt;proposal is concerned with elliptic
and parabolic equations in divergence form &lt;br/&gt;where the coefficients are
random variables. The author intends to study the &lt;br/&gt;regularity
properties of the expectation value of the Green's function, and the
&lt;br/&gt;rate of convergence of the solution of the equation to the solution
of the &lt;br/&gt;homogenized equation. The second part of the proposal is
concerned with the &lt;br/&gt;application of ideas from the theory of divergence
form parabolic equations with&lt;br/&gt;random coefficients to Euclidean field
theory. The relationship between elliptic&lt;br/&gt;and parabolic equations with
random coefficients and Euclidean field theory was&lt;br/&gt;discovered recently
by Helffer and Sjostrand. It was then more fully developed &lt;br/&gt;by Naddaf-
Spencer. The author intends to apply some ideas he and Naddaf have
&lt;br/&gt;developed for random elliptic equations to the Euclidean field theory
situation.&lt;br/&gt;In the third part of the proposal the author proposes to
study nondivergence &lt;br/&gt;form elliptic equations with random coefficients,
in particular an&lt;br/&gt;equation corresponding to Brownian motion with a
random drift. It has been&lt;br/&gt;shown by Sinai that in one dimension
diffusion with random drift is strongly&lt;br/&gt;subdiffusive for large time.
It has been conjectured that in dimension larger &lt;br/&gt;than 2 the scaling
limit of diffusion with random drift is Brownian motion. The &lt;br/&gt;author
has found a connection between this conjecture and certain
combinatorial&lt;br/&gt;problems concerning the existence of cycles in graphs.
He plans to continue his&lt;br/&gt;program to solve these combinatorial
problems. The final part of the proposal is&lt;br/&gt;concerned with uniformly
elliptic equations with deterministic coefficients.&lt;br/&gt;The coefficients
can oscillate arbitrarily rapidly however. The author plans
to&lt;br/&gt;continue his work to obtain estimates on the underlying diffusion
which are&lt;br/&gt;independent of the degree of oscillation of the
coefficients. This part of the&lt;br/&gt;proposal is related to the previous
parts since random equations have&lt;br/&gt;coefficients which are rapidly
oscillating.&lt;br/&gt; The goal of the proposal is to understand properties of
the solution to a&lt;br/&gt;partial differential equation when the only
information one has is that the&lt;br/&gt;coefficients of the equation are
bounded in some way. Within this goal there&lt;br/&gt;are two sub-themes: (a)
understanding worst possible behavior, (b)&lt;br/&gt;understanding "on average"
behavior -given our knowledge of the coefficients.&lt;br/&gt;The sub-theme (a)
is the subject of the final part of the proposal. It is&lt;br/&gt;intimately
related to problems of stochastic control theory. Examples
of&lt;br/&gt;stochastic control theory abound in the world of engineering and
finance. To &lt;br/&gt;take a financial example, consider the problem of valuing
a stock option. The&lt;br/&gt;classic work of Black and Scholes shows that the
value of the option depends&lt;br/&gt;only on the stock volatility. For a stock
with constant volatility they have a&lt;br/&gt;formula for the value of the
option in terms of the volatility. The formula is&lt;br/&gt;the solution to a
partial differential equation in which the volatility is
a&lt;br/&gt;coefficient. (a) is therefore related to the problem of estimating
worst&lt;br/&gt;possible scenarios for option values when one can only assume
some bounds on &lt;br/&gt;stock volatility. The sub-theme (b) has similar
applications to (a). The most&lt;br/&gt;exciting of these to this author is that
it offers a way of beginning to&lt;br/&gt;understand the problem of turbulence
in fluids. Turbulence is roughly speaking&lt;br/&gt;the onset of random behavior
in the velocity of a fluid. It is well known that &lt;br/&gt;a fluid will
undergo turbulent behavior when subject to a sufficiently
large&lt;br/&gt;disturbance. The mathematical problem of understanding
turbulence is well&lt;br/&gt;defined. One simply needs to understand the
solutions of a partial differential&lt;br/&gt;equation known as the Navier-
Stokes equation. To date there is not even the&lt;br/&gt;beginnings of an
understanding how to derive turbulence in a mathematically&lt;br/&gt;rigorous
way out of the Navier-Stokes equation. The reason is that the
fluid&lt;br/&gt;velocity is a coefficient of the equation. In the turbulent
regime therefore&lt;br/&gt;the Navier-Stokes equation is like a partial
differential equation with a&lt;br/&gt;random coefficient. The sub-theme (b) is
then concerned with the "typical"&lt;br/&gt;behavior of the fluid velocity in
this situation. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;