* 0138349
* US-South Africa Workshop:  Space, Race and Urban Development; Durban, South Africa, August 2002
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2003
* Gary Gaile, Association of American Geographers
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 04/30/2003
* USD 42,000.00

0138349&lt;br/&gt;Abler/Gaile/Aspaas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports 30
participants (15 from the United States and 15 from the Republic of South
Africa) in a US-South Africa Workshop on Space, Race and Urban Development,
scheduled for August 8-10, 2002 in Durban, South Africa. The co-organizers are
Drs. Ronald Abler, Gary Gaile, and Helen Aspaas with the International Research
and Scholarly Exchange Committee in the Association of American Geographers; Dr.
Christopher Rogerson, in the Department of Geography and Environmental Studies
at the University of Witswatersrand; and Dr. Etienne Nel, in the Department of
Geography at Rhodes University. There will be a total of approximately 38
participants, who will be drawn from academia and governmental organizations in
the United States, the Republic of South Africa, Canada, and the United Kingdom.
Workshop discussions will be organized around three themes: 1) Urban Dynamics,
2) Local Economic Development, and 3) Race and Space. The major goal of the
workshop is to establish linkages between the geography communities in the
United States and the Republic of South Africa for the development of
collaborative research and education programs. An additional goal is to identify
ways that geographers can help policymakers make better, scientifically-based
decisions in order to contribute to the sustainability of democratic and fair
economic/urban systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The United States has also
experienced many changes that can be linked to the issues of "Space, Race, and
Urban Development," but these changes and major policy shifts have occurred much
more rapidly in the Republic of South Africa. This changing urban situation in
South Africa provides US geographers an opportunity to contrast and compare the
urban situations in the two countries. At the same time South African
geographers and policymakers will be able to learn from US experiences in more
mainstream local economic and other urban development issues. A virtual
conference will be conducted, via e-mail, one week prior to the workshop so the
participants can become familiar with the agenda and begin to develop some ideas
for cooperative research projects. Workshop results will be disseminated through
professional journals, meetings, and a web site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project supports the participation of five junior investigators from the United
States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Office of International Science and
Engineering and the Division of Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences jointly
support this award.&lt;br/&gt;