* 0138602
* Compactorization of the Specimens and Library of the UC Davis Herbarium
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Thomas Rost, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Richard M. McCourt
* 06/30/2006
* USD 370,000.00

The UC Davis Herbarium is a reference collection of over 240,000 dried and
pressed plant specimens and an associated botanical library that is used by
faculty in over 20 campus departments for their research in the diverse fields
of genomics, plant biology, entomology, ecology, conservation, veterinary
medicine, and agriculture. The current were outgrown by the early 1970s, at
which time specimen cabinets were stacked on top of each other to a height of
eleven feet. In the 1980s when no further cabinets could be stacked in the main
collections area, cases were placed in the hall. Since that time, many more
cases and freezers have been added to the hallway to accommodate incoming
specimens. In addition, the lack of temperature control results in temperatures
close to ninety degrees within the collection area for at least one time period
per year. This makes it impossible to completely control the population of
herbarium beetles in the main collections, and the larvae rapidly eat the
flowers and leaves off the dried specimens. To remedy these problems, space has
been allocated for the herbarium on the first floor of the Life Sciences
Laboratory Building. The new herbarium facility will be temperature controlled
and insect-free. As space is extremely limited and expensive on the UC Davis
campus, the herbarium cases in the new collections area and the herbarium
library will need to be installed on a movable aisle storage system.

The specimens of herbaria are an historic record of where and when plants have
grown in all parts of the world, and as such are repositories of tremendous
biological information including the current locations of invasive weeds and the
former locations of extinct species. In addition, the UC Davis Herbarium houses
unique collections of California vernal pool plants, wine grape varieties,
grasses, and oaks which should be preserved for future generations. UC Davis
trains hundreds of scientists in diverse fields every year. Many of those
scientists make their way to the herbarium for help with plant inquiries.
Herbarium staff routinely do plant identifications for both university
affiliates and the general public, including federal and state agencies, and
such a service is impossible without reference specimens. As herbarium specimens
can be used for both sight identification of plants and a source of genetic
material for evolutionary studies, it is critical that these specimens be
rehoused in a safe and functional facility in insect-free cases.