* 0138028
* Development of a Single-Photon Spectrometer/Microscope: Probing Conformational Dynamics of Single Biomolecules on a Photon by Photon Basis
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Xiaoliang Xie, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 04/30/2005
* USD 663,615.00

This award supports the construction of a new, state-of-the-art single-photon
spectrometer/microscope. The instrument will enable study of the conformation of
single molecules of enzymes and nucleic acids using photo-induced electron
transfer techniques that have been pioneered by the PI. In comparison to
available instruments, the device will have an extended excitation frequency
range and significantly improved time resolution. The excitation makes use of a
frequency-doubled and synchronously-pumped optical parametric oscillator.
Through collaboration with an Italian group, a custom avalanche photodiode with
a very small active area will be developed. The detector will permit the probing
of short-distance conformational fluctuations. Among the types of experiments
the instrument will permit are the use of photo-induced electron transfer
between tetramethlyrodamine (TMR) dye and guanine to probe the conformational
dynamics of double-stranded DNA, and the use of fluorescence resonant energy
transfer (FRET) to probe dynamics of a DNA hairpin. The new instrument is
expected to make a variety of other new single-molecule experiments possible,
and to improve knowledge of macromolecular dynamics and of the role of
conformational fluctuation on macromolecular function. The funds provided by the
award will also support multidiciplinary training of graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows working at the interface of physics, chemistry and
biology.&lt;br/&gt;