* 0138916
* Elementary, Secondary, and Informal Education:  The MENTOR (Mathematics Education for Novice Teachers:  Opportunities for Reflection) Project
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2008
* Alexander Dawson, Pacific Resources for Education and Learning
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,977,972.00

In the Pacific region served by Pacific Resources for Education and Learning
(PREL), lack of access to four-year degree granting programs, coupled with a
rapidly growing student population, resulted in the increased hiring of
inexperienced and under-qualified teachers. The MENTOR Project addressed this
problem by establishing a mentoring program for novice teachers aimed at
developing in them the knowledge, skills and dispositions necessary to be
effective teachers of mathematics, thereby decreasing the length and trauma of
their induction into teaching and increasing their commitment to the
profession.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on training led by PREL personnel,
Project mentors provide summer institutes as well as in-class nentoring, inquiry
group sessions, and lesson study for novice teachers. The Project includes two
cadres, one a group of well-trained and effective mentors of novice teachers,
and the other a group effective novice teachers who have an understanding of how
to implement standards-based mathematics instruction and who exhibit a strong
commitment to the profession. Working together these two groups will generate a
collection of exemplary standards-based lesson plans, make presentations at
three Pacific Education Conferences (in 2003, 2004 and 2005), and prepare for
publication a set of narratives describing novice teachers' and mentors'
professional growth in the MENTOR Project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MENTOR
Project contributes significantly to the development of culturally responsive
and appropraite mentoring models for neo-indigenous cultures characterized by
linguistic diversity and geographic isolation. The insights gained inform
attempts to establish mentoring and other professional development programs in
cross-cultural settings in the Pacific and beyond.