* 0138145
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Cranial Morphological Change in Three Regions of North America During the Early to Middle Holocene
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2003
* Joe Powell, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 01/31/2003
* USD 7,308.00

The goal of this research is to obtain a better understanding of the
evolutionary and environmental events that may have affected the biology of the
initial migrants into the New World. Most of the research conducted on early
Americans (Paleoindians and Early Archaic) has tended to compare their observed
morphology to that of modern Native Americans, effectively ignoring 8,000 years
of potential evolution. Additionally, the majority of the current research has
been focused on the entire North American continent, paying little attention to
the potential for regional variation. This research project will analyze the
skeletal variation present among early to middle Holocene (10,000-2000 BP)
skeletons from three distinct regions of North America (Great Lakes, Great
Basin, Southeast). The variation and potential change through time of the skull
shape will be assessed using multivariate statistical techniques. In order to
help counteract small sample problems, randomization methods will be used. The
data will also be used in several population genetic models to help determine
which evolutionary factors may have affected the initial migrants. In addition,
the parameters for several current "Peopling of the Americas" models will be
used in population genetic computer simulations. The results from the
simulations will be compared to the observed results to see which of the several
models (and their corresponding implicit parameters) are most realistic
considering the data. Data will be collected on relatively complete skulls from
archaeological sites that date between 2000 BP and 10,000 BP and for which
appropriate permissions have been obtained. The skulls are currently housed at
several institutions throughout North America. This research will quantify the
variation present among the first Americans, examine the Paleoindian/Archaic
transition from a biological perspective, and elucidate the morphological
history of Native Americans. Finally, by incorporating a regional approach, the
proposed study will evaluate the potential environmental effects on this
morphological history.

