* 0138052
* Adaptive Resolution Microscope for Fast Structural and Functional Optical Imaging
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Peter Saggau, Baylor College of Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 12/31/2005
* USD 851,205.00

This award provides support for development of a type of confocal microscope
that will be able to scan samples much more rapidly than current commercial
instruments. Optical imaging techniques play an important role in studying
structure and function of nerve cells, a role that has been facilitated by
advanced techniques such as multiphoton microscopy. This type of microscopy
allows collection of high-quality structural images as well as high-fidelity
transient signals from light-scattering preparations such as living tissue.
While the spatial resolution of existing instruments of this type is remarkable,
their temporal resolution has been limited by use of mechanical devices to scan
the specimen. As a result, drastic sacrifices of spatial resolution are usually
necessary when monitoring fast cellular signaling. The instrument to be
developed will combine the use of Multiphoton Microscopy with Acousto-Optic
Laser Scanning. For structural Imaging, the instrument will permit significantly
higher spatial resolution at fast frame rates. For observation of transient
signals (functional imaging), it will allow the user to select points of
interest from previously imaged structures and perform multi-site measurements
at frame rates of more than 1000 per second. The instrument will be of great
advantage for experimental work in neuroscience where it will allow study the
computational properties of individual neurons in brain slices by imaging
dendritic structures and their function, and to study processing of sensory
information in intact brain. Other applications are likely to include imaging of
structure and function in excitable non-neuronal tissue, such as heart, smooth
and skeletal muscle, and imaging of other light-scattering biological
preparations.