* 0138147
* Genetic Control of Cerebellar Zonal Patterning
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* John Oberdick, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Evan Balaban
* 08/31/2006
* USD 480,000.00

Much is known about the molecular and genetic mechanisms controlling the
regionalization of the developing brain, but much less is known about how this
information ultimately gives rise in maturity to unique brain regions with
distinct functions. One strategy to approach this is to dissect the molecular
and genetic mechanisms controlling the expression of region-or cell-specific
genes whose products contribute directly to a unique functional property of
cells in the mature brain. The rodent cerebellum is ideal for the understanding
of these mechanisms as there is a rich historical record of natural mutations
affecting the development and function of this brain region. In addition much is
known about the precise neurobiological functions of its constituent. The
purpose of our proposed experiments will be to determine the molecular
mechanisms of expression of the L7/Pep-2 gene in the rodent cerebellum. In the
mature brain this gene is expressed only in cerebellar Purkinje cells and not in
any non-brain tissues. In addition, the gene is expressed in a transient pattern
of stripes in the cerebellum during the development and this pattern reflects
the well know-known zonal wiring diagram of the cerebellum. Furthermore, the
L7-Pcp-2 protein carries a GoLoco-domain and functions as a modulator of GDP
binding to large heterotrimeric G-proteins suggesting a role of the protein in
modulation of Ca2+channels, a major component of information flow in Purkinje
cells. We have combined a novel in vivo expression strategy using transgenic
mice with comparative genomics to identify key DNA sequence elements within the
promoter (expression control region) of the L7/Pcp-2 gene. The data show very
high conservation across species of both the sequence and spacing of seven
elements within a short region of this promoter. One of these elements is a
binding site for the orphan nuclear receptor, RORa, a likely modulator of Ca2+
metabolism genes in bone that is also known to be expressed in Purkinje cells.
The aims will be i) to determine more precisely the role of these elements by
expression testing in further transgenic mouse studies, ii) to use FPLC
purification and MALDI-MS protein sequencing to identify the key factors that
bind to these elements, and III) to test the effect of null mutation of these
factors on the expression of L7/Pcp-2. These studies provide the best
opportunity to-date to identify a precise molecular complex controlling both
cell-specific and G-protein pathway-specific gene expression in the brain.