* 0138565
* Craniofacial Biomechanics of Primates
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2007
* William Hylander, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna E. Lambert
* 07/31/2007
* USD 185,839.00

&lt;br/&gt;Recently there has been renewed interest in determining the
functional and adaptive significance of symphyseal fusion of the mandible in
primates and other mammals. This interest is in part because symphyseal fusion
is thought to play an important role in various adaptive scenarios of mammalian
and especially primate evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study tests the
hypothesis that jaw muscle force recruitment and firing patterns vary between
species of strepsirrhines, depending on the stiffness and strength of their
symphyses. This hypothesis predicts that those strepsirrhine species such as the
indriids, with their stiffer, stronger, and often partially-fused symphyses,
have a jaw-muscle firing pattern that is similar to the derived condition found
in living anthropoids, i.e., the "wishboning" pattern. Furthermore, this
hypothesis also predicts that those strepsirrhines with a completely unfused and
highly mobile symphysis, such as ring-tailed lemurs and thick-tailed galagos, do
not have this pattern. Instead, they have the primitive mammalian motor pattern,
which is also found in North American opossums and tree
shrews.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This hypothesis will be tested by analyzing
masseter, medial pterygoid and temporalis muscle force recruitment and firing
patterns using EMG techniques in (1) ring-tailed lemurs (Lemur catta), (2)
gentle or bamboo lemurs (Hapalemur griseus), (3) sifakas (Propithecus
verreauxi), and (4) aye-ayes (Daubentonia madagascariensis). It is predicted
that EMG patterns in ring-tailed lemurs and aye-ayes will be more similar to
patterns found in thick-tailed galagos, and that EMG patterns in bamboo lemurs
and sifakas will be more similar to those patterns found in anthropoids. If the
predictions for bamboo lemurs and sifakas are confirmed, this constitutes a
refutation of the ontogenetic timing hypothesis regarding symphyseal fusion
simply because strepsirrhines that exhibit late partial and/or complete fusion
are hypothesized to not have the "wishboning" pattern of anthropoids.
Furthermore, these data would also indicate that the "wishboning" pattern of
anthropoids evolved more than once within primates, and if so, perhaps it
evolved independently several times in various primate lineages. In summary, the
main purpose of this project is to pursue these matters further by analyzing
jaw-muscle force recruitment and firing patterns in various strepsirrhine
species that have completely or partially unfused symphyses, but yet vary in the
amount of symphyseal stiffness and strength&lt;br/&gt;