* 0138991
* REU SITE: Interactions Between Algebra, Computation, and Mathematical Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2006
* Edward Letzter, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 04/30/2006
* USD 180,930.00

This REU features simultaneous subprograms in algebra and applied mathematics.
The unifying theme is the interplay between algebraic methods, computational
techniques, and mathematical physics. Throughout, there is an emphasis on
computer-aided experimentation in a collaborative environment.

Students in the algebra subprogram learn to develop -- and prove --mathematical
conjectures based on extensive studies of specific examples. The primary
mathematical focus is on (finite dimensional) algebraic representation theory --
that is, the study of matrix solutions to systems of polynomial equations in
noncommuting variables. Investigations along these lines have played, and
continue to play, a key role in modern physics. Moreover, solutions to these
systems correspond to objects in ``noncommutative geometric spaces.'' The
particular systems considered in this subprogram are mostly composed of
quadratic and cubic polynomials in two or three (noncommuting) variables. These
systems typically define more abstract algebraic objects whose structures can
form the basis for deeper investigations. The use of advanced symbolic
computation software plays an important role throughout.

Students in the applied mathematics subprogram are introduced to the three
components of applied mathematics research: modeling, analysis, and computation.
The focus is on two topics arising in materials science: complex electro-
magnetic permittivity of dielectrics, and exact relations for fiber-reinforced
composites. Students working on complex electro-magnetic permittivity develop
mathematical stratgies for predicting how much electro-magnetic energy a
material will absorb, in a given frequency, if data for other frequencies is
already known; such prediction techniques have the potential to reduce the cost
of experimental measurements drastically. Students working on exact relations
mathematically analyze the influence of composite microstructure on macroscopic
properties; understanding this influence is crucial to developing new materials
with various desired properties -- potentially applicable industrial products
include skis, golf clubs, and aircraft parts.