* 0138077
* RUI: Subordinates' Information Inquiry in Turbulent Environments: Cross-Cultural Differences Between the U.S. and the European Union
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Svjetlana Madzar, Gustavus Adolphus College
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2004
* USD 66,809.00

This study will offer new insights into cross-cultural differences in superior-
subordinate interaction in rapidly changing organizational settings in three
countries of the European Union (EU) and in the U.S. The study will challenge
the traditional assumption from U.S. research findings that managers are seen as
subordinates' major link to their information environment. In this light the
subordinates' information inquiry process will be explored in terms of
frequency, types of information sought, other relevant information sources, and
their information seeking tactics. Based on interview and survey data, the study
will provide useful information on the underlying dynamics of superior-
subordinate relationships in terms of: 1. the level of subordinate pro-activity
in soliciting different types of information; 2. the differences in tactics used
to solicit various types of information; 3. the effect of a superior's
leadership style on the extent and nature of information inquiry; and 4. the
influence of organizational norms/rules on inquiry patterns. Upon exploring such
dynamics within each of the four countries, cross-country comparisons will be
made, looking at the moderating effect of major relevant cultural dimensions
such as vertical individualism and power distance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
study will make a contribution to the field of organizational behavior through a
distinctive inquiry into subordinate information seeking patterns in the context
of both organizational turbulence and of cross-cultural comparison. This
information is crucial in times of rapid organizational change and international
interdependence, when information inquiry in the midst of such an environment is
of strategic importance.