* 0138445
* Collaborative Research:  Modeling and Processing of Topologically Complex 3D Shapes
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Denis Zorin, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 04/30/2006
* USD 224,983.00

DMS-0138445 Denis Zorin DMS-0221666 Mathieu Desbrun DMS-0220905 Peter Schroder

This is a collaborative project funded by the CARGO program under DMS-0138445,
DMS-0221666, and DMS-0220905. Accurate computational representations of complex
geometry are of great importance in many disciplines ranging from engineering
and manufacturing to medicine and biology. With the wide availability of
powerful computational resources and ever better acquisition technologies such
as 3D laser scanning and volumetric MRI or CAT imaging the geometries used in
applications are becoming increasingly complex. One aspect of this complexity is
topology, i.e., the presence of holes and tunnels and of a network of one and
zero-dimensional surface features such as creases and spikes. Typical examples
of topologically complex shapes are a perforated plate or the system of blood
vessels of the body. Traditional representations of geometry are at worst weak
and at best cumbersome and inefficient in representing such complex topologies.
Modeling of macro- and microscopic biological structures is becoming
increasingly important for medical research, training, and treatment support.
Such structures often have extremely complex shape and topology (e.g., the blood
vessel or the nervous system, facial muscles, a folded protein molecule). The
representations and algorithms we develop will result in new efficient ways of
manipulating and processing computer representations of such structures.

In this project a team with expertise in numerical analysis, geometric modeling,
discrete algorithms and computer graphics is studying ways to bring fundamental
mathematical tools and highly efficient algorithms to bear on the challenge of
creating efficient and accurate computational representations and algorithms for
surfaces of complex topology. In particular we are investigating theory and
practical algorithms for (I) removal of topological noise in existing models as
well as in raw data used for surface reconstruction; (II) topology discovery in
volumetric data sets; (III) construction of multiresolution representations of
geometry which can meaningfully abstract fine level topology at coarser
resolutions to enable powerful multiscale techniques for rendering, modification
and simulation. Particular attention is paid to exploring measures of
topological scale which are crucial to most of the algorithms being developed.
The algorithms to be developed by the team will have immediate applications in
two areas: Computer-Aided Design and Medical Visualization. In CAD, examples of
potential applications include topology cleanup, simplification for integration
of scanned 3D data with manually constructed models and use of multiscale
representations for interactive conceptual design representations.