* 0138030
* Enhancing Natural History Museum Visitor Understanding of Evolution:  A National Conference
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Bruce MacFadden, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 06/30/2005
* USD 144,847.00

This award will support two years of work to plan and implement a national
conference of approximately 30 participants representing the major research-
based natural history museums in America to consider best practices for
enhancing museum visitor understanding of evolution. Evolution is the central
paradigm of the life sciences, and natural history museums are of fundamental
importance to an understanding of the paradigm of evolution. Despite this fact,
recent surveys indicate that the majority of the American public, including
visitors to natural history museums, neither understands nor believes in
evolutionary theory. The three-day conference to be held at the Florida Museum
of Natural History in 2003 will be preceded by a pre-conference planning
workshop in 2002 and a synthesis of literature and practices pertinent to the
understanding of evolution in museums. The conference will bring together chief
scientists, directors of education and exhibits, and directors of research and
collections as participants in a program professionally facilitated by informal
science education experts. Findings and outcomes of the conference will
constitute 'best practices' for the field and will be published in the
professional literature and disseminated via the Florida Museum website. With
more than 10,000,000 visitors to natural history museums per year, once
implemented in museum exhibitions and programs the results of this conference
will have a broad impact on science literacy in America for years to come.