* 0138459
* US-India Cooperative Research:  Extracting Gravitational Wave Signals of Inspiraling Compact Binary Stars from Laser Interferometric Data.
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2006
* Lee Finn, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 02/28/2006
* USD 35,000.00

0138459&lt;br/&gt;Lazzarini &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award
supports a US-India cooperative research project entitled Extracting
Gravitational Wave Signals of Inspiraling Compact Binary Stars from Laser
Interferometric Data. US PIs Albert Lazzarini, California Institute of
Technology and Lee Finn, Pennsylvania State University will collaborate with
Sanjeev Dhurandhar and two young scientists from his group at the Inter-
University Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics (IUCAA), Pune. The aim of the
research is to advance gravitational wave physics by raising the efficiency and
probability of detecting gravitational waves. The first task is to devise
computationally efficient signal extraction techniques for detecting inspiraling
binary signals; the second is to increase the likelihood of wave detection by
analyzing how these signals can be identified using a network of detectors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The Indian collaborators have complementary skills
and the expertise to ensure a successful collaboration. Theoretical analysis,
algorithm design, and simulations are the vital components from their side.
Professor Dhurandhar and the IUCAA group, which he heads, is internationally
recognized for theoretical work on extraction of inspiraling binary signals from
detector data. The participation of two young scientists from India has the
potential to be a valuable contribution to the US effort in gravitational wave
detection. The US PIs are leading researchers in this field. The newly
established Center for Gravitational Physics (CGWP) is dedicated to the physics
and phenomenology of gravitational wave astrophysics and funded under the
Physics Frontier Center Program. The CGWP will host the visits of the Indian
researchers. &lt;br/&gt;