* 0138238
* US-Benin Cooperative Research:  Groundwater Characterization In Central Benin Using Element Analysis
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Stephen Silliman, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 03/31/2006
* USD 26,000.00

0138238 Silliman

This award supports a three-year collaborative research project between
Professor Stephen Silliman, with the Department of Civil Engineering and
Geological Sciences at the University of Notre Dame, and Professor Moussa
Boukari, with the Faculty des Sciences et Techniques at the Universite Nationale
du Benin. The investigators will conduct a study of the groundwater hydrology of
central/northern Benin.

Hydrogeologically Benin can be subdivided into three regions: southern,
central/northern, and northeastern. The central/northern region consists
primarily of fractured crystalline rock with water levels regularly being
greater than 40 meters. Professors Silliman and Boukari will collect samples of
groundwater, precipitation, and host rock from various sites in the
central/northern area. A set of sophisticated analytical techniques (ICP-MS and
ICP-OES) will be used to conduct geochemical analyses to determine: (1) if
chemical signatures in the groundwater can be used to differentiate atmospheric
sources and geologic interactions influencing the quality of recharge, (2)
whether anthropogenic signatures are observed in this groundwater system, and
(3) the utility of high-precision element analysis for groundwater
characterization. This project combines Professor Silliman's expertise in the
areas of characterization of groundwater systems and statistical analysis with
Professor Boukari's intimate knowledge of, and historical research regarding,
the hydrogeology of Benin. Both investigators have extensive experience
performing field studies.

Through this project the investigators expect to achieve a greater understanding
about the utility of groundwater geochemical measurements in terms of
identification of forcing functions. Such information will be valuable to a
broad spectrum of scientists, including geologists and hydrological and
environmental researchers. It will also provide increased insight into the
potential for development of non-coastal, western Africa, and the current
chemical threats to water supplies in this area of the developing world. The
results are also expected to have applications to improved drilling and
hydrofracing techniques. The project will include the participation of a US
graduate student, who will gain experience in conducting field research in a
developing country.

The Office of International Science and Engineering and the Division of Earth
Sciences are jointly providing support for this project.