* 0138315
* Normal Subgroup Structure of the Groups of Rational Points of Algebraic Groups and of Their Special Subgroups
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Andrei Rapinchuk, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2006
* USD 123,986.00

This award provides funding for an investigation of the normal
subgroup&lt;br/&gt;structure of groups of rational points of algebraic groups
over&lt;br/&gt;general as well as over special (primarily, global) fields.
The&lt;br/&gt;principal investigator attempts to prove a new conjecture
on&lt;br/&gt;solvability of finite quotients of the groups of rational points
of&lt;br/&gt;simple algebraic groups over arbitrary infinite
fields.&lt;br/&gt;He also plans to analyze finite quotients of the
multiplicative group&lt;br/&gt;of a finite dimensional division algebra in order
to obtain their&lt;br/&gt;reasonable classification. Another central problem is
investigation&lt;br/&gt;of the Margulis-Platonov conjecture for special unitary
groups over&lt;br/&gt;global fields. The principal investigator collaborates on
these problems&lt;br/&gt;with Gopal Prasad, Yoav Segev and Gary Seitz. He also
plans to work&lt;br/&gt;with Gopal Prasad on a joint book project in the
congruence subgroup&lt;br/&gt;problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Questions related to
the normal subgroup structure of linear groups&lt;br/&gt;have historical roots
in the 19th century (Galois, Jordan, Dixon),&lt;br/&gt;and have been an area of
active research in the 20th century. Recently,&lt;br/&gt;new techniques for
analyzing this problem for anisotropic groups&lt;br/&gt;over general fields have
been discovered in the joint work of the&lt;br/&gt;principal investigator with
Y.Segev and G.Seitz. These techniques enable&lt;br/&gt;one to investigate groups
over general fields using methods of the&lt;br/&gt;theory of valuations, which
were previously used only in the&lt;br/&gt;number-theoretic setting of global
fields. This approach fits into&lt;br/&gt;the general area of investigation of
the congruence subgroup problem,&lt;br/&gt;which is connected with other
fundamental problems in number theory,&lt;br/&gt;currently applied in data
transmission, data processing and communication&lt;br/&gt;systems.