* 0138151
* US-Pakistan Cooperative Research:  Magnetic Nanoparticle Synthesis and Characterization
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2006
* S. Ismat Shah, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 02/28/2006
* USD 39,500.00

0138151&lt;br/&gt;Shah&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is for
support of a cooperative project by Dr. S. Ismat Shah, Department of Materials
Science and Engineering at the University of Delaware, Newark, Delaware and Dr.
S. Khurshid Hasanain, Magnetism and Superconductivity Laboratory, Physics
Department, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan. They plan to study the
magnetic behavior of nanometer sized magnetic particles by the techniques of DC
and AC magnetometry.&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Shah's team will synthesize nano magnetic
particles to be characterized by the team of Dr. Hasanain. The initial work will
focus on nanoparticles of iron. The area of nanoparticles in general, and
magnetic nanoparticles in particular, is rapidly growing due to the numerous
potential applications. The development of the experimental framework will have
broader application to magnetic systems. The study of the magnetic properties of
nanometer sized iron particles will provide much needed information on the novel
properties of these systems, and will also contribute greatly to our fundamental
understanding of the behavior of magnetic nanoparticles. The work will help
establish the framework for the analysis of magnetic properties of newly
prepared samples of metallic nanoparticles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The
University of Delaware has good programs and good equipment for magnetic
nanoparticle research. The two scientists have complementary expertise, as Shah
is an expert in the synthesis and characterization of these systems, and
Hasanain has broad expertise in the area of superconductivity and thin-film
magnetism. Some preliminary collaboration has already begun with encouraging
results, and the proposed experimental techniques are already available in Dr.
Hasanain's laboratory. The project will optimize interaction among scientists
and graduate students from each of the participating universities. The students
will be provided training in an international setting in one of the leading edge
areas of research in the field of nanotechnology. The project meets INT criteria
for support of cooperative projects that are mutually beneficial. Support for
this project is provided by the Office of International Science and Engineering
and the Division of Materials Research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;