* 0138115
* US-India Cooperative Research:  Relativistic Effects in the Photoionization of Free and Confined Atoms
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2007
* Steven Manson, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 02/28/2007
* USD 21,000.00

0138115&lt;br/&gt;Manson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award supports a
US-India collaboration entitled Relativistic Effects in the Photoionization of
Free and Confined Atoms. US PI Steven Manson, Georgia State University (GSU) and
Pranawa Deshmukh, Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Madras will continue to
develop theoretical methodologies and perform calculations that explore ionizing
collisions of electromagnetic radiation with atoms and ions. They will develop
the relativistic random phase approximation (RRPA) methodology and apply it to a
number of diverse problems in the area of ionization of free and confined atoms
and ions by electromagnetic radiation. The investigators will work closely with
experimental groups to insure quantitative accuracy of the newly developed
methodologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: This research will provide further
insight into the nature of fundamental atomic processes. By extending atomic
theory methodology to confined atoms, the PI brings the expertise of atomic
physics to bear on the broader fields of chemistry and condensed matter.
Additionally, greater understanding of the properties of confined atoms may
yield insight into the new physics of a largely unexplored area and possibly to
the development of a whole new class of devices. The PIs have a highly
productive collaboration and many joint publications to their credit. This
project will enable a US graduate student to do research at the Indian
collaborating institution and will contribute to internationalizing students at
both universities. Additionally, it will facilitate the build-up of an
internationally competitive research program at the IIT, Madras. &lt;br/&gt;