* 0138036
* Development of Nested, Autonomous Phytoplankton Monitoring Technology
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Gary Kirkpatrick, Mote Marine Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 12/31/2004
* USD 400,673.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Gary Kirkpatrick at Mote Marine Laboratory, Dr.
Mark Moline at California Polytechnic State University and Dr. Oscar Schofield
at Rutgers University to&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; develop and expand the
present capabilities of autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs) to study the
distribution and taxonomic composition of phytoplankton communities. Traditional
methods of study involve boats to collect water samples and then manual
examination of the individual water samples. The results from the traditional
approach have poor spatial and time resolution, their quality depends on the
expertise of the investigator and they are very costly. The goal of this project
is to develop a nested AUV observation capability that can provide near
continuous in situ data over ecologically significant spatial
scales.&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this work will develop and integrate an
optically-based phytoplankton detection instrument into two classes of AUVs to
provide an end-to-end in situ phytoplankton detection and mapping network. The
existing platforms for this network development effort include a Webb Research
Corporation non-propeller autonomous glider (owned by Rutgers University) and a
propeller driven Remote Environmental Measuring UnitS (REMUS) (owned by Cal
Poly). The proposed optical detection system consists of a capillary waveguide
system, which will provide quantitative hyperspectral measurements of
particulate light absorption which will be used to differentiate between
phytoplankton groups. PIs propose to test the developed network by detecting and
mapping harmful algal blooms (HABs) along the West Florida continental
shelf.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed systems will complement the broader research
community efforts to use satellite remote sensing techniques to monitor the
distribution and taxonomic composition of phytoplankton communities. The
resulting systems will have world-wide applicability to monitoring and study of
phytoplankton communities in freshwater and marine systems. The instruments
resulting from the proposed development effort will have value as stand-alone
tools and as components of observation networks. The undergraduate and graduate
students to be involved in this project will gain insight into the scientific
principals and engineering considerations underlying these technologies that
will form the basis for future aquatic sciences. Finally, the public will be
involved in the information transfer aspects of this system through near-real-
time data products available on the World-Wide Web and visualization of
biological community structure through existing formal and informal public
outreach programs.&lt;br/&gt;