* 0138011
* Real-Time Animal Telemetry
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2006
* George Vincent Rebec, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Continuing Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 04/30/2006
* USD 547,209.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Paul A. Garris at Illinois State
University&lt;br/&gt;to develop a new instrument for wireless monitoring of
neural activity in&lt;br/&gt;the brain of awake, unrestrained animals. The new
instrument, called&lt;br/&gt;real-time animal telemetry (RAT), will combine two
powerful technologies;&lt;br/&gt;microsensors for spatially and temporally
resolved measurements, and digital&lt;br/&gt;telemetry for remote data
transmission and system control with high speed&lt;br/&gt;and high fidelity. The
primary advantage of RAT will be sub-second&lt;br/&gt;characterization of brain
function with minimal perturbation of behavior. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed RAT
instrument holds great promise for advancing the study &lt;br/&gt;of brain-
behavior relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RAT will be a modular and
multifunctional instrument, a design that advances&lt;br/&gt;development and
affords flexibility to its application. Several types of&lt;br/&gt;measurement
techniques will be incorporated into RAT: Voltammetry which &lt;br/&gt;monitors
the chemistry of the brain and electrophysiology which&lt;br/&gt;measures brain
bioelectrical activity. Combined, the techniques assess the&lt;br/&gt;release of
a neurotransmitter and its postsynaptic effect to obtain a
more&lt;br/&gt;integrative view of brain function. Although great strides have
recently been made &lt;br/&gt;applying real-time voltammetry and
electrophysiology to awake animals, &lt;br/&gt;the connection between sensor and
recording equipment is made by a cable tether. Unfortunately, the hard
connection affects behavior and hinders or even prevents
&lt;br/&gt;investigation of important paradigms such as those involving social
interactions &lt;br/&gt;and complex environments. To overcome this problem, the
new instrument will &lt;br/&gt;use a wireless link. Moreover, because real-time
voltammetric and electrophysiological measurements are very susceptible to
transmission artifacts, RAT will use high fidelity digital
telemetry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultimately, RAT should be commercially viable
instrumentation in the support of&lt;br/&gt;biological research. The
incorporation of well-established techniques will&lt;br/&gt;make the proposed
RAT instrument attractive to large number of users working&lt;br/&gt;in the
neuroscience fields. With further development, there is
enormous&lt;br/&gt;potential for RAT to support other existing real-time
microsensors. RAT can&lt;br/&gt;also evolve to accommodate sensor technologies
that emerge in the future.