* 0138506
* The Haystack Observatory as an REU Site for Astronomy and Atmospheric Science
* MPS,AST
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2007
* Robert Phillips, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 01/31/2007
* USD 600,000.00

Proposal ID: AST 0138506 PI: Joseph Salah

Dr. Salah is awarded funds to continue a successful Research Experiences for
Undergraduates site and associated Research Experiences for Teachers at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology's Haystack Observatory. Funding is
provided jointly through the Division of Astronomical Sciences, the Division of
Atmospheric Sciences, and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities. Over the
next five years, seven undergraduate interns and four K-12 science teachers will
be hired per year at the observatory to do summer research projects in radio
astronomy, atmospheric science, and instrumentation.

Each undergraduate student will be paired with a staff mentor, and will
participate in a seminar series. Research projects in radio astronomy will
include investigations of star-forming regions, active galactic nuclei, and
envelopes of evolved stars. Atmospheric science projects will include
investigations of the structure of the upper atmosphere, space weather, and the
effect of atmospheric delays on satellite transmissions. Instrumentation and
software projects will include new designs for digital radio receivers, software
radar, and signal processing. At the end of the summer each student will prepare
a detailed report and give a presentation, and will be encouraged to present the
results at a national meeting.

The participating teachers will spend eight weeks at the site their first
summer, and four weeks the following summer. During the first summer, the
teachers will participate in a group research project and develop curriculum for
their classroom that is related to the underlying scientific concepts of the
research project. During the following school year, the teachers will test their
lesson plans and then refine the plans during the next summer.