* 0138167
* Oscillatory Integrals:    Generalized Radon Transforms and Inverse Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2002,12/31/2005
* Allan Greenleaf, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 12/31/2005
* USD 196,101.00

Proposal Number: DMS-0138167&lt;br/&gt;PI: Allan
Greenleaf&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Three problems
will be investigated, related by the&lt;br/&gt;common thread of oscillatory
integrals with degenerate &lt;br/&gt;(or singular) phase functions. First,
estimates for Fourier&lt;br/&gt;integral operators associated with two-sided
Morin &lt;br/&gt;singularities, both symmetric and asymmetric, will
be&lt;br/&gt;considered. This will be attempted by using new
&lt;br/&gt;decompositions of the operators that reflect the
underlying&lt;br/&gt;geometry of the phase functions. Secondly, global
uniqueness&lt;br/&gt;will be considered in the Calderon problem for low-
regularity&lt;br/&gt;conductivities and potentials in dimensions
greater&lt;br/&gt;than two, using Radon transform decompositions of the
&lt;br/&gt;potentials. Finally, a detailed microlocal analysis will
&lt;br/&gt;be made of the problem for low-regularity and/or conormal
&lt;br/&gt;conductivities in two dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The operators
to be studied in this project transform&lt;br/&gt;functions on one space to
functions on another space &lt;br/&gt;(possibly the same, possibly different) in
a way in which&lt;br/&gt;oscillation (cancellation caused by high-frequency
waves)&lt;br/&gt;plays an important role. This general type of operator
has&lt;br/&gt;been central to progress in the last thirty years in
the&lt;br/&gt;understanding of a wide range of partial
differential&lt;br/&gt;equations governing, e.g., wave propagation of sound
and&lt;br/&gt;electromagnetic waves. It turns out that the
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;analysis of CAT scanners and other noninvasive medical
&lt;br/&gt;imaging technologies falls under the same framework.&lt;br/&gt;The
current project should give a better understanding of the&lt;br/&gt;mathematical
foundations of these techniques. In the longer&lt;br/&gt;term, this might
contribute to refinement and improvement&lt;br/&gt;of these imaging
methods.&lt;br/&gt;