* 0138486
* Cosmogenic Nuclide-Based Boundary Conditions for Numerical Ice Sheet Models: A Simulation of the Fennoscandian Ice Sheet through A Glacial Cycle
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2006
* Jonathan Harbor, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 04/30/2006
* USD 307,443.00

&lt;br/&gt;0138486&lt;br/&gt;Harbor&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Major limitations in
the successful use of ice sheet models for climate research arise from limited
field data for model calibration. This may result in unrealistic simulations of
ice sheet inception, growth, and decay, and uncertainties in reconstructing ice
sheet basal boundary conditions and surface profiles. For example, trimlines and
weathering differences have been interpreted as indicators of former ice sheet
height in some locations, while mapping and cosmogenic nuclide-based assessment
of glacial erosion patterns in Scandinavia suggest that such features in some
cases represent internal thermal boundaries between wet-(warm) based erosive ice
and dry-(cold) based non-erosive ice. Such radical differences in interpretation
have profound impacts on reconstructed ice sheet thickness, dynamics, and
extent, and paleoclimates interpretations derived from ice sheet
reconstructions. The fact that uneroded areas have been identified in
Scandinavia within the known limits of multiple ice sheet overriding events
indicates that these uneroded areas must have survived as non-eroding
(presumably frozen-bed) patches throughout ice sheet inception, growth, and
decay. This observation represents a significant new constraint on basal thermal
conditions for ice sheet models and is indicative of the types of constraints
that field-based geomorphology and glacial geology can provide to enhance ice
sheet modeling efforts. Over the past three years the Principal Investigator
Arjen Stroeven, Stockholm University, and Derek Fabel, Australian National
University, have worked collaboratively with support from National Science
Foundation (NSF) and Swedish NSF to examine deglaciation chronology and patterns
of erosion and landscape preservation in the northern Swedish mountains, the
core area of the Fennoscandian Ice Sheet (FIS). The results provide the
groundwork for proposing the next phase of this work, in which they will
reconstruct FIS thickness, extent, and dynamics (including total ice volume-
induced sea level change) over critical periods of the last glacial cycle
(Marine Isotope Stage [MIS] 5d or 5b, inception phase; MIS 2, Last Glacial
Maximum (LGM) phase, and; MIS 1, deglaciation phase). The paleotopography
(height) of the FIS through a glacial cycle will be simulated using a state-of-
the-art thermomechanical numerical ice sheet model, with key boundary conditions
constrained both by cosmogenic nuclide-based reconstructions of subglacial
conditions, and by an isostatic model. The team for this work has been expanded
to include Alun Hubbard, University of Edinburgh, Kurt Lambeck, Australian
National University, and Jens-Ove Naslund, Stockholm University, in the areas of
glaciological and isostatic modeling. New reconstructions will likely have wide
significance, both to European ice sheet and paleoclimate reconstructions and
evaluations of evidence of sea level low-stands (proxy for total land-based ice
on earth) and also in encouraging re-evaluation of the dynamics of inception,
growth, and decay of other major ice sheets worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;