* 0138123
* A New Facility for the Cornell University Museum of Vertebrates:  Moving, Compactors, and Cases
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* David Winkler, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Farmer
* 06/30/2004
* USD 471,999.00

This project partially supports the move of the Cornell University Museum of
Vertebrates (CUMV) to a new museum facility in a building currently under
construction at the Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology (CLO). Cornell has raised
over $6M (out of a total project cost of about $32M) for the new museum space in
this building, which is on schedule for occupation in 2003. NSF Funds will be
used to: (1) purchase compact shelving and cases for storage of both fluid-
preserved specimens and dry specimens (skins, skeletons, nests, and eggs) of
vertebrates (fishes, amphibians, reptiles, birds, mammals) and (2) provide
partial funding for moving the collections into the new facility. This move will
be the largest single enhancement to the CUMV in more than three decades: the
new home for the Museum will relieve crowding of specimens, allow expansion
space and safeguard the collections against a variety of problems related to the
deterioration of the current facility. The new museum will also include a state-
of-the art preparation facility, large teaching laboratory, radiography room,
preparation lab, dermestid room, walk-in freezer, and molecular laboratory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CUMV is an active university research museum of
national importance. Students and staff are actively engaged in original
research, and students are trained in curatorial techniques while they help
disseminate the information in the Museum to scientists and wildlife managers
throughout the globe. The CUMV contains one of the most comprehensive
collections of fish, birds and mammals from the Northeastern United States, and
its holdings are widely representative of the diversity of vertebrates
throughout the world. Museum specimens are irreplaceable sources of data
documenting changes in ecological conditions, both through the identity of
specimens collected from pristine localities before alteration by humans, and
through the tissues that specimens contain, which provide a biochemical window
into the genetics of historical populations as well as the levels of pollutants
their environments once contained. These collections thus provide measures of
baseline conditions and, through continued accessions, on-going monitoring of
the effects of environmental changes. Staff of the CUMV will collaborate with
the large community of vertebrate biologists at the Laboratory of Ornithology to
increase the information stored in and interpreted from the Museum's
collections, and to disseminate the knowledge attained through the variety of
web and media outlets.&lt;br/&gt;