* 0138660
* Collaborative Research:  Optical Gradient Polymeric Materials via Isothermal Frontal Polymerization
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* John Pojman, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 06/30/2006
* USD 158,209.00

The goal of the project is to learn how isothermal frontal polymerization (IFP)
can be efficiently used to produce gradient optical materials. IFP is a method
of producing polymers in which a localized reaction zone of free-radical
polymerization propagates at the rate of about one cm per day through an
unstirred solution of monomer and initiator. A "seed" of polymer is placed at
the bottom of a cuvette, and a solution of the polymer's monomer with a free-
radical initiator is placed over it. The system is maintained at a constant
temperature. Polymerization occurs slowly in the bulk solution but much faster
in the region of polymer as the monomer swells it because of the gel effect. The
overall effect is the slow propagation of a transition zone between polymer and
the monomer/initiator solution. Using Laser Line Deflection, we will measure the
gradients created during the polymerization of methyl methacrylate and compare
these to analytical and numerical models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A gradient
optical material is a material that possesses a spatial gradient of an optical
property. Two types can be prepared via IFP. One type is Gradient Refractive
Index (GRIN) lenses and fibers. The other type is organic optical limiters. The
RI gradient can be produced by adding a dopant, with a refractive index
different from that of the polymer, to the monomer/initiator solution. The
dopant is redistributed by the propagating front to create a dopant
concentration gradient and resulting refractive index gradient. Using a
nonlinear optical dye as the dopant allows the creation of a concentration
variation of this dye in a polymer
matrix.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
result in a superior understanding of how isothermal frontal polymerization can
be used to prepare special materials with useful applications. Gradient
refractive index fibers are used commercially for applications in which large
amounts of digital signals must be transferred between devices over a short
distance. Plastic fiber is cheaper to produce and so this research can help the
production of consumer products and fibers for computer networks. Optical
limiters are used for protecting human eyes from intense laser pulses. Preparing
such devices with polymers can make their weight and cost lower and thus their
utility greater.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will benefit the education of
two graduate students. The collaboration between mathematicians and chemists
will provide them an important learning experience in collaborative research.
Because of the significant number of African-Americans and women at USM, these
groups will benefit from this project.&lt;br/&gt;