* 0138933
* Collaborative Research: Development of Molecular and Biochemical Markers for Nutrient Stress and Toxin Production in Pseudo-Nitzchia
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2005
* E. Virginia Armbrust, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 11/30/2005
* USD 276,574.00

The two intertwined goals of this project are to determine the suite of genes
expressed by Pseudo-nitzschia under toxin-producing conditions, and to acquire a
better understanding of the connections between environmental conditions and
physiological responses leading to toxin production. A set of physiological
experiments will permit evaluation of molecular probes generated from gene
expression studies. In turn, the molecular probes will be used
to&lt;br/&gt;interrogate natural populations and help determine the
physiological status of Pseudo-nitzschia in the field. The ultimate goal is to
find a specific gene transcript or a pattern of gene expression that is
correlated with toxin production in the field. The following hypotheses will be
tested: &lt;br/&gt;H1: There are genes or a suite of genes whose expression
pattern is highly correlated with toxin production in Pseudo-nitzschia.
&lt;br/&gt;H2: A primary trigger for toxin production in Monterey Bay is
silicate limitation, so that certain oceanographic conditions permit bloom
development. &lt;br/&gt;H3: Silicate limitation may sensitize cells to trace-
metal (e.g. copper) stress and the toxin (domoic acid) can function as a metal
ion buffer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Batch and continuous cultures will be stressed
with silicate, copper, and iron. Growth, substrate utilization, and
physiological parameters (variable fluorescence, nutrient quotas, amino acid
pools, including domoic acid) will be assessed. Cells will be harvested for
development of cDNA subtraction libraries under different stressors. Gene arrays
developed from these libraries will provide molecular probes for field testing.
Identification of genes related to toxin production, but not general metabolism,
will be facilitated by information generated by the physiology experiments. The
laboratory work will be combined with a limited field program for assessment of
environmental triggers (e.g. copper, silicate, iron stress) and for testing of
the molecular probes. Results from the molecular expression and physiological
assays will permit an initial description of the cellular pathways mediating
environmental triggers (e.g silicate and metals) for production of
toxin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;