* 0138523
* Geometric Function Theory in Several Complex Variables
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Jean-Pierre Rosay, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2006
* USD 186,000.00

There are two main research directions in this project. The first one is the
continuation of the work on a general theory of boundary values, in the sense of
analytic functionals or hyperfunctions. In its present state this theory has
clarified several points in the study of boundary values of functions, in
particular viz the intrinsic character of the definitions. Points which they
have clarified in the global setting need further study in the local version. A
theory in the non real analytic setting is still to be done. The second
direction is at the confluent of pluri-potential theory and complex geometry. A
still remote goal is the possible extension of Poletsky's theory of disks to the
case of almost complex manifolds, whose role in Mathematics is rapidly growing.
It also leads to the study of approximate solutions to the d-bar operator.

The primary field of this proposal is Several Complex Variables. This field is
rich due to its connections to many fields in Mathematics. There is in
particular a remarkable interplay between Several Complex Variables and the
theory of Partial Differential Equations, which itself is the most basic tool in
the study of many processes in Physics and Engineering. The first direction
discussed above fits in that setting. In applications quantitative studies have
often to be replaced by qualitative studies, either because the quantitative
study is too difficult or because the qualitative study is in fact more
illuminating. This is where the field of Topology is essential. Several
important connections exist between Several Complex Variables and Topology. The
second direction discussed above fits in that setting. Deformation theory is a
major theme, in which the study of almost complex structures has already played
a crucial role.