* 0138639
* Behind Closed Doors:  New Cabinetry for the Herbarium at the Academy of Natural Sciences, Philadelphia (PH)
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2005
* James Macklin, Academy of Natural Sciences Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* Richard M. McCourt
* 03/31/2005
* USD 490,903.00

This project will bring the storage conditions for the plant collection at the
Academy of Natural Sciences (PH) up to archival standards. These specimens,
representing many of the earliest and historically most significant plant
collections of the United States, are currently threatened by environmental
instability and pest incursions that result from current storage conditions. The
mobile shelving systems installed more than 20 years ago were one of the first
such installations and were thus something of a testing ground for several
design features. Although designed with the best of intentions, the system has
proven to be fundamentally flawed on several counts including absence of doors,
storage spaces (cubbies) that are the wrong size for herbarium specimens, and
construction materials that are not archival quality. The cabinet system is made
of bulky yet permeable wood-composite materials that outgas volatile compounds.
In addition to these flaws in the compactor system, the surrounding storage area
is not adequately sealed from adjacent areas and has poor control of temperature
and humidity. These conditions will be ameliorated by acquisition of new metal
herbarium cabinets to be installed on existing, refurbished compactor carriages
and by installation of a new HVAC system to control temperature and humidity.
Metal cabinets with tightly closing, gasketed doors, will solve several problems
including elimination of exposure of specimens to non-archival quality
construction materials, correction of cubby dimensions, and buffering of local
environmental conditions. Together with climate control, this will permit
control of insect infestations and prevent pest movement between cabinets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Herbarium of the Academy of Natural Sciences of
Philadelphia is home to unique resources of scientific and historical
importance. Notably, it houses upwards of 44,000 type specimens and half again
as many specimens of special historical significance. The collection totals more
than 1.3 million specimens, including many of the most historically significant
collections of the North American flora. Notable collections from the 18th and
19th centuries include those of B. S. Barton (1766-1815), H. Muhlenberg
(1753-1815), T. Nuttall (1786-1859), and nearly all of the surviving specimens
collected by Meriwether Lewis and William Clark during their historic
exploration of the western U.S. (1804-06). This project will preserve the
current collection and allow for expansion of approximately 10-15%, sufficient
to handle anticipated growth over the next 10-15 years. The new cabinets and
HVAC system will have the immediate and long-term impact of saving the specimens
at PH from further damage and protecting them for the future. Due to the many
type specimens and wealth of historical material, these upgrades will benefit
the national and international community of botanical and historical scholars,
while