* 0138051
* US-India Cooperative Research:  Theory of Pi-Conjugated Photonic Materials
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Sumitendra Mazumdar, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 02/28/2006
* USD 17,364.00

0138051&lt;br/&gt;Mazumdar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award supports
the US-India cooperative research project entitled Theory of Pi-Conjugated
Photonic Materials. The investigators, Sumitendra Mazumdar, University of
Arizona and Suryanarayana Ramasesha, Indian Institute of Science (IISc),
Bangalore will undertake theoretical studies on the photophysics of pi-
conjugated oligomers and polymers. These materials are of high current interest
for their applications in photonics. The PIs will study the optical properties
of conjugated organic polymer materials with a focus on interpreting
experimental results, developing mechanisms for photophysical processes, and
predicting optical properties of new materials. The goals are to develop a
comprehensive theory of charge-transfer and collision processes important in
organic light emitting diodes and to develop a density matrix renormalization
technique capable of calculating energies of low band gap polymers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: This project extends research funded under grant,
DMR-0101659 to Mazumdar and continues a highly successful collaboration with
Ramasesha. Their work on organic light emitting diodes was published in Nature
this year. The PI is a leading theorist in the area of excited states and
optical properties of conjugated polymers. The research is expected to lead to
greater understanding of correlated electron physics and to significant advances
in the development of new concepts and methodologies for organic semiconductors
and low dimensional correlated electron systems. Due to the technological
importance of the materials and methodologies under study, this research is
likely to strongly impact the development of this rapidly evolving field over
the next few years. It extends DMR funded research and provides mutual benefits
to students and junior colleagues in both countries. The project is supported by
the Office of International Science &amp; Engineering and the Division of
Materials Research. In India, it is supported by the Department of Science and
Technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;