* 0138309
* NIEE Video Project: A Sequel to Gilbane Gold
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2002,08/31/2005
* Steven Nichols, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 08/31/2005
* USD 265,661.00

A project team of engineer educators, engineer practitioners, and philosophers
with international reputations in engineering ethics creates a video dramatizing
a fictional but realistic case study in engineering ethics. This is a sequel
Gilbane Gold; a highly successful, award-winning video. This video will help
meet the contemporary need for effective instruction in engineering ethics,
prompted by recent accreditation requirements for engineering curricula to
include aspects of engineering ethics, and by increases in requirements for
awareness of professional ethics in the licensing of professional engineers by
states' licensing agencies. The video will reach hundreds of thousands of
engineering students, practicing engineers, and others who work with engineers.
It emphasizes the positive responsibilities of engineers and the resulting
benefit to the public, rather than whistle-blowing, which was one aspect of
Gilbane Gold. &lt;br/&gt;Because of the globalization of the economy, the new
video is cast in an international context. The video is done in three versions
to enhance its exposure and pedagogical effectiveness: a 20-25 minute "basic"
story version along the lines of Gilbane Gold, a "segmented' version that can be
viewed in parts, and an "interactive" version on DVD that allows the viewer to
observe the consequences of different ethical decisions. The film will improve
the ability of students and practicing engineers to: &lt;br/&gt;Evaluate
alternatives according to basic ethical values and through simple tests
&lt;br/&gt;Identify and distinguish ethical issues, technical issues, and
economic issues &lt;br/&gt;Identify affected parties (stakeholders) and their
rights and responsibilities &lt;br/&gt;Identify social and political constraints
on possible solutions &lt;br/&gt;Determine whether additional information is
needed to make a good decision &lt;br/&gt;Formulate alternative courses of
action &lt;br/&gt;Test the alternatives and imagine possible consequences of
those alternatives. &lt;br/&gt;Also, the video will help the viewers become more
aware that: &lt;br/&gt;Ethical considerations are an integral part of making
engineering decisions &lt;br/&gt;A code of ethics will provide guidance in the
decision-making process &lt;br/&gt;The obligations of a code of ethics do not
stop at the United States border &lt;br/&gt;The obligations of engineers go
beyond fulfilling a contract with a client or customer. &lt;br/&gt;The
effectiveness of the video in achieving these goals is assessed through
questionnaires and a &lt;br/&gt;standard test of moral reasoning. As part of the
dissemination plan and in order to assure its wide use in the educational
environment, a free copy will be sent to every engineering dean in the United
States who oversees ABET-accredited engineering programs. Free examination
copies will also be sent to major engineering and applied ethics societies in
the United States. This wide distribution will encourage use of the video in
conveying the importance of ethics in undergraduate curricula, graduate
curricula, and continuing education programs. &lt;br/&gt;