* 0138518
* Photonics Technology Access Program - PTAP
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Arpad Berg, Optoelectronics Industry Development Association
* Continuing grant
* Rongqing Hui
* 06/30/2006
* USD 4,824,470.00

ECS-0138518 Arpad Bergh

The Optoelectronics Industry Development Association is establishing under NSF
and DARPA support the Photonics Technology Access Program (PTAP), where
government funds are used to procure pre-commercial photonics experimental
research prototypes (hereinafter referred to as "prototypes") to be made
available to qualified researchers in a competitive solicitation and evaluation
process. These pre-commerical prototypes may comprise novel materials, material
structures, devices and device arrays, circuits and modules. Academic
researchers can use the prototypes to advance discovery and understanding in
photonics and provide feedback to the industry. Professors may also use the
prototypes to enhance teaching, training and learning in class demonstrations
and teaching laboratories. The goal of the program is to improve the
availability of novel experimental research prototypes to universities. New
prototypes are evolving at increasing rate and frequency, and if researchers
have access to them only when they are available commercially, they are one or
two generations behind leading edge technology.

The program is modeled after the successful parts of the U.S.-Japan Joint
Optoelectronics Project (JOP). Although the proposed program is domestic in
nature, it has the potential to be expanded internationally at a later date to
include Japan, Europe and others. Such an expansion might be considered to
enrich the offerings of the program to include prototypes that are not available
in the U.S. and to collect feedback from academic researchers from outside the
U.S. who might have different perspectives. OIDA is well qualified to provide
the broker function for this program based on its five years of experience with
the JOP, including managing the domestic competitive solicitation and evaluation
process supported with NSF and DARPA funds. OIDA also has strong interactions
with large and small photonics companies and photonics-active academic
institutions. To further strengthen its ties with PTAP constituencies, OIDA
would assemble an Advisory Board for this program comprising leading researchers
and educators from academia, industry and government.

Photonics is a key enabling technology for the information age and it
complements the goals of the National Nanotechnology Initiative and the National
Information Technology Initiative. The proposed Photonics Technology Access
Program also contributes to workforce development in science, engineering and
technology and benefits numerous existing photonics programs thoughout the
government. The program also helps industry, especially small companies who
might find new applications for their leading prototypes.