* 0138662
* Storage Equipment for New Vertebrate Paleontology Acquisitions
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2004
* Richard Cifelli, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Farmer
* 03/31/2004
* USD 76,927.00

The vertebrate paleontology (VP) collection of the Oklahoma Museum of Natural
History (OMNH), University of Oklahoma, constitutes a major, international
resource of vertebrate fossils, with over 61,000 specimens. The collection is
particularly strong in Permian vertebrates, Jurassic dinosaurs, Cretaceous
faunas, and Miocene mammals. The core of the collection, amassed during the
1930s-40s, remained largely uncurated and fell into disuse and inaccessibility.
In 1987, the institution began a multi-phased program of collection renovation.
Two initial phases focused on specimen curation, preparation/restoration, and
storage; a third phase, data verification and computerization (including web
access to specimens data and images), is in progress. Successful completion of
the first two phases has led to a dramatic increase in collection activity and
utilization, documented by sharp rises in visiting researchers, outgoing loans,
and publications. In 2000, OMNH opened a comprehensive new building with vastly
expanded and improved resources for research, exhibits, and education. The
resultant expansion of the VP program assures a strong potential for
substantially higher utilization in the foreseeable future. However, current
collection use is tightly constrained by available storage cabinets. This
problem will be addressed through (1) purchase of additional storage equipment
and (2) curation of these new acquisitions and rearrangement (decompression) of
the collection. Within the context of our overall plan for collection
improvement, the proposed project is timed to coordinate with a major, related
initiative: specimen inventory and data verification. The recent move of OMNH
natural history collections into a single building has brought new standards and
concerns in collection management. Existing wooden pallets that hold oversized
specimens pose a threat (pest infestation) to other collections now housed in
the same facility. We propose to address this issue through replacement of
wooden with archival plastic pallets.&lt;br/&gt; With the recent hiring of new
curators and collection support staff, OMNH is poised to emerge as a major
center for research and education in paleobiology. The VP collection is a
fundamental resource to this fledgling program and to the biological community
in general. Given this environment, demand for use of the collection will
continue to increase sharply. Completion of the proposed project will permit
proper housing, logical arrangement, and ready access to the entire holdings,
thereby permitting us to meet the demands of increased
utilization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;