* 0138923
* Nonlinear Differential Equations, Mechanics and Bifurcation Conference, May 20-22, 2002, Durham, North Carolina
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2003
* M Forest, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 04/30/2003
* USD 17,000.00

NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0138923&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear
Differential Equations, Mechanics and
Bifurcation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0138923
Shearer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports U.S. participants in the
conference on Nonlinear Differential Equations, Mechanics, and Bifurcation held
at Duke University on May 20-22, 2002. The purpose of the conference is to
explore connections between the fields of ordinary and partial differential
equations, mechanics and bifurcation, and industrial mathematics, and to
encourage the involvement of young mathematical scientists in these
areas.&lt;br/&gt;The speakers include established leaders in these fields, as
well as promising young mathematicians and scientists. The meeting is a
collaboration between the Research Triangle universities of Duke University,
North Carolina State University, and the University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central theme of the conference is the role of
nonlinearity in physical systems, especially elasticity, granular materials, and
fluid flow. The interplay between experiments, modeling, theoretical mechanics,
mathematical analysis, numerical simulation, and industrial design has proved
particularly fruitful in recent years. This conference brings together
scientists and mathematicians from all of these areas. The conference is
designed to include lively discussion of the interplay between discoveries of
new experimental phenomena, proposed mathematical models, theoretical
developments and challenges, and corresponding innovations in numerical methods.
Bifurcation and pattern formation are observed in experiments with solids,
fluids and granular materials, and the mathematical techniques to analyze
phenomena have grown quite sophisticated. This connection between experiment and
theory, coupled to numerical simulation, occurs throughout the
conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;