* 0138995
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research Experience in Native American Archaeology &amp; Heritage Preservation: A Cooperative Project of the Univ.of Arizona &amp; the White Mountain Apache
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2005
* John Welch, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Linda G. Lopez
* 03/31/2005
* USD 200,989.00

This award provides support for an Undergraduate Research Experience in Native
American Archaeology and Heritage Preservation: A Cooperative Project of the
University of Arizona and The White Mountain Apache Tribe. A major focus of the
project will be to demonstrate, through participatory activities, the scientific
and heritage benefits of cooperative research in archaeology. The REU experience
will combine the resources of the University of Arizona's Department of
Anthropology, which has an archaeological research station in Pinedale, Arizona,
with one of the most active tribal heritage resource management programs
operated by the White Mountain Apache Tribe on the Fort Apache Indian
Reservation. Ten students will be supported for the six-week program each
summer. Students will be drawn from undergraduates from across the country, with
special recruitment from Native American communities. Student research
activities will include mapping of Pueblo and Apache sites, archaeological
survey, surface collections, ruins stabilization, damage assessment, laboratory
processing and analyses, field trips, and excavation. All but the excavation and
field trip component will be held on the Fort Apache Indian Reservation in east-
central Arizona. Excavations will be conducted on the Sitgreaves National
Forest. A distingui8shed lecture series will be included as well as an ethics
component. The results of the research projects will be presented in a mini-
symposium at the end of the project and the symposium proceedings will be
submitted to the White Mountain Apache Tribe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
contributes to the Foundation's continuing efforts to attract talented students
into careers in science through active undergraduate research experiences.