* 0138920
* Improving Alaska Native Elementary Students' Math Performance
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Jerry Lipka, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Paola Sztajn
* 05/31/2006
* USD 1,228,673.00

This three-year Teacher Retention and Renewal project seeks to improve the
mathematics performance of Yup'ik Eskimo and urban Native students through four
basic strategies: (1) improving teachers' content and pedagogical knowledge, (2)
involving teachers in action research, (3) recruiting (and retaining)
mentor/novice Alaska Native teachers, and (4) researching teacher training
effects and its relationship to teachers' knowledge and student performance. The
principal vehicle to accomplish these goals is a National Science Foundation
sponsored curriculum, "Adapting Yup'ik Elders' Knowledge." This curriculum
includes culturally relevant topics such as salmon fishing, kayaking, orienting
and navigating. Including Native knowledge in the classroom may decrease the
long-standing tension between school and community, which often leads to high
teacher turnover.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instructional components of the
project include three-week Summer Institutes, follow-up workshops in the
communities, online support and community math activities. The Summer Institutes
are devoted to the integration of culture, pedagogy and content knowledge
through the use of the Adapting Yup'ik Elders' Knowledge curriculum. Through
hands-on and inquiry-oriented sessions, participants generate questions, work in
peer-assisted groups and keep journals as they explore mathematics, teaching and
culture. As a teaching tool, the project uses videotapes from Alaskan
classrooms, from other classrooms using culturally-based math programs and from
international studies on math teaching and learning. Participants of the Summer
Institutes receive credit for three University courses: Geometry and Spatial
Reasoning; Algebraic Thinking; and Pedagogy, Content and Culture. The follow-up
workshops occur in each community and involve teachers, elders, students and
families. To further support the mentors and novice teachers, there are three
audio conferences during the school year and on-line support via the use of
Blackboard. &lt;br/&gt;The project also involves a large research study. The
Principal Investigator uses both quantitative and qualitative research methods
to investigate (a) the relationship between the teacher training component and
teacher knowledge, attitude and performance, and (b) the effects of these
processes on Alaska Native and Yup'ik student mathematics
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;