* 0138113
* Collaborative Research:  Evolution and Development of Retinal Organization in Primates
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2008
* Barbara Finlay, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Martha Flanders
* 07/31/2008
* USD 551,756.00

We know very little how evolution produces new species adapted to particular
ecological niches. This project is to study two closely related species, one
diurnal and the other nocturnal. The nocturnal animal has more rods for night
vision, fewer cones, a bigger eye and a different eye conformation than the
diurnal one. How many and what kind of genetic changes produce this
constellation of differences?

We hypothesize that a relatively simple change, an alteration of when maximal
cell proliferation occurs to favor rods over cones in the nocturnal species, is
the essential genetic change, and the rest of the alterations in eye
conformation are "epigenetic" as eye growth patterns fall under the control of
rods. To test this, we bring the together the expertise of three laboratories.
The Finlay lab at Cornell University has developed the quantitative techniques
for comparing the developmental schedules and morphologies of different animals;
the Cepko lab at Harvard Medical School has pioneered studies of cell
proliferation and differentiation of the eye; the Silveira lab of the Federal
University of Para, Amazonia, Brazil has produced the fundamental descriptions
of the visual systems of these species. We will investigate the development of
the retina and the eye in both species, looking at the expression of
developmental control genes, regulators of the cell cycle, and markers of cell
type to see exactly what has changed between the two. At the heart of the
project lies the question whether genes, over evolutionary time, have produced
coordinated patterns in response to repeatedly encountered challenges like the
shift from diurnal to nocturnal living.

As a multi-institutional international collaboration, this project has special
features. The universities of the north of Brazil struggle economically, so this
project provides a link for the researchers and students of Amazonia to new
technologies, research resources and ideas. All of the students, North American
and Brazilian, benefit from the exposure to different educational systems and
expectations; we plan to provide more formal means for student exchange in the
near future. Financial support for the animal center is also very important: in
addition to its role as a research facility and breeding colony, the center
serves as a cachement center for animals confiscated by poachers and those
endangered by natural or man-made ecological challenges.



