* 0138312
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Ethnoprimatology of Macaca tonkeana:  The Interface of Primate and Human Ecology in Lore Lindu National Park, Sulawesi, Indonesia
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Carolyn Ehardt, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 06/30/2004
* USD 10,000.00

In many areas of the world (e.g., Africa, Asia and Southeast Asia), human and
nonhuman primates increasingly occur in close proximity, often exploiting common
environmental resources. This results in situations with strong potential for
conflict. Human-nonhuman primate conflict, such as crop raiding, often occurs in
protected areas (e.g., National Parks), where villagers must comply with
restricted use/access policies, thus perpetuating negative attitudes towards the
protected area (and its wildlife) and potentially encouraging "illegal" land
conversion and poaching. It is therefore critical that research, which occurs
within the context of these protected areas, address both sides of the conflict.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ethnoprimatology is a new area of interest within
anthropology that addresses ecological and cultural interconnections between
human and nonhuman primates and their implications for conservation. An
ethnoprimatological approach is therefore well-suited to an examination of both
sides of human-nonhuman primate conflict. In this research the primary unit of
investigation will be the "human-nonhuman primate community" which includes
human residents of the village of Tomado and the Tonkean macaques (Macaca
tonkeana) that border this village in Lore Lindu National Park (LLNP), Central
Sulawesi, Indonesia. This project will contribute to ethnoprimatology by
examining how Tonkean macaques respond to human-induced habitat alteration
(e.g., forest use/disturbance and the development of agriculture) and how the
behavior and ecology of these macaques, as well as conservation policy
associated with LLNP, affect the livelihoods of villagers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The significance of this project is threefold. First, this
project will be the first long-term research effort to explore the ecology and
social behavior of M. tonkeana; a little-known macaque species found only in
Central Sulawesi. Second, by examining patterns of feeding/foraging and habitat
use, the researcher will determine the factors that allow these macaques to
persist in what is becoming the dominant land type in the tropics: secondary
forest or agriculture/forest 'scrub,' and thus contribute to our understanding
of the ecological and behavioral flexibility of these primates. Lastly, this
project will contribute to the improvement of conservation management plans for
LLNP in two ways. First, by examining patterns of habitat use in M. tonkeana,
the PI can help to improve the management of the area between agricultural lands
and the forest edge, to minimize human-macaque conflict. Second, the examination
of aspects of local human ecology, such as attitudes towards conservation and
patterns of resource use will inform the development of culturally sensitive
conservation efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;