* 0138352
* Upgrade and Operation of a Marine-Atmospheric Sampling Facility at Tudor Hill, Bermuda
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Anthony Knap, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2005
* USD 181,903.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0138352&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The atmospheric
transport and air-sea exchange of aerosols and gases play major roles in the
global geochemical cycles of many elements. These processes also exert
significant controls on the global radiation budget and affect the
concentrations and distributions of major anthropogenic pollutants. Much of our
present knowledge of atmospheric transport and ocean- atmosphere exchange has
come from time-series data collected at atmospheric sampling stations, of which
oceanic sites are essential components. Bermuda has been a key sampling location
for numerous studies of the marine atmosphere, owing to its strategic geographic
location in the western North Atlantic, and it is likely to feature importantly
in future field studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the research
team at the Bermuda Biological Station for Research will: (1) upgrade and
maintain a state-of-the-art atmospheric sampling station at Tudor Hill, Bermuda;
(2) operate this atmospheric sampling station to provide facilities for the
collection of atmospheric samples and operation of analytical instrumentation in
research programs led by other investigators; and (3) collect and store selected
core meteorological data and atmospheric samples on a continuous basis, in
collaboration with and in support of other
investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The time-series data and samples collected
in this program will provide the basic context for future marine-atmospheric
research programs to be conducted in the Bermuda region, while the upgrade and
maintenance of sampling facilities will provide the basic support needed for
such programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;