* 0138070
* GOALI: High Throughput Activity and In-situ Infrared Spectroscopy and X-Ray Absorption Fine Structure Studies of the Effect of Sulfur on Noble Metal Supported Oxidation Catalysts
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2006
* Eduardo Wolf, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* John R Regalbuto
* 02/28/2006
* USD 238,906.00

Proposal Title: GOALI: High Throughput Activity and in-situ FTIR and EXAFS
Studies of the Effect of Sulfur on Noble Metal Supported Oxidation Catalysts
Proposal Number: CTS-0138070 Principal Investigator: Eduardo Wolf Institution:
Notre Dame University

The objective of this proposal is to investigate the effects of sulfur on the
state of the surface of supported platinum, palladium, and rhodium catalysts and
to develop structure-activity correlations for these catalysts during oxidation
reaction. The approach is to conduct a comprehensive study on the effect of
sulfur poisoning on model oxidation reactions by combining kinetic measurements,
catalyst characterizations, and microkinetic and Monte Carlo simulations of the
experimental results. High throughput catalyst evaluations will be used to
ascertain the effect of sulfur on carbon monoxide, propane, and proplyene
oxidation on Pt, Pd, and Rh on a variety of oxide supports. An array of
catalysts will be used to identify the major trends in activity caused by sulfur
poisoning of the catalysts' surface. Selected samples will be studied using a
variety of surface analytical techniques such as EXAFS and FTIR. An industrial
collaborator brings expertise in surface science and catalyst preparation
techniques. The results of this study may be useful in developing more sulfur-
tolerant catalysts in automobile exhaust applications and for fuel cells.