* 0138600
* Consolidation of the WIS and MAD Herbaria, and Computerization of Wisconsin Vascular Plant Specimens
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2005
* Paul Berry, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Richard M. McCourt
* 03/31/2005
* USD 352,250.00

This project will improve the botanical collections facilities at the University
of Wisconsin-Madison in two ways. First, it will consolidate two campus museum
facilities into one, by incorporating the USDA Forest Products Laboratory
Herbarium (acronym "MAD", with 45,000 specimens) into the larger UW-Madison
Herbarium ("WIS", currently with 1,020,000 specimens). These collections are now
located at opposite ends of the Madison campus, and their merger will
consolidate physical, human, and computerization resources, as well as
facilitate better research and curation of the collections. Whenever the
incoming specimens from MAD are vouchers for actual wood specimens at the Forest
Products Lab, they will be digitally photographed by the USDA-FPL before
arriving at WIS, and these images will be linked to an online reference
database. To fit the MAD herbarium into the limited space available at WIS, and
to alleviate overcrowding and correct substandard collection storage conditions
there, we will install compacterized and non-compacterized specimen storage
cases in available sections of the main herbarium. The second major improvement
entails expanding the computerized database of Wisconsin vascular plant
specimens from the current 100,000 accessions to about 250,000, including all
herbarium collections from the state at WIS. The Wisconsin Vascular Plants
website (www.wisc.edu/herbarium) is currently a searchable, species-based
checklist, with extensive supplementary information and photographs of over
2,000 species. With the databasing accomplished by this project, we will be able
to provide online computerized distribution maps for all 2,500 species in
Wisconsin, as well as searchable record information from any of the 250,000
databased specimens.

The Wisconsin Vascular Plant website (www.wisc.edu/herbarium) is already a
heavily consulted resource at the state and national levels (over one million
hits in 2001), and we are proud that we are able to outreach to a broad public
as well as to the scientific community. We do this by providing a simple user
interface, effective search mechanisms, rich graphic content in plant
photographs and distribution maps, and useful links to associated websites. Our
user base includes natural resource managers, state and federal agencies,
secondary schools and universities, and amateur naturalists. With the increased
computerization of Wisconsin specimens, we will significantly expand the
website's role as an effective and continually developing online flora. The
consolidation of WIS and MAD will provide the infrastructure to safely and
efficiently manage a combined herbarium of over 1,100,000 specimens
(incorporating some of the unprocessed collections now in storage). We will then
be among the top five university-based plant collections in the country in size
and a forerunner in the electronic dissemination of plant-related data and
images designed to serve both the general public and the more specialized
scientific community.