* 0138760
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  RAMSys: Collaborative Metacomputing System
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2005
* Ian Greenshields, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 03/31/2005
* USD 29,700.00

0138760&lt;br/&gt;Greenshields&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is
to support a collaborative project by Dr. Ian Greenshields and Dr. Reda Ammar,
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Connecticut,
Storrs, Connecticut, and Dr. Ayman El-Dessouki, President of the Electronics
Research Institute (ERI), Cairo, Egypt. They propose to do research, which seeks
to establish the ERI in Cairo as a Center of Excellence in Egypt in grid
computing, linking Egyptian and US computation resources. The project will
include three phases: an establishment phase, in which a small US-Egyptian
cluster is established at ERI, together with extant grid middleware; an
educational phase, in which they will jointly create an on-line educational
resource for Egyptian (and also for U.S.) scientists regarding grid computing;
and a research phase, in which they will exercise the small clusters with a
collaborative project in computational medicine to assess loading
characteristics relative to time differences and the effect of low bandwidth
network connections relative to problem granularity and the ratio of compute
time to data transfer time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The aggregation of
widely distributed computing resources into a seamless massively parallel
virtual machine (grid computer) has the potential for providing cost-effective
supercomputing and for encouraging international scientific collaboration by the
sharing of data in a massive virtual data space. However, scientists in
developing countries tend not to have access either to massive grid computers or
to the kind of IT support which allows them to exploit inexpensive clusters of
commodity workstations as local nodes within a collaborative grid. The proposed
development can provide the Egyptian scientific community with a medium-scale
Grid computer, and because of the time differences between Egypt and the U.S.,
machines at U.S. sites which collaborate with Egyptian scientists can be
harnessed by Egypt during the off-hours at the U.S. end, and the same holds for
U.S. use of Egyptian machines during off-hours at the Egyptian end. The US PI
and the Egyptian collaborator have extensive experience in this area of
research. One graduate student from the University of Connecticut will work on
the project in Egypt. This proposal meets the INT objective of supporting
collaborative research in areas of mutual scientific interest. &lt;br/&gt;