* 0138598
* Spin Filter with Polarized Superfluid:  Effects of Surface and Interface
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Haruo Kojima, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 03/31/2006
* USD 231,768.00

This research is focused on experimental investigations of the spin fluid
dynamics in ferromagnetic superfluid He-3. The spin-polarized He-3 constitutes a
pure, nearly ideal, material system for studying fundamental processes governing
spin transport, diffusion and relaxation. Earlier experiments indicated that an
"interface" between the magnetic and non-magnetic fluid He-3 could present a new
channel for spin relaxation. It is proposed to provide a direct test of the
importance of the interface by eliminating the interface altogether. A new spin
filter experiment is proposed to create a much greater polarization than
heretofore possible by inducing ferromagnetic fluid flows through a "superleak".
The hydrodynamics and spin dynamics properties of such a fluid state with large
non-equilibrium polarization will be studied for the first time. Experiments
will be carried out with liquid He-3 cooled down to 0.5 mKelvin, in magnetic
fields up to 15 Tesla. These studies of spin fluid dynamics are closely related
to current research in the field of "spintronics". The proposed research has
certain advantages, in that simpler macroscopic structures are involved, it is
relatively easy to alter material conditions and parameters, and the relaxation
or decoherence time scales are longer. The proposed work will be carried out in
collaboration with the Institute for Solid State Physics of the Tokyo
University. The graduate students will participate in international cooperative
research. They will gain experience in the state-of-the-art technology in ultra
low temperature physics and in materials physics. They will acquire a solid
foundation for scientific careers in industry, academia or government
laboratories. Undergraduate students will also participate in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is directed at understanding of the
nature of ferromagnetic fluid dynamics. The ferromagnetic fluid state occurs
when an isotope of helium, He-3, is specially cooled to ultralow temperatures.
The motivation for the experiments is that novel changes in the magnetic fluid
properties may occur when the fluid is made to flow through a small structure
called a spin filter. The model material system is ferromagnetic liquid He-3
cooled to nearly absolute zero: about 0.0005 degrees Kelvin. In addition, a very
large magnetic field, up to 15 Tesla, is required. These "extreme conditions"
are only available in ultra low temperature laboratories. The work will be
carried out via an international collaboration involving the Institute for Solid
State Physics of the Tokyo University. The ferromagnetic He-3 is attractive
because it is an ideal pure substance, free from impurities, and its magnetic
relaxation properties can be related to more common or "spintronic" materials.
The spin fluid dynamics provides a novel analog for spintronics device research
where the spin degree of freedom of the electron is used to carry information.
Hence the proposed research may ultimately contribute to spintronics device
technology. The graduate students participate in international cooperative
research and gain experience in the state-of-the-art technology in ultra low
temperature physics and materials physics. They receive rigorous training that
prepares them for careers in industry, academia or government. Undergraduate
students will also participate in the research.&lt;br/&gt;