* 0138283
* US-Turkey Cooperative Research:  Processing for Sub-Micron Imaging in Supercritical CO2: An Integrated Approach to the Deposition and Development of Photoresists
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2005
* Joseph DeSimone, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 01/31/2005
* USD 22,749.00

0138283 &lt;br/&gt;DeSimone&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project
supports a cooperative research between Dr. Joseph DeSimone, Department of
Chemistry, University of North Carolina (UNC) at Chapel Hill, North Carolina and
Dr. Yusuf Menceloglu, Department of Engineering and Natural Sciences, Sabanci
University (SU), Istanbul, Turkey. They plan to research means to improve the
manufacturing of semiconductor devices. A bottleneck in advancing semiconductor
devices to sub-micron features is the development of novel resist materials that
show nearly unprecedented sensitivity at the desired exposures and undergo a
fundamental shift away from the phenolic resins that have been used as the basis
for virtually all optical resist development, while improving the environmental
conditions associated with the process. The PI and his colleagues will
synthesize an array of fluorinated polymers that will enable photoresist
fabrication using a supercritical CO2 process. The two groups plan to develop
new photoresists for 157 nm lithography. The new resists will be transparent,
and will be soluble at liquid and/or supercritical CO2. Their properties will be
evaluated by theoretical calculations, and then their synthesis will be
conducted at SU laboratories. The research may lead to significant change in
future microelectronic processes and could have a major impact on rendering
photoresist production an environmentally friendly
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The two groups at UNC and SU have
complementary capabilities and technical resources. A combination of activities
will be used to facilitate communication between the two groups over the
proposed three-year collaboration including one-month per year visits to SU
laboratories, electronic mail, and teleconferencing. The two groups have
collaborated in the past to develop eight US patents on heterogeneous
polymerizations in CO2 and to produce several publications in important journals
on polymerizations and on characterizations of polymer materials. A graduate
student at UNC will participate in the project providing him with an
international experience. Funding is provided by the Office of International
Science and Engineering and the Division of Chemical and Transport
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;