* 0138733
* ESIE:  NAEP Mathematics Assessments:  Interpretive Analyses and Materials Development
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Catherine Brown, National Council of Teachers of Mathematics
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Earle
* 06/30/2007
* USD 1,304,388.00

The National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM) proposes a three-year
project, the goal of which is to prepare reports on the 8th grade NAEP
mathematics assessment conducted in 2000, any NAEP items to be released in 2002
and several earlier NAEP assessments. The project concentrates on two issues:
(1) Focus 1 which will be the preparation of the interpretive reports that
include content and process analyses, comparison studies and trend analyses; and
(2) Focus II which will be the creation of materials for teachers. Products for
Professional Development and Teaching will be: (1) three sets of materials based
on 4th grade, 8th grade and 12th grade student responses. The first set will be
directed toward teachers of grades 3 through 5, the second toward middle school
teachers and the third toward high school teachers. Materials will be organized
around the five NAEP content strands (i.e., number sense; properties and
operation; measurement; geometry and spatial sense; data analysis, statistics
and probability; and algebra and functions) to correspond with the framework
used for Focus I; and (2) facilitator's guides that will contain suggestions and
strategies to be used by the workshop leaders. Materials for professional
development will be piloted in the NCTM meeting and through the Association of
Mathematics Teacher Educators (AMTE). Data will be collected in the form of
surveys and interviews with participants, as well as copies of participants'
work. In addition, case studies of teachers sampled from elementary, middle and
high school levels will be conducted in order to obtain a sense of the impact of
the materials on teachers' instruction. Evaluation will focus on the progress of
Focus I and the impact of materials on teachers' classroom practices (Focus II).
An advisory board will oversee the analyses, process and products.