* 0138172
* US-India Workshop:  Viscous Liquids and the Glass Transition, Bangalore, India
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/2001,11/30/2002
* C. Austen Angell, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 11/30/2002
* USD 26,000.00

0138172&lt;br/&gt;Angell&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award provides
travel support for 20 American participants at the US-India Workshop: Viscous
Liquids and the Glass Transition, Bangalore, India, January 2002. US PI Austen
Angell, Arizona State University and Srikanth Sastry and Chandan Dasgupta,
Indian Institute of Science, are organizers for a workshop on transition from
mobile liquid to glassy solid, a subject of much current debate and an important
unsolved problem of condensed matter physics. They will convene leading
international physicists and experts in the related areas of granular matter,
foams, spin glasses and vortex glasses to discuss problem boundaries and explore
a series of well-defined themes. US participants were selected on the basis of
their valuable contributions to this research area and for their importance to
future progress. The scope of the workshop is exploration of six themes that
have generated the current wave of interest on glass transition in structural
glasses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The US PI is one of the world's leading
scientists in this field. Some of the most active contributing scientists to
research in this field are Indian nationals. The workshop will take advantage of
the presence in India of theorists attending concurrent statistical physics and
condensed matter physics conferences. The Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore, the workshop venue, has a long history of achievement in physics and
materials research, including those of Indian Nobel Laureate C.V. Raman and CNR
Rao. Indian hosts will meet local costs for US participants; the Office of
International Science and Engineering and the Division of Materials Research
jointly support this activity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;