* 0138401
* US-India Cooperative Research:  Enzyme-Inorganic Materials: Peroxidase Behavior at Selected Interfaces
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2007
* Challa Kumar, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 03/31/2007
* USD 16,880.00

0138401&lt;br/&gt;Kumar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is for US-
India collaborative research in biochemistry entitled Enzyme-Inorganic
Materials: Peroxidase Behavior at Selected Interfaces. The investigators will
test the hypothesis that solid surfaces perturb enzyme structure, and that the
extent of perturbation depends on the strength of interaction between the solid
and the enzyme. The key issues addressed in this research are important for the
rational design of materials for enzyme binding. Advanced materials of this type
have applications in biocatalysis, biosensors, implants, and artificial organs.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Scope: This initiates a three-way collaboration between
US PI Challa V. Kumar of the University of Connecticut and C.P. Rao, Indian
Institute of Technology (IIT) Mumbai and V. Jagannadham, Osamania University
(OU). The proposed studies are logical extensions of the research interests of
the US PI and overlap with the collaborators interests. The IIT group brings to
the collaboration their expertise in design, synthesis, and chacterization of
ligands/metal complexes, while the OU group brings its high level expertise in
reaction kinetics and mechanistic studies. It will enhance research and teaching
activities at all three institutions. The project is supported by the Indian
Department of Science and Technology(DST) under the NSF/DST joint program.
&lt;br/&gt;