* 0138065
* CARGO:  Approximation and Simulation of Neurons
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Binhai Zhu, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 04/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

DMS-0138065&lt;br/&gt;Binhai Zhu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, we
investigate a three-dimensional geometric &lt;br/&gt;problem that originated in
neural maps, which model the &lt;br/&gt;motions of neurons so as to understand
the human behavior. &lt;br/&gt;The problem is defined as follows: given a
neuron, which is &lt;br/&gt;modeled as a polyhedron, compute a minimum set of
(minimal) &lt;br/&gt;cylindrical segments to approximate the neuron. We plan to
&lt;br/&gt;design a good approximation for this problem (i.e., the error
&lt;br/&gt;between the cylindrical segments and the neuron is
small).&lt;br/&gt;We also plan to have a good implementation, build a prototype
&lt;br/&gt;system, and perform extensive empirical studies. Practically,
&lt;br/&gt;a solution to this problem will have a great impact in
&lt;br/&gt;computational biology. Theoretically, this problem generalizes
&lt;br/&gt;the problem of finding a single line stabbing a set of balls
&lt;br/&gt;in 3D (and has never been seriously studied to the best of our
knowledge).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modeling the motions of human neurons is an
important problem &lt;br/&gt;in biology, especially in understanding human
behavior under &lt;br/&gt;different circumstances. To do that, we first need to
model &lt;br/&gt;a single neuron, which is very much like a tree-shaped
&lt;br/&gt;polyhedron, using a set of cylindrical segments.
Different&lt;br/&gt;cylindrical segments of different radii have different
&lt;br/&gt;functionality, so the union of the cylindrical segments
&lt;br/&gt;should be as close to the neuron as possible. In practice
&lt;br/&gt;this problem is estimated manually by technicians in&lt;br/&gt;the
computational biology community. The process is &lt;br/&gt;time-consuming and
error-prone. Our research will focus &lt;br/&gt;on automating this process with
computers and a successful &lt;br/&gt;solution will have deep influence in the
computational &lt;br/&gt;biology community. We will train two graduate
students&lt;br/&gt;throughout this project.&lt;br/&gt;