* 0138247
* US-West Africa Workshop:   Scientific Data for Decision Making Toward Sustainable Development: Senegal River Basin Case Study; Dakar, Senegal, March 2002
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/2002,04/30/2003
* Paul Uhlir, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 04/30/2003
* USD 89,000.00

0138247&lt;br/&gt;Uhlir&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports 17 participants
(11 from the United States and six from West Africa) in a US-West Africa
Workshop on Scientific Data for Decision-Making Toward Sustainable Development:
Senegal River Basin Case Study, scheduled for March 2002 in Dakar, Senegal. The
co-organizers are Dr. Paul Uhlir, with the US National Committee for the
Committee on Data for Science and Technology (CODATA) at the National Academy of
Sciences, and Dr. Abdoulaye Gaye, of the Senegal National Committee for CODATA.
There will be a total of approximately 35 participants, who will be drawn from
academia and governmental and nongovernmental organizations in the United
States, Senegal, and other West African countries. Multidisciplinary discussions
will focus on biodiversity and ecosystem assessment, as well as remote sensing
and public health issues. The purposes of the workshop are to: 1) Identify all
types of existing scientific and technical data and information sources relating
to the Senegal River basin; 2) Examine how these data and information sources
have been used for research and decision making regarding the environment and
people in the Senegal River basin area; and 3) Determine the technical,
scientific, management, and policy barriers encountered in both the creation of
these databases and in their use for decision making, and how they might be
overcome. Site visits will be made to the Diama Dam on the Senegal River and to
two research institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific databases relating
to the environment, natural resources, and health on the African continent are,
with few exceptions, very difficult to create and manage effectively. Yet the
creation of these and other types of databases-and their subsequent use to
produce new information and knowledge for decision makers-is essential to
advancing scientific and technical progress in that region and to its
sustainable development. This meeting will help identify local and foreign
scientific databases related to the ecology and environment of the Senegal River
system, as well as the related human health of its populations. The compilation
of information on these databases will help policymakers and citizens make
better, scientifically based decisions about activities in the region. The
meeting will also afford the US participants a unique view of an African science
and technology data program, and the co-organizers expect it to promote the
development of linkages which will lead to future cooperative research
activities. Workshop results and information on the databases will be made
available through an online report, and will also be presented at the Summit on
Sustainability in September 2002 in South Africa. The project supports the
participation of two graduate students from the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Office of International Science and Engineering
and the Division of Biological Infrastructure jointly support this
award.&lt;br/&gt;