* 0138328
* US-Jordan Cooperative Research:  Hazardous Waste Management
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2004
* Debra Reinhart, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 03/31/2004
* USD 25,900.00

0138328&lt;br/&gt;Reinhart &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a cooperative project between Dr. Debra R. Reinhart, Associate Dean for
Research, College of Engineering, Professor Manoj Chopra, Department of Civil
and Environmental Engineering, University of Central Florida (UCF), Orlando,
Florida and Professor Wa'il Abu-El-Sha'r, Director, the Center for Environmental
Sciences and Technology (CEST), Jordan University of Science and Technology
(JUST) at Irbid, Jordan. They plan to gather and exchange information and to
identify common environmental concerns related to hazardous waste management.
They will focus on the phosphate mining industry, a major industry in both the
US and Jordan. The objectives of this research are to: collect and review
information available on the phosphate mining industry in the US and Jordan,
identify methods to minimize water consumption and environmental impact of
byproducts, conduct site visits in both countries, identify training needs for
regulatory personnel, identify methods to increase awareness for waste
generators concerning waste minimization and regulations, and plan a follow up
seminar for industry representatives, consultants, and regulators. Based on the
data analysis and site visit results, it is anticipated that recommendations
regarding phosphate mining environmental impacts will be made. A workshop on
these findings is planned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The results of previous
US-Jordanian collaboration reveal a lack of information on hazardous wastes and
its management in Jordan. There is no operative hazardous waste disposal
facility in the country, even though there are plans to finish constructing an
already existing site in Jordan. The project will address a topic that is
important to the United States and Jordan where the phosphate mining industry is
strong. The two sides plan to increase the collaboration between JUST and the
University of Central Florida. The project is mutually beneficial, is expected
to promote research, teaching, training and learning in this field, and is
expected to give US researchers an understanding of the issues faced in other
geographical regions. The project meets INT criteria for support of cooperative
projects that are mutually beneficial.&lt;br/&gt;