* 0138588
* US-Bangladesh Workshop:  Water and Environment in the Ganges-Brahmaputtra-Meghna Delta; Dhaka, Bangladesh
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2004
* Shafiqul Islam, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 12/31/2004
* USD 41,670.00

0138588 &lt;br/&gt;Islam&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project supports
a US-Bangladesh Workshop on Water and Environment in the Ganges-Brahmaputra-
Meghna Delta to be held in Dhaka, Bangladesh, January 28-31, 2002. The
organizers are Dr. Shafiqul Islam, Department of Civil and Environmental
Engineering, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio, Dr. Charles Harvey,
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, and Dr. C.S. Karim, Member, Physical
Science, Bangladesh Atomic Energy Commission. The workshop is to explore the
issues of long-term sustainability of water resources and environments in the
Ganges- Brahmaputtra- Meghna (GBM) Delta. The workshop will focus on five areas:
1) Geology and Hydrogeology of the GBM Delta, 2) Biology and Ecology, 3) Water
Resources, Irrigation &amp; Environmental Aspects, 4) Arsenic Contamination in a
Tropical Delta, 5) Socioeconomic Aspects of Population Dynamics and Agriculture.
The workshop goals are to explore areas of mutual interest for international
collaborative research on the GBM delta, identify and prioritize key research
questions within each thematic area, and disseminate information through the
workshop proceedings and web based publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope:
This project enables US and Bangladesh scientists to participate in a workshop
to discuss an area of importance to both countries and to identify potential
collaborative research. Dr. Islam and Dr. Harvey are currently conducting
research on arsenic contamination of well water in Bangladesh. The other US
participants include well-respected scientists with long experience in the river
network in south Asia. The Bangladesh delegation is being selected by Dr. Karim
with the supervision of the Ministry of Science and Technology. The project
meets INT objectives in supporting mutually beneficial joint workshops. This
project is jointly supported by the Office of International Science and
Engineering, the Division of Earth Sciences, the Division of Behavioral and
Cognitive Sciences, and the Division of Bioengineering and Environmental
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;