* 0138184
* 2002 Floral Scent, Biology, Chemistry, and Evolution Conference; March 2002,  Ventura, California
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2003
* Eran Pichersky, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Neil E. Hoffman
* 02/28/2003
* USD 12,000.00

This application requests partial funding to support the Gordon Conference on
the&lt;br/&gt;Biology, Chemistry and Evolution of Floral Scent to be held March
3 to 8, 2002, at the&lt;br/&gt;Ventura Harbortown Resort in Ventura, CA. The
primary goal of this conference is to&lt;br/&gt;bring together researchers
investigating the emergent field of floral scent from
diverse&lt;br/&gt;disciplines and foster new interdisciplinary exchanges and
collaborations that will&lt;br/&gt;increase our understanding of the
evolutionary significance and mechanisms of floral&lt;br/&gt;fragrance
emission.&lt;br/&gt;The conference will consist of 4 formal sessions, each
consisting of 6 oral presentations&lt;br/&gt;(including 2 plenary talks by
leading scientists in the area) and 4 afternoon poster&lt;br/&gt;sessions. The
sessions focus on the principal disciplinary areas that are at the forefront
of&lt;br/&gt;floral scent research and include the diverse fields of pollination
ecology and systematics,&lt;br/&gt;analytical chemistry and methodology,
neurophysiology and ethology, and biochemistry&lt;br/&gt;and genetic
engineering. We have selected invited speakers on the basis of their
current&lt;br/&gt;activity in the field while also striving for a program that
has a balance of gender,&lt;br/&gt;includes peoples from different ethnicities
and countries, and involves young promising&lt;br/&gt;investigators.