* 0138234
* US-Turkey Cooperative Research:  Investigations of the Chemistry of Carbon Vapor
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2003
* Philip Shevlin, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 12/31/2003
* USD 8,364.00

0138234&lt;br/&gt;Shevlin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a collaborative project by Dr. Philip Shevlin, Professor of Chemistry,
Auburn University, Auburn, Alabama, and Dr. Fatma Sevin, Professor of Chemistry
at Hacettepe University in Ankara. They plan to conduct studies of the reactions
of carbon vapor with hydroxy- and alkoxy-substituted organic species with the
objective of having deeper understanding of both carbon atom chemistry and
carbene rearrangements. The chemistry of carbon vapor forms the intellectual
foundation for topics as diverse as the formation of fullerenes / nanotubes /
soot, combustion processes, and the reaction chemistry of interstellar clouds.
Carbon atoms are among the few chemical species whose reactions from several
excited states can be studied. These studies are intended to extend our
knowledge of the effects of extreme electron deficiency on chemical reactivity.
Many of the unusual molecules that are formed as products of carbon atom
reactions, for instance the highly strained small-ring cumulenes to be studied
in this project, are otherwise inaccessible. Practical benefits from carbon
vapor reaction studies include the prospects for new materials such as modified
fullerenes and fulleroids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The project brings
together a leading US expert in the field and a young energetic Turkish (female)
scientist to work in an important research area. Shevlin is the leading chemist
in the US in studying the organic chemistry of carbon vapor, and will provide
expertise in the intricacies of atomic carbon generation. Dr. Sevin has
developed some experimental expertise through previous collaborations in
Professor Shevlin's lab at Auburn, and also has considerable theoretical
expertise. There is a potential for significant educational and developmental
benefits. The investigation of carbon vapor chemistry involves extremely
sophisticated ideas but the equipment required, now that it has been effectively
developed by Professor Shevlin, is robust and transportable. Thus it is quite
feasible to set up a facility at Hacettepe University in Turkey for these
experiments. This will enable Dr. Sevin to provide cutting edge research
opportunities to her students, and to enhance the training of young chemists in
Turkey. Dr. Shevlin and his university will benefit from having Turkish
scientists as graduate students and postdoctoral research associates. This
proposal meets the INT objective of supporting collaborative research in areas
of mutual interest. The project is being funded jointly by the Office of
International Science and Engineering and the Division of Chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;