* 0138615
* Improvement and Computerization of the Preserved Collection of Orchid Flowers at Selby Gardens
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2003
* Bruce Holst, Marie Selby Botanical Gardens
* Standard Grant
* Poston Muriel
* 06/30/2003
* USD 22,626.00

The world-class collection of preserved orchid flowers in the Herbarium at the
Marie Selby Botanical Gardens in Sarasota, Florida, is deteriorating, as metal
caps and paper-lined closures show their age. As a result, the alcohol
preservative is evaporating and rust is contaminating many of the 24,000 orchid
flower specimens. The glass specimen bottles currently are stored in cardboard
boxes, arranged by the Orchid Identification Center (OIC) accession number. In
addition to OIC of research botanists, scientists from around the world and
especially from countries with tropical rain forests use this valuable
collection. The current arrangement makes it time consuming to locate all
specimens of a given orchid species for comparison. The National Science
Foundation project will allow for replacement of metal lids and paper liners
with plastic caps and liners, storage of glass bottles in plastic crates, bar-
coding of each bottle, and databasing of all accession information. The scope of
the project encompasses processing all 24,000 preserved orchid specimens. In
addition to OIC vouchers, the collection contains the irreplaceable field
collections of such prominent research botanists as Galfrid Dunsterville,
Alexander Hirtz, Calaway Dodson, and Carlyle Luer. A barcode label will be
applied to each bottle, which will be refilled with preservative; caps and
liners will be replaced as required; and inventory information will be entered
into a database developed for the collection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF
project will preserve a scientifically significant taxonomic resource. The Selby
Gardens Herbarium, known worldwide as SEL, is a library of plant specimens used
by "alpha" (species level) taxonomists for plant identification. The preserved
collection of orchid flowers at Selby Gardens is the largest in the Western
Hemisphere and contains many type specimens (reference plant specimen for
published scientific names). Many orchids have large complex blooms that are
best preserved as 3-dimensional flowers rather than pressed-and-dried specimens.
The preserved collection is crucial to orchid identifications made by the OIC.
The societal benefits of the project include facilitating the work of the OIC,
which is the only "store-front" in the United States for orchid identification.
The preserved collection is also available to visiting scientists for
morphological studies on the structure of orchids. Plant identification has
societal impact because some orchids are edible, but others contain alkaloid
compounds that, if ingested, can be harmful. Plant identification, using the
preserved collection, has an economic impact by allowing plant
breeders/producers to correctly name their products. Orchids are not just
pretty; they rank in the top three plant groups in the multi-million-dollar
floriculture industry in the United States. The preserved orchid flower
collection at Selby Gardens is a botanical resource to be maintained and
cherished for the nation and the world.&lt;br/&gt;