* 0138143
* Design, Synthesis, and Applications ot Tetra (2,3-thienylene) and Related Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Michael Marsella, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph L. Templeton
* 06/30/2005
* USD 360,000.00

The Advanced Materials Program in the Division of Chemistry makes this renewal
award to University of California Riverside to design and synthesize novel
chiral macromolecular materials based on thienylenes and Dewar benzene. Primary
focus of the proposal will be to fine tune solid-state electronic and optical
properties of this system by permanent (non-covalent) guest inclusion. These
materials would have potential for applications in photomechanical actuators,
photolithographic substrates and thermally induced chemiluminescent materials.
Ultimate goal of the project will be to develop molecular actuators that
function like "molecular muscles". Planned research and education activities
with graduate and undergraduate students including mentoring of minority
students would prepare them for future careers and studies in science and
engineering fields. The proposed web based outreach programs would benefit a
large number of students in the community and would prepare them for future
science education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Novel chiral macromolecular crystalline
materials will be designed and synthesized from thienylenes and Dewar benzene,
both of which possess dynamic topologies. Solid-state electronic and optical
properties of this system will be studied, and these materials would have
potential applications as photomechanical actuators, photolithographic
substrates and thermally induced chemiluminescent materials. Participation of
graduate and undergraduate students in the material chemistry related research
would prepare them for new careers and higher education. Planned web based
programs would benefit the whole community, and would create awareness and
appreciation of science related topics in the community.