* 0138329
* US-India Cooperative Research:  Morphological Properties of the Supercluster-Void Network in the Universe
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Sergei Shandarin, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 05/31/2005
* USD 21,000.00

0138329&lt;br/&gt;Shandarin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award
supports a US-India collaboration entitled Morphological Properties of the
Supercluster-Void Network in the Universe. US PI Sergei Shandarin, University of
Kansas and Varun Sahni, Inter-University Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics
(IUCAA), Pune will test current theories of cosmological structure formation by
comparison of the statistical properties of the observed universe with those of
numerical simulations. This is one of the the major themes of current
cosmological studies; the collaborators are well-established in studying large-
scale structure in the universe. The PIs will quantify the geometrical
properties of the supercluster-void network using robust statistical measures
called Minkowski functionals. This powerful technique will enable them to
determine the texture and topology of the global cosmic web, as well as the
properties of its individual components --clusters, superclusters and voids.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The research will develop a software library
consisting of sophisticated numerical algorithms for studying morphological and
geometrical properties of large scale structures. It &lt;br/&gt;will be made
available to the astronomy and astrophysics community through the internet. The
tools developed through this research have the potential for use in a large
number of applications for physicists and the larger scientific community. This
research is cofunded by the Indian Department of Science &amp; Technology (DST)
under the NSF/DST joint program. &lt;br/&gt;