* 0138516
* Purchase and Installation of a Compactor Storage System in the Entomology Research Museum, University of California, Riverside
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2004
* John Heraty, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Poston Muriel
* 03/31/2004
* USD 354,773.00

With some 3 million specimens, UCR's Entomology Research Museum (ERM) is one of
the 20 largest insect collections in North America, and one of the 10 largest
strictly University-based collections. Given that insects represent the bulk of
our biodiversity, and this diversity is highest in the southwest, the ERM is one
of our nation's most important biological resource repositories. The ERM is,
unfortunately, operating at a significant space deficit, preventing proper
curation of the collection and inhibiting growth, affecting its ability to house
reference material and vouchers for field research and biocontrol work. The need
for additional space is immediate and compelling, but no such space is or will
be available for the foreseeable future. The only viable solution is to improve
the storage capacity of the existing space. Also, the present storage cabinets
are inadequate; few offer an air-tight seal to deter destructive museum pests.
By upgrading to a space-efficient compactor storage system with new high-quality
cabinets, as requested, the ERM can add storage space for over 2 million
additional specimens and simultaneously improve access to specimens, collection
workspace, physical organization, earthquake safety, and pest
control.&lt;br/&gt; The continued maintenance and acquisition of material by the
ERM is vital to the identification of species in support of research, applied
science, and for the training of new students of Entomology. The UCR Entomology
department includes numerous faculty, staff, and students that work with and
deposit specimens in the ERM, and the ERM participates in a global loan program,
so its specimens are utilized all over the world. The ERM's parasitic wasp
collection is one of the world's most diverse and fastest growing, and unlike
most similar collections, the majority of its over 500,000 specimens have host
records, making it one of the world's most valuable sources of information about
beneficial parasitoids of agricultural pests. The value of this reference
material of biocontrol agents (and pests) to agriculture cannot be
overestimated, since the foundation of pest control is the ability to accurately
identify the various organisms involved, and close ties to California's
agriculture place the ERM in a recognized position of importance for the state's
far-reaching biocontrol research. The ERM's bee collection is likewise widely
recognized as one of the world's most important, with over 200,000 specimens
representing over half of the 3,000 bee species native to the US, several of
these being pollinators important to agriculture. The ERM's collections are also
increasingly being used in making decisions relating to the environment (e.g.,
Multispecies Conservation Plans), including training of environmental
consultants, plus acting as a repository and identification center for
biodiversity surveys in California and elsewhere. The ERM itself has extensive
ongoing collecting efforts throughout southern California, including surveys of
several protected and restricted areas, and is not only crucial in assessing the
present diversity, but the past, as well, as many specimens are 40-100 years
old, representing species or populations that are extinct, in decline, or have
changed substantially over the last century; a source of irreplaceable data on
Californian insects, and some of the nation's most unique and/or threatened
habitats. The ERM further serves as a valuable resource for people working with
urban pest control, public health, and environmental biology, as well as for the
general public. It plays an important role in UCR's educational outreach
programs, and responds to requests by schools and individuals. It gathers and
disseminates information, including through the Internet, and local and national
media draw on the expertise of the ERM staff. &lt;br/&gt;