* 0138566
* Laurentide Ice Sheet Dynamics: Applying Cosmogenic Exposure Dating to Constrain Chronology and Glacial Style in the Eastern Canadian Arctic; A Collaborative Proposal
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* P.Thompson Davis, Bentley University
* Continuing Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 03/31/2006
* USD 146,105.00

&lt;br/&gt;0138566&lt;br/&gt;Davis&lt;br/&gt;This is a collaborative proposal by
Principal Investigators at the University of Colorado and Bentley College. Over
the past half century, the perception of the Laurentide Ice Sheet (LIS) has
developed from a thick monolithic dome with a relatively stable central core, to
a thinner, multi-domed and more dynamic system with inherent instabilities. The
role of the ice sheet in the climate system includes perturbations to
atmospheric flow as its height increased and altering the planetary energy
balance due to albedo changes. In addition, through massive ice-berg and
meltwater discharges, the ice sheet was a determinant on North Atlantic thermo-
haline circulation, the greatest non-linearity in the climate system. Primary
information on the timing and style of continental glaciation has played a key
role in this conceptual evolution. Along the northeastern margin of the LIS,
extensive series of moraines provide a direct record of past ice-sheet behavior.
Early studies were limited by an inability to date these deposits directly.
Consequently, arguments were advanced for both a similar timing and magnitude of
glacial advances along all margins of the ice sheet, and for fundamentally
asynchronous responses between different sectors of the former ice sheet. With
the development of cosmogenic exposure dating, it is now possible to date the
moraines directly and resolve much of this debate. Recent studies establish the
utility of the method at Clyde and provide the basis for two competing, but
testable hypotheses of the glacial history. Hypothesis 1 predicts that one of
the moraine systems preserved on the Clyde and Cape Aston forelands is the last
glacial maximum (LGM) marginal position, and that highlands above the moraines
and coastal forelands outside the moraines remained beyond the limit of
continental ice throughout the LGM. Implicit is the recognition that more
extensive glaciations occurred earlier in the last glacial cycle. For hypothesis
2, preliminary results suggest that an alternative model might also be
plausible: complete inundation of the region by non-erosive ice early in the LGM
followed by a reorganization of the ice sheet later to a configuration similar
to that projected in Hypothesis 1. Resolving these two hypotheses is probably
the single most important step to understand the behavior of the LIS through the
last glaciation. In addition to resolving the LGM ice limits and glacial style,
the Principal Investigators will produce a detailed chronology of dated moraines
from Clyde and Inugsuin fiords.