* 0138152
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: High Precision Spectroscopy of Lambda-Hypernuclei
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/2002,09/30/2006
* Joerg Reinhold, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 09/30/2006
* USD 51,200.00

0138152&lt;br/&gt;Reinhold&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a three-year
collaborative research project between Professor Joerg Reinhold at the Florida
International University in Miami, Florida and Professor Satoshi Nakamura of
Tohoku University in Sendai, Japan. The researchers will undertake a study of
the high precision spectroscopy of lambda-hpernuclei. They will be looking at
hypernuclear excitations in medium heavy nuclei. A hypernucleus contains a
hyperon implanted as an "impurity" within the nuclear medium. This introduces a
new quantum number, strangeness, into the nucleus, and if the hyperon maintains
its identity it will not experience Pauli-blocking, easily interacting with
deeply bound nucleons. In this sense, it has been proposed that the hyperon is a
good probe of the interior of a nucleus, where information is difficult to
obtain. The researchers will extract the characteristics of a hyperon embedded
in a nucleus by observing the spectroscopy of its states.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project brings together the efforts of two
laboratories that have complementary expertise and research capabilities. The
U.S. researchers will have available a new magnetic spectrometer for kaon
detection which will significantly enhance the capabilities of their Jefferson
Laboratory's hypernuclear spectrometer system. For the foreseeable future, this
instrument will be without competition and will considerably advance the field
of hypernuclear spectroscopy. The Japanese researchers contribute a significant
expertise in hypernuclear spectroscopy, on the experimental as well as the
theoretical level. They are currently building a new facility, the Japanese
Hadron Facility, which will be operational for this research project and will
contribute to the next generation hypernuclear experiments. The research will
offer a good opportunity to join efforts between the two countries. Through the
exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our base of basic
knowledge and promote international understanding and cooperation. Florida
International University's student body is largely Hispanic and a number of
their graduate and undergraduate students will be participating in the research.
A publication committee has been formed that will oversee and coordinate the
publication of the research results and presentations at conferences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;