* 0138400
* US-India Cooperative Research:  Magnetic Evaluation of Fatigue Damage and Deformation
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2002,09/30/2008
* Chester Lo, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 09/30/2008
* USD 25,000.00

0138400&lt;br/&gt;Jiles &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award supports
the US-India cooperative research entitled Magnetic Evaluation of Fatigue Damage
and Deformation. Collaborators David Jiles, Iowa State University and Amitava
Mitra, National Metallurgical Laboratory, Jamshedpur will conduct advanced Non-
Destructive Evaluations (NDE) to obtain measurements on the structure of
materials at the micrometer scale by using magnetic force microscopy and
scanning Hall sensor microscopy. These will improve understanding of the
relationships between microstructure and magnetic properties, which can then be
used to interpret the results of traditional magnetic NDE measurements. The
measurement data will be analyzed through mathematical modeling of the
magnetization processes in materials using a new approach to the magnetic
Preisach model. The research goal is to obtain specific details on how magnetic
inspection methods can reliably be used to infer changes in structure and stress
states during fatigue and deformation processes. This will greatly enhance the
predictive capabilities of magnetic inspection techniques for estimating the
remaining lifetime of components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The idea that
magnetic measurements could determine fatigue damage and deformation in
materials has great potential and high relevance for the scientific community of
engineers and materials scientists. For society, detection of impending failure
in components could have significant impact for civil, aerospace, and mechanical
structures. Jiles is the authority in the United States on using magnetic
methods for NDE. The collaboration with the Indian scientists at National
Metallurgical Laboratory will leverage the strengths of both laboratories. Under
this grant, two US graduate students will have the opportunity to participate in
the experimental work at the National Metallurgical Laboratory in Jamshedpur.
This project is supported by the Indian Department of Science and Technology
(DST) and by NSF's Office of International Science &amp; Engineering and the
Division of Civil and Mechanical Systems. &lt;br/&gt;