* 0138621
* Web-Based Catalog and Mapping Application of Mexican Land Plant Collections at the University of Michigan Herbarium
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2002,10/31/2006
* James Beach, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Richard M. McCourt
* 10/31/2006
* USD 449,926.00

Mexico, with nearly 30,000 plant species, represents one of the great centers of
biodiversity in the world. Its diverse topography and climates harbor a complex
mix of tropical, temperate, dry forest, and unique cloud forest floras. The
Sonoran and Chihuahuan deserts, and particularly the dry tropical deciduous
forests in western Mexico support one of the world's great arid-land floras.
These rich floras are key to understanding plant evolution and biogeography, but
are threatened by rapid changes in land and water use. The need for accurate and
accessible biodiversity information on Mexico's flora has never been greater. In
the last few decades a new and critical role for specimen collections has
emerged. Degradation of global ecosystems and the accelerated pace of
environmental change has led to massive loss of the World's biodiversity.
Conservation of plant and animal species has thus become a major reason for
research museums and herbaria. Most old collections from biodiversity-rich
tropical regions are held ex situ, in museums and herbaria within developed
countries. As developing nations build strong conservation programs they need to
access information about organisms from their territory. For this reason, and to
promote biodiversity research, more conscious efforts have to be made by the
major, well-established institutions with large holdings of material to make
this information widely available. The Michigan Herbarium with its nearly
1,700,000 specimens, is the seventh largest in the United States and the third
largest university herbarium. It contains probably the second largest and most
important collection of Mexican plants outside of Mexico, with approximately
240,000 land plant specimens. The project will catalog some 130,000 specimens
over a three-year period. The data model used is SPECIFY, developed at the U of
Kansas under the auspices of several federal agencies, currently in use for
cataloging Michigan plants at the Herbarium. It will provide, via the Internet,
a digital catalog of public access with specimen images and mapping serving
capabilities that will allow users to perform searches and query spatially on
particular areas on a map, download species lists and generate distributional
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The biological information contained in specimen
collections constitutes an enormous but underutilized scientific resource. It is
now possible through digital imaging and Internet technologies to easy and
efficiently capture, store, and access specimen information, enormously reducing
the potential damage to specimens from frequent loans to researchers throughout
the world. This project will enhance the research value of Mexican plant
collections at Michigan for botanists, ecologists, resource managers, teachers,
students, institutions and Government agencies. The project proposed here will
also enhance links between the University of Michigan and key Mexican scientific
institutions like Mexico's National Commission for the Study and Use of
Biodiversity (CONABIO) and the Instituto de Biologia at the National Autonomous
University (UNAM), as well as other US herbaria with important Mexican
collections. The database will be part of the REMIB (Mexican Network on
Biodiversity Information, to which many international institutions belong) and
the Species Analyst networks. &lt;br/&gt;