* 0138715
* Elementary, Secondary, and Informal Education:  Assessing Technological Literacy in the United States
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Naomi Chudowsky, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Karen F. Zuga
* 07/31/2006
* USD 710,578.00

The National Academy of Engineering and the National Research Council Center for
Education propose a two-year project, the goal of which is to determine the most
viable approach or approaches for assessing technological literacy.
Technological literacy, as defined in the proposal, includes an understanding of
the nature of technology, the design process and the history of technology; a
capacity to ask questions and make informed decisions about technology; and some
level of hands-on capability related to the use of technology. The project will
focus on three distinct populations in the United States: K-16 students, K-16
teachers and out-of-school adults. It is to be overseen by a committee appointed
by the National Research Council in consultation with the National Academy of
Engineering which is to be comprised of experts in such fields as cognitive
science, assessment, curriculum development, technology education and teacher
education. The committee will collect and analyze relevant literature and get
information through workshops and commissioned papers prior making a
recommendation for assessing technological literacy. The primary product will be
a report that describes the committee's work, findings and conclusions, and then
presents its recommendations. The outcome will be a widely disseminated,
visible, well-supported document that will: (a) increase the ability of
educational researchers and policy makers to critically evaluate established and
new methods for assessing technological literacy; (b) encourage the inclusion of
technology-related items in established assessments (e.g., NAEP); and (c) help
develop new approaches for determining what various subsets of the U.S.
population know about technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;