* 0138530
* Curation and Data Capture for Reptilian and Amphibian Biodiversity at American Museum of Natural History
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Linda Ford, American Museum Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* Richard M. McCourt
* 04/30/2006
* USD 307,400.00

The Department of Herpetology, American Museum of Natural History (AMNH)
conserves one of the world's largest, globally diverse and most broadly utilized
scientific collections of amphibian and reptile specimens. The records are
computerized, but servicing users is hampered by two major problems:(1) about
half of the specimens may become dissociated from their data owing to past use
of metal tags that are corroding; and (2) gaps in data captured occur in the
electronic records. NSF support would allow metal tag replacement and completing
of data capture concurrently, improving the database in preparation for going
onto the internet, and continuing current activities in serving the
international user community. (1) Metal Tags: From 1912-1965 metal tags with
unique catalog numbers were tied to 180,126 specimens stored in alcohol. The
metal tags are corroding, some have become completely illegible, and some have
fallen off their specimen. Consequently, specimens are at risk of becoming
completely dissociated from their data, which would be a tragic loss to science.
(2) Data Capture: The electronic database was compiled from the original hand-
written catalog ledgers. We have recently discovered, however, that in past
decades data in the ledgers were often abbreviated from other sources (e.g., jar
labels, 3 X 5" card file). Thus, data from these other sources need electronic
capture before they become dissociated from the specimens. The herpetological
collection has accumulated for more than 130 years, obtained by AMNH expeditions
around the world, purchase of historically valuable collections, and donations
of private or orphaned collections from other institutions. The collection
contains 315,784 individually cataloged specimens. In addition, 20,000 specimens
await cataloging. The collection includes 100% of the world's families of
amphibians and reptiles, 80% of the genera, and about 6,800 species (over 55%).
There are more than 650 primary types (specimens used for original descriptions
of the species). The collection is global in scope, with special strengths in
the Western Hemisphere, Africa, Pakistan, China, New Guinea, Australia, and
Pacific islands. The collections are used daily by students and professional
scientists for global biodiversity research. For example, we provide loans
involving 2100-4100 specimens per year and 169 loans are now open to scholars in
14 countries. In addition, last year 39 researchers studied specimens on-site in
the Department for 261 days. Publications based on the collections are part of
the primary technical literature in the natural sciences concerning: (1)
discovery of new species; (2) faunal surveys (resource inventories, economic
development, siting of nature preserves, conservation); (3) follow-up surveys
decades later; and (4) monographs, or other research on specific groups of
organisms, including ones of potential medical (pharmaceutical development) or
other importance. The collections are also used extensively in education, by
supporting the research conducted by undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
students at diverse universities around the world.