* 0138157
* Evolutionary Synthesis Center Conference Workshop II, January 31- February 3, 2002, Belmont, Md
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2003
* Margaret Riley, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 12/31/2003
* USD 52,650.00

Evolution has long served to unify the study of biology, but now it has acquired
a more central role. Today evolution serves to inform data acquisition, analysis
and interpretation in all of the life sciences. This transformation comes in
part from the explosion of raw data, from sources as far ranging as genome
sequences, functional genomics, ecological genomics, large-scale ecosystem
studies, long-term behavioral studies and phylogenetics. There is no institution
or funding agency dedicated to the consolidation, synthesis and dissemination of
this broad sweep of evolutionarily relevant information. NSF sponsored a
workshop in Spring 2001 to address the need for an evolutionary synthesis center
(ESC) and to develop an action plan to meet this need (award DEB-0120472; draft
report at http://frog.biology.yale.edu/esc). The participants unanimously agreed
that there is a clear and compelling need for a center to promote and facilitate
evolutionary synthesis. Although the first workshop made impressive progress in
the development of an ESC working model, it became clear that a second workshop
would be required to address several topics in more detail. The goal of this
proposal is to hold a second ESC workshop to address the following issues.
First, if a center is to be embraced by the diversity of the evolutionary
community, it is critical that comments and suggestions from that community be
incorporated into the earliest possible phase of ESC development. Thus a draft
report from the first workshop was made available to the relevant scientific
communities and comments and endorsements were solicited. One focus of the
second workshop is to address all of the concerns raised. Second, the
participants of the first workshop were chosen for their ability to represent
the diversity of evolutionary research. The resulting group did not have
adequate strengths in the areas of bioinformatics, information technology,
statistics, and mathematics to determine the needs of the proposed Evolutionary
Informatics Division (EID) of an ESC. An appropriate group of such specialists
will be invited to participate in the second workshop to consider the goals,
content and capacities of the EID more carefully. Finally, because in the first
workshop little attention was paid to how to achieve the goals of the Outreach
Division of an ESC, this will be another focus for the second ESC
workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;