* 0138674
* Incorporation and Improvement of Collections of Marine Invertebrates into the Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Joel Martin, Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Richard M. McCourt
* 05/31/2006
* USD 420,016.00

Despite a growing interest in, and concern over, global biodiversity, many
priceless collections of marine invertebrates (crustaceans, echinoderms, marine
worms, molluscs, and other groups) have become "orphaned" in recent years. This
project will provide funds to care for several existing and diverse collections
of marine invertebrates that have been donated to the Natural History Museum of
Los Angeles County. New shelving will be installed on existing tracks, and
supplies needed to care for these collections will be purchased. Additionally,
two persons will be hired in the Museum's Marine Biodiversity Processing Center
to help sort, curate, and upgrade the collections.

The broader scientific significance of the project is that these collections,
and others like them, represent windows into historical marine diversity along
the west coast. In some cases, the collections contain specimens from areas that
are no longer accessible. Such collections form the basis for what we understand
about marine biodiversity, past and present, and represent priceless storehouses
of data on Pacific coast marine life. Knowledge gleaned from these collections
can form the basis for strong educational programs and for making sound
decisions in conservation and resource management.