* 0138391
* Radiataive and Ultrafast Non-radiative Electronic Relaxation in Individual and Assembled Noble Metallic Nanopartiacles of Different Shapes
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Mostafa El-Sayed, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* David Nelson
* 03/31/2006
* USD 365,156.00

This project aims to study radiative and nonradiative properties of individual
gold nanodots and nanorods and their self-assembly properties from solution. One
aspect is to measure properties for silver and copper individual nanoparticles
in solution and in different liquid and solid media. The second is to examine
the properties of self-assembled forms of either gold, silver, or copper
nanoparticles having different shapes. Different methods for self-assembly of
these nanoparticles from solution will be examined. For the individual
nanoparticles, the project will address: 1) the dependence of electron-phonon
and phonon-phonon relaxation on the atomic mass of the metal; 2) the effect of
the medium in which these nanoparticles are dissolved on the electron-phonon and
phonon-phonon relaxation; and 3) the laser photothermal transformation of
nanoparticles of different shapes. Because of the close proximity of the
metallic nanoparticles they are able to couple electronically via the plasmon
resonance, changing in turn the optical properties of the assembled structures
compared to those of the individual particles. Accordingly, the proposed
research will explore radiative and ultrafast nonradiative relaxation properties
as a function of the particle type, size and shape of the multi-particle
structure. This is very important when incorporating metallic nanoparticles into
solid-state devices. By using time-resolved femtosecond pump-probe transient
spectroscopy and microscopy, the dynamics of heating, cooling and structural
transformation will be examined for the assembled structures of the individual
particles. %%% The study of the electron dynamics of individual metallic
nanoparticles is of great importance to fundamental physics and for their
potential use in nanotechnology. Understanding the electron energy conversion
into lattice phonons and the interactions of the hot metallic nanoparticles with
their surrounding environment is of great importance for possible future
applications. These areas are of high interest to industry, and the proposed
studies will train these students to contribute to materials science and
engineering areas of significant national interest.