* 0138393
* GOALI: Development of Transferable Force Fields for Phase Equilibria and Simulation Studies of Microheterogeneous Fluids
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Joern Ilja Siepmann, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 05/31/2006
* USD 282,309.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CTS-0138393&lt;br/&gt;Siepmann, Joern
I.&lt;br/&gt;University of Minnesota - Twin Cities&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurate
knowledge of the phase equilibria and other thermophysical properties of complex
fluid mixtures are of enormous fundamental and practical importance. The success
of molecular simulation in predicting thermophysical properties an in advancing
our understanding of the relationship between molecular architecture and
macroscopic observable depends on the availability of efficient simulation
algorithms and accurate force fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the
research are to continue the development of three levels of transferable force
fields and of biased Monte Carlo methods. The first-level force field, called
TraPPE-UA (transferable potentials for phase equilibria-united atom), employs
the united-atom representation for alkyl segments and simple Lennar -Jones an
Coulombic terms. In the second level, called TraPPE -EH (explicit hydrogen), all
atoms including alkyl group hydrogens and some lone-pair electron and bond-
center sites are treated explicitly. In the third-level, called TraPPE-pol
(polarizable), both the van der Waals and electrostatic interactions can respond
to changes in the environment. Whereas the first level is designed for
simplicity and computational efficiency with good accuracy, the second level is
aimed at improved accuracy for mixtures of non-polar or apolar non-hydrogen-
bonding compounds. The third level is directed solely at the highest possible
level of accuracy and transferability. These transferable force fields will
encompass linear, branched, and cyclic alkanes, alkenes, alkynes, alkylbenzenes,
alcohols, ethers, ketones, aldehydes, esters, carboxylic acids amines, amides,
nitriles, thiols, sulfides, heterocycles, perfluorinated alkanes, and last, but
not least, water. In addition to the force field development, this proposal also
addresses novel simulation algorithms which are targeted at efficient
simulations of solid-fluid equilibria, spatially heterogeneous mixtures, and
hydrogen-bonded networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular simulations using the
transferable force fields will be employed as engineering tool
to&lt;br/&gt;predict thermophysical properties of a variety of systems, thereby
adding to the available &lt;br/&gt;experimental database. The simulations will
also provide a wealth of microscopic-level information for complex chemical
systems, thereby giving new physical insight into how molecular architecture and
composition determine macroscopic phenomena. In particular, simulations will be
carried out to investigate the association of alcohols in non-polar solvents,
the influence of entrainers on structure and solubility in supercritical fluids,
the effect of pressurization on gas-expanded liquids, the solute partitioning
between water and octan-1-ol at elevated temperatures and pressures, the
structures of minimum and maximum boiling azeotropic mixtures, the liquid-liquid
equilibria of alcohol/water mixtures, the partial solubilities of drugs and
their sodium derivatives, and the influence of solvents on the stability of
polymorphs and on solvate formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
profit from extensive collaboration of a close university-industry team
consisting&lt;br/&gt;of the PI and Dr. Sami Karaborni of Merck Research
Laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;