* 0138275
* US-Jordan Cooperative Research:  Bifurcation and Chaos Theory as Applied To Power Electronic Circuits
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/2002,02/29/2004
* Issa Batarseh, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 02/29/2004
* USD 25,500.00

0138275 &lt;br/&gt;Batarseh&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project
supports a cooperative research project between Dr. Issa Batarseh, School of
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Central Florida,
Orlando, Florida and Dr. Ahmad Harb, Department of Electrical Engineering,
Jordan University of Science and Technology in Irbid, Jordan. This project deals
with bifurcation and chaos theory for power electronic circuits. Most of today's
dynamic modeling methods applied in power electronic converters is based on
either linear ripple approximation, assuming that the natural frequencies of the
converter are well below the switching frequency, or on time-averaging the
output or the duty ratio function, effectively eliminating the sampling effect
of the switch. These methods fail to predict the system behavior at high
frequencies. The accuracy of these models degrades as the modulation frequency
approaches one-half the switching frequency; hence they fail to predict the
instability occurring in this region of frequencies. The objective of this joint
research project is to investigate the application of bifurcation theory to
newly developed modern high frequency dc-dc converters. The project will focus
on two groups of power electronic circuits: I) parallel-input/series-output two-
module boost-derived DC-DC converter with mutually coupled output filter
inductors, and II) Single-stage Power Factor Correction (PFC) circuits.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: This project enables the US and Jordanian
scientists to pool their complementary expertise and resources in providing a
new approach to analyzing the behavior of power electronics converter systems.
One US graduate student from UCF will participate in this international
collaborative project. The project meets the INT objective in supporting
workshops where mutual benefits and dissemination of information is likely to
result. This project is funded by the Office of International Science and
Engineering and the Division of Electrical and Communications
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;