* 0138633
* Improvements to the Florida Museum of Natural History Ichthyological Collection
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* George Burgess, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Richard M. McCourt
* 03/31/2006
* USD 399,643.00

Abstract. A grant has been awarded to Dr. James Albert and Mr. George Burgess at
Florida Museum of Natural History to improve the Ichthyological Collection.
Species are in decline around the world as we pass through a wave of mass
extinctions due to human activities. While the biodiversity crisis accelerates
efforts are being made to preserve our genetic heritage for future generations.
The Florida Museum of Natural History ichthyological collection is a significant
national resource, with principal strengths in western and eastern Atlantic
shelf and deepwater marine fishes, western Atlantic reef fishes, and freshwater
fishes from the Southeastern United States, Central and northern South America,
and the West Indies. The UF collection continues to grow and is used by
researchers throughout the nation and the world. The Florida Museum
ichthyological collection presently contains about 216,000 identified lots
(jars) bearing close to 2.2 million specimens ascribed to approximately 6,600
species. Of these about 150,000 lots are electronically catalogued. Among the
uncatalogued materials are an estimated 73,000 lots of specimens identified to
species acquired from orphaned collections. These uncatalogued lots include some
of the Florida Museum's most valuable materials. At present a large number of
these specimens are not electronically catalogued, greatly restricting their use
and access. The lack of availability to these substantial resources on
electronic databases dramatically reduces their utility and represents a
significant loss of research opportunities.

This project will electronically catalogue and physically integrate orphaned
lots into the existing Florida Museum collection in newly provided facilities.
The specific goals are to: 1: Install mobile, high density shelving units in the
newly allocated space. 2. Electronically catalog 46,500 identified lots. 3:
Physically integrate these materials into the existing catalogued collection on
newly purchased and existing compactor shelving units. All lots will receive new
labels, be topped off or receive new alcohol as needed, receive new closures or
be rebottled if appropriate, and be shelved with conspecifics on compacted
shelving units. To facilitate continued safety and access throughout the
cataloguing process all materials will be maintained in phylogenetic order by
family in air-conditioned facilities provided with access aisles. To expedite
incorporation of new collections we will minimize new taxonomic identifications.
Specimens representing highly redundant taxa or those terminally damaged will be
recorded and discarded.

Electronic cataloguing of the orphaned materials will substantially increase the
flow of information into and out of the Florida Museum collection as a whole.
Cataloguing and integrating orphaned ichthyological collections will provide
visiting scholars, students and users of the Florida Museum and Internet
databases access to these important data. Achieving the project objectives will
facilitate long-term growth of the collection, promote research into the
catalogued materials, and greatly increase the long-term management and public
outreach capabilities of the Florida Museum and its information resources. These
results will enhance the role of the University of Florida as a center for the
education and training of a new generation of scientists in aquatic
biodiversity.

