* 0138547
* Collaborative Research: Development of Molecular and Biochemical Signatures for the Detection of Toxin Production in Pseudo-nitzchia spp. Under Nutrient Stress
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2005
* George Smith, San Jose State University Foundation
* Continuing grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 11/30/2005
* USD 234,966.00

The two intertwined goals of this project are to determine the suite of genes
expressed by Pseudo-nitzschia under toxin-producing conditions, and to acquire a
better understanding of the connections between environmental conditions and
physiological responses leading to toxin production. A set of physiological
experiments will permit evaluation of molecular probes generated from gene
expression studies. In turn, the molecular probes will be used to interrogate
natural populations and help determine the physiological status of Pseudo-
nitzschia in the field. The ultimate goal is to find a specific gene transcript
or a pattern of gene expression that is correlated with toxin production in the
field. The following hypotheses will be tested: H1: There are genes or a suite
of genes whose expression pattern is highly correlated with toxin production in
Pseudo-nitzschia. H2: A primary trigger for toxin production in Monterey Bay is
silicate limitation, so that certain oceanographic conditions permit bloom
development. H3: Silicate limitation may sensitize cells to trace-metal (e.g.
copper) stress and the toxin (domoic acid) can function as a metal ion buffer.

Batch and continuous cultures will be stressed with silicate, copper, and iron.
Growth, substrate utilization, and physiological parameters (variable
fluorescence, nutrient quotas, amino acid pools, including domoic acid) will be
assessed. Cells will be harvested for development of cDNA subtraction libraries
under different stressors. Gene arrays developed from these libraries will
provide molecular probes for field testing. Identification of genes related to
toxin production, but not general metabolism, will be facilitated by information
generated by the physiology experiments. The laboratory work will be combined
with a limited field program for assessment of environmental triggers (e.g.
copper, silicate, iron stress) and for testing of the molecular probes. Results
from the molecular expression and physiological assays will permit an initial
description of the cellular pathways mediating environmental triggers (e.g
silicate and metals) for production of toxin.