* 0138948
* Functional Ortho-Phenyleneethynylenes
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2002,10/31/2004
* Uwe Bunz, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 10/31/2004
* USD 200,001.00

This project aims to synthesize and self-assemble a library of novel ortho
phenyleneethynylene (OPE), compounds important to advancing the area of nano-
materials with specific materials properties for possible applications in solid-
state devices such as sensors. Heterocyclic modules will steer the self-assembly
of OPEs to helically folded or linearly-extended nano structures. Metal ions
will be utilized to make self-assembled nano grids. Depending upon the selected
self-assembly mode, the conjugation in these OPEs can be switched on and off at
will, without change of the primary structure of the phenyleneethynylene.
Helically folded OPEs will have a large external surface, and almost no
accessible interior cavity, similarly to helical proteins. Constituents at
defined sites depending upon the utilized monomer will decorate the helical
structures. As a consequence, helices with highly evolved outside surfaces,
being recognition sites, are viewed as achievable. These decorated surfaces will
provide a way to manipulate the aggregation of helices towards lamellar,
micellar, and other super-structures. Novel luminescent metallosupramolecular
nano-grids will be formed when metal-ions are successfully used to coordinate
pyrazine-containing OPEs. Such hitherto unknown 2D-conjugated nano-structures
offer exciting prospects for potential applications in sensory, device, and
semiconductor nano-memory applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
synthesize a class of novel ortho phenyleneethynylene (OPE) compounds with
expected capabilities to assemble into extended, helical and grid-type nano-
structures. The self-assembly process is guided by specific substitution
patterns determined by the chemical environment. The overall goal is to develop
novel conjugated oligomers displaying attractive emissive and sensory attributes
relevant to the invention of efficient devices such as sensors. The proposed
research is important to the education and training of young scientists and
engineers to work in areas of current high national interests. This project is
being co-funded by the Chemistry Division and the Division of Materials
Research.&lt;br/&gt;