* 0138319
* Town and Country: A Regional Study of Swahili Village and Urban Households
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Adria LaViolette, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2007
* USD 168,783.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Adria LaViolette and her colleagues
will conduct three seasons of archaeological excavations on Pemba Island,
Tanzania, to address changes in Swahili political economy in the context of Iron
Age urbanism. In the first millennium A.D. Swahili society emerged based on
farming, fishing, and trade. By the 11th century economic and political centers,
called stonetowns, dominated the political and economic landscape of the entire
eastern African seaboard. Stonetown merchants presiding over long-distance trade
relationships to the African interior and along much of the Indian Ocean rim
have formed the basis of reconstructions of Swahili society. With a high density
of stonetowns and associated countryside settlements, Pemba Island offers a
unique location to study the dynamics of an emerging urban polity. A team of
American, Tanzanian, and European archaeologists will investigate households and
domestic spaces in one Pemban polity, targeting non-elite households, both urban
and rural, hitherto overlooked in reconstructions of Swahili society. Three
sites have been chosen for intensive testing and excavations. These include
Chwaka, a stonetown inhabited from the 8th -16th centuries, and two villages
that date to the 8th-9th centuries and 14th-16th centuries. At these sites, Dr.
LaViolette and her collaborators will institute an innovative approach to
locating the remains of highly ephemeral earthen houses. Once identified, these
household remains will be investigated through large-scale excavations at each
site. This will allow a comparison of household assemblages across economic and
social classes within a regional polity over an 800-year period. Close
examinations of households will allow the reconstruction of the Swahili domestic
economy including subsistence, manufacturing, provision of services, and local
and regional movement of domestic goods. Targeting the domestic economy provides
a counterbalance to the long-distance prestige economy that has dominated the
reconstruction of Swahili political economy. The project will thus focus on
three questions: What is the pattern of production and consumption in non-elite
rural and urban households and how does this compare to that of their elite
neighbors? If elites were involved in long-distance trade for the establishment
and maintenance of social power, were they able to convert those symbols of
power into economic wealth, and how? And, what is the relationship between the
domestic and prestige economies in Swahili society?&lt;br/&gt; This project
contributes to anthropological knowledge about the development of Swahili
society; the range of sub-Saharan urban models and socio-economic systems; and
cross-cultural approaches to households and regions within complex societies.
Within the literature on African complex societies, this study also contributes
to a growing understanding of the uniqueness and range of African urbanisms. By
exploring the connection between economic wealth and social power-between
agrarian economies and prestige economies-this project will draw non-elite
people, places, and production into discussions of political economy and social
complexity.&lt;br/&gt;