* 0138649
* Re-housing and Database Development of the Primary Type Specimens in the Entomological Collection of the Academy of Natural Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2005
* Jon Gelhaus, Academy of Natural Sciences Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* Poston Muriel
* 03/31/2005
* USD 92,432.00

A primary type specimen holds a special status in scientific research, as it is
the name-bearer specimen on which the recognition of the species is based. The
International Code of Zoological Nomenclature states that institutions holding
primary type specimens should take all necessary steps for their safe
preservation, make them accessible for study and publish lists of the type
specimens in their collections. The Entomology Department of the Academy of
Natural Sciences has holdings of over 11,000 primary type specimens of insects
and related invertebrates. The current housing of the primary type specimens is
sub-standard, with antiquated metal cabinets with degraded felt gaskets that do
little to prevent intrusions by pests and do not ameliorate greatly the
fluctuations in room temperature and humidity. Some drawers in the cabinets show
significant gaps that also can allow pests to enter. The type specimens of many
groups of insects are stored with multiple species per storage tray, subjecting
each specimen to unnecessary handling and causing problems in re-associating
loose parts with the appropriate specimen. Some of the collections have been
exchanged with other institutions in the past, and the lack of available lists
of type specimen holdings of the Entomology Department at the Academy of Natural
Sciences has caused unnecessary confusion for researchers and hindered their
scientific research. This project will re-house the type specimens in state of
the art cabinetry, and expand to safer storage of just one species per storage
unit. This project will also develop a primary type computer database that will
be used in the re-curation process, to help in collection management, and most
importantly, to be available to users worldwide, through searchable Internet
access. The entire two-year project will cost $124,020. The Academy of Natural
Sciences and the Bradley Bequest (administered through Cornell University) will
provide $31,588 (35%); the remainder is funded through the National Science
Foundation.&lt;br/&gt; Accurate species identification is essential in
scientific research, for example, as a tool for understanding global biological
diversity, to confirm the identify of an invasive or beneficial species, or to
help characterize a threatened species. Primary type specimens serve as the
foundation of accurate identifications and act in an important role in
stabilizing the naming system of species that is used worldwide by scientists,
government agencies, conservationists, educators, and students. The type
specimens not only must be preserved for use now and for future generations, but
the information available with the specimens must be available for use
worldwide. This project not only preserves the specimens, but the information on
the specimen holdings will be available through the internet to users worldwide
when they need to use it. This re-housing, cataloging, and internet
accessibility for the primary type specimens in this project are all necessary
first steps toward subsequent digital imaging of the specimens and internet
image access in future years.&lt;br/&gt;