* 0138440
* Computational and Algorithmic Representations of Geometric Objects - CARGO:   The Geometry of Optical Paths:  Intrinsic Properties, Complexity of Approximation, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2002,10/31/2003
* James Arvo, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 10/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

DMS-0138440&lt;br/&gt;James R. Arvo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most familiar
principle of geometrical optics asserts &lt;br/&gt;that a ray of light impinging
on an ideal mirror will emerge &lt;br/&gt;in such a way that the angle of
reflection equals the angle of incidence. The trajectory of a photon (or a
billiard ball, &lt;br/&gt;using another common metaphor), is thus completely
determined &lt;br/&gt;by its initial conditions and the geometry of the mirrors
it subsequently encounters. The geometry of such trajectories &lt;br/&gt;has
been of interest in numerous fields, including plane &lt;br/&gt;geometry,
computational geometry, and computer graphics, &lt;br/&gt;yet they comprise a
vanishingly small subset (a set of &lt;br/&gt;measure zero) within the class of
all optical paths that &lt;br/&gt;fall within the purview of geometrical optics.
In particular, &lt;br/&gt;optical paths resulting from non-specular reflections
&lt;br/&gt;constitute a vastly larger class. Moreover, they are of far
&lt;br/&gt;greater importance to image synthesis as they result from
&lt;br/&gt;physically realizable models of reflection. Nonetheless,
&lt;br/&gt;non-specular paths have thus far been largely overlooked as
&lt;br/&gt;a source of interesting geometrical problems. The main
&lt;br/&gt;objective of this research is therefore to launch
an&lt;br/&gt;initial investigation into the basic geometrical properties
&lt;br/&gt;of non-specular optical paths, both in the traditional
&lt;br/&gt;combinatorial sense, such as finding a optimal paths
&lt;br/&gt;connecting two points, and in the continuous sense, such &lt;br/&gt;s
finding extremal paths, or computing the measure of all &lt;br/&gt;k-segment
paths connecting two regions. A secondary &lt;br/&gt;objective is to explore
connections with probabilistic &lt;br/&gt;methods, such as standard Monte Carlo
visibility techniques &lt;br/&gt;and Metropolis light transport, which will
likely be the &lt;br/&gt;first direct beneficiaries of this
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is expected to contribute primarily to
the&lt;br/&gt;mathematical foundations of image synthesis by
identifying&lt;br/&gt;optical paths as interesting geometrical entities in
&lt;br/&gt;themselves, and by exposing some of their fundamental
&lt;br/&gt;properties in terms of density, measure, and computational
&lt;br/&gt;complexity. Moreover, it is expected that this new
&lt;br/&gt;perspective will ultimately be instrumental in studying
&lt;br/&gt;the accuracy and computational complexity of realistic
&lt;br/&gt;image synthesis in general, about which very little is
&lt;br/&gt;known currently. While the problems investigated here &lt;br/&gt;will
invariably have much in common with previous work on&lt;br/&gt;direct and
indirect illumination problems in computational&lt;br/&gt;geometry, the
approaches taken will have a distinctly more&lt;br/&gt;continuous flavor,
drawing heavily from fields such as &lt;br/&gt;measure theory, differential
geometry, and geometric &lt;br/&gt;probability. Finally, it is expected that
this work will &lt;br/&gt;serve as a segue into a longer-term investigation of
&lt;br/&gt;computational complexity in computer graphics by
&lt;br/&gt;establishing basic tools and connections with other
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;