* 0138807
* Elementary, Secondary, and Informal Education:  A Distance Learning Model for High School Statistics Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2008
* William Smith, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* John S. Bradley
* 06/30/2008
* USD 1,001,601.00

"A Distance Learning Model for High School Statistics Teachers" proposes a
collaboration between the American Statistical Association, university faculty
(Cal Poly and UCLA), and secondary teachers to develop and pilot a sequence of
two courses for high school mathematics teachers whose training has not
adequately prepared them to teach statistics. The primary professional
development resource currently available for enhancing statistics knowledge is a
weeklong workshop, which lacks a mechanism for continued learning and sustained
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By combining a workshop with a yearlong distance
education component, this project provides a model of professional development
in content areas mandated by curricular change. More specifically, the project
will have two parts: a Content Course and a Practicum Course. The two courses
have a common format comprised of a weeklong workshop followed by a yearlong,
online distance learning component. Both courses also include additional
components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year project will enroll a total of
108 high-school teachers. Upon completion of the project, efforts will be
focused on the dissemination of (1) the content course and (2) a model for
improving teacher qualifications in other SMET content areas undergoing
curricular change, such as physics and chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;