* 0138624
* Partnerships for Math,  Science and Engineering Instruction through Computer Visualization
* EHR,DGE
* 04/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Hiroaki Mukai, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 12/31/2006
* USD 1,569,281.00

This program aims to energize 6th-8th grade students in two middle schools
within two St. Louis school districts, about math, science, and engineering
through experimentation and computer visualization. Ten teaching teams with
specific areas of expertise will be formed, consisting of a GK-12 Fellow, a
UGTA, a K-12 teacher and a Washington University faculty member. Each team will
develop a teaching module in conjunction with K-12 teachers in a K-12 subject
area related to the research interests of the students. A team will rotate
through four classrooms during each year and since each project is
multidisciplinary, teaching teams will be expected to draw on the expertise of
other teams as necessary. This program will achieve the maximum leverage
possible by ensuring that each student has an opportunity to develop a depth of
knowledge in at least four areas and learn how each is strongly tied to the
other disciplines. Faculty from the Washington University Department of
Education will develop and implement a GK-12 Teaching Workshop to instruct the
teaching teams so that they will have a more effective interaction with the
students. The GK-12 Fellows will be selected from diverse backgrounds and in
addition to classroom activities will act as role models to the students,
potentially influencing them to consider math, science, or engineering as career
options. This project is receiving partial support from the Directorate for
Engineering.