* 0138190
* New Sorbents for Separation and Purification Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Ralph Yang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 02/28/2006
* USD 249,773.00

New Sorbents for Separation and Purification Processes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a
means of meeting more stringent sulfur standards for gasoline and diesel fuels,
adsorption under ambient conditions has become an attractive alternative (to
hydrodesulfurization, which is a high-pressure catalytic process). In prior work
pi-complexation has been exploited for fuel desulfurization. Thiophene in
benzene was used as the model system to represent sulfur compounds and gasoline,
respectively. &lt;br/&gt;Preliminary results showed that Cu(I)Y and AgY zeolites
both adsorbed thiophene at low concentrations much more strongly than NaY, which
is among the best sorbents for desulfurization. Molecular orbital calculations
showed stronger pi-complexation bonds between these zeolites and thiophene than
with benzene. Based on these promising results, a comprehensive study of both
vapor-phase and liquid-phase adsorption has been undertaken. Two classes of pi-
complexation sorbents are used: ion exchanged zeolites and monolayer salts
supported on high-surface-area substrates involving Cu+ and Ag+
as&lt;br/&gt;well as other promising d-block cations. The study investigates
thiophene, benzothiophene, and dibenzothiophene dissolved benzene and toluene.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Also, the study examines the unique and promising
adsorption properties of carbon nanotubes. Preliminary results showed that 2.5%
(wt.) of hydrogen could be stored in&lt;br/&gt;alkali-doped nanotubes at 1 atm
H2, and up to 1% (wt.) H2 could be stored in&lt;br/&gt;Ni-containing nanotubes,
also at 1 atm H2. The project studies H2 adsorption by multi-wall and single-
wall carbon nanotubes and graphite nanofibers doped with alkali metals, noble
metals, and transition metals. Experimental conditions include hydrogen
pressures up to 1000 psig, temperatures up to 500oC, and nanotubes of various
inner diameters. The mechanisms of hydrogen storage in nanotubes are studied
theoretically through molecular orbital and Monte Carlo calculations. Multiwall
nanotubes appear to be effective for dioxin removal from combustion gases,
exhibiting much better capacity that activated carbon so this application is
also being tested. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is aimed at developing
efficient sorbents for desulfurization of gasoline and diesel fuels under
ambient conditions. Success of this program will enable refiners to meet easily
the new (2006) sulfur standards. The second aim of this program is to develop
carbon nanotubes as sorbents for hydrogen storage as well as to explore other
unique sorbent properties of carbon nanotubes. The results of this program will
make a significant advance in the applications of carbon nanotubes and
contribute to protection of the environment.&lt;br/&gt;