* 0138446
* Computational and Algorithmic Representations of Geonetric Objects - CARGO: Degeneracy Detection for Curved Solids
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2002,08/31/2003
* J Maurice Rojas, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 08/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

DMS-0138446&lt;br/&gt;John Keyser&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Degeneracies are a major
source of robustness problems &lt;br/&gt;in many geometric algorithms. Many
degenerate situations &lt;br/&gt;can be expressed as a root of a multivariate
system of &lt;br/&gt;polynomials. We propose to study the use of toric
resultants &lt;br/&gt;to detect degenerate situations in solid modeling
applications. &lt;br/&gt;By taking advantage of the underlying monomial
structure &lt;br/&gt;of a system of polynomials, the toric resultant can provide
&lt;br/&gt;a method for solving systems of polynomials that is
&lt;br/&gt;dramatically more efficient than the classical "dense"
&lt;br/&gt;resultants of Macaulay and Cayley. We will focus on
&lt;br/&gt;application to boundary evaluation for curved solids.&lt;br/&gt;Our
work will include enumeration of degenerate conditions &lt;br/&gt;and
identifying detection algorithms for each category, &lt;br/&gt;using the toric
resultant where appropriate. The work &lt;br/&gt;is intended to foster future
collaborative research &lt;br/&gt;endeavors on topics including resolution of
geometric &lt;br/&gt;degeneracies, general algebraic number computation,
and&lt;br/&gt;computational Morse theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geometric
degeneracies occur when a minor perturbation &lt;br/&gt;of the geometry would
cause a qualitatively different &lt;br/&gt;positioning between the objects.
Degeneracies, such as &lt;br/&gt;two overlapping surfaces or a vertex of one
object lying &lt;br/&gt;on the face of another, are common occurances in
many&lt;br/&gt;real-world solid modeling examples. The problems of
&lt;br/&gt;detecting and dealing with degenerate situations becomes
&lt;br/&gt;particularly difficult when dealing with curved surfaces.
&lt;br/&gt;Usually, detecting such cases involves finding roots of
&lt;br/&gt;polynomials. Thus, accurate and efficient root-finding &lt;br/&gt;is
crucial to an effective approach for handling&lt;br/&gt;degeneracies. The toric
resultant is an approach for &lt;br/&gt;finding solutions to systems of
polynomial equations. &lt;br/&gt;Because of its efficiency compared to other
methods of &lt;br/&gt;solving such systems, it is a promising
approach&lt;br/&gt;for detecting and treating degeneracies. We propose
&lt;br/&gt;to address degeneracies in solid modeling applications
&lt;br/&gt;through the use of the toric resultant.&lt;br/&gt;