* 0138493
* US-India Cooperative Research:  Development of a Digital Artifact Archive:  An American and Indian Collaboration for Pottery Visualization and Analysis
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2005
* Brian Slator, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 03/31/2005
* USD 22,000.00

0138493&lt;br/&gt;Clark &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award supports
US-India cooperative research entitled Development of a Digital Artifact
Archive: An American and Indian Collaboration for Pottery Visualization and
Analysis. Jeffrey Clark of Archaeology Technologies Laboratory (ATL) at North
Dakota State University (NDSU) in Fargo, North Dakota and Vinod Nautiyal of the
Department of History and Archaeology at HNB Garhwal University in Srinagar will
link their databases to create a digital archive of historic and prehistoric
artifacts, with special emphasis on archaeological collections of Indian
pottery. These databases will become part of an NDSU project, the Digital
Archive Network for Anthropology (DANA), which is a federation of distributed,
interoperable databases, each with specific content that is of value to
archaeology, anthropology, and related fields. DANA will contain three-
dimensional (3D) models of artifacts that are sufficiently precise to allow for
detailed measurements and analyses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: This research
will make archival data and 3D renderings of physical objects through DANA
available to researchers and eventually to other users via the internet using
state-of-the-art technology for digital archiving and distributed networking.
While the intention is to provide a unique and innovative set of products and
services, the underlying technologies are understood on both sides and the
collaboration will draw upon the strengths and experience of both partners. The
immediate goal of the India collaboration is to demonstrate the viability of the
DANA project internationally. In the long term, this effort is an important step
toward enabling the conduct of research in a virtual environment. The Indian
Department of Science and Technology(DST) is funding this research under the
NSF/DST joint program. &lt;br/&gt;