* 0138010
* High-Resolution Constraints on the Magnitude and Timing of Climate Change in Iceland Over the Past 15 ka.
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2005
* Gifford Miller, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 05/31/2005
* USD 173,354.00

&lt;br/&gt;Miller&lt;br/&gt;0138010&lt;br/&gt;This is a collaborative proposal
among Principal Investigators at the Universities of Colorado and Iceland.
Iceland is situated at the boundary between cold, polar air masses and
relatively warm air masses of tropical origin and between the cold, relatively
fresh East Greenland Current and the warm, salty North Atlantic Drift. Subtle
shifts in either atmospheric or oceanic circulation may have produced strong
changes in the terrestrial environment. Therefore, the impact of North Atlantic
Holocene circulation variability was likely to be stronger on Iceland than most
other North Atlantic landmasses. There has been a historical record of
environmental change on Iceland since its settlement and the large variations
observed confirm Iceland's climate sensitivity. The goal of the project is to
reconstruct Iceland's large ice caps through the present interglacial and
document abrupt shifts that occurred during deglaciation, and the magnitude,
timing and possible cyclicity of terrestrial environmental change. The Principal
Investigators will attempt to answer two specific questions: 1) did some of the
extant large ice caps disappear in the early Holocene, and if so, when did they
regrow and 2) what were the terrestrial and near-shore environmental conditions
during deglaciation? Continuous cores from two deep, high-sedimentation-rate
lake basins will be recovered. These lakes were selected because the sediments
are expected to provide high-resolution, quantitative evidence of environmental
change over the past 10 to 15 thousand years. The Principal Investigators will
undertake a multiproxy approach, with an emphasis on physical characteristics of
the sediments, lacustrine primary productivity changes, palynology, and marine
micropaleontology. These data should allow them to determine whether there is a
natural cyclicity in Holocene environmental change on Iceland, similar to that
reported from the adjacent oceans and the Greenland Ice Sheet.