* 0138595
* GOALI:  Aggregation of Protein Therapeutics in Aqueous Solutions
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* David Brems, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 06/30/2006
* USD 431,456.00

Therapeutic proteins provide numerous unique treatments for human diseases
(e.g., diabetes, and cancer). However, due to their delicate three-dimensional
structures, proteins are very difficult to keep stable during the required 18-24
month shelf life of a pharmaceutical product. Furthermore, it is currently not
possible to predict which solution conditions will result in sufficient
stability. The Principal Investigators (PIs) propose to conduct fundamental
studies of critical physical properties of proteins to develop methods for
predicting optimal solution conditions for long-term stability. This
multidisciplinary project combines efforts from Chemical Engineering and
Pharmaceutical Sciences Departments at the University of Colorado with those of
Amgen, an industrial partner. The PIs propose to determine the effects of
critical solution conditions (pH, ionic strength and presence of stabilizing
excipients) on rate and pathway for aggregation of several model proteins.
Levels, and kinetics for formation and loss (where applicable) of soluble
oligomeric species and insoluble precipitates will be measured, and structure of
proteins in aggregates will be determined with infrared and derivative UV
spectroscopies. To understand these effects, the PIs will determine the effects
of pH, ionic strength and stabilizing excipients on protein structure and
thermodynamic properties. Protein secondary and tertiary structures will be
studied with circular dichroism, infrared, fluorescence and derivative-UV
spectroscopies. The free energy of unfolding and hydrogen-deuterium exchange
rates will be measured to test the hypothesis that increasing the thermodynamic
stability of the native state and shifting the native state ensemble toward most
compact species are important factors for inhibiting protein aggregation. The
second osmotic virial coefficient will be measured by light scattering to assess
the effects of solution conditions on the colloidal stability of the protein
systems. High-pressure spectroscopic techniques will be used to complement these
measurements. Finally, the effect of solution conditions on chemical stability
(e.g., deamidation, oxidation and non-native disulfide formation) of the model
proteins will be determined by the industrial collaborators at Amgen, and
linkages between physical and chemical stability of the model proteins will be
elucidated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;