* 0138456
* CARGO: Shape Analysis From Point Cloud Data
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Leonidas Guibas, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 12/31/2005
* USD 699,924.00

DMS-0138456&lt;br/&gt;Leonidas J. Guibas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The wide
availability of scanning technologies for &lt;br/&gt;3-d shape acquisition has
led to the development of &lt;br/&gt;algorithms and software, in both academia
and industry, &lt;br/&gt;for building surface meshes from the raw data returned
&lt;br/&gt;by the scanner. For most optical and contact sensors&lt;br/&gt;this
raw data is in the form of an unorganized point &lt;br/&gt;cloud, or PCD set
(point cloud data); current scanners &lt;br/&gt;are able to generate object
surface samplings at &lt;br/&gt;submillimeter accuracy. At such high
resolutions,&lt;br/&gt;these dense PCD sets become adequate representations
&lt;br/&gt;of object geometry in themselves, without any need to &lt;br/&gt;fit
a mesh or surface. The work undertaken under this &lt;br/&gt;grant will exploit
tools from algebraic topology and &lt;br/&gt;computational geometry to perform
local and global&lt;br/&gt;analysis directly and efficiently on PCD data.
Specifically,&lt;br/&gt;algorithms for PCD feature detection, segmentation,
matching, &lt;br/&gt;fitting, and compression will be developed and
analyzed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is expected that PCD sets will become a
lightweight &lt;br/&gt;and convenient representation of object geometry not
&lt;br/&gt;only in reconstruction or visualization applications, &lt;br/&gt;but
even more so in the largely unexplored area of directly interrogating object
geometry in the PCD format for&lt;br/&gt;applications such as robotic
exploration or product&lt;br/&gt;customization. Over the next five years we can
expect &lt;br/&gt;to see wide commercial deployment of 3-d scanning and
&lt;br/&gt;the appearance of compact, portable scanning devices. &lt;br/&gt;By
exploiting the acquired PCD data it will become &lt;br/&gt;possible to customize
and tailor manufactured products &lt;br/&gt;to their user to a degree that has
been impossible up &lt;br/&gt;to now. Technology developed under this proposal
should &lt;br/&gt;facilitate this transition in the apparel, footwear,
&lt;br/&gt;hearing-aid, orthodontic, prosthetics, and automotive
&lt;br/&gt;industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;