* 0138285
* Elementary, Secondary, and Informal Education:  West Virginia Reach Out:  Expanding the WV-Handle on Science Project to Grades 7 and 8
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2002,03/31/2005
* H Cook, West Liberty State College
* Continuing grant
* David B. Campbell
* 03/31/2005
* USD 151,656.00

The West Virginia Pilot Local Systemic Change project will build upon an NSF-
funded teacher enhancement project targeting K-6 grade teachers. The proposed
project will provide content enhancement and leadership development in science
for sixteen seventh and eighth grade science teachers over a two-year period of
time. Two participants from each of the five counties in the region served by
the Northern Regional Consortium for science, mathematics and technology, and
three rural counties outside of the Northern Panhandle will participate in the
project. The six rural county teachers will be involved via distance learning
technologies. Participants will experience a 10-day summer workshop, on-line
chat sessions, informal science workshops during the academic year, and ATM
(asynchronous transfer mode) technology. Four informal science education
providers will help to expand upon the participants' content knowledge and to
link real life experiences to the study of science. During the two hundred
professional development hours over two years, teachers will field test and
evaluate modules from the STC/MS, FOSS and SEPUP curricula. Appropriate teaching
techniques and a redesign of the current curricula are required to allow all of
the area's middle level students to learn concepts that will serve them well in
their changing economy. As a result, science content, especially physical
science, and materials will be the primary focus of this Pilot LSC project.

