* 0138288
* US-South Africa Dissertation Enhancement:  The Evolution of Long-Tongued Fly Pollinators (Diptera: Tabanidae)
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Michael Sanderson, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 07/31/2005
* USD 23,446.00

0138288&lt;br/&gt;M. Sanderson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation
enhancement grant supports a US graduate student, Ms. Shelah Morita, working
under the guidance of Professor Michael Sanderson, in the Section of Evolution
and Ecology at the University of California-Davis, to conduct a study in South
Africa on the coevolution of long-tongued horse flies (Diptera: Tabanidae) and
the deep-throated flowers that they pollinate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of
coevolution can provide knowledge about the importance of species interactions
in speciation, but present day associations between species may not reflect
their past relationships. Diptera: Tabanidae is an ideal system for studying
coevolution because their unusually long mouthparts are thought to covary with
the morphological features of the flowers on which they feed, and it has already
been demonstrated that these horse flies are closely tied to the fitness of the
endemic flora of the South African fynbos region. But the biogeographical
distribution of this group of horse flies does not match the predicted biotic
distribution provided by the current understanding of historical biogeography.
Ms. Morita hypotheses that: 1) Nectar-feeding Tabanidae in South Africa have
coevolved with the plants they pollinate, and 2) Blood feeding is ancestral in
female long-tongued horse flies within the tribe Philolichini. She also seeks to
learn if the current classification of horse flies correctly represents their
evolutionary relationships. Through a unique combination of phylogenetic
approach and population-level studies, Ms. Morita will first study the
phylogenies of both plants and pollinators, after which she will analyze the
coevolution of proboscis length and nectar spur length in order to understand
the evolutionary relationships within this group of Tabanidae. The student will
use data obtained from field collected samples and institutional specimens. Dr.
Steven Johnson, with the School of Botany and Zoology at the University of
Natal, is a noted authority on the pollination ecology and plant systematics of
this system, and he will provide guidance on this project to Ms. Morita.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this study are expected to advance the
current knowledge on how animals and plants coevolve and new feeding behaviors
are acquired. This project will also support an international research
experience very early in the career of an outstanding graduate
student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Office of International Science and
Engineering and the Division of Environmental Biology jointly fund this
project.&lt;br/&gt;