* 0138374
* Computational and Algorithmic Representations of Geonetric Objects - CARGO: Folding and Unfolding Processes for Polygonal Linkages, with Applications to Robotics and Biology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* R. James Milgram, Smith College
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,961.00

Abstract for DMS - 0138374&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This incubation project plans to
start an interdisciplinary collaboration&lt;br/&gt;whose goal is the
understanding of folding and unfolding processes for&lt;br/&gt;polygonal
linkages and other related structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We plan to
investigate the topology and the algebraic-geometric structure&lt;br/&gt;of
configuration spaces of two- and three-dimensional serial linkages,
via&lt;br/&gt;generalizations of recent successful rigidity-theoretic approaches
based&lt;br/&gt;on pseudo-triangulation mechanisms, and to advance the
understanding of&lt;br/&gt;the global structure of the associated configuration
spaces. The&lt;br/&gt;rigidity-theoretic techniques have allowed the definition
of 2-d motions&lt;br/&gt;that are purely expansive or contractive: the former
can guarantee that a&lt;br/&gt;chain will not self-collide. We plan to extend
these techniques to three&lt;br/&gt;dimensions and subsequently develop
efficient data structures and&lt;br/&gt;algorithms for planning, analyzing,
approximating, tracking and querying&lt;br/&gt;such
motions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We expect that folding problems, beyond their
intrinsic mathematical&lt;br/&gt;interest, will lead to techniques that will
impact areas such as molecular&lt;br/&gt;biology, where the protein folding
problem is of central significance, as&lt;br/&gt;well as robotics and
micromechanics, where modular kinematic mechanisms&lt;br/&gt;(with possibly
large numbers of links) are often employed. The common&lt;br/&gt;denominator of
these endeavors, and our main theme, is the general&lt;br/&gt;question of
planning and reasoning about collision free motions for
serial&lt;br/&gt;linkages of various kinds. &lt;br/&gt;