* 0138426
* Computational and Algorithmic Representations of Geonetric Objects - CARGO:   Computational Topology for Exploring Time-varying Volume Data
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Jarek Rossignac, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 07/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

DMS-0138426&lt;br/&gt;Jack S. Snoeyink&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific
measurements and computer simulations of &lt;br/&gt;phenomena like air
turbulence, nuclear explosions, or &lt;br/&gt;combustion in an engine, when
conducted at high-performance &lt;br/&gt;computing facilities, produce vast
amounts of four-dimensional &lt;br/&gt;data representing how variables such as
temperature and&lt;br/&gt;pressure change over time. This incubation project
brings &lt;br/&gt;together researchers at UNC Chapel Hill, Georgia Tech, and
&lt;br/&gt;Lawrence Livermore National Labs to develop a prototype
&lt;br/&gt;visualization tool that can both quickly compute such &lt;br/&gt;iso-
surfaces from such data sets and also provide a global &lt;br/&gt;summary that
can indicate where a user should look in the &lt;br/&gt;data set to find
interesting phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach to be taken is to
extend work on contour trees &lt;br/&gt;to a "Morse theory for a parameterized
family of functions" &lt;br/&gt;that is sufficient to visualize 4D data from 2D
iso-surfaces &lt;br/&gt;or slices. When scientists, engineers, and students can
&lt;br/&gt;explore the data that comes from simulation, their understanding
&lt;br/&gt;of the process that is being simulated can only
improve.&lt;br/&gt;This not only increases the return from the national
&lt;br/&gt;investment in high-performance computing centers, but can
&lt;br/&gt;also result in, for example, cleaner-burning engines.&lt;br/&gt;