* 0138640
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Chemistry:   A Dispersed Site in Physical Organic Chemistry
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2005
* I. David Reingold, Juniata College
* Continuing grant
* Richard D. Foust
* 04/30/2005
* USD 210,000.00

This Chemistry Division award supports a Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) "site" at six primarily undergraduate institutions. This dispersed site is
coordinated by David Rheingold at Juniata College and involves 12 undergraduates
each summer for 2002, 2003 and 2004. While this REU site is geographically
dispersed, it is linked by the common theme of physical organic chemistry. The
research projects include the synthesis and material science applications of
hexaazaanthracenes (Brisbois, Macalester); antiaromatic fluorenyl and indenyl
dications (Mills, Trinity University); rational syntheses of
buckminsterfullerene (Mitzel, Trinity College); ordered arrays of polyphenols by
tandem reactions (Rheingold, Juniata); synthesis and electronic structure of
bicyclo[1.1.1]pentyl-phenylacetylenes (Mondanaro, St. Michael's College); and
electronic effects in the cycloaromatization of arenediynes (Russell, Northern
Kentucky University). Students will be recruited by each research mentor, with
special efforts to recruit members of underrepresented groups. The mentors and
undergraduate researchers will meet as a group at least twice each summer (once
at a national meeting) and use electronic bulletin boards or tele/video
conferences to discuss their research informally. The REU program will be
assessessed by participant surveys and faculty evaluations of student progress.