* 0138488
* Tests and Further Development of the Interstitialcy Theory of Liquids and Glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2007
* Andrew Granato, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 03/31/2007
* USD 396,000.00

The principal goals of this program are to test and develop further the
Interstitialcy Theory of liquids and glasses. This will be done with critical
experiments on the interstitialcy concentration dependence of the shear modulus
and volume, the kinetics of the non-linear, non-exponential aging effects found
near the glass temperature, and the Boson Peak arising from interstitialcy
resonant normal modes. According to the theory, liquids are crystals containing
a few percent of self-interstitials in thermal equilibrium, while glasses are
frozen liquids. If the behavior predicted by the theory is confirmed
quantitatively, the results will add to our microscopic understanding of liquids
and glasses. This information could be of importance to technologies based on
amorphous materials. The post doctoral associate involved in this program can be
expected to play a leading role in the development of this emerging area, while
the students will be well prepared for a variety of career choices as a result
of their training in leading-edge technologies.

The principal goals of this program are to test and develop further a recent
microscopic theory of liquids and glasses with several critical experiments. For
this work, the extraordinary sensitivity of measurements of the shear modulus,
which plays a central role in the theory, will be exploited. If the behavior
predicted by the theory on the temperature, concentration and aging dependence
of the thermodynamic and kinetic properties is confirmed quantitatively by these
experiments, the results would add considerable to our microscopic understanding
of liquids and glasses. This could provide information relevant to many fields
of science (physics, chemistry, materials science, geology and biology) as well
as technologies based on amorphous materials. The post doctoral associate
involved in this program can be expected to play a leading role in the
development of this emerging area, while the students will be well prepared for
a variety of career choices as a result of their training in leading-edge
technologies.