* 0138209
* Tunneling and Transport in Ordered and Disordered Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2005
* Allen Goldman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 03/31/2005
* USD 420,000.00

Superconductor-insulator (SI) transitions in ultrathin metal films and organic
crystal field effect transistor configurations can be tuned by external control
parameters and are believed to be zero-temperature quantum phase transitions,
driven by quantum rather than thermal fluctuations. The nature of the underlying
physical models of SI transitions is uncertain, as existing experiments do not
distinguish between competing fermionic and bosonic descriptions, and there may
be a distinct metallic phase separating the superconducting and insulating
ground states. This individual investigator award will support a research
project that will attempt to resolve these outstanding questions in our
understanding of SI transitions. Keys to resolving the issues are the extension
of the parameter space to very low temperatures to insure measurements in the
critical regime, careful shielding from both external noise and thermal noise
generated in electrical leads, and determining the structure of samples. The
super-electron density critical exponent will be determined by measuring the
penetration depth, avoiding the pitfalls of finite-size scaling in determining
exponents. Transitions will also be tuned by applying magnetic fields, and by
controlling dissipation. In addition, the SI transition will also be tuned by
changing the carrier concentration of organic superconducting two-dimensional
electron gases. This fundamental work is potentially significant for far-
reaching technological applications of superconductivity at the nanoscale. It
serves as an important training ground for doctoral students in physics,
providing them with an extremely broad range of research skills.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phase transitions tuned by an external control parameter
such as pressure, magnetic field, or carrier concentration, rather than
temperature are called quantum phase transitions. These zero-temperature
transitions are driven by quantum fluctuations governed by Heisenberg's
uncertainty principle, rather than by thermal fluctuations, as when water
changes to steam or ice. Systems that exhibit quantum phase transitions include
two-dimensional superconductors, 4He adsorbed on random substrates, high-
mobility two-dimensional electron gases, various strongly-correlated magnetic
systems, and high-Tc superconductors. This individual investigator award
supports a project that is focused on studying superconductor-insulator
transitions in two-dimensional superconductors in the form of granular and
homogenous metallic films, and in truly two-dimensional field-effect transistor
configurations of organic crystals. The issues that will be addressed include
the nature of the underlying physical models and whether there is a distinct
metallic phase separating the superconducting and insulating ground states. This
fundamental work is potentially significant for far-reaching technological
applications in both nanotechnology and high-temperature superconductivity. The
program breaks new ground technologically in the fabrication and
characterization of samples, and provides important training for doctoral
candidates in physics by developing an extremely broad range of research skills.