* 0138000
* Virtual NMR Spectrometer, a Computer Tool for Efficient Simulation of Modern NMR Experiments and for Learning NMR
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* David Fushman, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 03/31/2006
* USD 294,540.00

&lt;br/&gt;This award provides support for a project focused on the development
of a novel software package, Virtual NMR Spectrometer, for accurate and
efficient computer calculation of the outcome of nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) experiments. As NMR experiments grow more elaborate it becomes
increasingly difficult to predict the resulting spectra analytically. These
difficulties are particularly great for spin systems of high complexity typical
of biological macromolecules. The Virtual Spectrometer will be capable of
simulating all contemporary experimental NMR approaches, including multichannel,
multidimensional experiments involving shaped radio-frequency pulses and pulsed
field gradients. The software will provide a powerful tool for designing new NMR
approaches and for optimizing pulse sequences and experimental conditions prior
to running NMR experiments. The Virtual NMR Spectrometer will also serve as an
efficient tool for learning the general principles of magnetic resonance
spectroscopy and for training students and novice users in pulse sequence design
and data processing. In contrast to the existing software, use of the virtual
spectrometer will not require computer programming skills. This will permit a
variety of users with variedbackgrounds to use this program for learning
purposes and/or for improvement in design of experiments using NMR.&lt;br/&gt;