* 0138973
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates - REU: DIMACS-DIMATIA International REU Program
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2008
* Fred Roberts, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 04/30/2008
* USD 654,305.00

EIA-0138973&lt;br/&gt;Roberts, Fred&lt;br/&gt;Rutgers Univ. New
Brunswick&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: REU DIMACS-DIMATIA International REU
Program&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DIMACS, the Center for Discrete Mathematics and
Theoretical Computer Science, headquartered at Rutgers University, proposes a
three-part domestic and international REU program. The program will be co-
sponsored by DIMATIA, the Center for Discrete Mathematics, Theoretical
Informatics, and Applications, at Charles University in Prague, Czech Republic.
The REU program we are proposing will be modeled after the highly successful
programs we have already run and will have the following three parts: (i) A
group of five students from all across the U.S. will participate in an 8-week
REU program headquartered at DIMACS; (ii) A second group of five students from
all across the U.S. will participate in the 8-week domestic REU program and then
spend 3 additional weeks at DIMATIA; (iii) a group of five students from the
Czech Republic will participate in the 8-week domestic REU program and then act
as hosts at DIMATIA when the U.S. students go to Prague. The REU program will
focus on the strengths that are joint between DIMACS and DIMATIA, and in
particular on the fields of extremal and algebraic combinatorics, graph theory,
computational geometry, logic and complexity theory, and combinatorial
optimization.&lt;br/&gt;