* 0138083
* US-Tunisia Cooperative Research:  Vibration Confinement in Seismically Excited Linear and Hysteretic Structures
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2007
* Ali Nayfeh, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 03/31/2007
* USD 30,000.00

0138083 &lt;br/&gt;Nayfeh&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award supports
a cooperative research project between Professor Ali&lt;br/&gt;Nayfeh,
Department of Engineering Sciences and Mechanics, Virginia Polytechnic Institute
and State University (VA Tech.), Blacksburg, Virginia and Dr. Sami El-Borgi,
Department of Engineering, Ecole Polytechnique de Tunisie (EPT), Tunis, Tunisia.
The investigators will examine the control of a seismically excited linear
elastic or hysteretic structure by passive confinement of vibrations. The
objectives of the research are: a) to develop a passive control strategy which
allows the transfer of the vibrational energy from the structure to added
passive elements, such as diagonal bracing elements, resulting in reducing the
vibration amplitudes of the structure and bringing it down to its desired
equilibrium state more rapidly at the expense of slowing down the convergence of
the passive elements to their initial state; b) to ensure the sensitivity
robustness of such a strategy against parameter uncertainties related to the
mass, damping, and stiffness of the structure; and c) to preserve the vibration
confinement in the passive elements for various types of seismic
loadings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The protection of structures from harmful
earthquake and/or wind vibrations is a worldwide issue. The control of
seismically excited structures by confinement of vibrations with the aid of
passive elements is a novel design methodology in civil engineering
applications. The idea is relevant to various fields, such as mechanical systems
and multi-floor buildings. Dr. Nayfeh has been quite active in research on
linear and nonlinear control of dynamical systems. He will collaborate with Dr.
El-Borgi and two other Tunisian faculty members. Dr. El-Borgi has been quite
active in nonlinear analysis and control of seismically excited structures and
experimental testing of large civil engineering structures. Funding is provided
by the Office of International Science and Engineering and the Division of Civil
and Mechanical Systems.&lt;br/&gt;