* 0138138
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Agricultural Production in the Emergence of Chiefdoms in Tierradentro, Southwestern Colombia
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2004
* Robert Drennan, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2004
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Robert D. Drennan, Ms. Andrea Cuellar will collect
data for her doctoral dissertation. Her research focuses on the initial
development of complex hierarchical social organization in the Eastern piedmont
of Ecuador during the last few centuries BC. As in other parts of the Andes, the
development of complex societies has been attributed to the extremely varied
environments packed closely together because of the sharp variations in altitude
which this mountain range presents. At the time of the Spanish Conquest in the
sixteenth century, residents of different altitude zones often specialized in
the cultiva-tion of crops especially adapted to local conditions and exchanged
their products for those of other zones. Andeanists have often tended to as-sume
that such economic patterns characterized the much more distant past as well,
but in fact there is very little archeological evidence to document patterns of
agricultural production in these societies. This project will map out settlement
distribution over a region of 200 km2 and conduct test excavations in a sample
of sites for the recovery of pollen samples and plant macroremains. The pollen
samples from cultural con-texts will provide a sensitive indicator of the
species of plants culti-vated in gardens near the house, and thus monitor
patterns of local ag-ricultural production. The plant macroremains will reflect
plant species brought into the household and manipulated there, and thus will
monitor patterns of consumption. The delineation of changing patterns of re-
gional political centralization and social complexity by the settlement survey
will combine with the reconstruction of patterns of production and consumption.
It will, as a result, be possible to determine whether changes in the one
accompany changes in the other chronologically, and thus whether they might be
causally related. As a consequence we will be better able to evaluate whether
patterns of specialized economic produc-tion must underlie the development of
social hierarchies and political centralization, as some anthropologists have
long argued. The two might be found to go hand in hand in the Valle de los
Quijos sequence, or it could be found that complex regional organization emerged
long before specialized agricultural production did. The research will provide
ar-cheological documentation of a sequence of 2,000 to 3,000 years during which
societies developed that integrated thousands of people in numer-ous communities
scattered through a region. It will also document the nature of the economic
base that sustained these societies, and evaluate the importance of specialized
agricultural production in that economic base.