* 0138314
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Statistical Analysis of the Location Factors of High-Tech Centers in the United States, 1950-1997: An Evaluation Using Quasi-Experimental Method
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2002
* Peter Gordon, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 12/31/2002
* USD 12,000.00

What are the location factors that explain successful high-tech centers? Do
previous studies of the high-tech industry shed light on this question? If not,
how can we identify plausible factors and causes? These questions will be
addressed in this dissertation research project through a statistical study of
U.S. high-tech centers. High-tech industries, as a major job generator and as a
major industrial innovator, play a key role explaining the postwar U.S. economic
prosperity. There has been considerable discussion of how to possibly duplicate
the success of high-tech centers such as Silicon Valley, Route 128, or Research
Triangle Park. Research has been directed at questions on the pivotal location
factors of the major high-tech centers, in an attempt to assist planners and
policy makers who desire to develop similar centers of innovation. Previous
research has focused on: (1) the role of federal support, (2)universities as
providers of basic research and as suppliers of educated workers, (3)business
conditions such as local industry size, patent, venture capital, and foreign
direct investment, (4) quality of life, which includes climate, cost of living,
crime, recreation, and education, and (5) combinations of factors are considered
significant. Most recent studies seek to identify the factors that explain the
robustness of established centers, but a serious gap in these discussions is
that they focus on the performance of the group of high-tech centers by
themselves. The plausibility of conclusions from such studies is limited
because, to our knowledge, no control groups were used. The proposed research
would fill this gap by first identifying suitable control groups and then
systematically testing hypotheses on the explanation of high-tech center
success. Until the growth and development of these centers is clearly
understood, it will be difficult to fathom the process on which a successful
high-tech centers growth policy can be built. Other methods such as shift-share,
econometric analysis, and panel data analysis will also be required to fully
test the hypotheses. This research project will necessarily employ statistical
approaches to identify reliable location factors that explain successful high-
tech centers. Specifically, a quasi-experimental control group method will be
used. This involves the selection of a control group with similar initial
conditions as the successful high-tech centers, and requires measuring the
differences between the control group and high-tech centers. County-level U.S.
census data from 1950 will be utilized in order to exclude most endogenous
effects. To prevent a scale problem among variables in the selection process of
properly paired comparisons, Mahalanobis distance will be adopted; this is a
measure frequently used in anthropology, biostatistics, epidemiology, and other
disciplines (Isserman 1999). Regression analysis will be utilized to compare and
to identify significant causal factors. Competing hypothesis will be tested, and
conclusions and policy implications will be suggested. The results of this study
should provide a better understanding of the success of selected high-tech
centers. The results can offer guidelines for high-tech center development, more
so than the available high-tech centers literature. In so doing, the study will
shed light on plausible high-tech location policies that many local and regional
governments and planners are interested in.&lt;br/&gt;