* 0138023
* US-Turkey Cooperative Research:  Hydrothermal Alteration and Genesis of Halloysite Deposits Along the Active Southern Segments of North Anatolian Fault Zone, NW Turkey
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Paul Schroeder, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 04/30/2005
* USD 32,400.00

0138023&lt;br/&gt;Schroeder&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is for
support of a cooperative project by Dr. Paul Schroeder, Department of Geology at
the University of Georgia (UGA), Athens, Georgia and Dr. O. Isik Ece of the
Geological Sciences Department of Istanbul Technical University (ITU) in
Istanbul, Turkey. Tectonic evolution of North Anatolian Fault zone and Neo-
Tethys suture belts from Aegean Sea to Western Anatolia and the recent discovery
of kaolin deposits within these tectonic belts have become a new focus of earth
scientists in assessing resources in the global clay industry and the magnitude
of silicate alteration effects on global climate change. The purpose of this
joint research is to determine (1) the alteration mechanism of volcanic rocks to
kaolin group minerals, and estimate its role in the mass-balance of global
element cycles, (2) the distribution of parent, secondary and tertiary minerals
in order to estimate the extent of hydrothermal alteration zones, and (3) to
verify alteration stages and physico-chemical conditions of volcanic tuffs by
geochemical analysis of the waters. The area selected for field research in
Turkey has unique features of mineral occurrences and hydrothermal alterations
associated with branches of major active North Anatolian Fault system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The field setting is particularly suitable to
examine the full range of geochemical and sedimentological conditions leading to
the formation of economically viable deposits. Because Turkey is on one of the
most active fault zones, it provides an ideal setting to study hydrothermal
alteration of primary (and formation of industrial secondary) clay minerals. The
project will shed new light on fossil hydrothermal systems and on the occurrence
of high quality industrial phyllosilicates from the point of view of physical
features and crystal chemistry. There is a possibility for the discovery of
halloysite deposits that could serve the ceramic markets. This study could
provide mineralogical and geochemical information that can be utilized in
understanding the genesis of other kaolinite and halloysite occurrences. Turkish
scientists will utilize the X-ray diffraction, transmission electron microscope
and stable isotope facilities at UGA. Geology students from UGA will gain
valuable field experience and will benefit from the international collaboration.
The project meets INT criteria for support of cooperative projects that are
mutually beneficial. &lt;br/&gt;