* 0138306
* US-Algeria Cooperative Research:  Limestone Concrete Durability Research
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2002,06/30/2008
* Winston Soboyejo, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 06/30/2008
* USD 29,300.00

0138306&lt;br/&gt;Soboyejo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a collaborative project by Dr. Winston Soboyejo, Department of
Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, New
Jersey, Dr. Alfred Soboyejo, Department of Aerospace Engineering, The Ohio State
University and Dr. Said Kenai, Department of Civil Engineering, University of
Blida, Blida, Algeria. The research will focus on developing a basic
understanding of the effects of limestone content on the fracture and fatigue
behavior of limestone cements. The manufacture of limestone concrete and the
characterization of their basic properties (composition, structure, strength and
permeability) will be done in Algeria. Electron microscopy and x-ray diffraction
techniques will be used to further characterize the structure of the cementious
materials at Princeton University and at the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST). Fracture behavior studies will be carried at Princeton
University, including the crack-microstructure interactions and the process zone
development associated with resistance-curve behavior. The crack-tip shielding
mechanisms observed during the resistance-curve experiments and fatigue crack
growth will then be modeled. The effect of relative humidity and temperature on
fatigue crack growth will be investigated, and will be modeled. A U.S.-Algeria
workshop on the durability of limestone cements will be held in Algeria during
the final year of the program, to introduce state-of-the-art concepts on
limestone cement concrete to graduate students, industrial representatives and
researchers from Algeria and the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: This project
deals with a problem of significant value to most developing countries and also
of significance to the United States. Limestone cements are considerably less
expensive and more environmentally friendly to produce than existing cements.
The project will investigate the value of these materials as structural cement
for static and dynamic loads. Limestone is readily available in Algeria and most
Middle East countries and if it can be used in cements would help increase
housing availability to the growing populations. In the U.S. such materials, if
proven successful, would help reduce the environmental impact of producing
cement. The project will initiate a US-Algeria collaboration in the area of
science and technology. One US graduate student from the Princeton University
will participate in the project in Algeria. This proposal meets the INT
objective of supporting collaborative research in areas of mutual scientific
interest.&lt;br/&gt;