* 0138411
* CARGO: Advanced Topological Methods for Robust Surface Intersection Algorithms and Trimmed Surface Representations
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Joel Hass, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 04/30/2006
* USD 400,014.00

DMS-0138411&lt;br/&gt;Rida T. Farouki&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Though motivated by
practical engineering considerations, &lt;br/&gt;surface intersection problems
have deep roots in diverse &lt;br/&gt;areas of mathematics, including algebra,
geometry, topology, &lt;br/&gt;analysis, and numerical methods. The proposed
project will &lt;br/&gt;bring the diverse expertise and renewed commitment of an
inter-disciplinary team of mathematicians, computer&lt;br/&gt;scientists, and
engineers to bear on this critical problem. &lt;br/&gt;Since successful
solutions will require radically new &lt;br/&gt;approaches and paradigms, rather
than incremental advances, &lt;br/&gt;special emphasis will be placed on re-
visiting the problem &lt;br/&gt;from first principles, seeking new insights
through &lt;br/&gt;synergistic dialog among participants with diverse areas
of&lt;br/&gt;expertise, and use of exploratory software implementations
&lt;br/&gt;as research tools. A central theme of the proposed research
&lt;br/&gt;is the ab initio incorporation of topological information
&lt;br/&gt;into the formulation and verification of intersection algorithms.
Although failure to guarantee topological consistency is &lt;br/&gt;the main
deficiency of existing algorithms, this remains a &lt;br/&gt;poorly explored
domain. Our initial line of enquiry will&lt;br/&gt;focus on using the homotopy
or "embedding" method to track &lt;br/&gt;topological changes in implicitly-
defined algebraic curves, &lt;br/&gt;as they evolve from "simple" initial
configurations into a &lt;br/&gt;prescribed intersection
locus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The accuracy, efficiency, and reliability of modern
&lt;br/&gt;computer-aided design (CAD) systems has been severely
&lt;br/&gt;compromised by the persistent lack of rigorous algorithms
&lt;br/&gt;for topologically-consistent representations of surface
&lt;br/&gt;intersections and trimmed surfaces. The solution to
this&lt;br/&gt;fundamental problem can have tremendous economic impact,
&lt;br/&gt;in terms of eliminating the laborious "geometry preparation
&lt;br/&gt;and repair" task that currently precedes the use of CAD
&lt;br/&gt;data in analysis, manufacturing, and inspection applications,
&lt;br/&gt;and in resolving data-exchange incompatibilities among
&lt;br/&gt;different CAD systems. The ensuing productivity benefits,
&lt;br/&gt;manifested in accelerated design cycles and greater reliance
&lt;br/&gt;on "virtual prototyping" for design verification, are crucial
&lt;br/&gt;to the maintenance of technological
leadership.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;