* 0138992
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates - REU:  An Idaho Physics Department Based Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site
* MPS,PHY
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2005
* Rex Gandy, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 01/31/2005
* USD 125,475.00

The University of Idaho Physics Department will host seven undergraduate physics
students annually for a ten-week summer research experience. These students will
closely work with Idaho faculty members and subsequently present their research
project results at an appropriate venue (e.g. National Conference on
Undergraduate Research). The objectives of this program are: (1) to introduce
undergraduate physics majors to the excitement of physics research, (2) to train
these students in the laboratory skills needed in modern physics research, (3)
to foster student personal growth by having the students work in teams and by
teaching them the ethical dimension of scientific research, and (4) to promote
diversity in the field of physics by encouraging applicants and participants
from under-represented groups. The Idaho physics faculty will design research
projects that are challenging yet viable. The areas of research in the
department that will be represented are condensed matter physics, plasma
physics, astrophysics, and nuclear physics. Both theoretical and experimental
projects will be made available. The students will be encouraged to work in
small groups to foster teamwork skills. Weekly meetings will be held to allow
the students to interact and to keep each other posted on their progress. The
REU students will interact with Idaho faculty, research staff personnel, post-
doctoral researchers, graduate students and undergraduates. Weekend activities
will take place that revolve around the tremendous outdoor experiences available
in Idaho. A targeted recruiting plan will be undertaken. Particular attention
will be given to recruiting from institutions with significant populations of
students from traditionally under-represented groups. The program presented
herein will benefit the REU participants by allowing them to learn and grow in
an active research environment and will also benefit the Idaho physics
department by bringing bright, enthusiastic researchers from around the country
into our department.