* 0138560
* Workshop on Dynamics and Control, August 19-21, 2002, Los Angles, California
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2002,10/31/2003
* Firdaus Udwadia, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Alison Flatau
* 10/31/2003
* USD 26,600.00

The rapid development of technology and its by-products require
increased&lt;br/&gt;precision in mathematical modeling of the relevant phenomena
to make the&lt;br/&gt;models more realistic and more readily applicable. This
has required some&lt;br/&gt;basic changes in the direction of research in many
fundamental areas. The&lt;br/&gt;scientists concerned have been involved for
some years now in promoting the&lt;br/&gt;use of advanced methods in Analytical
Dynamics and Control, and in the&lt;br/&gt;Control of Complex Nonlinear Systems.
The workshop will involve experts both&lt;br/&gt;in the purely dynamical aspects
of such systems so that improved models with&lt;br/&gt;more realistic
predictions can be generated and experts in Lyapunov&lt;br/&gt;formalisms for
handling bounded uncertainties in system parameters so that&lt;br/&gt;control
actions can be made in the face of uncertainties. A range
of&lt;br/&gt;application areas is also intended to be broached, so that a
crossover of&lt;br/&gt;information between various disciplines that have the
same types of&lt;br/&gt;fundamental problems can be effected. Past experience
has shown that such&lt;br/&gt;crossover of information has led to new ideas and
new collaborative research&lt;br/&gt;projects among attendees of the
workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Eleven workshops have been held to date between
1986 and 2000. The first&lt;br/&gt;five were held in the US at the University of
Southern California, and they&lt;br/&gt;helped to get together scientists and
engineers mainly from the US and the&lt;br/&gt;Pacific Rim, with occasional
participation from scientists from other&lt;br/&gt;countries. In an effort to
initiate a technical exchange between US and West&lt;br/&gt;European scientists
and engineers who are working in this area, the next two&lt;br/&gt;workshops
were held in Vienna (Austria) and Ulm (Germany). The East
European&lt;br/&gt;scientific community was drawn into the following workshop in
Sopron&lt;br/&gt;(Hungary), which was co-sponsored by NSF and the Hungarian
Academy of&lt;br/&gt;Sciences. The 1997 workshop was held in Rio de Janeiro and
was sponsored by&lt;br/&gt;the Brazilian Ministry of Science. This workshop
indicated that there were&lt;br/&gt;numerous scientists working in the area of
Dynamical systems and Control in&lt;br/&gt;South America. The tenth workshop was
held in Lambrecht (Germany) and was&lt;br/&gt;co-sponsored by the Volkswagen
Corporation and the National Science&lt;br/&gt;Foundation. The large community
of scientists and engineers working in South&lt;br/&gt;America caused the
International Organizing Committee to select Brazil yet&lt;br/&gt;another time,
and the 11th workshop was held in Brazil in 2000.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; It has
been decided by the International Organizing Committee to have
the&lt;br/&gt;next workshop in the US, in Los Angeles, bringing the venue after
an entire&lt;br/&gt;decade back to the location from which the workshops
initiated. The workshop&lt;br/&gt;will be held at the University of Southern
California. One of the main&lt;br/&gt;thrusts of this particular workshop is to
focus more on bringing junior&lt;br/&gt;faculty (especially women-faculty) and
graduate students, so that they can&lt;br/&gt;have a greater chance of increased
exposure to the more established&lt;br/&gt;community in the area of dynamics and
control, and so that they can have an&lt;br/&gt;opportunity to interact with
their counterparts who are working outside
the&lt;br/&gt;US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These workshops, each of whose
proceedings have been published either as&lt;br/&gt;special journal issues or as
books, have led to the realization that there&lt;br/&gt;are today a large number
of scientists who are working in South America, the&lt;br/&gt;former USSR, as
well as both West and East European countries like Germany,&lt;br/&gt;France,
Russia and the Ukraine, in similar areas of dynamics and control.
In&lt;br/&gt;particular the last three meetings have clearly pointed out the
need for&lt;br/&gt;increased interaction between scientists from Europe, South
America, and the&lt;br/&gt;former USSR. There appears to be a substantial body
of information gathered&lt;br/&gt;in these countries that is yet unknown to US
scientists and engineers. An&lt;br/&gt;exchange of information in this important
area with our colleagues in these&lt;br/&gt;countries will be beneficial to the
engineering and scientific community&lt;br/&gt;here in the US. These workshops
have led, in the past, to collaborative&lt;br/&gt;research projects, not only
among the US attendees but also between&lt;br/&gt;investigators from the US and
those from different countries; some of these&lt;br/&gt;joint research projects
have been funded by NSF. We therefore expect, as&lt;br/&gt;before, that the
forthcoming workshop will open up new avenues for&lt;br/&gt;collaborative
research and sustained long-term cooperation among scientists&lt;br/&gt;and
engineers through joint research projects. This, we hope, will be
more&lt;br/&gt;so true for this particular workshop, since its focus will be
more on junior&lt;br/&gt;faculty who may be more active and enterprising.