* 0138018
* Characterization of Atmospheric Moisture Transport and the Freshwater Budget of the Arctic with an Improved Regional Model
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2007
* Mark Serreze, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 02/28/2007
* USD 170,000.00

0138018&lt;br/&gt;Serreze&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Changes in the freshwater budget
of the Arctic Basin have potentially large impacts on the circulation and sea
ice of the Arctic Ocean, which is in turn coupled to the global ocean
circulation and climate. However, the atmospheric components of the arctic
freshwater budget are characterized relatively poorly and difficult to model.
This project will utilize state-of-the-art computational methods to improve
climatological simulations of the atmospheric freshwater budget of the
Arctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The salient aspect of high latitude numerical
modeling difficulties is the extreme range of scales that must be simulated
adequately. Modeling moisture processes requires appropriate treatment of
interactions at small spatial scales. By contrast, numerous observational
studies have suggested that arctic climate variability is dominated by decadal
time scales and planetary spatial scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These
requirements necessitate a trade-off between temporal and spatial scales that
cannot be addressed readily with current Eulerian modeling methods, due to
computational stability constraints. This study will implement semi-Lagrangian
transport for state and dynamical atmospheric variables within the context of a
fully coupled atmosphere-ocean-sea ice model. This new implementation would
allow both long-term simulations of the fully coupled arctic climate at high
resolution, as well as increased use of ensemble techniques for an uncertainty
analysis of crucial components of the atmospheric hydrologic cycle. Model
experiments will be used to address the following primary research
questions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. What is the sensitivity of the arctic
hydrologic cycle to variability in the simulated atmospheric
circulation?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. To what extent does the Northern Hemisphere
semiannual oscillation influence surface moisture fluxes and/or atmospheric
moisture transport? What factors influence interannual variability and trends in
the arctic semiannual oscillation?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. What is the influence
of anomalous sea ice and/or snow cover on the atmospheric moisture budget over
subsequent seasons? Do anomalies in wintertime climate indices translate into
anomalous precipitation in other seasons? What summertime or year-round
structures in the arctic climate can be identified in atmospheric moisture
variables?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4. Does atmospheric convection over land play a
significant role in the arctic hydrologic cycle during the summer
season?&lt;br/&gt;