* 0138789
* US-Bangladesh Workshop:  Composite Materials and Thermal Loading, Dhaka, Bangladesh
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2002
* Anwarul Haque, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 11/30/2002
* USD 10,000.00

0138789&lt;br/&gt;Haque&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project supports
the participation of US scientists in an US-Bangladesh Workshop on Composite
Materials and Thermal Loading to be held in Dhaka, Bangladesh between December
26, 2001 and January 2, 2002. The US organizer is Dr. Anwarul Haque, Department
of Aerospace Engineering and Mechanics, University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa,
Alabama. The co-organizer is Dr. A.K.M. Sadrul Islam, Professor of Mechanical
Engineering, Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology (BUET), Dhaka,
Bangladesh. The workshop will include discussions on response of composite
materials to various loading conditions including static and cyclic, mechanical
and thermal. It will include a short course on composite materials with emphasis
on polymer matrix composites. The binational workshop is to be in conjunction
with a meeting organized by the American Society of Mechanical Engineering
(ASME) and The Bangladesh Society of Mechanical Engineering (BSME) and titled
"BSME-ASME International Conference on Thermal Engineering". The organizers plan
a publication of the proceedings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: This project
enables four US scientists to attend this workshop to exchange information with
Bangladesh scientists about recent developments in the analytical and
experimental research on composite materials in the United States and in
Bangladesh. Discussions will be held on possible future collaborations among
University of Alabama and BUET researchers. The project meets INT objectives in
supporting workshops where mutual benefit and dissemination of information are
likely to result. &lt;br/&gt;