* 0138806
* Elementary, Secondary, and Informal Education:  Newark Public Schools Systemic Initiative In Mathematics
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2002,10/31/2008
* May Samuels, Newark Public Schools
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 10/31/2008
* USD 6,184,417.00

The "Newark Public Schools Systemic Initiative in Mathematics" is a five-year
Local Systmeic Change project targeting K-8 mathematics. In association with
higher education partners Rutgers University and Montclair State University, the
project will effect change in three broad areas: the implementation and
institutionalization of standards-based curricula, instruction and assessment in
every K-8 mathematics classroom in Newark; professional development for the
existing cadre of mathematics resource teachers as well as K-8 teachers and
administrators; and intensive collaboration with parents, higher education
partners and community agencies.

The project targets 1040 elementary teachers, 260 middle school teachers, 30
mathematics resource teachers, and 60 school administrators. Teachers will
participate in two-week summer institutes, monthly follow-up sessions and
mathematics/mathematics education courses at the universities. In addition,
teachers will receive ongoing classroom-based support for their work. The
mathematics resource teachers will receive professional development aimed toward
enhancing their ability to provide instructional support to the classroom
teachers. School administrators will participate in professional development to
enhance their understanding of current mathematics educational practices,
providing a basis for leadership and support of standards-based mathematics
instruction. Project partners will also develop after-school centers to serve as
laboratories for collaboration among unversity partners, prospective teachers,
undergraduate/graduate students, classroom teachers, mathematics resource
teachers, administrators and parents.