* 0138475
* US-Jordan Cooperative Research:  Borehole Paleoclimatology and Heat Flow in Jordan
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2004
* William Gosnold, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 03/31/2004
* USD 8,360.00

0138475&lt;br/&gt;Gosnold&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is for
support of a cooperative project by Professor William Gosnold, University of
North Dakota, Grand Forks, North Dakota and Dr. Abdallah Al-Zoubi of the
Geophysics Department of the Natural Resources Authority, Amman, Jordan. They
plan to conduct exploratory research in Jordan by making geothermal measurements
in existing boreholes, made for purposes such as mining and oil drilling. These
data would then be used to determine the terrestrial heat flux from the crust,
and to reconstruct the ground surface temperature history for the past 500-1000
years. Subsurface temperature bears importance to our understanding of the
climate history at the Earth's surface and the tectono-thermal structure and
evolution of the lithosphere. Understanding the terrestrial heat flux at various
places in Jordan has the potential to shed light on the tectonic development of
the Dead Sea Rift, as a part of the larger Red Sea rift system. The paleoclimate
of the area over the past millennium may help explain the spatial transition
from Mediterranean climate to desert climate in this region. The scientists will
assess data quality to determine the feasibility of making extensive data
collection through a full-scale collaborative research
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: In this project the collaborators plan to
combine their expertise to explore the soundness of using existing boreholes to
make paleoclimatology and heat flow measurements. The two scientists have
complementary expertise. The US PI is experienced in borehole measurements and
in paleoclimatology. The Jordanian scientist has experience with the field
research area and has produced strong publications on that area. The US PI will
include a graduate student from U. North Dakota in the field research thus
giving him experience in an international research setting. The project meets
INT criteria for support of cooperative projects that are mutually beneficial.
&lt;br/&gt;