* 0138587
* Elementary, Secondary, and Informal Education:  CourseMap: On-line Courses to Enhance Precollege Mathematics Teaching
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Sheila Sconiers, Consortium For Mathematics & Its Applications Inc
* Continuing Grant
* David C. Royster
* 02/28/2006
* USD 845,372.00

The project "CourseMap: On-line Course to Enhance Precollege Mathematics
Teaching" proposes to create and disseminate a new set of on-line teacher
development courses to enhance the skills and subject-matter understanding
needed in our nation's mathematics classrooms. Over the proposal two-year period
the PIs plan to create 8 one-credit-hour graduate courses, four at the middle
school level and four at the high school level. Understanding that the
distinction between content and methods can be artifical, they intend that all
methods courses will reinforce important new content, and similarly, the
presentation of content courses will model best pedagogical pratice.
Consequently, there will be significant integration of the standards-based
content and methodologies across the courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed
project looks at new and emerging technologies to begin to address these
concerns, with a team of some of the most prominent mathematics educators in the
country. More specifically, the design and production teams comprise leading
mathematics, educators, technology specialists and instructional video
specialists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Moreover, Teachers College Columbia will offer
the courses for graduate credit, with Lesson Labs to provide an authoring
system, and with WebCT to provide expertise in course management and on-line
community building, as well as to promote and host the courses. Their goal is to
reach the largest possible in-service teacher audience.