* 0138117
* New Solid-State NMR Techniques for Analyzing Insoluble Organic Matter
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Klaus Schmidt-Rohr, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2006
* USD 281,400.00

In this project supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry and the
Geology and Paleontology Programs, Professor Klaus Schmidt-Rohr and coworkers at
Iowa State University, advanced solid-state NMR methodologies will be developed
and applied to identify at least 40 specific functional groups and estimate
their concentrations in natural organic matter. This will be achieved by means
of a set of efficient new spectral-editing pulse sequences based on
heteronuclear dipolar couplings or chemical-shift anisotropies. Furthermore, the
larger environment of a given functional group will be identified in two- and
three-dimensional correlation experiments, and inhomogeneities on a 1- to 50-nm
scale by spin diffusion. NMR dynamics measurements will enable the search for
soft mobile regions that have been invoked to explain the partitioning of
organic contaminants into soil organic matter. Near the end of the project,
improved structural models for examples of soil and marine organic matter will
be generated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy will
be used to elucidate the chemical and supramolecular structures of insoluble
organic substances that are presented by the natural environment, such as soil
and marine organic matter, kerogen, or bituminous materials. To this end,
advanced solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance methods are being developed that
can identify and quantify a large number of chemical groups in organic solids.
In addition, nanometer-scale domains will be characterized. The NMR methods will
be used to characterize the chemical binding sites of contaminants; to help
understand nutrient release into soil; to indicate methods for enhanced carbon
sequestration in soil to reduce "greenhouse gases" in the atmosphere; and to
shed light on the chemical processes of soil, kerogen, and fossil-fuel
formation. This will help to provide deeper insights into the chemical history
of natural organic matter, its role in the global carbon cycle, and the results
of human activities on the environment. &lt;br/&gt;