* 0139823
* Two-Dimensional Leaky-Mode VCSEL Arrays: Active Photonic Lattices
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2006
* Luke Mawst, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 03/31/2006
* USD 245,942.00

In this work the PI will exploit the mode selectivity properties of two-
dimensional arrays of closely spaced leaky-mode VCSELs to achieve spatially-
coherent light sources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two-dimensional arrays of closely
spaced antiguided VCSELs offer a unique platform to study the optical modal
properties of an active photonic lattice. He proposes the first comprehensive
above-threshold study of the leaky-modes supported by such photonic lattice
structures. The allowed leaky-mode photonic bands of 2-D active photonic
lattices have not been studied to date. An understanding of the propagating
leaky-modes and the influence of nonlinear gain, carrier-induced-index
variations, and thermal lensing, above laser threshold will result in a valuable
knowledge base for the development of next generation optical sources. He
proposes a closely coupled experimental and theoretical program to study the
unique properties of these structures and exploit these properties for the
development of novel diode laser sources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These structures
have high potential for the realization of compact monolithic surface emitting
sources with high-spatial coherence. Unlike conventional VCSEL arrays, the
proposed devices have gain placed in the low-index lattice sites, thus relying
on long-range (coherent) coupling via leaky waves. Based on an MOCVD regrowth
process, the built-in refractive index step of the antiguides can be quite large
(Dn = 0.10 - 0.20), making the structure less sensitive to waveguide
pertubations which occur above laser threshold. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Novel
device structures based on 2-D active photonic lattices are proposed for
achieving spatially-coherent surface emitting sources:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1.
Laterally resonant, large-area spatially-coherent 2-D phase-locked arrays:
Antiguided VCSEL devices involving large-area phase-locked arrays of
rectangular- as well as of triangular-lattice configuration relying on radially
resonant leaky-wave coupling, which in turn insures uniform intensity profile
across the entire array structure, and thus coherent operation to high drive
levels above threshold.&lt;br/&gt;2. Radiation fanout vertical cavity
semiconductor optical amplifiers: Arrays of leaky-wave-coupled vertical-cavity
surface-emitting amplifiers (VCSOA) hold potential not only for providing high
amplified output powers but also act as a large-volume gain media for nonlinear
interactions such as four-wave mixing. &lt;br/&gt;3. Low-index defect based
lasers: lattice-defect" VCSEL devices are proposed relying on radially
antiresonant devices, which allow single-mode operation from emitting areas an
order of magnitude larger than conventional VCSELs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed devices have potential as high-coherent-power (&gt; 100 mW), circular-
beam monolithic sources for use as transmitters (l=1.3-1.55mm) or amplifier pump
sources (l=0.98mm) in fiber-optical communication systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;