* 0139076
* Computational Studies of Lithium Dialkylamide Mixed Aggregates in Enolization Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Lawrence Pratt, Fisk University
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 08/31/2005
* USD 57,000.00

The objective of this work is to use ab initio calculations to determine the
mechanisms leading to the observed stereochemistries from enolate condensation
reactions. Lithium dialkyl amide bases are used for enolate generation and these
form mixed aggregates in solution. Geometry optimization will be performed on
each observed and suspected mixed aggregate using both microsolvation and bulk
solvation models. Geometry optimization will then be repeated for lithium
aggregate-ketone or ester complexes to determine relative activation energies
leading to stereoisomeric enolates. Enolate condensations are one of the most
important carbon-carbon bond forming reactions available to organic chemists and
this work should lead to a better understanding of the mechanisms of those
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Dr. Lawrence M. Pratt of the
Department of Chemistry at Fisk University. Dr. Pratt will use molecular
modelling and calculations to better understand a class of chemical reactions
know as enolate condensation reactions. Enolate condensations are one of the
most important carbon-carbon bond forming reactions available to organic
chemists and this work should lead to a better understanding of how those
reactions are occurring. Students trained as a result of working on this project
will gain experience in theoretical organic chemistry and molecular modelling,
hence they will have skills needed by the pharmaceutical and speciality
chemicals industries.