* 0139379
* REU Site Program: Undergraduate Opportunities in Tropical Ecology, Evolution and Natural Resources Management at the University of Hawai'i at Hilo
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Donald Price, University of Hawaii at Hilo
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2005
* USD 283,390.00

The study and conservation of natural resources in insular areas are necessary
for and critical to the preservation of the myriad, unique ecosystems present.
This is of immediate concern in Hawai'i, with its high levels of endemism,
geographic isolation, and biodiversity. In order to continue and hopefully
increase the number of future researchers focusing on these ecosystems, it is
important to capture the interest of undergraduates. The Island of Hawai'i, with
its diversity and high representation of almost all ecological niches found in
the archipelego, presents an excellent living laboratory in which to train these
future researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program represents a
collaboration between the University of Hawai'i at Hilo (UHH) and state and
federal research organizations conducting research on the Island of Hawai'i, to
develop an undergraduate research opportunity program focused on tropical
conservation biology. UHH, with its growing student enrollment in sciences (more
than 20% over the last four years alone), and diverse student base, is committed
to providing valuable research opportunities for undergraduates with faculty
mentors at UHH available in Biology, Marine Science, Agriculture, Forestry, and
Natural Resource Management. The Island of Hawai'i is also home to numerous
agencies and offices that have ongoing conservation biology research programs.
The US Department of Agriculture Forest Service, the US Geological Service
Biological Resources Division, the National Park and others work together on
many research projects and are will to provide additional research opportunities
for undergraduates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program entails a summer
component and a continued effort during the academic year. Ten students will be
selected for 10-week research experiences during the summer. Following a one-
week orientation, student participants will work side by side with researchers
on conservation biology projects located on the Island of Hawai'i. Weekly
meetings will allow students to interact with each other and with other
researchers and faculty, and give oral presentations on the progress of their
individual projects. Students will also submit written sections of their final
report in progressive pieces throughout the summer, which will be edited,
compiled and polished into a final report at the end of the summer. Each student
will give a final presentation at the end of the 10-week period. Students who
are attending UHH following their summer research experience and have shown
promise to develop a publishable research project will have the opportunity to
continue their research during the academic year. These students will also be
responsible for scheduled meetings throughout the academic year and a final
presentation and paper. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Information is available from
Sharon Ziegler-Chong at UHH (telephone: 808-&lt;br/&gt;933-0706; email:
ziegler@hawaii.edu).&lt;br/&gt;