* 0139569
* REU in Computational Number Theory and Combinatorics.
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2003
* Kevin James, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 05/31/2003
* USD 61,109.00

Eight students who have a solid background in mathematics and some knowledge of
computation will be selected to participate in an eight-week research experience
in computational number theory and combinatorics to be held at Clemson
University. Preference for four of these positions will be given to qualified
applicants who have roots in the Southeastern United States, provided that there
are a sufficient number of qualified applicants from this region. No more than
two of these four special positions will be filled by Clemson University
students. The eight students selected will be offered up to $350 in travel
support, a dorm room to be shared with another participant in the REU, up to
$600 for meals and a stipend of $2,660 in return for their participation in this
program.

Participants will be introduced to various tools, techniques and problems from
computational number theory and combinatorics. The participants will be divided
into teams of two and allowed to pick one problem on which to focus for the
remainder of the REU. The goal of the program will be to help students attain a
higher level of independence in mathematical research by giving them the
opportunity to take part in a significant and interesting research project. For
the first two weeks of the program participants will meet daily with the PI and
co-PI. As time progresses, these meetings will become less frequent in order to
allow the students to reach an increased level of independence. Students will
also be encouraged to attend the SouthEastern Regional Meeting On Numbers
(SERMON) in the spring of the following year and present their work there.

As a complement to working on their research, students will be required to
attend a weekly lecture series. These lectures will be given by faculty who have
been recognized as leaders in the various fields related to the students'
research problems and who have demonstrated the ability to clearly communicate
mathematical ideas to audiences of varying levels of mathematical maturity.