* 0139480
* REU on Human Technology Interaction
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Carmela Gottesman, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 04/30/2005
* USD 216,020.00

This award provides funds for a Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site on
Human Technology Interactions at the University of Oklahoma. This
interdisciplinary REU Site will give undergraduates the opportunity to engage in
research on human-technical systems. A total of 12 students, 10 funded by NSF
and 2 funded by OU will spend eight weeks in the program. The students' time
will be divided into three activities: individual research, team research, and
collective activities. Each student will participate in individual research
within an active laboratory. Research assistantships will be available in
Cognitive Psychology, Social Psychology, Computer Science, Industrial
Engineering, Library and Information Studies, History of Science, Information
Systems, and Communication. A distinguishing characteristic of this program is
that students will also participate on one of three multidisciplinary research
teams composed of undergraduates and supervised by faculty and graduate
students. To futher promote the experience of scientific inquiry, students will
also participate in seminar and workshop series and special events. A multi-
session ethics workshop will allow students to explore ethical issues in a
variety of fields. Students will be recruited nationally and regionally with an
emphasis on students who would otherwise have little opportunity to gain
research experience or to develop technical expertise. &lt;br/&gt;This award
contributes to the Foundation's continuing efforts to attract talented students
into careers in science through active undergraduate research experiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;