* 0139637
* Electrochemically Active Polymers - Designing Compositional Structures and Electronic Properties
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2006
* C. Michael Elliott, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph L. Templeton
* 04/30/2006
* USD 432,000.00

The Advanced Materials Program in the Division of Chemistry makes this renewal
award to Colorado State University to develop new electrochemically-active
metal-centered polymer materials based on transition metal complexes of diimine
ligands. With this award, Professor Elliott will functionalize ligands to
polymerize them and to fine-tune their redox properties. Polymer films of single
and multi-layer/multi-composition structures will be prepared and studied to
control counterion motion both within polymer phases and across their boundaries
and to control the oxidation-state distribution of redox sites. Determination of
the differences and similarities between electroluminescence and electro-
generated chemiluminescence, and potential application of these polymers in
organic light emitting diodes will also be studied with this award. In addition,
training in materials chemistry will be provided to a diversity of students with
this award.

New electrochemically-active materials with transition metals in the center will
be prepared using functionalized ligands based on diimines. Polymer films will
be prepared to control counterion motion both within polymer phases and across
their boundaries and to control the oxidation-state distribution of redox sites.
These dendrimeric polymers with controlled oxidation-reduction properties will
have applications in catalysis, phase transfer reactions, drug delivery systems
and sensors. Determination of the differences and similarities between
electroluminescence and electro-generated chemiluminescence would provide
insight into potential applications of these polymers in organic light emitting
diodes. In addition, the award would expose both graduate and undergraduate
students in different aspects of experimental materials chemistry.