* 0139499
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates: Nebraska REU in Applied Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2005
* Gordon Woodward, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 03/31/2005
* USD 125,406.00

The Nebraska REU is an eight-week summer program for 10 undergraduate students,
most of whom will be from other institutions. The Department of Mathematics and
Statistics at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln is a Ph.D. granting research
department that is regionally and nationally recognized for excellence in
teaching. The Nebraska REU draws on these qualities to cultivate an environment
that emphasizes interaction among its students and among its students and the
Department as the students develop their research&lt;br/&gt;skills. In addition
to research, there is an emphasis on developing written and oral communication
skills in mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Nebraska REU offers the
opportunity for mathematically talented students to carry out research in areas
of applied mathematics, each under the guidance of a team of applied
mathematicians. It is anticipated that two to four students will work under an
advisor team on closely related problems with daily seminars for the first few
weeks to get the research off to a good start. There will be weekly lectures on
topics of a general&lt;br/&gt;mathematical interest given by faculty, students,
and visitors. Social activities are planned throughout the eight weeks with a
greater frequency during the first week. On-campus room, board, and the student
recreation center are provided. The Department will also provide students up to
$400 toward the cost associated to presenting their REU work at a
conference.&lt;br/&gt;