* 0139726
* Partial Differential Equations and Harmonic Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Michael Taylor, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 04/30/2006
* USD 247,741.00

March 11, 2002&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Michael Taylor, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill&lt;br/&gt;DMS-
0139726&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***************************************************
*****&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT FOR MICHAEL TAYLOR'S
PROJECT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Taylor proposes to
investigate problems in partial differential&lt;br/&gt;equations, particularly
in the areas of wave propagation, boundary problems &lt;br/&gt;for elliptic PDE,
and functional calculus for elliptic self-adjoint &lt;br/&gt;operators. Taylor
will study wave propagation in fairly rough media, &lt;br/&gt;in which rays of
geometrical optics are just barely defined, and in even&lt;br/&gt;rougher media,
in which such rays are not uniquely defined. He will examine&lt;br/&gt;to what
extent wave propagation in such media behaves like that in
more&lt;br/&gt;regular media and to what extent it differs. He plans to pursue
the effects&lt;br/&gt;of curvature bounds on a manifold on the nature of such
wave propagation,&lt;br/&gt;and also investigate propagation, reflection, and
diffraction of waves at&lt;br/&gt;a boundary for a rough medium. Taylor will
also continue a program of&lt;br/&gt;studying elliptic equations with rough
coefficients on Lipschitz domains.&lt;br/&gt;This will include nonlinear
equations, such as arise in the study of&lt;br/&gt;harmonic maps between
manifolds with rough metric tensors. In the area&lt;br/&gt;of functional
calculus, one attack is to synthesize general functions&lt;br/&gt;of the Laplace
operator from the solution operator to the wave equation.&lt;br/&gt;A detailed
knowledge of wave propagation can then yield highly
nontrivial&lt;br/&gt;information on such functional calculus. Taylor is pursuing
a variety&lt;br/&gt;of projects in this area, ranging from detailed behavior of
eigenfunction&lt;br/&gt;expansions to singular perturbation problems arising in
the study of &lt;br/&gt;pattern formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wave motion,
from sound passing through air to pressure and shear waves&lt;br/&gt;passing
through the earth to radio waves traveling through space, is&lt;br/&gt;a
ubiquitous phenomenon, whose mathematical analysis has for a long
time&lt;br/&gt;been a major part of mathematics. A variety of partial
differential&lt;br/&gt;equations have arisen to describe different aspects of
wave motion, and their&lt;br/&gt;study continues to stimulate work on analytical
tools to elucidate the&lt;br/&gt;behavior of solutions to such PDE. Analyzing a
wave as a superposition &lt;br/&gt;of various frequencies gave rise to the area
of harmonic analysis. &lt;br/&gt;Localizing the study of a wave simultaneously
in space and in frequency is &lt;br/&gt;at the heart of the more recent area of
microlocal analysis. Taylor has &lt;br/&gt;been active in developing tools in
these areas and using them to produce&lt;br/&gt;results in PDE. Some of his
efforts have focused on treating PDE with&lt;br/&gt;rough coefficients and PDE
in domains with rough boundary. These arise&lt;br/&gt;to describe waves
traveling through complicated media, whose boundaries&lt;br/&gt;have many
corners and other irregularities. While harmonic analysis &lt;br/&gt;techniques
have provided much insight into partial differential equations,&lt;br/&gt;the
reverse direction has also led to significant results in
harmonic&lt;br/&gt;analysis. Taylor is continuing to investigate how results on
Fourier&lt;br/&gt;synthesis of singular functions can be explained in terms of
propagation&lt;br/&gt;and focusing of waves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt
;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;