* 0139284
* Numerical Investigation of Convective Initiation and Maintenance
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Robert Fovell, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 07/31/2006
* USD 492,290.00

The Principal Investigator will extend prior research concerning the initiation,
structure and behavior of atmospheric convection utilizing numerical
simulations. Part of the research is dedicated to the study of squall line
storms and part focuses on convection associated with sea breeze fronts (SBFs)
and horizontal convective rolls (HCRs). There is a considerable and profitable
synergy between the two, particularly with regard to the study of convective
initiation.

In squall line simulations, the small perturbations that are often seen in the
inflow just upstream of the model storms can act as convective triggers,
expediting new cell formation and even keeping the organized convection active.
These perturbations appear to be generated in response to storm motions and
circulations and reside in a portion of the environment that appears to be
preconditioned by the storm itself, making it more favorable for this initiation
to occur. In the case of the SBF, the boundary layer rolls provide the (now
independent) upstream perturbation. The SBF and HCR circulations can combine to
create deep convection in situations where neither phenomenon could do so in
isolation.

Both the squall line and the SBF/HCR phenomena provide an interesting interplay
of the three factors that influence convective initiation: kinematic controls,
moisture controls and dynamical forcing. Kinematic controls include the direct
effect of waves, vortices, etc., on convective initiation or inhibition; the
HCRs represent one example. The aforementioned preconditioning is a moisture
control: the environment, responding to latent heating and cooling in and around
the storm, tends to adjust by creating a cooled and moistened tongue of air in
the storm's immediate upstream environment, and the triggers tend to form in
this tongue. These triggers may have their genesis in transient gravity waves
excited by the convection itself and passing through the upstream environment;
this would represent a dynamical forcing.

One of the tools to be utilized in this research includes an adjoint cloud
model, which will be used for sensitivity analysis and dynamical tracking. The
adjoint will be of significant use in situations such as the convective
initiation study, in which more than one process or factor may be active and it
isn't clear which is the pivotal or primordial one.

Successful completion of this research will lead to better understanding of the
initiation of convective precipitating systems.