* 0139028
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site in Biology: Ecology, Behavior and Physiology of Exotic Species
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2002,02/29/2004
* Eric Bollinger, Eastern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2004
* USD 164,786.00

The Eastern Illinois University (EIU) Biology Department's Research Experience
for Undergraduates Program, funded by the National Science Foundation, will
provide an intensive research experience for 10 undergraduate students during
the summers of 2002 and 2003. The research experiences centered on the ecology,
behavior and physiology of exotic species is designed to (1) stimulate the
student's interest, intellectual independence and project ownership, (2) develop
each student's technical skills and understanding of the research process, and
(3) foster an appreciation of the cooperation and interdependence necessary for
research teams to achieve success. To accomplish these objectives participants
will be recruited nationally and selected based on their professional goals,
motivation and maturity, and academic achievements. Students will be fully
immersed in the research process as they choose their own research problem,
write a proposal, conduct the work, and report their results and conclusions.
Each participant will work closely with an individual mentor and as a member of
a research team. Opportunities to interact and collaborate with other faculty
and research teams will be provided through an orientation retreat, weekly group
meetings, and a series of formal workshops and field trips. In addition,
"visiting scientists", recognized leaders in the field of conservation biology,
will spend 1-2 days apiece interacting with program participants by presenting
seminars, participating in informal discussion groups, and critiquing research
projects. The overall goal of the 10-week research experience is to foster in
each participant an understanding of the research process, encouraging each
student's growth from dependent learner to independent researcher to
interdependent member of a scientific team.