* 0139045
* GOALI:  Plastic Anisotropy and Bauschinger Effect: Fundamental Role of Second-Phase Particles
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Robert Wagoner, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 06/30/2006
* USD 500,000.00

This project addresses the materials and mechanics issues involved in the
forming behavior of precipitation hardened aluminum alloys that exhibit
preferred orientations (textures) and directionally dependent properties
(anisotropy). The study is aimed at understanding the springback of aluminum
alloys during their forming operations that has hither to limited their use in
many metal forming applications. The fundamental understanding of these
behaviors will lead to the reduction in cost associated in forming of this
important class of structural materials. The project is a highly leveraged
cooperative program of research directed to clarify and extend the
microstructural basis of metallic constitutive equations to include the effects
of second-phase particles on anisotropic hardening. The objectives of the
project include processing of model alloys of Al-Ge-Si by the industrial partner
(Alcoa Technical Center or ATC), heat-treatments to produce different
microstructures and a thorough characterization of second-phase microstructures
in terms of precipitate size, orientation, morphology, grain size, etc. The
study will establish fundamental linkages between the precipitate structure and
anisotropic hardening. The alloy characterization is performed using advanced
techniques such as orientation image microscopy (OIM) and TEM along with
extensive mechanical testing as well as mechanics modeling leading to
constitutive forms for inputting into finite element programs. The project takes
advantage of the expertise and experimental facilities available at both the
Ohio State University (OSU) and ATC. The educational impact of this work lies in
close contact of the graduate students with the industrial counterpart through
summer internships as well as the research direction by the co-investigator from
ATC.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The project is a close collaboration between OSU
and ATC with crosscutting implications to research areas in metals, mechanics
and manufacturing. The study extends the fundamental understanding of the role
of second- phase structures in producing anisotropic hardening behavior. Such
knowledge is important for many research developments as well as commercial
applications, with plausible cost reduction in the forming operations of
aluminum alloys that are important for many technologies including aerospace and
automotive. The close collaboration of the university personnel with the
industrial counterparts provides significant opportunities for
students.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;