* 0139392
* Research Experiences in Estuarine Science for Undergraduates at Mote Marine Laboratory, with Special Focus on Native Pacific Islanders
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2002,02/28/2005
* James Gelsleichter, Mote Marine Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 02/28/2005
* USD 126,847.00

This award provides funding to initiate a Research Experience for Undergraduates
(REU) site that will provide a ten-week summer research experience in estuarine
science for a total of eight students each year. A team of over 30 faculty
mentors will help the students develop research projects on the physical,
chemical and biological aspects of estuaries. Their research site will be
Charlotte Harbor, one of Florida's largest and most ecologically and
economically important estuaries. At the end of the program, students will
develop a presentation on their research project and will be encouraged to
present their results at a major scientific conference. One important aspect of
this REU site is that the PI will attempt to recruit at leat 3 or 4 Native
Pacific Islanders (NPI's) each year. Recruitment of NPI's will be facilitated by
a subcontract to the University of Hawaii's Hawaiian Internship Program. The
proposal is based on the theory that mentoring and networking are the most
effective methods for recruiting students into a profession and for training
young researchers. This program will provide students with an in-depth
understanding of the ecology of an estuarine system. Plans for the site include
all the essential elements for an excellent REU site. The students will receive
one-on-one mentoring from researchers and will gain a broad understanding of the
scientific process. This program also fills an important niche in the continuum
of program supported under the REU program by the Division of Ocean Sciences as
it will be the only site that will focus on recruiting Native Pacific Islanders
into ocean sciences.