* 0139794
* Collaborative Research: The Weak Temperature Gradient Equations for Tropical Atmosphere Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Christopher Bretherton, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2006
* USD 195,147.00

In this project, meteorologists and applied mathematicians
are&lt;br/&gt;collaborating to study the "weak temperature gradient" (WTG)
equations for&lt;br/&gt;large-scale tropical atmospheric dynamics. The WTG
equations form a&lt;br/&gt;"balance model", or set of singular limit equations,
asymptotically valid&lt;br/&gt;in a parameter regime relevant to the tropical
atmosphere. The WTG&lt;br/&gt;equations are designed to facilitate study of key
aspects of the tropical&lt;br/&gt;climate problem, such as the large-scale
dynamical roles of moist&lt;br/&gt;convection and other diabatic processes. This
focus is achieved by&lt;br/&gt;eliminating other processes which can be present
in solutions to the&lt;br/&gt;primitive equations, such as gravity waves and
baroclinic instability, in&lt;br/&gt;the same way as gravity waves are
eliminated in extratropical balance&lt;br/&gt;models such as the quasi-
geostrophic equations. One goal of this project&lt;br/&gt;is to develop new
mathematics by studying the WTG equations' properties.&lt;br/&gt;Another goal is
to solve the equations under geometries, boundary&lt;br/&gt;conditions and
forcings which represent idealizations of those relevant to&lt;br/&gt;the real
earth's climate, and then to study the sensitivity of the&lt;br/&gt;solutions to
key parameters. Achievement of these goals is expected to&lt;br/&gt;lead to
deeper understanding of both the real climate and more
complex&lt;br/&gt;mathematical models of it, such as general circulation models
(GCMs).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The earth's climate system is notoriously complex.
Many different&lt;br/&gt;physical processes interact in a tangled web of
feedbacks to produce the&lt;br/&gt;dynamic and variable climate we observe.
Unlike a laboratory science,&lt;br/&gt;meteorology and oceanography are hindered
by the impossibility of&lt;br/&gt;controlled experiments which might allow the
key mechanisms to be&lt;br/&gt;conclusively revealed. We are stuck with the one
planet on which we live&lt;br/&gt;and cannot change its basic properties to see
what happens. Consequently,&lt;br/&gt;the science proceeds by observation and by
a heavy reliance on numerical&lt;br/&gt;simulation with GCMs, which are
sophisticated computer programs run on the&lt;br/&gt;most powerful computers
available. These simulations offer the&lt;br/&gt;possibility of a certain kind
of controlled climate experiments: we can&lt;br/&gt;create virtual earths on the
computer, control their properties, and&lt;br/&gt;observe their behavior with
precision. One obvious limitation of this&lt;br/&gt;approach is that the models
are imperfect representations of reality. A&lt;br/&gt;less obvious, but equally
important problem is the models' complexity,&lt;br/&gt;which both limits the
number and type of simulations which can be done and&lt;br/&gt;renders the
results nearly as difficult to understand as the real climate&lt;br/&gt;system.
Because of these problems, there is a need to supplement&lt;br/&gt;observational
and GCM studies with theoretical studies using models that&lt;br/&gt;are simpler
than GCMs - if not simple enough to allow solution with pencil&lt;br/&gt;and
paper, then at least using very simple computer programs that
run&lt;br/&gt;quickly on a PC. To the extent that these simpler models have
key&lt;br/&gt;features in common with the real system, their simplicity allows a
deeper&lt;br/&gt;level of understanding of the basic dynamics of climate and
leads to&lt;br/&gt;explicit hypotheses that can be tested against observations
and GCM&lt;br/&gt;simulations. This project harnesses the physical insight of
climate&lt;br/&gt;scientists and the sophisticated methods of applied
mathematicians to&lt;br/&gt;develop and study simple models designed
specifically to represent the&lt;br/&gt;tropical atmospheric component of the
earth's climate system.&lt;br/&gt;