* 0139008
* A Few Topics in Classical Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2006
* William Feldman, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 12/31/2006
* USD 49,347.00

Proposal Number: DMS-0139008&lt;br/&gt;PI: Dmitry
Khavinson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work
described in the proposal concerns several topics&lt;br/&gt;in Classical
Analysis: approximation theory, several complex&lt;br/&gt;variables,
miscellaneous problems on complex polynomials and&lt;br/&gt;classical operator
theory. The most central questions for the&lt;br/&gt;project are: uniqueness of
best approximation by harmonic&lt;br/&gt;functions in the supremum norm in
dimensions three and higher&lt;br/&gt;(the two-dimensional case has been
recently settled by the PI&lt;br/&gt;and H.S.Shapiro), sharp estimates relating
to multidimensional&lt;br/&gt;analogs of H. Bohr's phenomenon for power series,
counting&lt;br/&gt;zeros of complex-valued harmonic polynomials, Agler-Cole-
Wermer&lt;br/&gt;interpretation of Ando's theorem in C^2 and,
finally,&lt;br/&gt;understanding the spectral picture of the celebrated
double&lt;br/&gt;layer potential operator -a topic going back to the
pioneering&lt;br/&gt;work of I. Fredholm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most of the
questions in the project are rather simply stated&lt;br/&gt;and, accordingly,
will attract a fair number of graduate&lt;br/&gt;students and young researchers.
The problems are also open-ended&lt;br/&gt;and suggest several new paths of
investigation in these&lt;br/&gt;classical areas away from the well traveled
tracks. The&lt;br/&gt;investigations undertaken in the project have well-
defined&lt;br/&gt;applications to Mathematical Physics (Potential
Theory),&lt;br/&gt;Applied Mathematics (polynomials, special functions)
and&lt;br/&gt;Numerical Analysis (explicit solutions of some of the
most&lt;br/&gt;important boundary value problems). The project
entails&lt;br/&gt;active involvement of undergraduate and graduate students
at&lt;br/&gt;all stages of the project and, via local network of
workshops&lt;br/&gt;and seminars for teachers, to disseminate some of the
more&lt;br/&gt;elementary off-beats of the proposed work among high
school&lt;br/&gt;students interested in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;