* 0139626
* Computable Structure Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2008
* Julia Knight, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2008
* USD 37,150.00

Knight and her students will work on various aspects of computable structure
theory. Knight plans to continue work with D'Aquino on weak fragments of
arithmetic. She expects also to continue work with Goncharov and Harizanov, with
Young, and with Shore, on a collection of inter-related problems involving
complicated relations on computable structures, structures of high rank, and
paths through Kleene's O. She is currently working with Csima, Hirschfeldt, and
Soare on prime models and lowness properties. She plans to work with Lempp,
McCoy, and Solomon on Boolean algebras. The funds are mainly for student travel
and books. The remainder is for partial support of the Notre Dame Logic Seminar.
Currently, Knight has two students. Andrew Arana, who may finish this summer,
has a number of results on complexity in arithmetic, using some new independent
sentences (variants of the Godel-Rosser sentence). Arana is now concentrating on
problems of a more foundational nature. Wesley Calvert, a second year student,
is working on complexity of the isomorphism problem for various familiar classes
of computable structures. He already has results for several classes of fields.
Knight may acquire new students during the period of the grant.

The goal of Knight's research, and that of students working with her, is to
determine which aspects of mathematical structures are computable, and for those
which are not computable, whether there is some nice, computable approximation.
The grant will facilitate new work of this kind. There is a larger goal---
enabling students to become first-rate research scientists. The grant will be
used mainly for student travel and books. Without money for books, Knight's
students would hardly own any. She has found that, given money to buy the most
important references, her students read much more than they would otherwise.
They see how the problems they are working on arose, and what their work means
for the field as a whole. Knight's past students, and other logic students at
Notre Dame, have benefited tremendously from opportunities to travel to
meetings. They meet researchers from other universities and hear about new
developments. As soon as they have results of their own, they give talks, and
they get valuable suggestions. In short, they have the opportunity, as students,
to join the community of research mathematicians.