* 0139580
* REU Sites: Undergraduate Computer Research (UnCoRe) for Women at Oakland University
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Ishwar Sethi, Oakland University
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Heller
* 05/31/2006
* USD 288,384.00

EIA-0139580&lt;br/&gt;Sethi, Ishwar&lt;br/&gt;Oakland
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Undergraduate Computer Research for Women
at Oakland University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of the proposed
REU Site is to promote graduate studies in Computer Science
and&lt;br/&gt;Engineering to bright, talented undergraduate women students. The
objective will be achieved by creating a&lt;br/&gt;nurturing environment and a
first hand experience in the activities most directly related to graduate study
and research careers, and by targeting the pool of recruitment to women from
undergraduate institutions and women from majors related to Computer Science and
Engineering. We are planning on enrolling eight students in each of the three
summers covered by this program. The activities planned include conducting
research as part of a team, communicating research results orally through
presentations and in writing through research reports, and disseminating project
information and results through the web. In addition, each participant will
attend a national conference to gain an up-close experience about research as a
profession, and be enrolled in ACM and SWE (Society of
Women&lt;br/&gt;Engineers).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The national and local
statistics [2] confirm the existence of a large pool of women students who have
the&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual potential and the academic preparation for graduate
studies in Computer Science and Engineering, but who never receive the exposure
and motivation that led them to such career choices. The proposed REU Site will
actively seek and recruit such students from Oakland University as well as from
neighboring undergraduate institutions. There are many 2 and 4-year colleges in
the geographical vicinity of Oakland University with limited or non-existent
research programs. Examples of near-by four-year institutions that will be
targeted include Central Michigan University, Eastern Michigan University,
Lawrence Technological University, University of Detroit-Mercy, Madonna
University and University of Michigan at Flint. The two-year colleges that will
be targeted for participants include Macomb Community College, Oakland Community
College, Henry Ford Community College, Marygrove College and Rochester
College.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual focus of the proposed REU Site will be
intelligent information processing and management. This focus was selected both
because it represents a unifying theme to the research activities of the
investigators and other faculty participants, and because it is an area at the
edge of research with a wealth of applications. The match between the faculty's
research and the selected focus provides a natural setting for students to get
involved in on-going research projects, and an opportunity to follow up on this
research and continue to contribute after completion of their REU participation.
The wealth of potential and existing applications of the selected area of focus
will serve as a great motivator for the undergraduate students
targeted.&lt;br/&gt;