* 0139895
* FRG: Collaborative Research:  Approximation of Lyapunov Exponents
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Luca Dieci, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2005
* USD 235,481.00

This Focused Research Group project includes investigators from three different
universities: Luca Dieci at Georgia Institute of Technology, Michal Jolly at
Indiana University, and Erik Van Vleck at the University of Kansas. The project
considers the approximation of Lyapunov exponents and other spectral information
for dynamical systems. The main goal is to study and implement numerical
techniques to approximate Lyapunov exponents of continuous dynamical systems, as
defined by a system of time dependent differential equations. The investigators
are implementing and comparing so-called continuous and discrete QR and SVD
approaches. They distinguish between linear and nonlinear problems, the chief
difference being that in the linear case no approximation of solution trajectory
is attempted. The investigators study Lyapunov exponents for systems of large
dimension, such as spatially discretized time dependent PDEs. In particular,
they consider PDEs for which an inertial manifold is known to exist, and study
the relative merits of techniques that compute the exponents after a prior
inertial manifold reduction versus those that work with the full (spatially
discretized) PDE. Methods that use the Jacobian and Jacobian-free methods are
compared. The investigators also develop general purpose algorithms and software
for approximation of Lyapunov exponents and aim to include the algorithms within
standard software for differential equations. In many areas of science and
engineering, physical and biological systems are modeled with differential
equations. In a nutshell, a differential equation is a rule specifying how a
given initial state of the system evolves into future states. In practice, we
are given the differential equation and the initial state, and need to find the
solution (i.e., the evolution of the initial condition). Realistic models depend
on parameters and the solution of the differential equation will of course
depend on the values of the parameters as well. The ultimate goal of this
project is to provide scientists with quantitive means of assessing the
dependency of solutions with respect to variations of the initial state or the
parameters in the problem. Lyapunov exponents, and other related "spectral
quantities," do exactly this. A chief effort of the investigators is the
development of algorithms and computational software for approximation of
Lyapunov exponents and other spectra.