* 0139204
* Environmental Signal Transduction: An Interdisciplinary Research Experience for Undergraduates
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2007
* Susan Stapleton, Western Michigan University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2007
* USD 322,682.00

The program provides a collaborative research atmosphere for undergraduate
students in the sciences to work with faculty mentors in the Departments of
Biological Sciences and Chemistry at Western Michigan University. Participating
faculty and their students focus on basic and applied approaches to
interdisciplinary understanding of signal transduction cascades at different
scales of biological organization from molecules to ecosystems. Signal
transduction is the study of mechanisms by which biological molecules or
chemical agents initiate action within cells, tissues, organisms or
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emphases within the program include (1)
interdisciplinary research under the broad umbrella of environmental signal
transduction, (2) student ownership of research, (3) ethical conduct within a
research environment, (4) the development and implementation of defensible
scientific methods, (5) active recruitment of underrepresented groups to a
career in science, (6) peer-motivated and mentor-motivated interactions within a
cohort of collaborators, (7) communication, presentation and publication of
research results, and (8) post-research experience tracking to encourage the
pursuit of a career in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interactions within the
group lead to new and innovative ways of studying biologically relevant signals
that have broad applications in agriculture, health, and the environment.
Research projects within the program vary from signal cascades within cells that
may trigger immune responses to disease, to physiological responses to heavy
metal stress, to the impact of genetically engineered plant products on non-
target organisms. Students are exposed to a wide range of scientific methods and
modern equipment, in both laboratory and field settings, and they are encouraged
to take full advantage of available facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students
benefit scientifically from addressing highly focused questions from an
interdisciplinary perspective and the communication of results from team
efforts. Participating students also benefit socially and personally from deeply
motivating interactions within a culture of deep commitment, interdisciplinary
respect and societal relevance. In today's highly competitive research
environment, the ability to apply a wide range of methods, skills, ideas, and
theories from multiple disciplines is vital to the solution of both applied and
conceptual problems. &lt;br/&gt;