* 0139633
* REU SITE: Summer Research Opportunities in Enviromental Sciences in the Sierra Nevada and White Mountains of California
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Eric Berlow, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2006
* USD 251,999.00

White Mountain Research Station, University of California&lt;br/&gt;This REU
program will link nationally recruited undergraduates with accomplished academic
scientists. Special emphasis will be placed on including minority and women
students so they may benefit from the research and team building experience.
These research teams will work in the unique and challenging environment of the
eastern Sierra Nevada region of California and will use four laboratory
facilities in the White Mountains. This REU site will encompass a wide range of
environmental biology research, from high altitude physiology to population
ecology. These projects will expose students to broadly related research
questions and state-of-the-art technologies, while allowing each student to
explore a particular aspect of a project in depth. Project mentors will
facilitate the REU by supporting the technological, logistical, and
organizational needs of the students. Week long orientations at the beginning of
the program will introduce the research projects and mentors to the students,
and provide the students with basic knowledge of the region and the team
building process. Led by faculty mentors, weekly research team meetings will
provide time for traditional scientific reviews of the previous week's work.
Additionally, students will also meet as a group and discuss how they are
progressing as members of their research teams. An important emphasis of this
program will be team building and positive work environments and the direct role
of students in the process through discussions and feedback. As a result, the
impact of this REU program will be to expand a student's understanding of, and
participation in, effective research programs while producing research that has
the potential to contribute substantially to a particular &lt;br/&gt;