* 0139824
* FRG:  Collaborative Research:  Approximation of Lyapunov Exponents
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Erik Van Vleck, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2006
* USD 183,723.00

This Focused Research Group project includes investigators&lt;br/&gt;from three
different universities: Luca Dieci at Georgia&lt;br/&gt;Institute of Technology,
Michal Jolly at Indiana University, and&lt;br/&gt;Erik Van Vleck at the
University of Kansas. The project&lt;br/&gt;considers the approximation of
Lyapunov exponents and other&lt;br/&gt;spectral information for dynamical
systems. The main goal is to&lt;br/&gt;study and implement numerical techniques
to approximate Lyapunov&lt;br/&gt;exponents of continuous dynamical systems, as
defined by a system&lt;br/&gt;of time dependent differential equations. The
investigators are&lt;br/&gt;implementing and comparing so-called continuous and
discrete QR&lt;br/&gt;and SVD approaches. They distinguish between linear and
nonlinear&lt;br/&gt;problems, the chief difference being that in the linear case
no&lt;br/&gt;approximation of solution trajectory is attempted.
The&lt;br/&gt;investigators study Lyapunov exponents for systems of
large&lt;br/&gt;dimension, such as spatially discretized time dependent PDEs.
In&lt;br/&gt;particular, they consider PDEs for which an inertial manifold
is&lt;br/&gt;known to exist, and study the relative merits of techniques
that&lt;br/&gt;compute the exponents after a prior inertial manifold
reduction&lt;br/&gt;versus those that work with the full (spatially discretized)
PDE.&lt;br/&gt;Methods that use the Jacobian and Jacobian-free methods
are&lt;br/&gt;compared. The investigators also develop general
purpose&lt;br/&gt;algorithms and software for approximation of Lyapunov
exponents&lt;br/&gt;and aim to include the algorithms within standard software
for&lt;br/&gt;differential equations.&lt;br/&gt; In many areas of science and
engineering, physical and&lt;br/&gt;biological systems are modeled with
differential equations. In a&lt;br/&gt;nutshell, a differential equation is a
rule specifying how a&lt;br/&gt;given initial state of the system evolves into
future states. In&lt;br/&gt;practice, we are given the differential equation and
the initial&lt;br/&gt;state, and need to find the solution (i.e., the evolution
of the&lt;br/&gt;initial condition). Realistic models depend on parameters
and&lt;br/&gt;the solution of the differential equation will of course
depend&lt;br/&gt;on the values of the parameters as well. The ultimate goal
of&lt;br/&gt;this project is to provide scientists with quantitive means
of&lt;br/&gt;assessing the dependency of solutions with respect to
variations&lt;br/&gt;of the initial state or the parameters in the problem.
Lyapunov&lt;br/&gt;exponents, and other related "spectral quantities," do
exactly&lt;br/&gt;this. A chief effort of the investigators is the development
of&lt;br/&gt;algorithms and computational software for approximation
of&lt;br/&gt;Lyapunov exponents and other spectra.