* 0139058
* Research Experience for Undergraduates in Chemistry and Physics
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Geraldine Richmond, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Randall Christnert
* 03/31/2006
* USD 180,000.00

This joint Chemistry Division and Physics Division award supports the
continuation of a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site at the
University of Oregon. Geraldine Richmond is the site's Program Director. Twelve
faculty members from the Departments of Physics, and Chemistry will serve as REU
student mentors. Over the award period (2002-2004), ten students will be
supported each summer in a ten-week program. Selection of the participants is
based on a strong background in both chemistry and physics. A special effort is
made to recruit female and minority applicants using contacts with science
programs at several women's colleges, at historically black colleges and at
institutions where there is a higher percentage of Chicanos and Native American
students. This is an interdisciplinary Chemistry/Physics research program.
Students and research mentors participate in a collective program that includes
research seminars, weekly meetings, social activities and follow-up activities
after students return to their home institutions. At the end of the program
students present their research in an oral presentation and provide a written
report. At the closing of the summer, the students complete an evaluation. All
participants are tracked after they leave the program.&lt;br/&gt;