* 0139759
* FRG:   Collaborative Research:  Focused Research on Wavelets, Frames, and Operator Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* John Benedetto, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2006
* USD 116,088.00

FRG Collaborative Proposal&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NUMBER PI
INSTITUTION&lt;br/&gt;0139759 Benedetto University &lt;br/&gt;of Maryland, lead
PI&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental
problems are addressed in wavelet theory, non-uniform&lt;br/&gt;sampling,
frames, and the theory of spectral-tile duality. These&lt;br/&gt;problems are
inextricably interwoven by concept and&lt;br/&gt;technique. Operator theory
provides the major unifying framework,&lt;br/&gt;combined with an integration of
ideas from a diverse spectrum of&lt;br/&gt;mathematics including classical
Fourier analysis, noncommutative&lt;br/&gt;harmonic analysis, representation
theory, operator algebras,&lt;br/&gt;approximation theory, and signal
processing. For example, the&lt;br/&gt;construction, implementation, and ensuing
theory of single dyadic&lt;br/&gt;orthonormal wavelets in Euclidean space
requires significant input&lt;br/&gt;from all of these disciplines as well as
deep spectral-tile &lt;br/&gt;results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is intrinsic
mathematical importance in the aforementioned &lt;br/&gt;problems, and the
solutions to be formulated have broad and &lt;br/&gt;creative implications, both
for mathematics and for applications &lt;br/&gt;in engineering and physics. The
topics of this project have &lt;br/&gt;direct bearing on fast acquisition and
motion problems in MRI, &lt;br/&gt;as well as in formulating algorithms for
compression and noise &lt;br/&gt;reduction by means of proper cochlear
modelling. There are further&lt;br/&gt;applications in quantum computing and
image processing, and the &lt;br/&gt;development of non-uniform sampling
strategies by this project &lt;br/&gt;play a role in state of the art A/D
conversion methods used in &lt;br/&gt;multifunction RF systems. These
interdisciplinary applications &lt;br/&gt;depending on modern mathematical
analysis have educational &lt;br/&gt;implications in terms of cross-
fertilization of ideas and research&lt;br/&gt;opportunities for graduate
students. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;