* 0139494
* Dissertation Improvement Grant Proposal: An Actualistic and Stable Isotope Study of Three Modern Kenyan Communities Living near Lake Turkana
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2002
* John W. Harris, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 12/31/2002
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. John Harris, Ms Purity Kiura will collect data for
her doctoral dissertation. Her project is a study over the annual cycle by
direct observation and stable isotope analysis of the food consumption of three
groups of people with different subsistence strategies (the Dassanetch, Gabra
and El-molo) living today to the East of Lake Turkana in Northern Kenya. The
ultimate goal of this study is to provide an interpretive framework for
investigating the subsistence strategies and diet of people believed to have
occupied the region during the last 10,000 years (Holocene period). These three
modern groups are not direct analogues for the Holocene peoples but do have
diets similar to those proposed in the region by prior researchers. However, if
by direct observations, including the analysis of food residues discarded in
garbage pits, and by the study of stable isotope signatures of modern peoples
that these are found to be discrete, then it may be possible to identify similar
subsistence strategies in the regions Holocene record. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ms
Kiura and her field assistants will conduct daily observations and interviews of
the people's dietary behavior (food types, processing, preparing and sharing)
while at the same time they will document the food remains that are discarded in
garbage pits through the people's food processing and consumption activities.
Stable carbon and nitrogen isotope analysis to determine the food types consumed
will be carried out on the people's hair, bone and teeth from the animals
consumed by the people, and also the plants eaten by these animals. Daily
weather observations (i.e. rain, humidity, temperature and wind patterns) will
also be recorded to provide seasonal changes in the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data collected here will have broad
implications beyond setting up a base for the study of the Holocene people's
subsistence strategies. The data will also provide novel information on the
dietary activities through the annual cycle of three modern groups of people
that are poorly studied. Plants and animals in the region are poorly understood
and this project will therefore provide very important information to plant
physiologists, mammalogists, paleontologists and others. Daily weather records
will also prove important to all scientists interested in the region's seasonal
changes and effects on the overall environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;