* 0139714
* Metal-Catalyzed Asymmetric Cyclization Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2005
* Xumu Zhang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 02/28/2005
* USD 360,000.00

The objectives of this work are to design and test new transition metal
catalysts for effecting asymmetric carbon-carbon bond forming reactions. Two
reactions in particular will be studied in detail, asymmetric rhodium catalyzed
ene reactions and silver and copper catalyzed asymmetric 1,3 dipolar
cycloadditions of azomethine ylides. In each case, new sets of chiral phosphine
ligands will be prepared and then an understanding of the mechanisms of these
reactions will be used to "fine tune" metal/ligand catalysts systems for these
reactions. The rhodium catalyzed enyne cycloisomerization will be applied to
asymmetric syntheses of the natural products Oppositol and alpha-Kainic acid.
The silver and copper catalyzed reactions will be applied to core structures
found in hexahydrotriquinacene, hydantoin, and polycyclic fused lactam
containing natural products. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Organic
and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Dr. Xumu
Zhang of the Department of Chemistry at Penn State University. Dr. Zhang will
explore stereoselective cyclization reactions which are catalyzed by rhodium,
silver, and copper reagents. The ability to form carbon-carbon bonds in
molecules which are chiral (have two nonsuperimposable mirror images) and make
only one of the two possible forms (a single enantiomer) is one of the most
important problems facing the pharmaceutical industry today. When developed, Dr.
Zhang's rhodium catalyzed work could be applied to the synthesis of natural
products such as Oppositol and alpha-Kainic acid. The marine natural product
Kainic acids are potent neurotransmitters and a worldwide shortage of these
compounds has hindered work in the neuroscience community. The silver and copper
catalyzed reactions will be applied to core structures found in
hexahydrotriquinacene, hydantoin, and polycyclic fused lactam containing natural
products which have a broad range of biological activities as antivirals,
antifungals, antibacterials, and herbicidals. Students trained during the course
of this work will gain skills needed by the pharmaceutical industry which now
produces a number of single enantiomer compounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;