* 0139956
* Dynamics of R.F. Discharges for Materials Etching
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Michael Lieberman, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 05/31/2005
* USD 225,000.00

0139956 Lieberman

Chemically reactive plasma discharges are widely used in the semiconductor and
flat panel display industries for etching and deposition processes: moreover,
their use has become critical for very large scale integrated (VLSI) circuit and
thin film transistor (TFT) production. High density rf inductively coupled
plasma sources are playing an increasing role in processing as feature sizes
shrink and as wafer and TFT substrate sizes increase. This proposal is for
continuation of research on such discharges.

Almost all processing applications require the use of fluorine, chlorine or
oxygen-containing feedstock gases, which produces an electronegative discharge
plasma containing a high concentration of negative ions. Such discharges have
been found to be unstable in certain regimes of discharge pressure and applied
radio frequency power, adversely affecting processing performance.

The proposed research program has the following components:

(a) Experiments will be performed and analytical models will be developed for
instabilities in inductively coupled plasma sources with electronega-tive gas
feedstocks. The program continues the PIs experiments with more complete
diagnostics and improves the chemistry in their present models, which now only
qualitatively agree with the experimental results.

(b) They will perform general theo-retical studies of electronegative discharges
in support of (a) above, continuing a program to develop increasingly accurate
models.

The experimental studies of electronegative discharge equilibrium, hysteresis,
and instabilities will be performed in a planar inductive discharge
(transformer-coupled plasma, or TCP) of the conventional type used for VLSI
processing. A sulfur hexafluoride/argon feedstock gas mixture allowing control
of the negative ion density will be used.

