* 0139258
* Digital Data Collection for Damage Assessment at World Trade Center
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2002
* J. David Frost, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 09/30/2002
* USD 20,000.00

This project will support a reconnaissance team using recently developed
handheld technology to collect damage assessment data from structures damaged
during the terrorist attack on the World Trace Center. The team will use the
PQuake system developed by the Principal Investigator under NSF support for
collection of damage data immediately after earthquakes. The system includes a
GPS for recording location, a digital camera for photographic records, a
handheld computer with customized software for recording data and a digital
voice recorder to rapidly record notes. This system has been used successfully
following the earthquake in Gujarat, India. Only minor modifications would be
required in the software to adapt it for use in collecting damage from terrorist
attacks, as the system already designed to record structural damage.

The purpose of the data collection is threefold. First, systematic collection of
damage data from structures damaged, but not destroyed, during the terrorist
attack will aid in the assessment of the structural integrity of these
buildings. These data will speed up the assessment of damage and the repair of
these structures. Second, the data will serve as a valuable resource for future
research related to performance of structures subjected to terrorist attack,
explosions and fires; the development of methods of minimizing damage from such
occurrences; and future design of urban structures. Third, this work will
support the development of data acquisition and storage protocols for all post-
disaster reconnaissance activities. The earthquake engineering community in
particular is just starting to address the question of how to collect and
archive data. The PI is a pioneer in the utilization of handheld technology for
rapid data collection. This project will provide continued support for the
development of these methods and will extend their use to disasters other than
earthquakes.