* 0139294
* Next Generation Neutrinoless Double Beta Decay Experiments CUORE/CUORICINO (130Te) and Majorana (76Ge)
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Frank Avignone, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 06/30/2006
* USD 671,433.00

The neutrino is the lightest known elementary particle. It has no electric
charge but has an intrinsic angular-momentum(or spin) of one half unit of
Planck's constant just like it's cousin the electron. Discovered in 1957 by
Reines and Cowan, it remains one of the least understood particles in the
elementary zoo. According to conventional wisdom, in modern cosmology the
universe is densely populated with neutrinos. Accordingly,if they would have a
large enough mass, they could have played an important role in the evolution of
the universe in it's early stages and even at present. Approximately 90% of the
mass of the universe has not been identified. In 1998 it was announced
that&lt;br/&gt;neutrinos resulting from the decay of cosmic-ray muons in the
atmosphere were found to oscillate between different families. This would
require that they do have some mass but such experiments do not yield how much.
The rate of the hypothesized rare radioactive decay called double-beta decay can
yield this very valuable information when combined with the neutrino oscillation
results. The interesting version of this phenomenon would result if a nucleus
would decay by emitting two electrons and nothing else. An important
conservation law would be violated by such a process unless two anti-neutrinos
were also emitted with the electrons. Since the electrons are leptons and the
anti-neutrinos are anti-leptons the total number of leptons is conserved in the
the decay with anti-neutrinos. For the decay to occur without anti-neutrinos,
neutrinos in general must have mass and an important symmetry in physics must be
violated. The Majorana and CUORE experiments, which are the subjects of this
proposal, are next generation no-neutrino double-beta decay experiments with an
improvement in the sensitivity to neutrino mass that is predicted to be about
one hundred times better than the best experiments done to
date.&lt;br/&gt;Considering all the data available, they have a significant
probability&lt;br/&gt;for discovery, for being able to provide important
information on the&lt;br/&gt;mass of neutrinos as well as to determine if
neutrinos are there own&lt;br/&gt;anti-particles. CUORICINO is a smaller first
step towards building the&lt;br/&gt;full version of CUORE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;