* 0139653
* Undergraduate Research in Biological Diversity:  Phylogenetic Approaches to Biological Questions
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2005
* Glen Collier, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2005
* USD 232,860.00

The Undergraduate Research Experience in Phylogenetic Approaches
to&lt;br/&gt;Biological Problems will allow undergraduates to participate for
ten weeks&lt;br/&gt;during each of the summers of 2002-04. Research projects
will span diverse&lt;br/&gt;areas of biology from phycology, molecular
evolution, behavioral ecology and&lt;br/&gt;microbial diversity but will all
have a common phylogenetic perspective.&lt;br/&gt;Ten highly qualified
undergraduates will be selected for each summer's&lt;br/&gt;program from local
and national institutions with attention paid to&lt;br/&gt;recruiting from
underrepresented groups. The main objectives of this&lt;br/&gt;program are to 1)
train students in basic methods of molecular biology
and&lt;br/&gt;bioinformatics , 2) provide a mentored research experience using
these&lt;br/&gt;techniques, 3) educate students about the diversity of problems
to be&lt;br/&gt;understood with such techniques, and 4) raise awareness of
research career&lt;br/&gt;opportunities. These objectives will be attained by a
combination of&lt;br/&gt;tutorials in theory and techniques common to all of the
projects of the&lt;br/&gt;program, mentored research by individual faculty, a
seminar program&lt;br/&gt;delivered by visiting specialists, and career advising
by local staff and&lt;br/&gt;former alumni of the program. The program will
culminate in a day-long&lt;br/&gt;research symposium presented by the
participants. The long-term goals of&lt;br/&gt;the experience are increased
awareness of and competitiveness for careers in&lt;br/&gt;research and/or
university-level teaching.&lt;br/&gt;