* 0139335
* GK-12 K-Through-Infinity Systemic Initiative
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Walter Secada, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 08/31/2005
* USD 1,608,827.00



The goals of this KTI-S project are to: enhance the professional development of
the participating fellows and teachers; enhance science and mathematics
capabilities and enthusiasm among the populations served; and investigate the
effectiveness of the methods used. The project builds on and expands the
K-Through-Infinity Professional Development Partnership (KTI-P), a prior GK-12
project. Four different educational environments are included: a metropolitan
science museum that serves urban Milwaukee schools; a local public school
district revising its science and mathematics curricula and pedagogy; a local
private K-16 school organization seeking to integrate its science curriculum;
and a new District of Columbia Charter School that is working with UW-Madison
researchers to develop its science curriculum. The key element of our approach
is a robust concept of team design developed during our first GK-12 project and
implemented in many different settings. Fellows and teachers work with
university and school district resources to develop new curricula and relevant,
cutting edge materials coming out of research, map the standards to these
products, and then implement them in classroom learning environments. Some
fellows work intensively with a small number of teachers and classrooms, while
others work with a larger number of teachers through such mechanisms as summer
institutes and degree programs, and then follow those teachers back into
multiple classrooms in different schools and even different districts and
states.

The KTI-S teams work in ways aligned with school, district and state resource
allocations. KTI-S takes advantage of the four distinct educational settings and
the extensive and intensive evaluation activities included to encourage Fellows,
teachers and project staff to reflect on a larger question: how can team
activities in very different settings be aligned with district, state, and
university resources to most effectively help K-12 students learn, and
experience the excitement of, science and mathematics, and in ways that provide
fellows valuable K-12 classroom experience.

