* 0139476
* Collaborative Research: FRG:  Minimal Surfaces, Moduli Spaces, and Computation.
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Matthias Weber, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2006
* USD 217,294.00

&lt;br/&gt;The global theory of minimal surfaces in space is in a phase
of&lt;br/&gt;explosive growth. Many new methods of constructing
complete&lt;br/&gt;embedded minimal surfaces have recently been found; in place
of a&lt;br/&gt;dearth of examples just a few years ago, we now have a
quite&lt;br/&gt;varied collection of surfaces, including infinite families.
A&lt;br/&gt;basic problem is to classify these examples, i.e. collect
them&lt;br/&gt;into families with common properties and
understood&lt;br/&gt;limits. Fruitful approaches have recently been developed
that&lt;br/&gt;combine numerical simulation with methods from the theory
of&lt;br/&gt;geometric structures on surfaces and classical complex
analysis,&lt;br/&gt;notably Teichmuller theory. Some of the problems the team
will&lt;br/&gt;attack are: Are there embedded minimal surfaces with
one&lt;br/&gt;heliciodal end and arbitrary genus? Is the classical
Scherk&lt;br/&gt;surface the unique desingularization of a pair of planes?
Of&lt;br/&gt;what families is the Scherk surface the limit point? At the
same&lt;br/&gt;time, the group hopes to make progress on simulation of
minimal&lt;br/&gt;surfaces. For example, we hope to set up a library of
Weierstrass&lt;br/&gt;representations of minimal surfaces which is reproducible,
fully&lt;br/&gt;documented, and useful as a research
tool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A guiding philosophy in many areas of science, from
physics to&lt;br/&gt;biochemistry to ecology, is that nature is maximally
efficient;&lt;br/&gt;indeed, many explanations of natural phenomena have at
their&lt;br/&gt;foundation the assumption that the phenomenon has optimized
some&lt;br/&gt;or several of its features in the expression we witness. At
its&lt;br/&gt;base, this philosophical principle is mathematical in nature:
we&lt;br/&gt;search for principles in science that can be formulated
as&lt;br/&gt;extremal problems. In mathematics, we can make this assumption
of&lt;br/&gt;optimality very rigorous by expressing it as an equation.
This&lt;br/&gt;leaves us with the problem of understanding all of the
solutions&lt;br/&gt;of that equation. In this project, we aim to study one very
rich&lt;br/&gt;type of optimization problem, the minimal surface problem,
which&lt;br/&gt;is already known to have a number of quite
subtle&lt;br/&gt;characteristics. (A minimal surface is one for which each
small&lt;br/&gt;piece has less area than any other surface with the
same&lt;br/&gt;boundary.) The study of these surfaces has its origins
in&lt;br/&gt;physical problems studied first by Euler; then, a century
later,&lt;br/&gt;the problem also arose in the studies of the behavior of
rotating&lt;br/&gt;droplets and soap films by F. Plateau. Today the
applications&lt;br/&gt;range from cosmology to the understanding of the
structure of&lt;br/&gt;stable periodic structures in compound copolymers. As in
many&lt;br/&gt;other optimization problems, for the minimal surface problem,
we&lt;br/&gt;do not have much general information about solutions to
the&lt;br/&gt;equation expressing extremality. At present though, we do have
a&lt;br/&gt;wide variety of examples which help to guide our intuition,
and&lt;br/&gt;which we are beginning to organize. It is thus a good
model&lt;br/&gt;problem, enriching our understanding of all
optimization&lt;br/&gt;problems.&lt;br/&gt;