* 0139911
* FRG:  The Mathematics of Financial Risk Management
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Steven Shreve, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2006
* USD 1,043,716.00

The goal of this project is to develop rational and implementable methods
&lt;br/&gt;to measure and control risk in the finance industry. The topic is
timely &lt;br/&gt;because there have been some spectacular failures in the
finance industry, &lt;br/&gt;because regulations are under discussion which
would institutionalize &lt;br/&gt;quantitative risk measures, and because the
leading risk measure, "value-&lt;br/&gt;at-risk," has undesirable properties.
Chief among these is that in certain &lt;br/&gt;situations, situations that
often arise in credit-risky markets, meeting &lt;br/&gt;regulatory value-at-risk
requirements encourages concentration of risk &lt;br/&gt;rather than
diversification. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal builds on the idea of
coherent risk measures developed by a &lt;br/&gt;team, which includes one of the
principal investigators on this proposal. &lt;br/&gt;This team developed a set
of axioms deemed to be desirable, and then &lt;br/&gt;characterized those
"coherent" risk measures which satisfy these axioms. &lt;br/&gt;Their work
showed that every coherent risk measure can be characterized &lt;br/&gt;by a set
of probability measures over possible future scenarios. A three-&lt;br/&gt;part
project is proposed. The first part is to develop a decentralized
&lt;br/&gt;implementation of risk control based on coherent risk measurement.
This &lt;br/&gt;requires development of duality theory and equilibrium pricing
within a &lt;br/&gt;firm. The second is to elicit scenarios and estimate model
parameters in &lt;br/&gt;real settings. This mandates refining the mathematical
models to the point &lt;br/&gt;that a manageable number of measures over future
scenarios present &lt;br/&gt;themselves, and appealing to statistical theory to
make those choices. &lt;br/&gt;Finally, it is proposed to extend the existing
theory of coherent risk &lt;br/&gt;measures. This project is being supported
under the Focused Research &lt;br/&gt;Groups in the Mathematical Sciences
activity.&lt;br/&gt;