* 0139677
* Central Washington University REU Site: Society and Environment in South China
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Richard Mack, Central Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Richard H. Nader
* 04/30/2006
* USD 326,343.00

Cook 0139677

This is a 36-month AWARE/REU proposal submitted by Dr. James Cook, Central
Washington University (CWU), on society and environment in China. He proposes to
establish a collaborative training program in undergraduate social science
research on the impact of environmental degradation, economic growth, and social
change within two cities, Shanghai and Xiaman, in coastal China. The CWU will
cooperate with Shanghai Jiaotong University and Xiaman University to design a
program to mentor U.S. students through the complete process of planning a
research agenda and performing primary research in the environmental and social
sciences at an international field site. The eight week program will include a
pre-field experience at CWU, a field experience in Shanghai and Xiaman and a
post field wrap-up at CWU comprised of closely-mentored group interaction on the
organization, interpretation, and analysis of primary data, preparation of the
final report, and presentation of their findings at professional venues. This
research and training program will provide an excellent opportunity for U.S.
undergraduate students to perform social science research in an international
setting, and allow them have a in-depth understanding of the complex
relationship between environmental degradation, economic growth and societal
changes in coastal China.



