* 0139474
* REU Sites: Summer Undergraduate Program in Engineering Research at Berkeley-Information Technology (SUPERB-IT)
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2006
* Jitendra Malik, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 02/28/2006
* USD 154,650.00

EIA-0139474&lt;br/&gt;Sastry, Shankar&lt;br/&gt;Univ. of California -
Berkeley&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Summer Undergraduate Program in Engineering
Research at Berkeley-Information Technology (SUPERB-
IT)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Department of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Sciences (EECS) proposes a new Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) site for summers 2002-2004. The research focus of the REU site will be
Information Technologies. Information technologies are crucial for manipulating
large amounts of information in electronic formats. Berkeley is at the forefront
of many areas of IT research, and is known for its large-scale interdisciplinary
and experimental research projects. This area represents one of the most
critical technological developments of our era. Information industries use these
technologies to assemble, distribute, and process information in a wide range of
media. The field of Information Technologies, including embedded systems, is by
far the fastest growing job category in the U.S. The overall goal of this
research is to demonstrate new architectural solutions for the converged
information and communication networks of the next century. The REU site will
bring students together in computer networking, wireless communication, embedded
systems, and data acquisition through censoring, video and image processing, and
network-enabled applications from the EECS Department.&lt;br/&gt;