* 0139576
* REU Sites:  Summer Undergraduate Research Program
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2004
* Robert Pless, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 03/31/2004
* USD 173,600.00

EIA-0139576&lt;br/&gt;Pless, Robert&lt;br/&gt;Washington
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Summer Undergraduate Research
Program&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The department has a long history of
supporting undergraduate summer research opportunities, and these opportunities
will exist with or without external support. However, external support does
further particular NSF objectives having to do with the size of the program, the
quality of the student experience, and the balance f student
recruiting.&lt;br/&gt;In particular, the requested funding
would:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;oMaintain an efficient size of the program, sixteen
summer students. In addition to summer research projects funded from their
research funds, this gives a critical&lt;br/&gt;mass of students that improves
the overall student experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;oFoster a broader range f
student projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;oClearly separate the objectives of the
program from individual faculty research agendas. Faculty who support students
from individual research grants tend to be conservative in hiring and must
choose projects that serve the objectives of their funding sources. This may
negatively impact both the student experience and the student
selection.&lt;br/&gt;There are three explicit goals for this REU program. First,
to give undergraduates from many backgrounds the opportunity and training to
participate in frontier research.&lt;br/&gt;Second, to foster and extend the
undergraduate research culture already present at Washington University. Third,
to create a supportive and encouraging environment to do
research.&lt;br/&gt;This first goal will be met with a targeted advertising
campaign. This campaign will not exclude any source of potential students, but
will focus n (a) predominately teaching colleges, (b) historically minority
schools, (c) non-computer science departments.&lt;br/&gt;Second, a coherent
program involving a designated group of summer research program students gives a
reason to organize events, a social group, and a critical mass for which it is
appropriate to offer programs which aid all undergraduate students involved in
research. Finally, we propose a program that includes an explicit training
component to teach students the tools t attack research problems effectively. A
set of defined check points during the course of the summer will allow program
coordinators to identify and solve potential problems.&lt;br/&gt;