* 0139347
* GK-12: An Interactive Program Linking Graduate Fellow in Environmental Science with K-12 Students and Teachers
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Katherine Ellins, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 07/31/2006
* USD 1,821,537.00

The goal of the program is to provide K-12 teachers and students with recent
knowledge and innovative learning activities in the areas of biology,
environmental science, aquatic science, geology, meteorology, and oceanography
and to relate these topics to the impacts of environmental change on Texas
habitats and residents. The school districts involved range from 1 to 17%
limited English proficiency, from 23 to 47% economically disadvantaged, and from
12 to 65% minority. This project emphasizes field research for students and
teachers and builds on three existing programs between The University of Texas
at Austin and local school systems from the Texas coast to the State's interior:
The Marine Science Institute's Study of Arctic Change, The Institute for
Geophysics' Adopt a School, Teachers in the Field, and the Environmental Science
Institute's Outreach Lecture Series. Special features of the program include
numerous field activities for K-12 students and teachers led by Graduate
Fellows, summer workshops for teachers focused on developing content knowledge
in targeted interdisciplinary subjects aligned with State educational standards
and goals, joint participation by teachers and Graduate Fellows at local and
regional science conferences, and building partnerships between undergraduate
science and mathematics students seeking teaching certification with Graduate
Fellows and K-12 teachers. This project receives partial support from the
Geoscience Directorate.