* 0139431
* REU Site:  Excavation and Reconstruction of a Northern Plains Bison Kill Site
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Royce Engstrom, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Linda G. Lopez
* 02/28/2006
* USD 155,778.00

This award provides funds for an REU Site on "Excavation and Reconstruction of a
Northern Plains Bison Kill Site" at the University of South Dakota. The project
represents a unique cooperation between academic units of the University and the
W.H. Over Museum, a natural history museum which resides on the University
Campus. The project is highly interdisciplinary and provides opportunities for
students with a wide variety of backgrounds, including social science, physical
and natural science, education, and museum science. The scientific aspects of
the REU Site project are threefold: (1) the excavation of the bison kill site
using state-of-the-art archaeological methodology; (2) analysis and
documentation of the artifacts taken from the Site; and (3) an educational
program consisting of a professional exhibit at the museum and an accompanying
K-12 curricular module. In addition to the scientific component, the Site will
offer students field trips, social events, weekly discussions, and written and
oral presentation of results in a variety of local and national venues. This
award will support eight students per year for three years. In addition to
students from the University of South Dakota and smaller schools in the
surrounding region, an emphasis will be placed on involving Native American
students who are enrolled at two tribal colleges in South
Dakota.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award contributes to the Foundation's
continuing efforts to attract talented students into careers in science through
active undergraduate research experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;