* 0139572
* REU the Impact of Energy Technologies on Natural Environmental Systems
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Charles Jagoe, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2005
* USD 193,800.00

The Savannah River Ecology Laboratory's (SREL) research experiences for
undergraduates (REU) program provides scientific training and hands-on
experience in the process of research by actively involving undergraduates in
projects with full time research ecologists. Project participants will examine
the influence of nuclear and fossil fuel energy production and associated
technologies on selected biological and chemical properties in southeastern
ecosystems. SREL is located on the US Departments of Energy's 720 km2 Savannah
River Site (SRS), where a variety of habitats including pine forests, abandoned
farmlands and freshwater wetlands adjoin industrial facilities and
anthropogenetically-disturbed areas. Participant selection is based on written
statements of interests and goals in the application, letters of recommendation,
and academic record. We seek diversity and actively recruit minority
applicants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this program is to provide the
next generation of ecologists and environmental scientists with an introduction
to the practice of scientific research. Students accepted into the program
perform independent research projects that interface with ongoing research
programs at SREL. Faculty members actively engaged in research and publication
are paired with students with compatible research interests. At the beginning of
their residence, students participate in a series of workshops led by SREL
faculty and staff on research design, ethics, data collection and processing,
and oral and written presentation of results. They also prepare a formal
research proposal in collaboration with their faculty advisor. Students receive
hands-on training while performing their projects, as well as through brown bag
seminar-discussion groups, formal seminars, group field trips to representative
biomes of the southeast, and collegial interactions among themselves and
permanent research staff and faculty. Near the conclusion of their residence,
there is a formal workshop on graduate study. Each student must present a brief
seminar on their project before their peers and SREL faculty and staff. They
also prepare a scientific manuscript based on their research, and participate in
an exit interview and survey to provide feedback for program improvement. These
activities continue and refine undergraduate research training at SREL, which
began over 30 years ago, and has involved over 600 undergraduate participants to
date. This type of hands-on training and experience has proved highly beneficial
in attracting quality students to careers in environmental science, and
preparing them for graduate study and future research endeavors. &lt;br/&gt;