* 0139317
* REU Site Program for Undergraduate Research in Cellular and Molecular Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Michelle Whaley, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2006
* USD 184,458.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Department of Biological Sciences at the University of
Notre Dame is sponsoring a NSF-REU Site for undergraduate research during the
summers of 2001 - 2003. The focal point of the proposed REU projects is the use
of model systems and basic research to study the cellular and molecular basis of
disease. A nationwide search will be conducted for 14 sophomore or junior
participants. The primary goals of our program are to 1) expose students to the
excitement of scientific discovery, 2) help students develop the skills needed
to generate, analyze and report scientific data, 3) educate students on the
professionalism needed to succeed in graduate school and beyond, 4) give
students opportunities for leadership roles, and 5) encourage students to be
responsible scientists and citizens by providing international research
experiences and service opportunities. To reach these goals, participants will
carry out research projects for 9 weeks. During these 9 weeks, they will speak
on their proposed work twice, attend and coordinate a weekly seminar program to
develop students professional and leadership skills, as well as to educate them
on various career paths in biological sciences, attend weekly journal clubs
where students will present current published research, and participate in an
optional service component mentoring high school students. New to our proposed
program is an international research component for two students each summer. The
underlying aim of the program is to give students strong incentives for pursuing
careers in research.&lt;br/&gt;