* 0139303
* GK-12 and GeoKids: Bringing Place-Based Science to Urban Philadelphia Children
* EDU,DGE
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2006
* Roger Murray, St Joseph's University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 02/28/2006
* USD 971,570.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on strong existing collaborations
between Saint Joseph's University (SJU) science faculty and a Philadelphia
museum, the Wagner Free Institute of Science (WFIS), and between WFIS staff and
principals at three nearby urban Philadelphia public schools. GK-12 Fellows are
M.S. candidates or advanced undergraduates studying Biology, Chemistry, or
Environmental Science. Each year 4-8 Fellows will collaborate with WFIS
education specialists, SJU faculty, and K-6 teachers to develop and present
semester-long thematic units to students attending schools in one of
Philadelphia's most underserved neighborhoods. "GeoKids" incorporates a place-
based approach that uses the local environment as a resource to teach earth and
life sciences, a unique and challenging learning strategy for an inner-city
program. GeoKids emphasizes hands-on science, project-based learning, and
development of fundamental skills such as reading, writing, and observing. The
program includes annual summer workshops where Fellows, K-6 teachers, and
participating SJU and WFIS educators review curriculum standards, study in
appropriate content areas, and become more familiar with education issues
specific to students from the target schools. Doctoral education students will
collaborate with an education assessment expert in designing and administering
assessment tools. Expected outcomes of the program include: development,
testing, and documentation of environmentally-based lessons, K-6 teachers
empowered to develop their own place-based lessons, SJU faculty and graduate
students committed to enhancing science literacy, and incorporation of GK-12
program elements into existing Service Learning activities at SJU. The grant
activities support efforts underway at SJU to enhance and expand the graduate
programs in Chemistry and Biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;