* 0139974
* Quantum Foundations and Quantum Information
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Robert Griffiths, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Earle L. Lomon
* 09/30/2005
* USD 169,000.00

0139974&lt;br/&gt;Griffiths&lt;br/&gt; Much of modern technology, including
computers, lasers, and magnetic&lt;br/&gt;resonance imaging, utilizes the
principles of quantum mechanics, the&lt;br/&gt;physicist's most fundamental
theory of nature, and would not be possible if&lt;br/&gt;this theory had never
been invented. Given this success, one might suppose&lt;br/&gt;that quantum
mechanics would by now be as well understood as other
foundation&lt;br/&gt;stones of modern science, such as thermodynamics and
relativity theory. On the&lt;br/&gt;contrary, as Richard Feynman, one of the
great physicists of the 20th century,&lt;br/&gt;once put it, "Nobody understands
quantum mechanics." The lack of a clear&lt;br/&gt;understanding, to which
Feynman was referring, has not, obviously, prevented&lt;br/&gt;quantum mechanics
from being applied to a vast range of technological devices.&lt;br/&gt;But
students are frustrated when they try and learn the subject from
teachers&lt;br/&gt;and textbooks whose lack of clarity illustrates the truth of
Feynman's remark.&lt;br/&gt;Clearing up the conceptual mess in its foundations
would certainly not detract&lt;br/&gt;from, and might even assist in, the
technological applications of quantum&lt;br/&gt;mechanics, and could well prove
important for future developments in areas such&lt;br/&gt;as quantum computation
and quantum cryptography, where impressive advances are&lt;br/&gt;accompanied by
equally spectacular gaps in our current understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
This research project, as indicated in the title, has a double
focus.&lt;br/&gt;One is the use of quantum histories - a promising approach
developed by various&lt;br/&gt;people including Murray Gell-Mann, a Nobel
laureate who at one time was&lt;br/&gt;Feynman's colleague at Cal Tech - for
addressing and clearing up the conceptual&lt;br/&gt;difficulties in the
foundations of quantum theory. Several major paradoxes,&lt;br/&gt;including the
famous double slit, have been resolved using the histories&lt;br/&gt;approach,
and this method gets rid of mysterious long-range influences that
are&lt;br/&gt;present in some older interpretations of quantum mechanics, and
which are hard&lt;br/&gt;to reconcile with relativity theory. However, up till
now these new&lt;br/&gt;developments have been confined to the technical
literature, and they need to&lt;br/&gt;be moved into classrooms and textbooks if
they are to make the subject more&lt;br/&gt;accessible to the next generation of
scientists. There is plenty of work to be&lt;br/&gt;done, both in making
abstract mathematical formulations more understandable&lt;br/&gt;through simple
physical examples, and in convincing teachers and textbook&lt;br/&gt;writers
that students deserve something better than the
traditional&lt;br/&gt;("Copenhagen") approach, the one Feynman could not
understand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The second focus of this research is quantum
information theory, the&lt;br/&gt;fundamental science behind both quantum
computing and quantum cryptography.&lt;br/&gt;Classical information theory was
developed half a century ago by Claude&lt;br/&gt;Shannon, and plays an important
role in the modern theory of communication, as&lt;br/&gt;in the efficient use of
weak radio signals to transmit information from distant&lt;br/&gt;space probes
to the earth. Quantum information theory generalizes Shannon's&lt;br/&gt;ideas
to situations where quantum effects are important, and while it has
had&lt;br/&gt;some notable successes, it has also run into the following
difficulty:&lt;br/&gt;Shannon's formulation is based on the use of
probabilities, but incorporating&lt;br/&gt;probabilities into quantum mechanics
in a consistent way is the source of many&lt;br/&gt;of the conceptual
difficulties that troubled Feynman. The histories approach&lt;br/&gt;resolves
the problem of quantum probabilities in a consistent manner
that&lt;br/&gt;allows an immediate extension of many of Shannon's ideas into the
quantum&lt;br/&gt;domain. Whether this provides a satisfactory foundation for
quantum&lt;br/&gt;information theory remains to be seen, but it looks promising.
If it succeeds,&lt;br/&gt;there will be a double benefit: a clearer
understanding of what quantum&lt;br/&gt;computing and cryptography can and
cannot do, and a new way to think about&lt;br/&gt;quantum mechanical processes
in terms of the generation and transmission of&lt;br/&gt;information.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;