* 0139914
* Mathematical Tools for Non-invasive Spectroscopic Monitoring of Blood Chemistry
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Ronald Coifman, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 09/30/2005
* USD 890,000.00

The investigator and his colleagues undertake a coordinated&lt;br/&gt;effort to
bring to bear ideas from analysis, geometry, and&lt;br/&gt;statistics on the
problem of analysing spectroscopic data in high&lt;br/&gt;dimensions. A major
challenge confronting the analytical chemist&lt;br/&gt;involves the organization
and manipulation of massive amounts of&lt;br/&gt;data, both measured and
computed. Recent work indicates that&lt;br/&gt;special geometric structures
allow for efficient transcription&lt;br/&gt;and modeling of the relation between
spectral measurements and&lt;br/&gt;material composition. The investigators
develop tools to identify&lt;br/&gt;such structures and to automate the process
of analysis and&lt;br/&gt;feature extraction. In particular, the investigators
concentrate&lt;br/&gt;on near-infrared spectra of blood, with the goal being
to&lt;br/&gt;estimate concentrations of various blood analytes
from&lt;br/&gt;noninvasive spectrometric measurements. The
multidisciplinary&lt;br/&gt;team undertakes a coherent approach in which various
aspects of&lt;br/&gt;chemical analysis, blood pathology, and sensor
engineering&lt;br/&gt;interact with mathematical analytic tools. They adapt and
extend&lt;br/&gt;computational software to the particular geometry of
chemical&lt;br/&gt;spectra, for which the data manifolds need to be parametrized
by&lt;br/&gt;the concentrations of various constituent materials. To
achieve&lt;br/&gt;such parametrizations, they exploit mathematical tools for
local&lt;br/&gt;multiscale descriptions of data together with
clustering&lt;br/&gt;techniques that occur naturally in the context of data
analysis&lt;br/&gt;for expression profiles of gene arrays.&lt;br/&gt; Shining a
light on the skin allows one to get spectral data&lt;br/&gt;about the blood
beneath the skin and its chemical components.&lt;br/&gt;Hence noninvasive blood
analysis is possible, if only one could&lt;br/&gt;make sense of the data. The
investigator and his colleagues apply&lt;br/&gt;a range of mathematical and
statistical ideas to build tools that&lt;br/&gt;can make sense of such data.
There are important medical payoffs&lt;br/&gt;because of the role blood
chemistry plays in health. Moreover,&lt;br/&gt;the underlying mathematical
problem, to find efficient ways to&lt;br/&gt;make sense of enormous volumes of
high-dimensional data, arises&lt;br/&gt;across science and engineering, so the
potential impact of the&lt;br/&gt;project is even wider. The project provides
interdisciplinary&lt;br/&gt;research and training opportunities for students and
postdocs.