* 0139701
* FRG:   Focused Research Collaborative Proposal:   Differential Algebraic Inequalities and their Applications in Engineering
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Jeffrey Trinkle, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2006
* USD 437,514.00

Focused Research Collaboration Proposal: Differential
Algebraic&lt;br/&gt;Inequalities and their Applications to
Engineering&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This focused research project proposes a
comprehensive investigation&lt;br/&gt;of Differential Algebraic Inequalities
(DAIs) and Dynamic&lt;br/&gt;Complementarity Problems (DCPs), with the goal of
developing an&lt;br/&gt;extensive theory, designing and analyzing efficient
algorithms, and&lt;br/&gt;applying the results to problems in engineering of
practical&lt;br/&gt;importance. The two problem classes of DAIs and DCPs
represent a&lt;br/&gt;significant extension of an ordinary differential equation
(ODE) and a&lt;br/&gt;differential algebraic equation (DAE). The proposed study
necessitates&lt;br/&gt;the use of state of the art mathematical programming
methods in&lt;br/&gt;conjunction with ODE and DAE methods to deal effectively
with the&lt;br/&gt;inequalities and complementarity conditions in a DAI/DCP. The
latter&lt;br/&gt;are novel features that are absent in ODEs or DAEs. Since the
main&lt;br/&gt;methods for solving DCPs and DAIs in realistic situations
are&lt;br/&gt;numerical, the research will emphasize the interactions
among&lt;br/&gt;formulation, computation, and mathematical issues such as
convergence&lt;br/&gt;and approximation including numerical approximation and
sensitivity to&lt;br/&gt;parametric perturbations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DAIs and
DCPs provide a powerful mathematical framework for the&lt;br/&gt;comprehensive
treatment of a host of important complex system&lt;br/&gt;applications that have
so far received only minimal attention from&lt;br/&gt;applied and computational
mathematicians. The project will open a new&lt;br/&gt;chapter in applied
mathematics in which classical differential&lt;br/&gt;equation theory is merged
with contemporary mathematical programming&lt;br/&gt;methods. The deliverables
of the project will a set of broadly&lt;br/&gt;applicable mathematical and
computational tools that will have a&lt;br/&gt;direct impact in several distinct
engineering disciplines including:&lt;br/&gt;constrained mechanical systems with
frictional contact arising in&lt;br/&gt;robotics and manufacturing, conditional
modeling in chemical and&lt;br/&gt;hydraulic processes, and hybrid systems with
variable-structure&lt;br/&gt;control encountered in avionics, intelligent
highway systems, and&lt;br/&gt;automotive systems.&lt;br/&gt;