* 0139089
* "GK-12" Project SCORE: NSF Graduate Teaching Fellows/Teacher Partnership for Science Curriculum Enhancement in the Fort Worth Independent School District
* EDU,DGE
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Victoria Rudick, University of North Texas Health Science Center at Fort Worth
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 04/30/2006
* USD 1,507,162.00

&lt;br/&gt;This GK-12 project is a collaboration between the Fort Worth
Independent School District and the University of North Texas Health Science
Center (UNTHSC). The project will train and support biomedical science graduate
students as resources for the district's high school biology students and
teachers. The four participating schools serve predominantly minority students
and the overall goal is to encourage entry of these students into science
careers. The primary objectives of the project are to: 1) increase understanding
of science and science processes in the Fort Worth educational system and 2)
train biomedical science graduate students to function as resources for 9th and
10th grade biology classes. These goals will be met by: 1) adding to the science
content of the District curriculum; 2) promoting understanding of science
through age-appropriate inquiry-based experiences; 3) exposing students to
science and science-related health and medical research careers relevant to
specific topics in the districts' biology curriculum; 4) developing a science
web-directory and promoting the use of the internet based materials relevant to
the curriculum; 5) creating research teams of UNTHSC faculty mentors, teachers
and fellows to work with the school districts on science fair and research
projects; (6) enhancing teaching mentoring and communication skills of Fellows;
7) conducting training and professional teacher development workshops in
learning, pedagogy, biotechnology and new scientific discoveries; and 8)
strengthening existing partnerships of outreach and enrichment programs among
UNTHSC faculty, Fellows and Fort Worth Teachers.&lt;br/&gt;