* 0139061
* REU Site: Undergraduate Summer Research in Biology
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Stephen Munroe, Marquette University
* Continuing grant
* Sally E. O'Connor
* 04/30/2005
* USD 200,550.00

During the summers of 2002-2004 the Department of Biology at Marquette
University will sponsor a ten-week NSF-REU site program. Twelve undergraduate
students, who have completed their sophomore or junior year, will be selected to
work with individual faculty in the areas of microbiology, molecular and
cellular biology, developmental biology, neurobiology and vertebrate physiology.
The program is designed to provide a hands-on research experience that will
enhance the students' appreciation of experimental science and increase their
ability to work independently in a research environment. This program is also
intended to encourage students to pursue careers in science and research and to
foster the participation of women, members of underrepresented minority groups
and persons with disabilities. Each participant will help design and carry out a
research project during the summer and, at the end of the program, prepare a
report and present research findings at an undergraduate research symposium. In
addition to their research activities, students will participate in a variety of
program-sponsored activities including a journal club, seminars by visiting
speakers and workshops on contemporary ethical issues in biology and medicine.
The program will thus provide its participants with a unique experience that
will enhance their insight into the scientific process, facilitate their career
decisions and, ultimately, positively impact their contributions to science and
society. Further information on the program and application procedures is
available at the department website (http://mendel.biol.mu.edu) or by contacting
the Program Director, Dr. Stephen H. Munroe (telephone 414-288-1485; e-mail
stephen.munroe@marquette.edu).