* 0139748
* Questions Concerning Parabolic Measure, Uniform Rectifiability and the Kato Square Root Problem
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,08/31/2005
* John Lewis, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 08/31/2005
* USD 146,312.00

March 6, 2002&lt;br/&gt;PI: John L. Lewis&lt;br/&gt;DMS-
0139748&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this
project is to investigate further some problems originating from my work on (a)
caloric measure in parabolic flat domains, (b) inverse problems and (c) Kato
type problems. &lt;br/&gt;Under (a) I would like to know to what extent such
concepts as uniform rectifiability, Reifenberg flatness, and asymptotic optimal
doubling which have been extensively studied in regard to Laplace's equation,
can be generalized to the heat equation. As regards (b), I would like to
investigate whether very weak overdetermined boundary conditions for solutions
to certain &lt;br/&gt;p-Laplacian type equations in a domain D imply that the
boundary of D satisfies a regularity condition similar to uniform
rectifiability. Finally under (c) I would like to know if an extrapolation
technique, used by the author and co-authors on some parabolic measure and Kato
problems, could be applied to other Kato type problems. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Many physical problems can be described in the language of partial
differential equations (PDE's). Well known examples of such equations arising in
the 19 th century are Laplace's equation, the heat equation, the wave equation,
Maxwell's equations, and the Navier- Stokes' equation. Without question
knowledge derived from a theoretical study of these equations led to many
fundamental technological advances during the 19 th and 20 th centuries. Three
questions often asked by those who study PDE's are (a) does there exist a
solution, (b) is it unique and (c) does it possess nice properties or is it
regular? As concerns (a) and (b) one is often concerned with so called boundary
values or boundary conditions for a solution in its domain of existence. So
called overdetermined boundary value problems have no solution whereas such
classical problems as the Dirichlet and Neumann problems have solutions if the
boundary of the given domain and the boundary conditions are sufficiently nice
(smooth). My work is concerned with how much one can relax these assumptions and
still get meaningful theorems. For example, my co-authors and I have obtained
nearly optimal results, which show that certain boundary value problems for
Laplace's equation can only be solved if the given domain is a ball. As another
example of my work, classical theorems for the Laplacian in smooth domains have
been shown to hold in a class of rough domains called Lipschitz or sawtooth
domains. More recent work has generalized these results to nongraph domains
satisfying `uniform rectifiability' assumptions. My co-authors and I have
obtained the analogue of Lipschitz and uniformly rectifiable domains for the
heat equation. Our work provides a model for certain free boundary problems such
as ice melting (the Stefan problem).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;