* 0139876
* Kinetics and Mechanisms of Rapid Reactions in Solution
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2006
* Dale Margerum, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph L. Templeton
* 02/28/2006
* USD 524,000.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
supports research by Professor Dale Margerum at Purdue University to study the
rapid kinetics and reaction mechanisms of both nonmetal and metal containing
oxidants. Mechanistic studies of the reactions of chlorine dioxide with
hydroxide, oxone, metal reagents, nitrite ion and oxybromine species will be
done. This research has recently discovered that nucleophiles can assist a
thermodynamically unfavored electron transfer from chlorite to bromine dioxide
to yield a chlorine dioxide complex that oxidizes hydroxide. The reactions of
Br(III) and Br(IV) will also be studied because of their possible environmental
importance as intermediates when bromide in drinking water is converted to
bromate ion in disinfection treatments. Highly reactive Cu(III) and Ni(III)
peptide complexes will also be studied. Peptide complexes of these metal ions
form as reactive intermediates in some methods for site-specific DNA cleavage.

These studies encompass a broad and fundamental area of inorganic solution
chemistry and include many reactions of vital concern to environmental
chemistry. The research involving chlorine dioxide is particularly relevant as
this oxidant has recently been used to fumigate buildings contaminated with
anthrax.