* 0139195
* REU Site-Summer Undergraduate Research Focus Anthropogenic Impacts on the Environment
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2005
* Suzzette Chopin, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2005
* USD 220,862.00

The major objective of the ten week Summer Undergraduate Research Focus
(SURF)-Anthropogenic Impacts on the Environment program is to provide research
experiences and education for ten undergraduate students, particularly female
and minority students. Recruitment efforts focus on students who are not likely
to have research opportunities at their home institutions, for example students
at community colleges.&lt;br/&gt;The common focus of the research activities is
an investigation of the effects of human activities on the environment,
particularly the coastal environment. Research projects will be mentored by
faculty members of the Department of Physical &amp; Life Science Department at
Texas A&amp;M University-Corpus Christi. The research opportunities reflect the
interdisciplinary nature of this department. Hands-on laboratory and field
experiences will be provided by faculty members representing the disciplines of
biology, chemistry, environmental science, geosciences, and mariculture. The
goals of the program are to improve the critical thinking ability and
communication skills of the students, and to prepare them for a professional
career in the sciences. The intended impact is to provide hands-on science
experiences to foster life-long science learning and to increase the number of
minority students pursuing advanced degrees in science.&lt;br/&gt;Following an
initial one-week orientation, the standard weekly schedule includes four days of
laboratory/field research, a half day excursion and another half day of group
meetings. The group meetings include a debriefing session to assess and address
student progress, problems and concerns; a journal club; professional skills
activities; and an ethics in science component.&lt;br/&gt;SURF will conclude
with a symposium in which the students deliver oral or poster presentations of
their research. In addition to the ten-week summer program, students are funded
to present their research at one regional or national conference during the
regular academic year.&lt;br/&gt;