* 0139035
* REU Site:  A Collaborative Student-Faculty Research Program in the Biological Sciences at Hope College
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Thomas Bultman, Hope College
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 05/31/2007
* USD 323,350.00

The Department of Biology at Hope College will utilize a grant from the NSF-REU
program to provide research appointments for 48 undergraduate students (12 per
summer for 4 years). Half of the students will come from Hope College and half
will come from other colleges and universities throughout the U.S. We will make
special efforts, including a formal preferred acceptance program with Howard
University, to recruit and appoint both women and members of minority groups
underrepresented in science. To broaden the understanding by future teachers of
the conduct of science, 2 student participants each year will have a career goal
of teaching high school biology. Students will participate in research at all
levels of biology, from characterizing a new receptor gene for vasopressin to
studying the ecology of frugivory in a tropical cloud forest. One to 3 students
will be involved in internationally-based projects each year. Interactions among
students and faculty will provide each participant with knowledge about a wide
range of biological problems and ways in which those problems are addressed. In
addition to the research itself, participants will take part in weekly meetings
aimed at improving oral and written communication skills, exploring ethical
issues in biology, and learning about graduate school and career opportunities
in biology. Students will communicate results of their research in formal talks
(at Hope and at professional meetings), in a poster symposium and in a
scientific paper. The Hope program will impact the student participants'
understanding of science, the sciences, as students present their results to the
scientific community, and society as students move on to graduate schools and a
variety of careers.