* 0139801
* Calderon-Zygmund Operators on Sobolev-Besov Spaces and Boundary Problems with Minimal Smoothness Assumptions
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Marius Mitrea, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2005
* USD 59,999.00

Following A.P. Calderon's program (sketched in his Helsinki ICM
&lt;br/&gt;address in 1978), many basic boundary value problems in physics
&lt;br/&gt;and engineering can be attacked by starting with a representation
&lt;br/&gt;of the solution in the form of a potential operator, and then
&lt;br/&gt;reducing matters to analyzing the functional analytic
properties&lt;br/&gt;of a system of pseudodifferential operators on the
boundary.&lt;br/&gt;The new phenomenon, occurring when non-smooth structures
are&lt;br/&gt;present, is that these boundary operators belong to a
larger&lt;br/&gt;class, consisting of singular integral operators. The lack
of&lt;br/&gt;a symbolic calculus in this context makes the study of
such&lt;br/&gt;operators fundamentally harder, particularly when one has
to&lt;br/&gt;address such delicate issues like Fredholmness and
invertibility.&lt;br/&gt;While in the intervening years these ideas have
undergone a&lt;br/&gt;dramatic development, much remains to be done.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of the current proposal is to investigate
the&lt;br/&gt;specific nature of the singular integral operators arising
in&lt;br/&gt;connection with basic problems in mathematical physics, such
as&lt;br/&gt;Maxwell's equations, vector Poisson problems,
Hodge&lt;br/&gt;decompositions, and Stokes's system of hydrodynamics, in
light&lt;br/&gt;of recent advances in the fields of harmonic analysis
and&lt;br/&gt;partial differential equations. For maximum applicability,
it&lt;br/&gt;is important to consider these problems in the context
of&lt;br/&gt;general Sobolev-Besov spaces and when the underlying
&lt;br/&gt;structures are minimally smooth.