* 0139564
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Distributed Rational Agents
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Behrooz Shirazi, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 03/31/2006
* USD 191,111.00

EIA-0139564&lt;br/&gt;Shirazi, Behrooz&lt;br/&gt;University of Texas at
Arlington&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;REU: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in
Distributed Rational Agents&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
University of Texas at Arlington (UTA) is one of the leading research-oriented
institutions of higher education in Texas. The purpose of this proposal is to
sustain a highly successful NSF REU site program in UTAs Computer Science and
Engineering Department. Through this program, we intend to continue to provide
opportunities for highly talented and qualified upper division women, minority,
and disabled undergraduate students to participate in research programs in the
field of distributed rational agents. The goal here is to augment the students'
educational experience and to attract qualified undergraduates to graduate
studies in computer science and engineering. The student participants will be
recruited nationally, but due to the geographical location of UTA, one of our
goals is to emphasize recruitment of students from women and minority
institutions as well as institutions lacking research facilities in the
southwest region. In the course of previous and current REU site projects we
have already established contacts to a number of these schools and we intend to
utilize these contacts in order to optimize our recruitment
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;