* 0139439
* SGER: Stable Isotopic Determination of Microbial Carbon Sources In Streams
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Susan Ziegler, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Robert Kelman Wieder
* 05/31/2004
* USD 87,740.00

The main objective of the proposed research is to develop and test the use of
the stable carbon isotope composition of bacterial phospholipid fatty acids
(PLFA) for the investigation of microbial carbon sources in streams. The
question of how well the isotopic composition of organic matter sources in
streams can be resolved over different spatial and temporal scales remains
unanswered. Additionally, the stable carbon isotope composition of bacterial
PLFA is a new method that has yet to be related to dissolved organic matter
(DOM), a more challenging task due to the heterogeneous composition of compounds
of varying isotopic composition that form DOM. The proposed research will
establish the use of the proposed approach for investigating biogeochemical
processes of stream ecosystems. The specific objectives of the proposed research
will be to determine: (1) the relationship between the stable carbon isotope
composition of bacterial PLFA and DOM, (2) the separation in the stable carbon
isotope composition of allochthonous versus autochthonous materials across
spatial and temporal scales within streams, and (3) how the stable carbon
isotope composition of organic matter and bacterial PLFA are related in streams.
The objectives of the study will be accomplished through both laboratory and
field investigations of the isotopic composition of DOM, bacterial PLFA and
organic matter sources in two stream ecosystems with contrasting watersheds. The
relationship between the stable carbon isotope composition of DOM and the PLFA
of both free and attached bacteria will be determined in experiments of natural
assemblages of stream bacteria in both enrichment cultures and glass bead
bioreactors grown on different sources of stream DOM. These experiments will
represent the first studies to investigate the isotopic composition of
individual fatty acids of natural assemblages of bacteria in relation to DOM.
The ability to determine the source of carbon fueling bacterial activity would
advance understanding of the biogeochemical cycling of DOM in the aquatic
environment, and the linkage between DOM composition and microbial food web
dynamics.