* 0139306
* Impact of World Trade Center Disaster on Critical Infrastructure Interdependence
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2003
* Joe Chow, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Heller
* 09/30/2003
* USD 70,000.00

Impact of the World Trace Center Disaster on Critical Infrastructure
Interdependence&lt;br/&gt;This exploratory research focuses on time sensitive
data and field research related to the devastating impacts of the terrorist
attacks on the World Trade Center (WTC) in New York City, NY on September 11,
2001. The objective of this research is to increase our knowledge base of and
model the interdependencies of critical infrastructure systems with the aim of
understanding their vulnerabilities to disasters of this type and scale. A
systems approach will be used to represent 1) designed or intended
infrastructure interdependencies; 2) the impacts of the attack overall and
during emergency response; and the effects and needs related to
interdependencies during recovery operations. Much of the information will only
be available in the early phases of response. &lt;br/&gt;Infrastructure
interdependencies have been identified by Presidential Decision Directive 63 as
a part of the Critical Infrastructure Protection initiative. Understanding
interdependencies is key to efficient funds allocation for design, construction,
operations, maintenance, operations and security of our nation's infrastructure.
Interdependencies imply the potential for cost-efficiencies through redundancy
reductions as well as disastrous vulnerabilities through cascading losses of
lifelines and lives. This results of this research will be used to identify
opportunities for reducing vulnerabilities, developing countermeasures to
mitigate the impacts of disruptions, and guide actions for response and
recovery. &lt;br/&gt;