* 0139175
* US--Ghana  Summer Undergraduate Research Experience for US Students at the University of Cape Coast:  Bio Diversity in the Tropics
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2004
* Daniel Wubah, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 04/30/2004
* USD 74,500.00

0139175&lt;br/&gt;Wubah&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This two-year grant supports the
participation of eight undergraduate students (four per year) in a summer
research program in Ghana. The students will be supervised by Dr. Daniel Wubah,
Associate Dean of the College of Science and Mathematics at James Madison
University, and Dr. Kobina Yankson, Dean of the Faculty of Science, and other
faculty members at the University of Cape Coast (UCC). Students will also be
assigned peer mentors, who will be senior level UCC students engaged in research
projects in the faculty mentor's laboratory. The students' projects will
emphasize the importance of biodiversity to the health of ecosystems, and the
human and environmental factors that impact biodiversity. Site visits will be
made to nature preserves and national parks to examine the characteristics and
components of biologically diverse habitats. The undergraduate students will
participate in group meetings, research seminars, field trips, and technical
workshops, and they will also take part in activities that will increase their
knowledge about Ghanaian culture. At the end of the six-weeks the students will
present their work in both oral and poster formats at an end-of-program
symposium. Upon their return to the United States, the students will also
present the results of their work at campus, regional, and national meetings.
These research projects are expected to increase the students' understanding of
the ecology and biodiversity in a tropical region of West Africa, improve their
skills in critical thinking and problem solving, and broaden their understanding
of how science is conducted in a developing country. The project will also
provide the students opportunities to develop collaborative linkages with the
Ghanaian faculty and students. It is anticipated that the results of this
program will increase their competitiveness for graduate and professional
studies within the life sciences. This grant also promotes a collaborative
linkage between a predominantly undergraduate institution in the United States,
James Madison University, and a Sub-Saharan Africa university, University of
Cape Coast, that is actively engaged in research in the biological
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;