* 0139048
* REU Site: Undergraduate Institute in Physics - Research Experiences for Undergraduates
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2005
* Claudia Rankins, Hampton University
* Continuing Grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 02/28/2005
* USD 151,896.00

The Undergraduate Institute in Physics-Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(UnIPhy-REU) at Hampton University is an eight-week residential summer research
program for undergraduate students. The program offers research opportunities to
eight physics, science, or engineering students in the areas of nuclear,
particle, medical, and optical physics. Research sites are the Thomas Jefferson
National Accelerator Facility in Newport News, the Nuclear High Energy Physics
Center, the Nonlinear Optical Nanomaterials Laboratory, the Center for the Study
of the Origin and Structure of Matter, the Center for Particle Physics, the
Center for Advanced Medical Instrumentation, and the Research Center for Optical
Physics at Hampton University. UnIPhy-REU provides a strong REU site for
students from groups under-represented in physics. Students conduct research
under the guidance of a mentor; they are in daily contact with the mentor,
researchers, and graduate students. Additionally, students attend seminars, go
to twice-weekly lectures given by mentors and faculty, and participate in social
activities. Some of these activities are conducted jointly with the REU group
from the College of William &amp; Mary. At the conclusion of the program,
students give a thirty-minute oral presentation and submit a written research
report. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;