* 0139913
* Charge Structure of the Neutron
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2006
* Richard Madey, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 04/30/2006
* USD 222,000.00

This research addresses a fundamental question regarding the nature of the
charge structure of the neutron --- one of the basic building blocks of matter:
What is the spatial distribution of the constituent quarks within the neutron,
which has a net zero charge? This question was addressed in Jefferson Laboratory
Experiment 93-038 by scattering longitudinally polarized electrons
quasielastically from a neutron in deuterium. Deuterium consists of a neutron
and a proton bound loosely together; it represents the best neutron target
available. In a collision with the neutron, the electron transfers polarization
to the neutron. Both components of the neutron polarization vector lie in the
scattering plane: The transverse (or sideways) component is normal to the
momentum of the neutron, and the longitudinal component is parallel (or
antiparallel) to the neutron momentum. By measuring both the sideways and the
longitudinal polarizations, it is possible to extract a quantity called the
neutron electric form factor, which is designated by the letters GEN.
Measurements of GEN as a function of momentum transfer are related to the
spatial distribution of charge within the neutron. The uncertainty in our
knowledge of the interior charge density of the neutron becomes smaller as
measurements of GEN are extended to higher momentum transfer. Knowledge of GEN
is essential to understanding the structure of matter. GEN is a fundamental
quantity needed to challenge models of nucleon structure, to make detailed
microscopic calculations of electric structure functions, and to interpret the
results of parity-violating experiments. The current research involves carrying
out and completing a detailed analysis of the data obtained from E93-038,
preparing the results for publication, and preparing and carrying out a new
experiment to extract GEN at still higher momentum transfers.

