* 0139908
* SGER:  A Post-Crisis Analysis of the Attitudes and Value Orientations of the Islamic Publics in Egypt, Iran and Morocco
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Mansoor Moaddel, Eastern Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 09/30/2005
* USD 94,995.00

SES-0139908&lt;br/&gt;PI: Mansoor Moaddel&lt;br/&gt;Eastern Michigan
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator currently has NSF funding
(SES-0097282) to complete surveys of the worldviews of nationally representative
samples of 1,0000 citizens in Egypt, Iran, and Jordan using face-to-face
interviews. The objective of the study is to (1) analyze the value orientation
of the publics; (2) understand the connection between social groups and value
structure; (3) assess the relationship between secularization, rational-legal
authority and liberal urgency; and (4) examine the degree of
similarity/dissimilarity of the values in the three countries. Funds requested
by this Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) would be used to gather data
on concerns and attitudes of people in Egypt, Iran, and Morocco after the
September 11th terrorist acts. A survey presently in the field in Jordan will
capture the same information from citizens in Jordan. The rationale informing
this request is that the current events have introduced a significant contextual
factor (i.e., socio-political crisis) that potentially will impact the
determinants of the publics attitudes and value orientations in Islamic
countries. Pre-and post terrorist events will allow the investigator to capture
and examine such changes, (e.g., whether and how the September 11th events
affects values and beliefs of citizens in the Middle East, and shed light how
sociopolitical crises may affect attitudes and concerns more
generally).&lt;br/&gt;