* 0139261
* FRG:   Collaborative Research:   Focused Research on Wavelets, Frames, and Operator Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Christopher Heil, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2006
* USD 180,306.00

Fundamental problems are addressed in wavelet theory, non-uniform sampling,
frames, and the theory of spectral-tile duality. These problems are inextricably
interwoven by concept and technique. Operator theory provides the major unifying
framework, combined with an integration of ideas from a diverse spectrum of
mathematics including classical Fourier analysis, noncommutative harmonic
analysis, representation theory, operator algebras, approximation theory, and
signal processing. For example, the construction, implementation, and ensuing
theory of single dyadic orthonormal wavelets in Euclidean space requires
significant input from all of these disciplines as well as deep spectral-tile
results.

There is intrinsic mathematical importance in the aforementioned problems, and
the solutions to be formulated have broad and creative implications, both for
mathematics and for applications in engineering and physics. The topics of this
project have direct bearing on fast acquisition and motion problems in MRI, as
well as in formulating algorithms for compression and noise reduction by means
of proper cochlear modelling. There are further applications in quantum
computing and image processing, and the development of non-uniform sampling
strategies by this project play a role in state of the art A/D conversion
methods used in multifunction RF systems. These interdisciplinary applications
depending on modern mathematical analysis have educational implications in terms
of cross-fertilization of ideas and research opportunities for graduate
students.