* 0139495
* Harvard Forest REU Research Program in Forest Ecology
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2005
* David Foster, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2005
* USD 237,918.00

The Harvard Forest is a center for NSF-Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) and
related studies involving more than 75 researchers from Harvard University and
other institutions. Since 1993 Harvard Forest has provided a diverse and
talented group of undergraduate students with training in independent research
and guidance to graduate study and professional development through a Summer
Research Program in Ecology. This program, which is dedicated to promoting
career development in ecological sciences, includes between 13-18 students each
summer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research theme of the Harvard Forest REU
program addresses the relative importance of environmental change, natural
disturbance, and human activity in controlling current and prospective
ecological patterns and process in the northeastern U.S. Studies are diverse and
mentors are lead scientists and educators in areas ranging from atmospheric
chemistry and ecosystem studies to wildlife biology, population ecology,
ecophysiology, paleoecology, and conservation biology. Mentors in the program
include researchers with Marine Biological Labs-Ecosystem Center, Woods Hole
Research Center, University of New Hampshire, University of Massachusetts, Holy
Cross College, and three academic departments at Harvard University (Organismic
and Evolutionary Biology, Earth and Planetary Sciences, and Harvard
Forest).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To provide the most productive student experience
the program utilizes an effective protocol comprising: selection of diverse and
productive students; advanced preparation; individual mentorship within research
groups of faculty, graduate students, post-doctoral associates and
undergraduates; weekly seminars and discussion groups on science, careers,
graduate studies, and ethics in science; field trips to other research sites and
institutions; recreational opportunities; an annual student symposium and
published proceedings; program evaluation and discussion; and follow-up of
publications and presentation, theses and careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU
program at the Harvard Forest uses exceptionally well-equipped field,
laboratory, analytical, and housing facilities. Each student is closely
supervised in independent studies by a mentor and the program is overseen by a
coordinator working closely with the Harvard Forest Director, Administrator,
Museum Coordinator, and Data Manager. Participants are recruited nationally with
a strong emphasis on geographic coverage, small colleges and participation of
women, minorities, and students with disabilities. The program runs 12 weeks
during the summer although many students continue with research projects beyond
this period. Detailed information on past and proposed REU research projects and
the Summer Research Symposium, which includes past REU student research results,
is available at www.lternet.edu/hfr.&lt;br/&gt;