* 0139660
* REU Site:  Undergraduate Research Experiences in Coastal and Nearshore Marine Systems of the Northeastern Gulf of Mexico
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2006
* Kenneth Heck, Marine Environmental Sciences Consortium
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 02/28/2006
* USD 148,680.00

This award provides renewed funding for a Research Experience for Undergraduates
(REU) site that will provide a Fall semester (twelve weeks) research experience
in oceanography for a total of seven students. The REU site is located at the
Dauphin Island Sea Laboratory (DISL), a permanent field station located in the
Gulf of Mexico about four miles off the coast of Alabama. The DISL provides
courses and research facilities for students and faculty from twenty-two
colleges and universities in Alabama. Participants in the REU program will be
recruited nationally and matched with a faculty mentor. Under the guidance of
the faculty mentors, the students will design, implement, analyze and report on
independent laboratory and field research. Research areas include aspects of the
ecology and early life history stages of marine fishes and invertebrates; coral
reef ecology; evolution of benthic communities; the ecology of seagrass
ecosystems; marine conservation biology; the role of microorganisms in
transforming organic and inorganic compounds in marine systems; and
phytoplankton and zooplankton ecology. In addition, the program holds seminars
on career opportunities and scientific ethics. In the past, the program has
successfully attracted disabled and minority participants typically under-
represented in the marine sciences. Cost-sharing will be provided by the DISL.