* 0139373
* Reconstructing Rivers: Fluvial Environments of Cretaceous Strata in Dinosaur National Monument, an REU Site
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2003
* Julie Maxson, Gustavus Adolphus College
* Standard Grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 04/30/2003
* USD 65,871.00

This project will provide students with an exceptional opportunity to contribute
to a timely, important research problem in sedimentary geology. Eight
undergraduate students, along with two student Teaching assistants and the PI,
will conduct field and laboratory research to determine the sedimentary history
of fossil-bearing Lower Cretaceious strata in Dinosaur National Monument, Utah
and Colorado. Recent discovery of a new bone bed within Dinosaur National
Mounument (DNM) has led paleontologists to recognize that large sauropods,
previously thought to be restricted to Eurasia in mid-Cretaceious time, were
still extant in North America. Sedimentologic analysis, especially facies
interpretation to characterize ancient dinosaur habitats, is relatively
undeveloped in the Cretaceous strata that contain the newly discovered sauropod
skeletons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will progressively develop
students' research skills toward understanding and interpreting the
sedimentology of the Cretaceious Cedar Mountain formation. The project combines
field work in fluvial sedimentology with analog modeling of fluvial processes.
The results of this project will be highly significant to North American
paleontologists, and will thus provide student participants with an immediate
sense of the relevance of their research. Throughout the program, the PI and
visiting scientists will develop students' thinking about conducting research
based on observation and interpretation, and the development of actualistic
facies models.