* 0139190
* REU Site: Research Experiences in Marine Molecular Physiology
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2005
* James Claiborne, Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2005
* USD 216,000.00

The National Science Foundation's Research Experience for Undergraduates site at
the Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory (Salisbury Cove, Maine) provides
ten eight-week fellowships for undergraduate students majoring in biology or its
allied fields of study. Students prioritize three mentors/projects from a list
of 30 senior scientists exploring timely questions involving marine molecular
physiology and functional genomics. Using sharks, skates, flounder, sculpin and
other sea fauna including invertebrates, students work at the laboratory bench
to explore questions at the molecular level concerning reproduction,
osmoregulation, acid base balance, ion transport and environmental toxicology.
Students are trained in advanced techniques such as confocal microscopy and gene
expression. To supplement bench work, undergraduates attend three weekly
laboratory-wide science seminars on topics related to marine molecular
physiology (Monday Morning Membrane Transport Seminar, Wednesday Evening
Seminar, and Friday 'Brown Bag' Short Lecture Seminar) and participate in an
ethics course, 'Responsible Conduct in Laboratory Research' taught by their
mentors. Students are invited to attend a variety of MDIBL scientific
conferences in which internationally renown researchers present their work.
Selected undergraduates present their research at an end-of-the-season event,
'Future Scientists Night' sponsored by MDIBL and the Jackson Laboratory.
Finally, students write a research paper for possible publication in The
Bulletin of the Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory
(http://www.mdibl.org/parent-frames/publications/).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MDIBL's REU Fellowships are all-inclusive. Room, board,
supplies, travel and a stipend are provided. Undergraduates are housed on campus
in one of two residence halls adjacent to the Laboratory volleyball court. Three
meals a day are provided in the MDIBL CO OP. On weekends, undergraduates cook
their own meals, with 'raw materials' provided in the dining hall. Activities
outside the Laboratory include unlimited recreation in nearby Acadia National
Park and small towns on Mount Desert Island. The dormitories, the community
dining hall, dedicated mentors, energetic students, the Laboratory's natural
setting and ambiance coalesce to a truly unique and productive scientific
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student recruitment point of contact: Michael
McKernan (Director of Education), tel. 207 288-3605, mmckernan@mdibl.org. For
site and application information see web page at http://www.mdibl.org
&lt;br/&gt;