* 0139813
* Polylogarithms and Motivic Cohomology
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,09/30/2003
* Jianqiang Zhao, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 09/30/2003
* USD 57,379.00

There are two main approches to motivic (co-)homology appearing in recent years.
First, one tries to construct it as cohomology groups of certain complexes with
terms being given by explicit generators and relations generalizing Milnor's
K-groups. Second, one can construct cohomology of a scheme as cohomology of a
complex defined in terms of algebraic cycles thus generalizing the classical
defintion of Chow groups. Each has its own advantages and disadvantages. Dr.
Jianqiang Zhao's research will continue his work on understanding both
approaches by using polylogarithms and their generalizations. Polylogarithms
have been around for centuries in one form or another, but only recently has
their whole theory become available. They have deep connections with both number
theory and modern mathematical physics. This project should shed light on these
connections.

This research is in the field of arithmetic algebraic geometry, a subject that
combines the techniques of algebraic geometry and number theory. In its original
formulation, algebraic geometry treated figures that could be defined in the
plane by the simplest equations, namely polynomials. Number theory is the study
of numbers that can be expressed in terms of whole numbers, 1, 2, 3... In the
second half of last century these two seemingly far apart subjects have produced
tremendous impact on each other. The field of arithmetic algebraic geometry now
uses techniques from all of modern mathematics.

