* 0139079
* Research Experience for Undergraduates:  The Los Alamos Summer School REU Site
* MPS,PHY
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2006
* Howard Bryant, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 01/31/2006
* USD 204,586.00

The Los Alamos Summer School is a ten-week summer program for undergraduate
physics students held in Los Alamos, New Mexico under the auspices of the
University of New Mexico (UNM) and Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL). The
School's principal aims are to expose the students to frontier research in
physics and to provide training and encouragement to them in their pursuit of
careers in physics and related areas. About 20 participants are selected from a
pool of applicants based on their responses to a web-based application form,
their college transcripts, and two letters of recommendation. Of these,
approximately 10 students are supported by NSF and 10 by DoE/LANL. A stipend is
given to each student to cover cost of living, transportation, and tuition for a
special UNM graduate course, basically the student's project, with credit of 3
semester hours, into which the student is automatically enrolled. The students
are given lectures by experts from UNM and LANL as well as by distinguished
visitors, on topics in frontier areas of physics and applied physics including
biophysics and quantum computing. They also participate in weeklong symposia on
such subjects as astrophysics and supercomputing. Most of the students' time is
spent on individual research projects with mentors from the senior scientific
staffs of LANL and UNM, working on topics of mutual interest. Final reports by
the students on their summer research projects are published by LANL in a LA-UR
report. Attention is paid to making the experience as enjoyable as possible, and
the students share a number of extracurricular activities.&lt;br/&gt;