* 0139866
* High Risk Exploratory Research: Hunter-Gatherers of the Southern French Alps
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2003
* Michael Jochim, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2003
* USD 14,868.00

An archaeological survey in the southern French Alps will be carried out as the
first, pilot phase in long-term, comparative research. The survey will focus on
the late Palaeolithic and Mesolithic periods of the Stone Age, ca. 13,000 -
6,000 BC, and will seek to understand: 1) how areas at higher elevations were
colonized after the end of the last ice age and how they were integrated with
the coast and lowlands, 2) how the Alpine ecology affected cultural adaptations
and their change through time, 3) how this area's economies differed from those
of the quite different environments of central Europe, where the investigator's
previous work has concentrated, and 4) what role the last hunter-gatherers in
this region played in the transition to agricultural societies. A variety of
different field techniques, including surface-walking of plowed fields, coring
of upland bogs, and test-trenching at the base of rockshelters will be used in
initial investigations of two promising areas: the upper valley of the Loup
River and the basin of the Lac d'Allos. Analysis of collections of stone
artifacts will give particular attention to stone raw materials and their
sources, the technology of stone tool manufacture, and the typology of stone
artifacts. These data will facilitate comparisons with better known regions,
such as the lower Rhone Valley to the west and Italian Liguria to the east, as
well as forming the basis for interpretations of patterns of movement and the
organization of technology. Other types of artifacts, such as bone and shell,
will allow preliminary inferences about site activities, movement, and exchange.

The "Neolithic Revolution", the transition from a hunting and gathering to a
settled village agricultural and pastoral lifestyle, constitutes a significant
change in human adaptation and set the stage for the rise of civilization. Thus
archaeologists wish to understand how it occurred and Dr. Jochim's exploratory
research, if successful, has the potential to shed additional light on this
process. Because student assistants are included in the fieldwork, the project
will also serve a valuable training function.