* 0139668
* REU Site:  Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Molecular Biosciences
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2004
* Peter Gegenheimer, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2004
* USD 129,974.00

The University of Kansas offers a 10-week summer program of Research Experiences
for Undergraduates in Molecular Biosciences. Complete details of the scientific
and social aspects of the Molecular Biosciences summer program including an on-
line application are available at http://rnaworld.bio.ku.edu/reu/
.&lt;br/&gt;Because independent research is pivotal in a student's commitment to
a career in biological research, we encourage applications from students at
colleges with limited research opportunities, and members of groups
traditionally underrepresented in this field. Our program has several
objectives: to attract students to careers in science by allowing them to
contribute meaningfully to on-going laboratory research of national importance;
to ensure that students who are already interested in research, or are just
starting, receive the encouragement they need to continue; and to facilitate
this by providing faculty mentoring as well as peer mentoring from
undergraduates already involved in research. Participants gain the direct
experience they need to make an informed career decision and, if they so choose,
to succeed in graduate school. University of Kansas undergraduates currently
engaged in research serve as peer mentors and role models for the summer
students, helping them to become more quickly acquainted with the University and
making them feel more at ease in their labs. &lt;br/&gt;Our research focuses on
several overlapping areas of biochemistry; molecular, cellular, and
developmental biology; microbiology; and neurobiology. Major strengths are in
the areas of protein structure and function, enzyme mechanisms and protein
engineering; proteins involved in cytoskeletal structure; the structure,
function and regulation of membrane proteins - receptors, ion channels and ion
transporters - and of their genes; and molecular analysis of signal transduction
and gene regulation in microbial metabolism, virus infection, learning and
memory, and eukaryotic developmental biology. Projects have been chosen so that
a student can logically build upon previous laboratory and course experience in
the natural sciences. During the course of the summer, students gradually gain
more independence and control over their research. &lt;br/&gt;Participants will
engage in a variety of enrichment activities. At weekly lunch meetings,
participants give 20-minute presentations describing their project - background,
plans, and current status. A second weekly series targets career development and
career choices in the area of molecular biosciences, including careers in
academic, industrial, or medical research, as well as the nature of science and
its professional ethics&lt;br/&gt;