* 0139613
* Fundamental Studies of the Origin of Support Effects in Supported Monolayer Vanadia Catalysts
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* John Vohs, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
*  John R Regalbuto
* 03/31/2006
* USD 286,361.00

Abstract

Proposal Title: Fundamental Studies of the Origin of Support Effects in
Supported Monolayer Vanadia Catalysts Proposal Number: CTS-0139613 Principal
Investigator: John Vohs Institution: University of Pennsylvania

The objective of this project is to provide a more detailed fundamental
understanding of support effects on monolayer vanadia catalysts. Specific goals
of the investigations of this system are to provide quantitative information on
the nature of the bonding at the vanadia-support interface. The methods by which
the identity of the support influences the strengths and redox properties of V-O
support bonds will be studied. Reactivity of the catalytic surface will be
characterized through a study of kinetic parameters for elementary surface
reactions involved in the selective oxidation of alcohols. The model catalytic
systems studied will consist of vapor deposited vanadia films supported on the
surfaces of metal oxide single crystals. Surface sensitive spectroscopic
techniques including high-resolution electron energy loss spectroscopy (HREELS),
x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), and temperature programmed desorption
(TPD), among others will be used to characterize the catalytic surface and the
chemical species on the surface. Supported metal oxides are used industrially
for a variety of chemical processes including selective oxidations and the
catalytic reduction of NOx, and this study may lead to improved methods for the
production of catalytic materials.