* 0139336
* The Virginia Center for Urban Education at Old Dominion University: Engineering Graduate Fellows and Master Teachers for Grades 4 - 5
* EDU,DGE
* 05/01/2002,07/31/2006
* John Adam, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 07/31/2006
* USD 1,408,361.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Old Dominion University (ODU) in collaboration with
Norfolk Public Schools, Portsmouth City Public Schools and the Virginia Space
Grant Consortium, seek to enhance existing resources for mathematics and science
teachers and provide opportunities for graduate students to work with teachers
from these two urban school districts. The program will allow ODU to place
graduate students from the College of Engineering into 4th and 5th grade
classrooms to support specially designated Master Teachers. The program will be
integrated through the ODU College of Education, Center for Urban Education,
Professional Development Schools (PDS) program which fosters joint inquiry into
research problems by reviewing and revising curricula: drawing on shared
expertise, co-teaching experiences; and through sharing insights with colleagues
&lt;br/&gt;in the educational community. Teaching Fellows and Master Teachers
will collaborate in this atmosphere through four professional development
seminars designed to address applied mathematics, problem-solving, gender equity
and inquiry based instruction in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) education. Hands on classroom activities, focused on inquiry
and teamwork, will incorporate the Lego Control Laboratory as the tool to
introduce elements of modern technology into the classroom. This project is
receiving partial support from the Directorate for Engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;