* 0139372
* Integrating Biotechnology and Ecology into Science Education in Rural Schools in Oregon
* EHR,DGE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Lynn Royce, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 06/30/2007
* USD 1,318,079.00

The goal of our Rural Science Ed. program is to offer rural schools in Oregon
the opportunity to provide advanced and innovative inquiry-based science
education to their students through a partnership with the academic community at
Oregon State University. In our program, trained NSF Fellows from Oregon State
University, in collaboration with Teacher Mentors from participating rural
schools, will develop inquiry-based science curricula that meet the needs of
middle and high school children in Oregon. The curricula will include simple and
innovative experiments that integrate advances in biotechnology and ecology to
encourage critical thinking about the impacts of agriculture on the environment,
and the implications of advanced scientific research on human lives.

Twelve NSF Fellows, 6 graduates and 6 undergraduates from Oregon State
University, will be selected from the disciplines of Entomology, Botany & Plant
Pathology, Horticulture, Crop & Soil Science and Science and Math Education. One
graduate and one undergraduate will work as an NSF Fellow Team in each
classroom. Each Fellow's program will consist of the following activities: on-
campus instruction in science and rural education provided by the Department of
Science & Math Education, provision of year long science education in
participating schools, involvement in outreach activities of Oregon State
University such as 4-H, Science & Math Investigative Learning Experiences, and
Museum Days, and year-end evaluation of the program.

Science teachers from participating schools will serve as Teacher Mentors for
NSF Fellows to facilitate development of experiments that complement existing
science curricula. Videos and web pages will be developed for experiments
conducted for future use by science teachers in Oregon. The program will be
evaluated using 'before' and 'after' quizzes in the classroom, and term and
year-end evaluations by K 12 students, Teacher Mentors and NSF Fellows.

K-12 student will benefit by hands-on experience in scientific research using
live material and exposure to current scientific ideas and advanced technology
to make them more competitive and better prepared for later schooling. The
partnership will better equip Teacher Mentors for providing advanced scientific
inquiry based science instruction in the future. Besides obtaining a stipend for
their programs, NSF Fellow will benefit by the hands-on teaching experience that
they will gain in the classroom. The program will enable Oregon Styate
University professionals to recruit high quality graduate students, provide
teaching experience to complement research experience that students can acquire
on campus, and form partnerships with Oregon schools for extending science
education.