* 0139926
* Focused Research Groups (FRG): The Dynamics of Growing Biogels
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2007
* James Keener, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2007
* USD 1,014,555.00

The importance of biogels in the function of biological&lt;br/&gt;systems is
increasingly recognized, yet little theoretical work&lt;br/&gt;has been done to
understand their behavior. Mathematics is&lt;br/&gt;well-suited to sorting out
the interplay among the many forces&lt;br/&gt;(mechanical, electrochemical, and
biochemical) that determine&lt;br/&gt;biogel structure and function. The
investigators use&lt;br/&gt;mathematical tools to explore four closely related
problems of&lt;br/&gt;biogel growth and dynamics, with an emphasis on pattern-
forming&lt;br/&gt;mechanisms and the relationship between pattern and
function.&lt;br/&gt;The four problems are biofilm and blood clot formation
and&lt;br/&gt;function, gastric protection of the stomach, and the behavior
of&lt;br/&gt;biogels in contact with a moving fluid. Models are developed
to&lt;br/&gt;understand how physical properties such as the
viscoelastic&lt;br/&gt;constitutive properties and the gel morphology are
determined and&lt;br/&gt;controlled, and how these properties affect the
biological&lt;br/&gt;function of the biogel. The investigators use analytical
and&lt;br/&gt;computational tools to examine gel growth and dynamics
on&lt;br/&gt;different scales using various models (continuum,
discrete,&lt;br/&gt;isotropic, anisotropic), while attempting to incorporate
what is&lt;br/&gt;known experimentally, and to expand the experimental
database&lt;br/&gt;about specific biogel systems.&lt;br/&gt; Biogels are
composites of water, filamentous protein&lt;br/&gt;networks, and other
chemicals, and are increasingly recognized as&lt;br/&gt;having profound
influence on the function of many biological&lt;br/&gt;systems. Important
biological settings in which these biogels&lt;br/&gt;play a major role include
blood clot formation,&lt;br/&gt;difficult-to-treat bacterial infections, and the
proper&lt;br/&gt;protective functioning of the stomach lining.
Improved&lt;br/&gt;understanding of how biogels are formed and how their
properties&lt;br/&gt;are regulated is critical to understanding these
important&lt;br/&gt;processes and how they can be manipulated to improve
human&lt;br/&gt;health. Because the formation and regulation of biogels
is&lt;br/&gt;governed by physical and chemical properties and because
these&lt;br/&gt;properties can be expressed mathematically, mathematical
tools&lt;br/&gt;can be brought to bear on these problems. Through
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;analysis and computational simulations of biogels, a
wealth of&lt;br/&gt;detailed data can be obtained that complements the
data&lt;br/&gt;obtainable from traditional laboratory experiments. Hence
the&lt;br/&gt;combination of mathematical and experimental
investigators&lt;br/&gt;brought together in this project is expected to lead to
important&lt;br/&gt;new insights about biogel behavior. The project
includes&lt;br/&gt;mathematicians, a bioengineer, and a biologist, and
provides&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary research and training opportunities
for&lt;br/&gt;students and postdocs.