* 0139324
* GK-12: Sensors!
* EHR,DGE
* 05/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Stephen Godsoe, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 06/30/2006
* USD 1,686,114.00

The University of Maine (UMaine) College of Engineering proposes to partner with
Bangor High School (BHS) to develop a model university/K-12 partnership based on
the disciplinary theme of sensors. The proposed model integrates education and
research for the benefit of BHS students and teachers, and graduate and advanced
undergraduate students, and faculty, within the College of Engineering at
UMaine. GK-12 Sensors! will involve faculty and students from the chemical,
biological, electrical, computer, mechanical, civil/environmental, and spatial
information engineering programs at the University of Maine. Five advanced
undergraduate and ten graduate students will serve as GK-12 Sensor Fellows.
Faculty members recognized for their teaching and research expertise in sensor-
related areas will represent each of the major Engineering programs at UMaine.
High school teachers and students will benefit from the integration of cutting-
edge, standards-based STEM content within a variety of classes and extramural
activities such as students competitions. Undergraduate and graduate students,
and faculty will gain an understanding of the challenges and opportunities of
K-12 education, while improving their communication and teaching skills.
Industry involvement is also a key component of the proposed program. A variety
of technologies, including ATM, as well as traditional media and presentations
will disseminate "best practices" from GK-12: Sensors! across Maine and the
nation. This project is receiving partial support from the Engineering
Directorate.