* 0139382
* Infrastructural Damage Assessment Using Land-Based Laser Swath Mapping Technology
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2003
* David Bloomquist, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 09/30/2003
* USD 65,500.00

The September 11, 2001 terrorist attack on the WTC and Pentagon has created an
infrastructual catastrophe. While the recovery effort is underway, engineers
from FEMA and ASCE's disaster response teams are concurrently inspecting
adjacent buildings for damage. The objective of this research is to conduct
post-disaster reconnaissance at the affected sites in order to recover ephemeral
data for detailed damage assessment.

This SGER award is to support a team from the University of Florida in using a
new land-based laser system to produce very high-resolution 3-D "maps" of both
interior and exterior areas of damaged buildings. This system, based on airborne
laser swath mapping technology, can quickly generate very valuable data,
especially on damage related to deformations and cracking. The reflection of
laser pulses (at 2 kHz) is used to obtain X, Y, Z coordinates and ultimately a
digital elevation model. This results in photographic-like images and spatial
coordinates with an absolute accuracy of 4-5 mm and a relative accuracy of 1-2
mm. The spacing of data points is user selectable and can be extremely small,
but for this research, it is anticipated that spacing of several cm for large
areas and several mm for smaller areas such as rooms would be used. The laser
system is integrated with digital photography to compliment building damage
analysis. For example, exposed beams and columns can be checked for plumbness
and deformations; exterior walls for lateral deformations, architectural damage
and cracking. Other methods of obtaining these data are very time consuming and
less accurate.

The purpose of the data collection is threefold. First, systematic collection of
damage data from structures damaged, but not destroyed, will aid in the
assessment of the structural integrity of these buildings. These data should
expedite damage appraisal and if warranted, their eventual repair. Second, the
data will serve as a valuable resource for future research related to
performance of structures subjected to terrorist attack, explosions, fires, etc.
It should help in the development of methods to minimize damage from such
occurrences; and may result in better designs of urban structures. Third, this
work will support the development of land based laser swath methods that have
tremendous applications in civil engineering and construction. The PIs are
leaders in the application of this technology to civil engineering related
issues.

