* 0139202
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates at the Rice Quantum Institute
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Bruce Johnson, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 03/31/2006
* USD 216,677.00

The REU program conducted by the Rice Quantum Institute brings together a number
of students from outside universities as well as from Rice University for a ten-
week interdisciplinary summer research program. The focus is to provide
undergraduate students, frequently from schools with more limited resources,
with a jump start into many aspects of research that cannot easily be learned in
classes. The students are exposed to different disciplines by contact with a
variety of research groups, organized lab tours, weekly seminars by Rice grad
students, and frequent scientific and social interactions with other REU
students. Each student also works on a project with a particular research group
from among the departments of Physics and Astronomy, Chemistry, Electrical and
Computer Engineering, Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science,
Bioengineering, Chemical Engineering, Computational and Applied Mathematics, and
Civil and Environmental Engineering. This involves an accelerated learning
period where students become familiar with a new field and depend on the
undergrads, grads, postdocs and faculty mentor of the group to show them the
relevant literature, lab expertise, instrument and computer skills, etc. This
leads into the major period of research where they are given the responsibility
for bringing the project to a successful completion. Participants are given an
opportunity to to present their work on the last day at the RQI Colloquium. This
annual event, which assembles a large audience made up of REU students, of
research groups and others from Rice, as well as interested outsiders from
neighboring schools and industries, showcases research going on within the
Institute.