* 0139214
* The Archaeoethnobotany of Theobroma cacao in Mesoamerica
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2003
* Christine Hastorf, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2003
* USD 85,799.00

With National Science Foundation support a team from UC Berkeley will conduct
research on the cacao plant, the natural source of chocolate, in its original
area of cultivation in Central America. The project will develop a means to
identify evidence for this important crop in archaeological sites, allowing
researchers to tell whether different sites were centers of production prior to
the Spanish conquest. Under the direction of Professors Rosemary Joyce and
Christine Hastorf, postdoctoral researcher Dr. Kirsten Tripplett will conduct a
baseline survey seeking examples of cacao plants in areas of Mexico, Belize, and
Honduras that were recorded as important chocolate producing regions in the
sixteenth century AD. Samples of cacao plants representing native populations of
the species will be collected for further research in the United States. In a
specialized laboratory for the study of ancient plant remains operated by
Professor Hastorf, Dr. Tripplett will explore the possibility of identifying
pollen, starch, and other cacao plant parts in archaeological sites. She will
create a reference database for the identification of ancient cacao plant
remains, that will be made accessible by computer. Dr. Tripplett will test the
reference collection by comparing it to plant remains recovered from
archaeological sites where cacao production is suspected to have been important.
Because cacao was used as a form of money in the region in the sixteenth
century, identifying it in archaeological sites will be a critical step in
understanding the economy of the Aztecs, Mayas, and earlier Mesoamerican
societies. Archaeologists have proposed that production or trade of cacao was a
factor in many different sites, but until now, no systematic model has allowed
identification of remains of the plant. This project will establish procedures
for recovering and identifying evidence of this critically important plant.