* 0139705
* Computational Modeling of Interdiffusion Microstructures
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2006
* Harold Brody, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 04/30/2006
* USD 278,001.00

The project is aimed at deeper development of the science of interdiffusion
taking into account the type and shape of diffusion paths and the effect of
microstructure morphology on diffusion. An objective of the study is to develop
verified and validated computational models that can make quantitative
predictions of interdiffusion kinetics and microstructural evolution as
functions of processing and test variables. It will lead to a greater
understanding of interdiffusion kinetics and microstructural evolution as
functions of processing and test variables. The formation of interdiffusion
microstructures can lead to significant changes in properties of the structural
components in various fields such as materials protection, composites, metal
joining, and heat-treating. It is desirable to know how to promote or prevent
interdiffusion and hence control the interdiffusion microstructure, and to model
the changes in order to predict the service life of components. The approach
will integrate error function analyses, finite difference and phase field
modeling in order to predict the precipitate morphology, and to calculate its
effect on interdiffusion. The proposed research activities will impact science,
technology and education. The further development of multicomponent diffusion
concepts and corresponding modeling techniques will provide impetus for
including the topic in graduate courses on diffusion. As a result, engineers and
scientists will be better prepared to work on technological problems that by
their nature involve diffusion in complex commercial alloys.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research develops an improved understanding of
fundamentals related to interdiffusion in multi-component and multiphase
systems, which will help in the interpretation of experimental data taken in
both industry and academe. By developing verified and validated computational
models that have the capability to deal with the complexity of commercial alloy
systems, it will be possible to apply them to assist in the design of practical
processes that involve interdiffusion.&lt;br/&gt;