* 0139236
* Research Conference: Mathematical Theory of Networks and Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2003
* Joachim Rosenthal, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 04/30/2003
* USD 15,000.00

0139236 Rosenthal

The International Symposium on the Mathematical Theory of Networks and Systems
(MTNS) is a major international conference. It attracts typically 400
mathematicians and other scientists working in theoretical aspects of systems
theory. The symposium is interdisciplinary and attracts mathematicians,
engineers and researchers working in all aspects of systems theory. Mathematical
methods which play a role in the areas mentioned above stem from a broad range
of fields of pure and applied mathematics, including ordinary and partial
differential equations, real and complex analysis, numerical analysis,
probability theory and stochastic analysis, operator theory, linear and
commutative algebra as well as algebraic and differential geometry. In August
2002 the MTNS symposium will be held on the campus of the University of Notre
Dame. Travel support will be provided by this award for approximately twenty new
researchers (graduate students and recent doctoral recipients) and 2-3
international researchers needing special assistance to attend this conference.
The symposium program will include plenary lectures, special topic invited
lectures, mini-symposia, mini- courses, special topic sessions and contributed
papers. The symposium will cover serious mathematical issues as well as some
important applied areas. Several broad application areas were selected: (1)
Systems theoretic questions in biology, (2) Applications in the area of
telecommunications, (3) Computational questions arising in control and systems
theory and (4) Systems theoretic questions in the area of mathematical finance.
In each of these important application areas 2-3 established researchers were
asked to organize a "Mini-symposium". This is a sub-symposium which typically
consists of a sequence of tutorial lectures as well as a sequence of invited
sessions each consisting of 4 research papers. The organizers had these areas of
research in mind at the time the plenary speakers and the special topics speaker
were selected.