* 0139155
* Synthesis and Characterization of Conjugated Diblock Copolymers (Co-Oligomers)
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2007
* Luping Yu, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 02/28/2007
* USD 544,000.00

This research is aimed at establishing a vigorous project to synthesize various
well-defined, conjugated diblock copolymers and to investigate their physical
properties. A conjugated diblock copolymer possesses a rod-rod structure and
will behave differently than rod-coil types of copolymers. These conjugated
diblock copolymers are new architectures of electroactive polymers. The main
goal of this work is to understand the kind of electronic and structural
properties that the rod-rod types of diblock copolymers will exhibit. To probe
these properties, various combinations of conjugated blocks and their synthetic
approaches are outlined in this proposal. These combinations vary from having
different amphiphilic properties to having different electronic properties. A
series of functionalized conjugated oligomers, ranging from oligothiophenes and
oligophenylenenvinylenes to oligophenlylenes, will be synthesized. The
electronic and physical properties of these oligomers will be investigated as
the database for their comparison with diblock copolymers (or co-oligomers).
Several of the oligomers obtained will be coupled to form diblock copolymers
with various conjugation lengths and electronic properties. Since these block
copolymers can undergo phase separation and form self-assembly, microscopic
studies of the self-assemblies will be carried out to find the principles
underlying their molecular packing and phase behaviors. Copolymers with various
redox properties will be coupled to explore electro-optic properties such as
optical absorption and luminescence, and photoconductivity and electrical
conductivity. Copolymers with an electron-rich block and an electron-deficient
one will be functionalized with a hydrophilic side group attached to the first
and hydrophobic moiety attached to the latter. These block copolymers will be
sued to prepare L-B films, which are very interesting for their molecular-
electronic effects due to their built-in molecular "P-N" junction. These block
copolymers are expected to undergo phase separations to assemble into nanometer-
continuous domains, which will be explored for photovoltaic
effect.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigation of possible applications of the
diblock copolymers includes their use in electro-optic devises, such as
photovoltaic and electroluminescent devices, molecular-electronic components,
and optical switching. Experiments to explore the properties leading to those
applications are also proposed. &lt;br/&gt;