* 0139017
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Bridge Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2007
* Michael Chajes, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 02/28/2007
* USD 322,625.00

This award provides funding for a 5-year REU Site in Bridge Engineering at the
University of Delaware, under the direction of Dr. Michael J. Chajes. This
10-week summer program will provide 10 students from other institutions, with
research projects focused on bridge engineering based on the growing base of
expertise in this area at the University of Delaware. The program recruitment
efforts will focus heavily on students at Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCU's) and on female undergraduates who have up to now not been
significantly represented in this traditionally male-dominated field. This REU
program will be administered by the Center for Innovative Bridge Engineering
(CIBE) which was established at the University of Delaware in 2000 to serve as a
primary resource for the world's highway and railroad bridge owners. Each
student will work on an individual research project and will be assigned a
faculty member as her/his research mentor. In addition, the students will
participate in weekly seminars where they will have the opportunity to discuss
their work with fellow students, and hear from researchers, practicing bridge
engineers and graduate students on topics of mutual interest. The students will
also participate in field trips, several bridge tours, and will prepare and
submit a brief report for presentation at a research symposium.