* 0139309
* Observing and Documenting the Inter-Organizational Response to the September 11, 2001 Terror Attacks
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2001,03/31/2002
* Joseph Barbera, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Heller
* 03/31/2002
* USD 24,999.00

Observing and Documenting the Inter-Organizational Response to the 9/11 Terror
Attacks&lt;br/&gt;This research entails collecting, documenting analyzing time
sensitive data from the sites of the devastating terrorist attacks on the World
Trade Center (WTC) in New York City, NY and the Pentagon in Washington, DC on
September 11, 2001. The objective of this research is to build on the knowledge
base relating to the coordination of emergency responders. While communication
and coordination of emergency management and medical efforts is an active area
of research in earthquake and other natural disasters, this event is the first
time where, at such a large scale, emergency efforts have been required to
integrate with those of law enforcement and military resources as well.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Information flows between and within response
organizations as well as information management problems that occur will be
collected using personal observation, structured interviews, document
collection. They will be analyzed and written up as a summary document for use
by emergency planners and researchers. The results will support future research
to enhance the emergency management and response in the US. More generalizable
impacts are expected in terms of decision-making and inter-organizational
coordination in complex, stressed environments.&lt;br/&gt;