* 0139968
* Inverse Scattering Models and Algorithms for Functional Brain Imaging with Diffuse Optical Wavefields
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Eric Miller, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 08/31/2006
* USD 296,151.00

0139968&lt;br/&gt;Miller&lt;br/&gt;This project is concerned with modeling and
algorithmic issues surrounding functional brain imaging from diffuse optical
wave data. The primary objective is to efficiently obtain high-quality spatial
and temporal three-dimensional image maps of hemodynamic processes in the brain
from sparsely sampled scattered wavefield data in conjunction with auxiliary
data collected from fMRI scans. The specific aims are: 1) development of spatial
and temporal inversion algorithms that exploit the high spatial resolution of
simultaneously available MRI and fMRI data as well as the high temporal
resolution of diffuse optical wavefield data, 2) fast solution of the underlying
forward problem that models that physics of the diffuse optical scattering
problem and 3) validation of the algorithms and efficiency using data from
experimental studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One level of efficiency and accuracy
will be achieved by developing a low-dimensional, spatially adaptive
parameterization of the unknown physical parameters (specifically, optical
scattering and absorption coefficients) that reduces the ill-posedness of the
inverse problem and concentrates degrees of freedom so as to focus resolution
over cortical regions of interest. Further spatial accuracy will be achieved by
constraint-based incorporation of anatomical information provided by MRI and
fMRI images. To attain better computational efficiency, the proposed work will
also focus on parallel, preconditioned Krylov subspace methods for solving the
linearized subproblems that arise at every iteration of the inversion process.
In the interest of amortizing the cost in temporal imaging, the proposed
research will also address how to optimally exploit information obtained from
previous reconstructions. All modeling and algorithmic work will be validated
and modified based on experimentally obtained diffuse optical and MRI
data.&lt;br/&gt;