* 0139847
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Fully Nonlinear, Three-Dimensional, Surface Water Waves in Arbitrary Depth
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2007
* Joseph Hammack, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2007
* USD 639,311.00

The overall objectives of this work are to develop a thorough
&lt;br/&gt;understanding of three-dimensional water waves of finite amplitude,
and &lt;br/&gt;ultimately to develop a practical model to describe these waves
efficiently. &lt;br/&gt;A model that is both accurate and computationally
efficient could have &lt;br/&gt;many practical applications. Specific problems
to be addressed are: (1) the &lt;br/&gt;existence and stability of three-
dimensional, doubly-periodic, traveling &lt;br/&gt;water-wave patterns, through
the full range of depths; (2) the prevalence &lt;br/&gt;of hexagonal,
rectangular or crescent-shaped waves (or other multiply &lt;br/&gt;periodic wave
patterns) among ocean waves; (3) the long-wave and &lt;br/&gt;modulational
descriptions of water waves, and the subsequent stability &lt;br/&gt;analyses
that are feasible in these cases; (4) the design and implementation
&lt;br/&gt;of algorithms to make practical use of exact solutions of asymptotic
&lt;br/&gt;models in shallow and deep water; (5) the relation between the
detailed &lt;br/&gt;dynamics of three-dimensional, nonlinear waves and some
commonly &lt;br/&gt;used ocean-wave transport models; and (6) the impact of a
detailed local &lt;br/&gt;description of nonlinear wave dynamics on these
transport models, in the &lt;br/&gt;presence of large amplitude nonlinear waves
or under conditions of &lt;br/&gt;nonlinear wave focusing. These problems will
be studied using analysis, &lt;br/&gt;computation, asymptotics, and algebraic
geometry, involving the full &lt;br/&gt;equations and approximate models, all in
conjunction with state-of-the-art &lt;br/&gt;physical
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The destructive force of large-amplitude ocean
waves is well known. &lt;br/&gt;Large-scale ocean waves have a major impact on
the design of ocean-&lt;br/&gt;going ships, of off-shore oil platforms, and of
other structures in a coastal &lt;br/&gt;environment. These waves also impact
the scheduling and routing of &lt;br/&gt;shipping patterns, and they strongly
affect air-sea transport processes. Yet &lt;br/&gt;most theoretical models of
ocean waves now in use are based on waves of &lt;br/&gt;small amplitude. In this
investigation we focus on developing a thorough &lt;br/&gt;understanding of
large-amplitude waves. The ultimate goal is to develop a &lt;br/&gt;practical,
mathematical model that may be used operationally in the &lt;br/&gt;applications
listed above. In particular, the investigators plan to build on &lt;br/&gt;their
recent work in which they have observed certain coherent patterns of
&lt;br/&gt;large-amplitude waves. They have observed these patterns in
laboratory &lt;br/&gt;experiments, as solutions to the well-known equations of
water waves, and &lt;br/&gt;as solutions to other equations that are (more)
approximate models of &lt;br/&gt;water waves. Their work involves a variety of
mathematical and &lt;br/&gt;computational tools as well as state-of-the-art
laboratory experiments. In &lt;br/&gt;the present work the investigators will
combine all of their tools to &lt;br/&gt;understand and describe these coherent
patterns and to use them as the &lt;br/&gt;building blocks for a practical model
of ocean waves.&lt;br/&gt;