* 0139459
* Construction of a Variable Frequency Ka Band [26-40 GHz] Pulsed EPR Spectrometer for Multi-Dimensional ESEEM and ENDOR Studies of Metalloproteins
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2005
* Arnold Raitsimring, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 03/31/2005
* USD 385,908.00

This award supports the development of a variable frequency pulsed Ka-band
(26-40 GHz) EPR spectrometer for electron spin echo envelope modulation (ESEEM)
and electron-nuclear double/triple resonance (ENDOR/ENQOR) studies of proteins
containing paramagnetic metal atoms. Paramagnetic metal centers in biomolecules
are exquisitely sensitive "beacons", whose magnetic coupling to nearby magnetic
nuclei reveal the immediate surroundings of the metal atom and can thereby
provide detailed information about catalytic reaction pathways. Ligands with
coordinated O, N, or S atoms play crucial roles in the paramagnetic metal
centers of many biomolecules. The hardware and software to be developed will
enable powerful multi-dimensional pulsed EPR methods to be extended to the
investigation of nearby magnetic nuclei such as 17O and 33S. In addition, this
new instrument will substantially simplify the analysis of coupling with 14N
atoms. The hyperfine interaction (hfi) and nuclear quadrupole (nqi) parameters
obtained for these atoms will provide direct insight into their paramagetic
metal centers. The project includes construction of the instrument, and
development of software for data acquisition, data processing and spectral
simulation. The initial applications of this new pulsed EPR spectrometer system
will be to the catalytic processes of molybdenum enzymes and ferriheme electron-
transfer proteins. However, this advanced pulsed EPR instrument will be a
powerful tool that will enable the surroundings of paramagnetic metal centers in
biological systems to be mapped out in unprecedented detail by biochemists,
biophysicists and bioinorganic chemists. A large number of national and
international collaborative studies are envisioned once the instrument becomes
fully operational, and the software developed in this project will be made
generally available to the scientific community.