* 0139555
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Plant Cell Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Elizabeth Bray, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2006
* USD 219,533.00

The Center for Plant Cell Biology (CEPCEB) in association with the Genomics
Institute at the University of California, Riverside (UCR) is committed to
provide fulfilling research experiences to undergraduates. As a Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site, CEPCEB will bring research experiences
to students of two- and four-year colleges who have limited opportunity to learn
about the excitement and career options that research in plant cell biology
offers. Outreach efforts will be centered on a number of colleges in Southern
California with high enrollment of underrepresented groups. Qualified students
will be encouraged to apply for the 10-week residential summer research program;
eight students will be accepted each summer. Each student will have a faculty
and a graduate or postgraduate mentor. In the initial week of the program,
students will be introduced to the basics of plant cell biology as well as
developing areas in plant cell biology in which UCR has expertise, including
genomics, proteomics and bioinformatics, through a series of lecture/laboratory
exercises. Students will then spend nine weeks on a research project of their
choice. To further enrich the students and to guide them toward graduate
studies, students will participate in workshops to enhance learning skills and
professional development, and to discuss ethics in science. In addition to the
ten-week research experience, a three-week summer laboratory course called
Arabidopsis Biology will be offered. During this course, students will use
Arabidopsis to study basic concepts in plant biology. Students who complete this
course will be given priority for admission to the 10-week research experience
the following summer, although the course is not a prerequisite. Students
requesting information about the program should contact the Genomics Institute
at (909) 787-2601 (genomics@ucr.edu) or Dr. Elizabeth Bray at (909) 787-4548
(bray@citrus.ucr. edu). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The anticipated impacts of the
NSF-sponsored REU are numerous. These include an increased awareness of research
options in the broad area of plant cell biology and expanded research
opportunities for students at "Hispanic Serving Institutes" and "Minority Post
Secondary Institutes" in Southern California. The underlying goals of this
educational outreach program are to encourage completion of four-year degrees by
underrepresented students and to present research plant biology as a career
option to young biologists&lt;br/&gt;