* 0139577
* Summer Program for Undergraduate Research in Biological Systems
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Julius Jackson, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2005
* USD 225,000.00

Summer Program for Undergraduate Research in Biological Systems (SuPURBS).
SuPURBS is a new, summer residency program to support students for 10 weeks of
undergraduate research at Michigan State University in East Lansing, Michgan.
The Program objectives are to: (i) facilitate undergraduate research with a
cross-disciplinary, thematic emphasis on molecular and cellular systems
analysis; (ii) broaden the exposure of students to mathematical skills that
apply to biological questions; (iii) promote student and faculty interaction;
(iv) broaden awareness of career opportunities in research, education and
industry; and (v) utilize educational and research collaborations between
faculty at undergraduate institutions and at Michigan State University to
prepare students for increased use of mathematical approaches to solve
biological questions. The Program focus is to combine a research experience in
areas of molecular and cellular biosciences, along with classroom exposure to
methods and strategies for analysis of biological systems. Over 54 faculty
associated with 15 academic departments, three research centers, and two
graduate, interdepartmental, academic programs comprise the pool of research
mentors who are accessible to SuPURBS program participants. Research disciplines
represented include microbial biology; biochemistry; cell biology; microbial
ecology; molecular evolution; immunology; signal transduction; parasitology;
cryobiology; phylogenetics; plant biology; astrobiology; infectious diseases;
genetics and molecular genetics. Maximizing the time for student research and
promoting interaction among students as well as between students and faculty are
key features of the overall program design. Core program activities for SuPURBS
participants include: a) four weeks of four hours per week mathematics exposure
under the theme of Analysis of Biological Systems; b) weekly, group journal club
and research discussion; c) informal seminar and discussion with faculty or
graduate students and postdocs about research and career opportunities. Students
will complete a written report of progress and a powerpoint poster of results
from the summer research. Group recreational activities will be planned and
scheduled by student participants. The SuPURBS program provides student
participants with free room and three meals per day in a residence hall on
campus; round trip travel expenses up to $500; and a stipend of $3000. The
SuPURBS program will generally start after Memorial Day in the last week of May
and run through the first week of August. A SuPURBS website at
http://www.msu.edu/~supurbs/ is under development and will be accessible from
the webpage of the College of Natural Science (www.ns.msu.edu), and the
Department of Microbiology &amp; Molecular Genetics (www.mmg.msu.edu), Michigan
State University. Email supurbs@msu.edu for information and an application.