* 0139171
* Developing Science Graduate Students into Middle Grade Science Classroom Resources
* EHR,DGE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* W. Burleigh Harris, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Continuing grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 05/31/2006
* USD 1,262,880.00

The University of North Carolina at Wilmington (UNCW) will conduct a three-year
program with the New Hanover County School system to improve science education
in the middle schools. A select group of science graduate students (GK-12
Fellows) from programs in chemistry, biology, earth sciences, and marine
sciences will be prepared to serve as classroom resource persons for middle
school teachers and students. The Science and Mathematics Education Center will
serve as the management hub for the project and the liaison between UNCW and the
New Hanover County School system. Other participants in the project include the
Program in Environmental Studies and the Graduate School. For a three-year
period, GK- 12 Fellows will be placed in all New Hanover County middle schools
each year focusing on a different grade level. Year I of the project will focus
on 8th grade classes, Year 2 on 7th grade classes and Year 3 on 6th grade
classes. Through this partnership with New Hanover County Schools, this project
will directly impact more than 5200 middle school students over the three years
of which almost 2000 are minorities. In addition, over 60 middle school teachers
will be directly or indirectly impacted by this project. The Science and
Mathematics Education Center will maintain a website that provides a conduit
between university science faculty, project staff and middle school science
teachers and students. This website will provide a forum for questions and
answers, the posting of project activities and a resource for database sharing.
NSF fellows will receive special preparation in teaching science as inquiry and
in using technology in instruction. Scientific instruction will be organized
thematically for each grade level addressing the following four program strands:
the nature of science, science as inquiry, science and technology, and science
in social and personal perspectives. UNCW faculty will serve as the
instructional staff for eight-day workshops each summer for GK-12 Fellows and
selected middle school science teachers. These workshops will focus on policy
regulations for working in K-12 schools, school safety, pedagogy instruction,
and creation of a curriculum-sequencing guide that is aligned with the North
Carolina Standard Course of Study for Middle Schools. Weekly seminars taught by
UNCW science faculty will develop specific inquiry-based activities for each
grade level according to the sequencing guide. Fellows will spend 10 hours per
week over 36 weeks in middle school classrooms assisting classroom teachers with
science lesson selection, setup, and demonstration. Participating middle school
teachers will serve as resource persons to non-participant, in-service teachers
within their schools, and along with GK-12 Fellows, develop and teach two,
grade-specific day long workshops during the school year. In addition, program
participants will develop a grade-specific activity book for distribution to all
middle school teachers. Participating middle school teachers and selected GK-12
Fellows will also serve as workshop leaders each summer for new cohorts of
Fellows and teachers.

