* 0139501
* Systematic Biology and Bioinformatics Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site at BYU
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2002,12/31/2006
* David Whiting, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 12/31/2006
* USD 225,000.00

Scientists who study systematics are interested in determining how living things
are related and in understanding the evolutionary processes that generate
biological diversity. Bioinformatics, on the other hand, is a relatively new
discipline whose practitioners are involved with management and analysis of
molecular data. Brigham Young University (BYU) has developed a summer program in
systematics and bioinformatics to provide undergraduate students with an
interactive and hands-on research experience. We will recruit 30 undergraduate
students (10 students in each of the years 2003-2005) to spend 10 weeks (June -
August) at BYU, Provo, Utah. Successful students will be paired with a faculty
mentor who will assist them in conducting an original research project.
Potential research areas include conservation genetics, HIV evolution,
systematics and evolutionary biology, molecular evolution, methods of phylogeny
reconstruction, and parallel processing of large data sets. We will recruit
students who do not have substantial research opportunities at their own
institutions and will focus on ethnic minority and female applicants.
Opportunities to interact with other students, faculty, post-docs and graduate
students will be provided through weekly meetings, workshops and a series of
weekend field trips. In addition, students will present results of their
research at a "symposium" to be held the 10th week. The overall goals of this
program are to assist students in understanding the scientific method of
investigation and to expose students to the possibilities of pursuing a career
in the biological sciences.