* 0139878
* Condition and Security Indicators for Interdependent Infrastructure Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2006
* Evan Vlachos, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Edward John Jaselskis
* 06/30/2006
* USD 246,284.00

The goal of this research is to define multi-attribute infrastructure
performance indicators for system condition and security ways using emerging
databases and software systems. The indicators will enable identification of
inefficiencies and vulnerabilities of three interdependent infrastructures-road
transportation, electricity, and water supply. The work initiates a new
assessment system for overcoming institutional inertia in publicly- and
investor-owned infrastructure systems: one based on interdependencies of
regional services.

As government- or investor-owned monopolies, road transportation, electricity,
and water supply support basic functions of society, but even large, well-
managed organizations publish little data about condition and security, and
where indicators exist, they are not used much. The project seeks to avoid the
overgeneralization problem of infrastructure research by focusing on
information-based indicators that apply both within and across infrastructure
categories. The hypotheses to be tested include: 1) condition and security
measures exist, but are detail-oriented and used mainly in budget processes; 2)
the public lacks information about condition and security of infrastructure
services; 3) indicators will facilitate detection of problems and
inefficiencies, 4) improve coordination and cooperation, and enhance condition
and security; 5) better system information will lead to more robust systems that
operate better and last longer, with measurement of effectiveness; 5)
information for indicators can be made available through new software; and 6)
new incentives can stimulate better reporting through computer-based information
systems.

In the study, indicators will be selected from the large number available and
from past failure incidents to be refined in a case study of infrastructure
systems in the Northern Colorado study region. A workshop will be conducted in
which agency managers will learn how use the indicators and insights will be
sought on why indicators are not used more often or more effectively. Based on
this case study, multi-attribute indicators will be constructed. The indicators
will then be tested on a stakeholder and public audience at a second workshop to
determine 1) whether the public judges the information to be relevant for
decision making and 2) the management of public infrastructure can be improved
if the public has more relevant and easily-understood information about
condition and security. The project reports will provide a comprehensive review
of infrastructure indicators, evaluate indicators and discuss how to synthesize
fewer and more meaningful ones; evaluate the actual status of use of indicators
by managers; evaluate public acceptance of the indicators for their decision-
making; and present reports with state-of-the-art assessments of use of
performance indicators to improve independent and interdependent management of
infrastructure systems.