* 0139962
* Boise Extravaganza in Set Theory (BEST) Conference, Boise State University
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Tomek Bartoszynski, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 03/31/2006
* USD 20,820.00

The Boise Extravaganza in Set Theory (BEST) is an annual conference in Set
Theory hosted by Boise State University. It has run continuously since it began
in 1992 and is the only regular conference in North America devoted primarily to
Set Theory. The talks and the participants are representative of set theoretic
research in North America with topics ranging from large cardinals, cardinal
invariants of the continuum, core models, fine structure, descriptive set
theory, set theoretic topology and analysis, forcing axioms, and combinatorics.
The small scale of the conference --- about 20 participants, most presenting
talks --- allows for an informal atmosphere and encourages discussion between
the representatives of various areas of set theory. The general format is that
of a three day conference. Four invited talks running approximately 50 minutes
each are spread throughout the conference with the remainder of the schedule
consisting of shorter contributed talks. NSF funds are used to cover the
expenses of the invited speakers and to help defray the local and travel
expenses of those who do not have their own form of travel support, especially
graduate students. The organizers make a sincere effort to invite women,
minorities, and young members of the field.