* 0139168
* Next Stage for US-China Cooperation in Science Policy, Research and Education - Seminars for 2002, 2003, 2004
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/2002,09/30/2006
* J. Thomas Ratchford, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard H. Nader
* 09/30/2006
* USD 609,277.00

0139168&lt;br/&gt;Ratchford &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
the second stage of the decade of U.S.-China Science Policy Dialogues that was
initiated under a previous grant ( INT 9986117 ). The Science Policy Dialogues
occur under the auspices of the National Science Foundation of the United States
(NSF) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC). The principal
objective of the decade of science policy dialogues is to explore issues facing
the United States and China that have significant implications for the vitality
of science and engineering in the borderless, knowledge-based economy of the
21st century. Funds provided in the first phase supported an initial seminar in
October 1999 in Beijing under the theme Enhancing Links between the Production,
Dissemination, and Application of Research and a second major seminar on in
December 2000 entitled U.S.-China Forum on Biotechnology and Biomedicine held on
the campus of the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Maryland, and will
be used to support the Technical Innovation Workshop that will be held in
Washington in March 2002. The second phase will include four major events: 1)
the Policy/Strategy Workshop (i.e., the meeting of the Advisory Council),
Beijing, June 2002); 2) the U.S.-China Seminar on Engineering Education for the
Global Economy, Shanghai and Beijing, October 2002; 3) a trilateral U.S.-Japan-
China seminar on Ethics and the Internet (tentatively targeted at spring 2003);
4) and a seminar on a yet-to-be-determined subject. The Advisory Council
envisioned in the first phase will be fully implemented in the second phase to
guide the selection of topics and to monitor progress toward the overall
objectives.&lt;br/&gt;