* 0139455
* Ninth International Conference on Muon Spin Rotation, Relaxation and Resonance; Williamsburg, Virginia; June 3-7, 2002
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2002,10/31/2002
* Carey Stronach, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 10/31/2002
* USD 15,000.00

This project will enable the attendance of students, young scientists and
distinguished Russian and East European scientists at the Ninth International
Conference on Muon Spin Rotation (MuSR) in Williamsburg, Virginia, June 3-7,
2002. MuSR is in the forefront of research in the richest areas of solid-state
physics and chemistry, such as superconductivity, weakly ordered magnetism,
defects and diffusion. Although MuSR was first developed in the US, this is the
first MuSR conference coordinated by US based MuSR scientists. Many attendees
will be from the major MuSR research facilities: TRIUMF in Vancouver, BC; PSI in
Switzerland, RAL in the UK; and KEK in Japan. The support for students and young
scientists will aid in their further understanding of the field and enable
contacts with potential collaborators from the MuSR facilities. The support for
Russian and East European scientists will encourage collaborative research,
e.g., on understanding the high temperature
superconductors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enable the attendance of
students, young scientists and distinguished Russian and East European
scientists at the Ninth International Conference on Muon Spin Rotation (MuSR) in
Williamsburg, Virginia, June 3-7, 2002. MuSR is in the forefront of research in
the richest areas of solid-state physics and chemistry, such as
superconductivity, magnetism, and diffusion and trapping of this hydrogen like
particle in metals. Although MuSR was first developed in the US, this is the
first MuSR conference coordinated by US based MuSR scientists. Many attendees
will be from the major MuSR facilities, which are in Vancouver, BC; Switzerland,
the UK; and in Japan. The support for students and young scientists will aid
their further understanding of the field and enable contacts with potential
collaborators from the MuSR facilities. The support for Russian and East
European scientists will encourage collaborative research on, e.g.,
understanding the high temperature superconductors. &lt;br/&gt;