* 0139504
* RUI: Structure Evolution in the Tellerium Isotopic Chain
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Jeffrey Vanhoy, United States Naval Academy
* Interagency Agreement
* Bradley D. Keister
* 06/30/2005
* USD 88,566.00

Tellurium has a wide range of abundant stable isotopes. The tellurium nuclei
have two valence protons with respect to Z = 50 and a range of neutron numbers.
Three different types of structure are thought to be active in these
nuclei:collective, two-particle, and particle-hole excitations known as
intruders. Because there are seven stable even-even Te nuclei, one can study the
evolution of these excitation modes over a wide range in neutron number.
Emphasis centers on understanding the interplay between particle and collective
features and on the aspects of the nuclear forces and shell model orbitals that
determine the relative importance. Several models are now able to reproduce the
level scheme.&lt;br/&gt;Often level energies are more important for evaluating
whether a model has sufficient built-in complexity rather than distinguishing
between physical descriptions. Transition rate information is crucial to
revealing the amplitudes of particle and collective components in the
wavefunctions. Excited levels in 130Te below 3.3 MeV will be studied at the
University of Kentucky Nuclear Structure Laboratory utilizing inelastic neutron
scattering techniques. Electromagnetic transition rates,multipole mixing and
branching ratios, and level spins and parities will be deduced from measured
gamma-ray excitation functions, coincidences,angular distributions, and Doppler
shifts. The excited levels in 118Te and 120Te will be studied at the University
of Cologne. The low-spin level scheme will be first verified with gamma-ray
spectroscopy following a few-neutron emission reaction. The lifetimes of states
in 118Te and 120Te will then be determined using the recoil-distance Doppler
shift technique.&lt;br/&gt;