* 0139083
* REU Site: Research in Prokaryotic Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Ellen Neidle, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2005
* USD 209,892.00

The objective of this REU Site program (Research in Prokaryotic Biology) is to
introduce undergraduate students to exciting areas of microbial research and to
increase their awareness about careers in science. This goal will be achieved
through an intensive, approximately 9-week long, hands-on summer laboratory
research program in the Microbiology Department of the University of Georgia in
Athens. Ten undergraduate student participants will be recruited from
undergraduate institutions with limited research opportunities in Microbiology.
In addition, students who are members of groups that are underrepresented in the
scientific community will be encouraged to participate in the
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;REU participants will conduct independent projects
under the supervision of faculty members, postdoctoral researchers and graduate
students. A wide variety of research topics will address the diverse functions
of prokaryotic organisms (bacteria and archaea). State-of-the-art techniques
will be used in interdisciplinary approaches that combine knowledge from the
fields of Genetics, Biochemistry, Physiology, Molecular Biology, Cellular
Biology, and Ecology. Microbial investigations will address broad questions
ranging from the role of prokaryotes in environmental and geochemical processes
to their role in human health. Research experiences should generate enthusiasm
among the students for the scientific topics and help them understand more about
graduate education and careers in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To enhance the
research experience, the REU students will have informal meetings with faculty,
attend scientific seminars, join the weekly research meetings of their lab
groups, and participate in ethics-in-science workshops. Students will present
their research results at the end of the summer. This program will have a
significant impact both on science and education. The students will advance the
research programs of the faculty mentors. Moreover, the exchange of ideas among
faculty and students from around the country will help spread awareness of the
importance of prokaryotic biology. Students will be able to communicate what
they learn about scientific careers to their peers at their home
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;