* 0139450
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research in Molecular Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2007
* Janet Schottel, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2007
* USD 444,850.00

Objectives&lt;br/&gt;The overall purpose of this program is to motivate and
prepare talented students, specifically more women and minority students, to
earn their PhD degree in basic life science disciplines and eventually to become
members of the faculty at colleges and universities or to take leadership roles
in the private sector. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Means to achieve
objectives&lt;br/&gt;This NSF award will sustain the highly successful NSF-REU
program developed by University of Minnesota faculty over the past twelve years.
For the next five years, the participants will continue to be recruited
nationwide, but particularly from Historically Black Institutions and other
small private colleges. Each year, twelve high ability undergraduate students
will come to Minnesota for the 10-week summer program. The students will spend
the first three weeks of the summer in an intensive three-credit laboratory
course at the Lake Itasca laboratories learning basic molecular biology
techniques. Following the course, each student will spend seven weeks on the
Twin Cities campus completing an independent research project that uses many of
the molecular techniques learned in the course. The research project will be
conducted under the direction of one of the more than 100 faculty members
affiliated with the program who share a common interest in molecular biology
research. Supplemental activities will include weekly student seminars and
evening workshops designed to strengthen future applications for postgraduate
studies. All students will present the results of their research project through
a scientific poster at a campus-wide symposium at the end of the program. An
orientation weekend at the start of the program, the laboratory course at
Itasca, communal housing in campus dormitories and numerous social, cultural and
recreational activities throughout the summer weekends will foster the formation
of strong personal and professional student-student and student-faculty
bonds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outcomes and significance of
award&lt;br/&gt;Students will have an interesting and exciting summer that will
strengthen their confidence and their desire to go to graduate school to earn an
MS, PhD or MD/PhD degree in a basic life science discipline. Intensive exposure
to the high quality and quantity of research opportunities as well as the
supportive and nurturing relationships with faculty mentors will motivate many
participants to pursue graduate studies. In addition, undergraduate students
from all backgrounds and ethnicity will have the opportunity to interact with
graduate student role models to encourage undergraduates from diverse
backgrounds to seek graduate school degrees. Over the long term, increased
numbers of African American, American Indian and Hispanic students will be
motivated to earn graduate degrees in basic life science disciplines and
eventually to become members of the faculty at colleges and universities or
leaders in the private sector. These new recipients of MS and PhD degrees will
be role models and mentors who can help move a much larger number of individuals
from underrepresented minority groups closer to full participation in the
scientific and technological workforce.&lt;br/&gt;