* 0139515
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Tropical Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Donald Stone, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2006
* USD 340,845.00

The Organization for Tropical Studies (OTS), a consortium of 64 research
universities, plans to implement a three-year REU program at the La Selva
Biological Station in Costa Rica. This project will provide hands-on, field-
oriented research experiences to undergraduate students from throughout the
United States, including minority students identified through the OTS Minority
Scholars Program. This program provides support for ten undergraduates each year
to have a ten-week research experience at La Selva, located in the lowland
rainforest of Costa Rica. Students selected to participate in the REU Program
will be paired with a research mentor at La Selva and will be responsible for
supervising all aspects of the student's research
design;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Though the students targeted for the REU research
experience will be participants in OTS' Undergraduate Program, REU fellowships
will also be available on a competitive basis to undergraduates who have not
participated in an OTS undergraduate course. Most importantly, through the OTS
National Fellowship Advisory Committee a major effort will be made to recruit
students from under-represented groups in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The overall goals and objectives of the REU Program at La Selva
are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) Encourage student interest in careers in field
research and tropical ecology. &lt;br/&gt;(2) Establish a clear understanding of
the design of field experiments and the logic and application of statistical
analysis. &lt;br/&gt;(3) Build skills in the interpretation of the results of
scientific experiments and the communication of these results to both technical
and non-technical audiences. &lt;br/&gt;(4) To introduce students through
scientific study to the importance of tropical ecosystems and facilitate a full
understanding of evolution and ecology. &lt;br/&gt;(5) Increase the
participation in research of women, ethnic minorities and economically
disadvantaged students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU students will have an
immersion experience in a tropical rain forest setting that will likely become a
career-determining summer. They will develop intellectual and practical skills
in one of the world's most important ecosystems and contribute to improved
understanding of the biodiversity conservation and ecological research
priorities.&lt;br/&gt;