* 0139665
* REU Site: Summer Program in Ethnographic Research on LA at Play
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2003
* Jill Stein, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Bonney Sheahan
* 03/31/2003
* USD 89,832.00

This award provides funds for an REU Site in Sociology at the University of
California, Los Angeles. Members of the Sociology Department, in collaboration
with faculty from a variety of other disciplines on the campus, are currently
involved in launching a large-scale research project concerning contemporary
urban life in Los Angeles called LA Observed. The REU Site will focus on the
training of undergraduate students to conduct ethnographic field research in one
substantive area of that project: cultural activities around the city. Fifteen
undergraduate students will participate in the eight-week program. The majority
of students will be recruited from the regional campuses of the California State
University system, with a smaller number coming from the host institution. The
goal of the Site is to attract a diversified pool of talented undergraduates,
especially those from under-represented groups, who might not otherwise have the
opportunity to participate in an intensive research environment. Students will
work closely with faculty research supervisors in classroom activities for 8-10
hours per week, and will engage in independent fieldwork at their chosen site
for an additional 10-15 hours per week. They will receive rigorous academic
training that will quickly allow them to gain first-hand knowledge about the
nature of sociological inquiry and analysis. Each student will produce a
professional-quality final research paper. Students will thus have the
opportunity to contribute to the success of the larger LA Observed project.

This award contributes to the Foundation's continuing efforts to attract
talented students into careers in science through active undergraduate research
experiences.