* 0139005
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Political Economy and the Development of Chiefly Societies from the Rio Parita Area in the Central Region of Panama
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2002,08/31/2003
* Robert Drennan, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2003
* USD 11,998.00

Under the direction of Dr. Robert Drennan, Mr. Mikael Haller will collect data
for his doctoral dissertation in Central Panama. He will conduct archaeological
investigations at the regional level by examining settlement occupation over a
4000 year period up to Spanish contact in the 16th century. Central Panama is an
ideal area to investigate the development of chiefdoms since there is both
archaeological and historical data relating to the region which can be used to
test against current models for the development of chiefly
societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On the one hand, anthropologists have argued
that long-distance exchange of esoteric knowledge was critical for establishing
political power, as opposed to economic gain. In contrast others claim that
chiefly control of local resources was the main factor. A third model, focusing
on warfare as the key factor in the development of chiefdoms from autonomous
societies, derives from a comparison of tribal and chiefly societies in South
America and Panama. In evaluating these models, Mr. Haller will use survey data
in determining the relative importance of five factors that combined include the
major components of the three models: control of agricultural land, population
growth, local exchange and craft production, long-distance exchange, and
warfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite recent archaeological work concerning
important sociopolitical issues, there is still relatively little information
about the geography, economy and development of Panamanian chiefdoms and various
hypotheses remain unsubstantiated by the archaeological record. Clearly, using
Panamanian chiefdoms as models for archaeological reconstruction of other cases
and for comparative studies requires a better understanding of their emergence
and development prior to the sixteenth-century, as well as the nature of the
archaeological record at the time of contact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project addresses concerns similar to those of regional specialists
working around the world on the formation of complex societies since an
underlying goal is to determine the relative importance demographic stress,
economic specialization, control of agricultural production, and local exchange
in this process. This research project will add to current understanding of
regional processes through an examination of the development of Panamanian
chiefdoms and it will provide a specific case for comparative studies of
sociopolitical organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Therefore, this project has
the potential to address several important lines of anthropological inquiry.
Foremost is the contribution this research will make to the study of the
development of complex societies. In addition, it will contribute to a better
understanding of the relationship between archaeological and ethnohistorical
accounts-crucial in reconstructing and interpreting prehistoric societies. On a
general anthropological level, data from this research can be used in
understanding the relationship between social complexity and population
pressure, warfare, and control of economic resources. It will also assist in
training a promising young scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;