* 0139634
* REU SITE:  Alaska Research Summer Challenge at the Arctic Region Supercomputing Center of the University of Alaska Fairbanks
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2002,03/31/2006
* Thomas Marr, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Heller
* 03/31/2006
* USD 300,226.00

EIA - 0139634&lt;br/&gt;Williams, Frank&lt;br/&gt;University of Alaska -
Fairbanks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Alaska Research Summer Challenge at the
Artic Region Supercomputing Center of the University of Alaska -
Fairbanks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Alaska Research Summer Challenge is an
intern program offered by the Arctic Region Supercomputing Center (ARSC) at the
University of Alaska Fairbanks (UAF). This program allows up to ten
undergraduate students to perform research in the areas of Computer Science,
Supercomputing, and Visualization. This minority outreach program is open to
students primarily from minority institutions, with preference given to minority
applicants. Recruitment is done by onsite recruiting at target institutions.
ARSC focus our efforts on these groups, as they have traditionally been
underrepresented in the science and research fields. With intern input, each
participant is assigned a project related to their field of study, to be
performed under the direct supervision of a faculty member or senior staff.
Students spend an average of 10 weeks in Fairbanks where they live in campus
housing with undergraduate interns from other groups and work an average of 40
hours per week to complete their projects. Under the oversight of the Program
Manager, they work independently and within research groups, live in housing
with other interns, gain new work and study skills and establish a stronger
sense of self-assurance. The program manager ensures that each participant fully
understands their project and what is expected of them. Through this program
ARSC strives to promote and further interests in many areas of arctic research.
The program also serves to develop positive research and life skills while
increasing involvement of various minorities in science and research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;