* 0139553
* REU: Undergraduate Research Experiences in Biology at James Madison University
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2005
* Douglas Dennis, James Madison University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2005
* USD 175,800.00

The Biology Department at James Madison University (JMU) is characterized by its
focus on undergraduate research as the ultimate teaching tool. This focus is
manifested in the number of undergraduates conducting research projects (over
100 per year) and the number of established faculty having extramurally-funded
research programs (66%). In the summer of 2001 a pilot summer research program
was enormously successful in supporting the continuation of research conducted
during the academic year and achieving the educational goals of the department.
Funding from the National Science Foundation (NSF) will enable JMU to expand
this pilot program to include students outside the boundaries of JMU and to
enhance the research pedagogy within the department.&lt;br/&gt;The new NSF
Research Experiences for Undergraduates Program will provide an exciting 10-week
summer research experience at the JMU campus. The experience will begin with a
research workshop aimed at ensuring that all students have the fundamental tools
necessary to conduct their research program. Mini-lectures and discussion
sessions will be interspersed with experiential activities throughout the day
and each day will end with a summary session where fundamental concepts will be
reinforced. Topics covered will include "thinking outside the box", quantitative
methods, data interpretation, technical writing, bioethics, multimedia
strategies, and an introduction to basic laboratory instrumentation. The
remaining 9 weeks of the experience will be largely devoted to research along
with seminars, student research talks and faculty-originated case study
scenarios. It is anticipated that the research project conducted in the summer
will continue into the academic year, either in a JMU laboratory or through a
collaborative arrangement with the student's home institution. It is also
expected that the results of these projects will be disseminated via
presentations in regional/national meetings and peer-reviewed
journals.&lt;br/&gt;Recruitment will focus on four primary groups of
constituents within our geographical region, 1) non-JMU students at institutions
that do not support robust summer research programs, 2) students from minority-
serving institutions, 3) community college students, and 4) JMU students. We
have already built liaisons with these college/universities through our recently
funded "Undergraduate Mentoring in Environmental Biology" (UMEB) program.
Recruitment will be accomplished using mailings, e-mails, personal contacts,
personal visits, and the resources of the Office of Multicultural Activities at
JMU. Applications will be assessed on the basis of the student's academic
achievements/potential, minimum course requirements, potential for continuation
of the summer research project, and ability to support the diversity of the
program. In addition to students, we will also recruit potential faculty mentors
from these institutions via the use of Research Opportunity Awards to faculty
that have active NSF grants&lt;br/&gt;