* 0139542
* World Trade Center Post-Disaster Reconnaisance and Perishable Structural Engineering Data Collection
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2002
* Abolhassan Astaneh-Asl, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Douglas A. Foutch
* 09/30/2002
* USD 20,000.00

On September 11, 2001, World Trade Center towers collapsed because of a
terrorist attack. The twin 110-story buildings had tube steel structures steel
and were the fifth and sixth tallest buildings in the world with a height of
about 1365 feet. The tragic collapse due to this criminal act will require
comprehensive analyses of the structure subjected to initial impact of airplane
as well as the intense fire that followed. Such analyses no-doubt will be
conducted in the future to establish the cause(s) of the collapse and failure
sequence in order to improve design of new buildings and retrofit existing
structures. The studies will need reliable data on mechanical properties of
materials used in the towers, actual as-built steel connections and members as
well as floor systems. The objective of this SGER is to conduct post-disaster
reconnaissance and collection of perishable data. Specifically, samples of
material and structural members and connections that later can be used to
establish their properties will be collected. Of particular interest is to
collect samples of steel from areas that were heavily affected by heat of the
jet fuel and/or impact of the planes.

The PI is collaborating with David McCallen of the Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory, who is providing expertise in computational mechanics, modeling and
analysis of large structural systems. He is also collaborating with Frederick
Mowrer of the University of Maryland who is collecting perishable data on the
fire protection engineering aspects of the WTC. Together, the data obtained in
these projects will be of critical importance to future analyses of the WTC
collapses.

