* 0139851
* Development and Applications of Aerobic Electron Transfer Initiated Cyclization Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2005
* Paul Floreancig, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 03/31/2005
* USD 310,490.00

With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program in the Chemistry Division,
Professor Paul Floreancig, of the Department of Chemistry at the University of
Pittsburgh, has begun a program in which electron transfer initiated carbon-
carbon sigma-bond activation serves to trigger new synthetic transformations.
Homobenzylic ethers and amides are used as the starting materials for electron
transfer initiated cyclization (ETIC) reactions. In these reactions,
photoinitiated single electron oxidation of the substrates form radical cation
intermediates that undergo a facile displacement of a benzyl radical by pendent
nucleophiles. The ultimate objective of the projects described in the proposal
is to advance the ETIC method to a sufficient extent that it can serve as a
method for efficient syntheses of complex natural projects and other medicinally
and structurally important compounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Paul
Floreancig, of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Pittsburgh, with
the support of the Organic Dynamics Program, will establish new synthetic
methodology and plans to develop applications of the chemistry, which minimizes
impact to the environment and uses ETIC in the synthesis of acylaminals. This
substrate will allow increased understanding of the structurally intriguing
anticancer agent, pederin, which is isolated from South Pacific
sponges.&lt;br/&gt;