* 0139767
* REU Site Proposal: The Calder Center Summer Undergraduate Research Program in Ecology and Field Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* James Lewis, Fordham University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 07/31/2004
* USD 105,613.00

The Calder Summer Undergraduate Research (CSUR) program will provide eight
undergraduate students each summer the opportunity for independent research in
ecology and field biology at the Louis Calder Center, Fordham University's
biological field station. Since 1967, the Calder Center has provided
undergraduate and graduate students opportunities to study relatively
undisturbed communities near an urban center, and has afforded many urban
students their first opportunity to examine the natural world first hand. As
part of this mission, the Calder Center and Fordham University have established
the CSUR program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CSUR program is a 12-week, intensive
curriculum in which students learn the fundamentals of experimental design, use
of the scientific literature, data collection and analysis, preparation of
manuscripts, and oral presentation. A core component of the program is an
independent research project each student will conduct in conjunction with
faculty mentors. Projects may be developed in a broad range of topics including
aquatic ecology, forest ecology, physiological ecology of plants and animals,
soil ecology, vector ecology, and wildlife conservation. Students will also
participate in weekly scientific seminars, seminar courses on the philosophy of
science and ethics in science, and a student exchange program with the American
Museum of Natural History. In addition, CSUR participants will be able to
interact with other undergraduate and graduate students at the Calder Center who
are supported through university fellowships and extramural grants.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The CSUR-REU project targets highly motivated students interested in
pursuing a career in ecology, especially those who are from institutions that
offer limited opportunities for independent research, are from urban
backgrounds, or are from groups under-represented in science. In addition to
these considerations, students will be selected based on academic performance,
research interests and potential, and previous research experience. Students
interested in participating in the program may contact Dr. John Wehr at
914-273-3078 ext. 11 or at wehr@fordham.edu for information and application
forms. Students may also obtain information and forms online at
http://www.fordham.edu/calder_center/calder-center/CSUR-Program.html&lt;br/&gt;