* 0139463
* Research Experience for Undergraduates in Biology at the University of Texas at El Paso
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2005
* Eppie Rael, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2005
* USD 140,000.00

The University of Texas at El Paso will be offering ten Undergraduate Research
Positions for ten weeks during June and July beginning 2002. These positions
will be funded through the NSF Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Program in biological research. The main goal of this program is to provide an
exciting and nurturing research experience for students, one that will encourage
them to pursue careers as research scientists. Each student is paired with a
faculty advisor, who is often supported by interested graduate and advanced
undergraduate students. Students are required to engage in a 10-week research
project. Areas of research conducted by our faculty include: host-parasite
interactions, DNA repair, toxicology, lipid metabolism, autoimmunity,
neurobiology, systematics, desert ecology, behavioral ecology, and many others.
In addition to the work with their faculty advisors, students attend several
weekly meetings: lab meetings with their mentor and fellow lab colleagues, a
faculty lecture series on research opportunities in biology, and a journal club
to discuss cutting-edge science that is followed by an informal gathering with
current UTEP undergraduate and graduate students to discuss questions, issues
and concerns. Students will also have the opportunity to visit a national
research laboratory so as to expand student exposure to biology beyond the
campus. Towards the end of the program, students are asked to give a short talk
at the Undergraduate Summer Research symposium and to provide a written summary
of their summer research. As recognition for student achievement, two of the ten
students will be selected to attend a national meeting with their REU mentor
based on their overall performance. Several social activities are also organized
throughout the summer to help students get acquainted with each other, with the
University, and with the surrounding area.