* 0139969
* RUI: Constraints on Negative Energy in Field Theory and Gravitation
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Thomas Roman, Central Connecticut State University
* Standard Grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 07/31/2005
* USD 50,000.00

The research discussed here deals with the implications of a very unusual form
of energy. The existence of this so-called "negative energy" is allowed by the
laws of quantum field theory, which describe the behavior of matter and energy
on microscopic scales. Since negative energy would have repulsive gravitational
effects, this work lies at the intersection of quantum field theory and
Einstein's theory of gravity, general relativity. The focus of the research is
the extended investigation of restrictions imposed by the laws of physics on
negative energy. These generalized restrictions would involve the placement of
constraints on the distribution of negative energy in both time and space. In
addition, the scope of the constraints would be extended to include the effects
of gravitation. Regions of negative energy also appear to be accompanied by
large fluctuations in energy density, which could perhaps lead to large
fluctuations in the gravitational fields produced by the negative energy. How
this would affect the description of gravity, given in Einstein's theory as the
curvature of the geometry of space and time, in these circumstances is currently
not well understood. It is hoped to investigate this issue as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These topics are of interest for several reasons.
Situations involving negative energy, such as the Casimir effect and squeezed
states of light, have been produced in the laboratory. The amounts of negative
energy generated in these experiments are extremely tiny. However, if the laws
of physics impose no constraints on negative energy, then one might be able to
create large amounts of it and thereby produce bizarre macroscopic effects. Such
effects could include: traversable wormholes (tunnels connecting otherwise
distant regions of space and time), warp drives (for faster-than-light travel),
time machines for travel into the past, violations of the second law of
thermodynamics (e.g., refrigerators requiring no power sources), and the
destruction of black holes (the remains of collapsed dead stars). However,
research by Larry Ford and the author has shown that quantum field theory does
impose some rather strong restrictions on negative energy. These constraints
have come to be known as "quantum inequalities", and yield severe limitations on
the macroscopic effects of negative energy mentioned above. Loosely speaking,
they say that large negative energies can exist for only short periods of time.
It has recently been realized that even the currently known quantum
inequalities, although formulated as restrictions in time, can be used to rule
out or constrain the ways in which negative energy can be distributed in space
as well. These results, together with some explicit examples of spatial
distributions of negative energy which are allowed by the laws of physics,
indicate that negative energy must be subtly intertwined with positive energy in
space. Must this always be the case? A major focus of the proposed investigation
will be to narrow the gap between distributions which can be ruled out and those
which are definitely allowed. The latter will involve the construction and
analysis of additional explicit examples. This represents a continuation of my
previous research and essentially aims to extend the scope of all of these
results.&lt;br/&gt;