* 0139067
* Undergraduate Research in Quaternary Geology at the Matanuska Glacier, Alaska: Research Experiences for Undergraduates
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Jeffrey Strasser, Northwest Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 02/29/2004
* USD 184,263.00

This award is to continue managing a Research Experience for Undergraduates
(REU) Site. Undergraduate students will conduct research for six weeks on the
Matanuska Glacier, a large valley glacier in south central Alaska. The glacier's
terminus is easily accessible from the Glenn Highway. Students will stay at the
Matanuska Glacier Research Camp, about two kilometers from the glacier's
terminus. The Camp is maintained by the Cold Regions Research and Engineering
Laboratory which also sponsors some of the ongoing research. Students will
participate in field work that will involve collecting water samples,
maintaining equipment, downloading data, filtering water for suspended sediment,
and tabulating data. Each student will identify a research project to which
he/she will devote several hours a day. Directed research projects may be in
subdisciplines of glacial geology, sedimentology, glaciohydrology, or
hydrogeology. The faculty associates will supervise the students' research to
ensure appropriate projects are defined and that the students are able to
collect the necessary information. The students will complete their
undergraduate thesis projects at the respective home institutions during the
subsequent school year and will be encouraged to present the results at a
national meeting.