* 0139958
* SGER: Development of an In Vitro Chromatin Assembly and Transcription System for Plant Genes
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2002,10/31/2003
* Alison Crowe, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Tornow
* 10/31/2003
* USD 96,790.00

Studies of both plant and animal genes have illustrated the key role that
chromatin and chromatin modulators play in regulating gene expression during
development. Correct spatial and developmental expression of phaseolin, the
major seed storage protein in bean, requires chromosomal integration. Chromatin
structural analyses have established that a nucleosome is rotationally
positioned over the phaseolin promoter in non-seed tissue, thereby blocking
transcription initiation. This repressive chromatin structure is disrupted prior
to beta-phaseolin gene activation in the maturing embryo, suggesting a mechanism
by which gene expression can be regulated during development. However, the role
that tissue-specific transcription factors and chromatin modulators play in the
transition from a silenced to an active phaseolin gene has not been elucidated.
The overall aim of this project is to develop an in vitro chromatin assembly and
transcription assay to study chromatin-mediated regulation of plant genes. To
achieve this goal, the PI will combine existing animal in vitro chromatin
assembly systems and a previously developed plant in vitro transcription assay
with purified plant transcription factors to reconstitute phaseolin gene
regulation in vitro. The three specific aims are 1) to reconstitute
physiological chromatin on the phaseolin gene in vitro, 2) to transcribe the
phaseolin gene in vitro using a tobacco cell transcription extract, and 3) to
reconstitute hormonal and tissue-specific regulation of phaseolin gene
expression in vitro. Results from these studies will provide definitive evidence
that the chromatin assembly/transcription system faithfully recapitulates the
endogenous chromosomal context and tissue-specific expression pattern of a plant
gene in vitro. If successful, this in vitro system may provide a universal tool
for elucidating the mechanisms driving chromatin-mediated gene regulation in
plants. An increased understanding of how chromatin context influences gene
expression during plant development will greatly facilitate the engineering of
stable transgenic plants for both commercial and agricultural use.