* 0139181
* Summer Student Program
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2004
* David Harrison, Jackson Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2004
* USD 173,046.00

The Jackson Laboratory's Summer Student Program has provided a life-altering
10-week research apprenticeship for thousands of high school and college
students for more than seventy years. The program immerses students in
laboratory science: hypothesis-driven research, rigorous testing of ideas using
the experimental method, collecting and interpreting experimental results to
arrive at a conclusion, and reporting results in an open forum. It inculcates
the unyielding demand for intellectual honesty in reporting and interpreting
results. The object is to introduce students to the real nature of research and
change perceptions of how science is done.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each summer
student participant conducts original hands-on research as a contributing member
of a sponsoring scientist's research team. Projects are tailored to the
student's background and interests. Each student's independent project focuses
on a vital subject such as cancer, the use of computers in biology, aging,
genetics, how the immune system fights disease, or diseases of the nervous
system. Students devote most of their effort to their individual research
projects, but the program also provides formal exposure to the breadth of
genetics research at the Laboratory, to different paths leading to careers in
science, and to consideration of the ethical conduct of research. The overall
theme is to introduce students to the professional life and habits of mind of a
scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Science is both a body of knowledge and a way of
exploring the natural world. In school, students are exposed to the body of
knowledge but often do not appreciate the creative nature of scientific
research. A research program changes these misperceptions. Alumni report that
these lessons last a lifetime, shape careers, and change the way participants
perceive their world. Students develop a close working relationship with a
research scientist and come to better understand the profound satisfaction of a
career in advancing human understanding of nature; more than 95% of Jackson REU
participants are now in graduate or medical school or are employed in
science.&lt;br/&gt;