* 0139215
* Extending the Summer Systematics Institute as an REU Site at the California Academy of Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2004
* Rich Mooi, California Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2004
* USD 109,450.00



Funding from the National Science Foundation will bring seven undergraduates to
the California Academy of Sciences for an 8-week summer session in the Academy's
Summer Systematics Institute. Recruitment will be on a national level, with
selection emphasis given to female students and students from groups
traditionally underrepresented in the biological sciences. African-Americans,
Native-Americans, and Latinos are especially encouraged to participate.
Participants will receive a stipend, housing allowance and travel funds to and
from his/her place of residence. Each prospective intern will apply to work with
an Academy research scientist on a research project. Successful applicants will
participate in formal lectures in systematic biology, tours of each of the
Academy's nine research departments, and research seminars in systematic
biology. Students will work on directed projects that provide them with an
introduction to the problem and organisms to be studied and introduce them to
the data collection, interpretation, and dissemination aspects of research in
systematic biology. Each student will produce a manuscript of the project's
results, in the form of a scientific paper, and make an oral presentation of
their results to their peers. Evaluations of interns and participating Academy
staff will be conducted each year with a view towards improving the Institute
for succeeding years.

