* 0139153
* REU Site:  Developing Student Scientists: Collaborative Research in the Life Sciences at Davidson College
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Karen Bernd, Davidson College
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 07/31/2006
* USD 248,101.00

The NSF Research Experiences for Undergraduates program makes effective use of
mentoring and networking to recruit and train young researchers. As a newly
named REU site, Davidson College has funding to support 10 undergraduate
students for 10 weeks of intensive summer laboratory or field research. Under
the mentorship of eight Biology and two Psychology faculty, students will
conduct independent research at all levels of the life sciences, from molecular
biology to neuroscience to field studies of animal populations. Formal and
informal interactions among students and faculty will provide each participant
with wide-ranging knowledge of biological problems and techniques. In addition
to the research itself, participants will take part in weekly discussions of
their own research, current issues in the life sciences, graduate school,
writing grant proposals, and ethical issues in research. Participants will
present the results of their research in a formal talk at the end of the summer
and in a scientific paper. We will engage in a national recruitment effort via
the Internet and personal contacts with faculty across the US. We will actively
recruit African-American, Hispanic, and Native American students via contacts at
historically black colleges and universities and other institutions with
significant minority enrollments. By working closely with Davidson College Life
Science faculty and gaining a better understanding of how science is conducted,
students will be better able to make informed decisions about scientific issues
shaping our world today and about their own career choices.