* 0139918
* Collaborative Research: The Weak Temperature Gradient Equations for Tropical Atmosphere Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Andrew Majda, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2005
* USD 180,000.00

In this project, meteorologists and applied mathematicians are collaborating to
study the "weak temperature gradient" (WTG) equations for large-scale tropical
atmospheric dynamics. The WTG equations form a "balance model", or set of
singular limit equations, asymptotically valid in a parameter regime relevant to
the tropical atmosphere. The WTG equations are designed to facilitate study of
key aspects of the tropical climate problem, such as the large-scale dynamical
roles of moist convection and other diabatic processes. This focus is achieved
by eliminating other processes which can be present in solutions to the
primitive equations, such as gravity waves and baroclinic instability, in the
same way as gravity waves are eliminated in extratropical balance models such as
the quasi-geostrophic equations. One goal of this project is to develop new
mathematics by studying the WTG equations' properties. Another goal is to solve
the equations under geometries, boundary conditions and forcings which represent
idealizations of those relevant to the real earth's climate, and then to study
the sensitivity of the solutions to key parameters. Achievement of these goals
is expected to lead to deeper understanding of both the real climate and more
complex mathematical models of it, such as general circulation models (GCMs).

The earth's climate system is notoriously complex. Many different physical
processes interact in a tangled web of feedbacks to produce the dynamic and
variable climate we observe. Unlike a laboratory science, meteorology and
oceanography are hindered by the impossibility of controlled experiments which
might allow the key mechanisms to be conclusively revealed. We are stuck with
the one planet on which we live and cannot change its basic properties to see
what happens. Consequently, the science proceeds by observation and by a heavy
reliance on numerical simulation with GCMs, which are sophisticated computer
programs run on the most powerful computers available. These simulations offer
the possibility of a certain kind of controlled climate experiments: we can
create virtual earths on the computer, control their properties, and observe
their behavior with precision. One obvious limitation of this approach is that
the models are imperfect representations of reality. A less obvious, but equally
important problem is the models' complexity, which both limits the number and
type of simulations which can be done and renders the results nearly as
difficult to understand as the real climate system. Because of these problems,
there is a need to supplement observational and GCM studies with theoretical
studies using models that are simpler than GCMs - if not simple enough to allow
solution with pencil and paper, then at least using very simple computer
programs that run quickly on a PC. To the extent that these simpler models have
key features in common with the real system, their simplicity allows a deeper
level of understanding of the basic dynamics of climate and leads to explicit
hypotheses that can be tested against observations and GCM simulations. This
project harnesses the physical insight of climate scientists and the
sophisticated methods of applied mathematicians to develop and study simple
models designed specifically to represent the tropical atmospheric component of
the earth's climate system.