* 0140688
* Proposal to Operate and Analyze Data from the High Resolution Fly's Eye Detector (Part III)
* MPS,PHY
* 02/01/2003,04/30/2004
* Pierre Sokolsky, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 04/30/2004
* USD 2,525,098.00

This proposal is from the University of Utah group and requests funding to
continue to operate the High Resolution Fly's Eye (HiRes) Observatory, located
at the U.S. Army's Dugway Proving Ground, Utah. The HiRes observatory consists
of two stations separated by 12.6 km and detects ultra high energy (UHE) cosmic
rays via nitrogen fluorescence in the atmosphere. The goals of the experiment
are to study the spectrum, composition and anisotropy of cosmic rays with
energies starting from about 1017 eV up to beyond 1020 eV. Previous experiments,
including the original Fly's Eye experiment, have shown evidence that the
spectrum may continue past the predicted Greisen-Zatsepin-Kuzmin (GZK) cutoff
and the nature of the events above the GZK cutoff is a puzzle. The goal of the
HiRes experiment is to achieve an order of magnitude greater sensitivity than
the previous Fly's Eye experiment. In earlier running of HiRes, a few
outstanding events have been observed above 1020 eV, but the flux of these
events is in significant disagreement with the published results from the AGASA
ground array. This proposal requests funds to continue running in order to
resolve this and other outstanding issues of UHE cosmic rays by measuring the
properties of events with energies above 1017 eV. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition, HiRes has a vigorous educational outreach program, ASPIRE, funded by
the NSF and conducted in collaboration with the Utah State Office of Education.
The goal of this program is to communicate the excitement of the scientific
research to the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The HiRes experiment is a
collaborative effort between the University of Utah, the University of Adelaide,
Columbia University, Rutgers University, Montana State University, the
University of New Mexico, and the University of Tokyo.&lt;br/&gt;