* 0140132
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Mechanics of Rock Glacier Creep: A New GIS Method and A Possible Response to Climate Change
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2002,09/30/2004
* T. Nelson Caine, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/2004
* USD 11,700.00

Rock glaciers are considered a glacial or periglacial feature that slowly creep
downslope as a result of deformation of ice that has been consolidated with
angular, coarse rock. Although rock glaciers have been studied using a variety
of field techniques and, more recently, with remote aerial photography analysis,
much still is unknown regarding the dynamics of flow. The mechanism by which
factors like micro-topography, ice content, or rock glacier form influence rock
glacier behavior is unknown. Similarly, little is known of the possible
existence of regional flow patterns as a result of climate change. Previous
analyses have been primarily limited to the Alps in Europe. This doctoral
dissertation research project will investigate the mechanics of rock glacier
creep in the U.S. and Canadian Rocky Mountains, using an approach that combines
analyses using high-precision temporal aerial photography and a geographic
information system (GIS). The doctoral student will design a digital methodology
for detecting motion of the rock glaciers to maximize the advantages of data
analysis within a GIS. Rock glacier sections within a variety of different rock
glacier forms will be analyzed to gain a greater comprehension of rock glacier
motion. Because active rock glaciers are considered an indicator of
discontinuous permafrost, a regionalized approach to rock glacier motion will be
undertaken to detect climatically induced changes in permafrost distribution.
The methods employed in this study will resemble those presented in earlier
studies, but they will incorporate GIS-based analytic procedures. A sequence of
temporal air photos for rock glaciers will be selected and scanned at a high
resolution. The photos will then be enhanced, orthorectified, and co-registered
to a common scale. Point-to-point methods will be conducted in a GIS to
temporally track large boulders and rocks. Attribute data about the points as
well as ancillary data will be included to determine the factors affecting flow.
Detailed digital elevational models (DEM) will also be constructed to monitor
surface slumping. Vertical and horizontal velocities will be calculated for
approximately five to ten rock glaciers extending across a latitudinal transect
of the Rocky Mountains for dates ranging from 1940 to the
present.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As development and recreation continue to increase
in mountainous regions, the nature and stability of these areas is threatened.
Global warming will further alter stability. An important component to the
alpine geomorphic system, rock glaciers, are expected to experience substantial
change. Rock glaciers may become unstable or may cause catastrophic releases of
water that could damage nearby residential areas, communication towers, ski
lifts, hiking paths, campgrounds, or other recreational areas. The results of
this study should help monitor the form rock glaciers. They also will provide a
better understanding of the dynamics of rock glacier flow, which will enhance
our understanding of other rock glaciers and permafrost distribution on other
terrestrial planets such as Mars. The study will develop methods using a GIS
that will allow the input of ancillary data and incorporate IKONOS data for
future analysis. This GIS-based format will be easily updateable and
transferable to other parts of the world. As a result, this research will help
advance the monitoring of global changes in permafrost. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;