* 0140112
* Topics in Dilation Theory
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Scott McCullough, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2005
* USD 53,562.00

PI: Scott McCullough Proposal Number: 0140112

ABSTRACT

The Sz. Nagy Dilation Theorem, which models a contraction operator on Hilbert
space as the adjoint of an isometry restricted to an invariant subspace has had
a profound influence on operator theory and its applications. The existence of
the Agler boundary for families of representations and of boundary
representations (not necessarily irreducible) and the C-star envelope for
operator algebras are abstract generalizations of the Sz.-Nagy dilation theorem
which naturally encode Pick interpolation and in many cases commutant lifting.
They also provide a natural setting for versions of Beurling's theorem. The
Agler boundary and C-star envelope have been explicitly computed for the
families of completely contractive representations of the algebra of multipliers
of symmetric Fock space, the algebra of multipliers of the Dirichlet space, as
well as quotients of the disc and annulus algebra. The PI will investigate
situations in which strong versions of Pick interpolation, Beurling's theorem,
and commutant lifting hold as a function of the complexity of the corresponding
Agler boundary and C-star envelope. The investigation will make contact with
function theory, special functions, differential equations, and the general
theory of operator algebras. Thre are also plans to continue studying
factorization of polynomials in several non-commuting variables pursuing the
theme that one-variable results most naturally generalize to the non-commutative
setting.

Operator theory has a history of rich interplay with engineering and physics as
well as other vital areas of mathematics including complex function theory and
algebraic geometry. Originally developed as a tool to study integral and
differential equations arising in physics, operator theory, operator algebras,
and operator systems play an important role in modern quantum physics. Four
fundamental themes in operator theory, Sz.-Nagy dilation, Pick interpolation,
commutant lifting, and Beurling's theorem are now basic technology in systems
theory which in turn has important applications in image processing and control
theory - the mathematics behind automatic controllers such as autopilots. A
major emphasis in the proposed work is generalizations of these themes with a
view toward applications to systems theory, control theory, operator algebras,
and function theory. McCullough will also study factorization problems for
polynomials in several non-commuting variables. (Here xy may not equal yx.) This
investigation is expected to make connection with non-commutative algebraic
geometry and Linear Matrix Inequalities or LMI's which frequently arise in
engineering applications.

