* 0140466
* Process Development for Microscale Robotic Deposition of Concentrated Colloidal Gels
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Placid Ferreira, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mary Lynn Realff
* 07/31/2006
* USD 385,000.00

This grant provides funds for the development of a processing tool, as well as a
processing planning system, for the rapid deposition of concentrated colloidal
gels. This is a solid freeform fabrication technology and the current grant is
focused at performing deposition based fabrication on length scales the order of
microns. The tool to be developed is a robotic system consisting of dual stage
serving axes in 3 dimensions. A coarse stage driven by linear motors will carry
a fine stage driven by piezos which will actually support the deposition head.
Process modeling will be performed to determine material flow behavior and
solidification characteristics. These models will then be used in a process
planning CAE tool to determine optimal machine processing conditions. The
overall project will fuse together expertise from the fields of Robotics,
Controls, Manufacturing, and Materials Science to create very small scale
periodic structures in an extremely rapid fashion.

If successful, this work will enable the creation of microscale periodic
lattices. By developing intentional defects in the structures, these lattices
can then be used to provide optical waveguide capability for advanced photonic
devices. The benefit of the proposed method is the time taken to construct such
devices. While standard lithography methods can achieve the same resolution, the
time for processing is on the order of days. The current system will have build
times on the order of minutes. This will allow for the exploration of a huge
design space in creating photonic bandgap structures that could be the future
backbone of computing and communication applications.