* 0140027
* U.S.-Japan Planning Visit:  Scaling Bubble Behavior Between the Deep-Sea and Laboratory
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Ira Leifer, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 04/30/2005
* USD 6,722.00

0140027&lt;br/&gt;Leifer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a one year
planning visit between Professor Ira Leifer at the University of California at
Santa Barbara and Professor Tomoaki Kunugi of Kyoto University in Japan and
Professor Katsumi Tsuchiya of the University of Tokushima in Japan. The
researchers will devise a plan to improve understanding of the behavior of deep-
sea bubbles by intercomparing field observations with laboratory studies.
Currently, few studies exist in the literature on these bubbles, and thus
incorporation of appropriate parameterizations of deep-sea bubble behavior
(chemico-hydrodynamic) into numerical simulations requires potentially
unjustified assumptions. Research to generate more realistic parameterizations
will improve the accuracy of numerical models of processes such as hydrocarbon
seepage bubble-mediated gas transfer into the ocean and atmosphere.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will facilitate collaboration between three
groups with complementary expertise and capabilities, allowing an important
technical problem to be addressed with a broad array of modern methods.
Professor Leifer has expertise both in laboratory research of bubble
hydrodynamics (at atmospheric pressure) and field bubble observations at depths
from 20 to 540 m. Professor Tsuchiya has experience in laboratory research both
at atmospheric and high pressure, and is a well-recognized theoretical expert on
bubbles and bubble wake hydrodynamics. Professor Kunugi is a well-recognized
expert on direct numerical simulation of two-phase flows. The project will offer
a good opportunity to join efforts between the two countries. This research
impacts important areas such as oceanic carbon dioxide injection to counter
human emissions, studying the fate of seep oil and hydrocarbons in the
environment, and the use of rising seep bubbles for location of marine petroleum
resources. Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will
broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and
cooperation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;