* 0140431
* U.S.-Czech-Hungarian Collaboration on Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science Involving DIMACS-DIMATIA-Renyi Centers
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Fred Roberts, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 06/30/2007
* USD 155,949.00

This U.S.-Czech-Hungarian research project involves three teams led by Fred
Roberts of Rutgers University's Center for Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical
Computer Science (DIMACS) with partners in Prague and Budapest. His counterparts
are Jaroslav Nesetril of the Czech Center for Discrete Mathematics, Theoretical
Informatics and Applications (DIMATIA) at Charles University and Gyula Katona of
the Hungarian Academy of Sciences' Alfred Renyi Institute for Mathematics. Their
collaborative research plan involves the formation of multinational "working
groups" in research areas of discrete mathematics and theoretical computer
science. These "working groups" will consist of a complementary mix of expertise
from each center and include graduate students as well as senior and junior
faculty. New members may be added as projects progress. Some participants may be
drawn from other institutions, when appropriate. Additionally, smaller team
collaborations resulting from working group interaction will be fostered through
a visit program that allows researchers and graduate students from the partner
centers to work together more intensively, with emphasis on a senior researcher
in one center and a junior researcher or student at another.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The topics to be studied include: 1) extremal
combinatorics, 2) graph colorings and their generalizations, and 3) algebraic
and geometric methods in combinatorics. Our knowledge of the interactions
between algebraic geometry and combinatorics will be extended through
examination of power series, hidden convexity phenomenon, and combinatorial
characterizations of algebraic sets. Results should lead to advances in discrete
mathematics which may be applicable to problems in group testing,
communications, and statistical physics. Additionally, the involvement of
outstanding junior researchers in this international network of excellence
should have a significant and long-lasting influence on human resource
development in all three countries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This international
project linking three leading mathematics research centers fulfills the program
objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling experts in the United
States and Central Europe to combine complementary talents and share research
resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence.