* 0140700
* Joint Performance Optimization of Wireless Networks and Control Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Stephen Boyd, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2005
* USD 150,000.00

Joint Performance Optimization of Wireless Networks and Control
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current control technology is not well
suited&lt;br/&gt;to operation over a packet based network, and
conversely,&lt;br/&gt;most networks are not optimized for control applications.
&lt;br/&gt;Moreover, critical network performance parameters that affect
control&lt;br/&gt;system performance, such as bit rates&lt;br/&gt;and delay and
packet loss statistics, depend on various&lt;br/&gt;choices made in the network,
such as powers allocated to wireless&lt;br/&gt;transmitters, bandwidths or time-
slot fractions allocated to &lt;br/&gt;channels, and routing
methods.&lt;br/&gt;So in addition to the challenge of working out how a
control&lt;br/&gt;system can be made to work in a packet-based
&lt;br/&gt;networked environment, we also&lt;br/&gt;have the challenge of
working out how the network should be &lt;br/&gt;configured, or operated, so as
to improve control system performance.&lt;br/&gt;This proposal addresses two
fundamental issues that arise.&lt;br/&gt;Neither solves the whole problem, but
each addresses a critical issue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first topic involves
joint optimization of&lt;br/&gt;a controller and critical communication and
network&lt;br/&gt;parameters such as transmit powers, packet routing,
and&lt;br/&gt;bandwidth and time-slot allocation. &lt;br/&gt;To simplify this
problem, only the affects of these&lt;br/&gt;network parameters on bit rates,
hence quantization noise, is &lt;br/&gt;considered. The second topic considered
is&lt;br/&gt;simultaneous routing and resource allocation for
wireless&lt;br/&gt;data networks.&lt;br/&gt;This is the problem of jointly
finding an optimal set&lt;br/&gt;of flows and communication resources that
maximize the performance of&lt;br/&gt;the network, with respect to some
objective such as optimal&lt;br/&gt;control system performance.&lt;br/&gt;Here
we hope to develop algorithms to dynamically allocate&lt;br/&gt;communication
resources (such as transmit powers, bandwidth)&lt;br/&gt;and simultaneously
optimize routing decisions.&lt;br/&gt;