* 0140343
* Three-Body Coulomb Effects and Asymptotic Normalization Coefficients in Nuclear Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Akram Zhanov, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 04/30/2006
* USD 90,000.00

PHY-0140343&lt;br/&gt;Zhanov&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of the research is
to further extend and apply the asymptotic three-particle Coulomb scattering
wave function to problems in nuclear astrophysics. Knowledge of the three-body
Coulomb scattering wave function is important both from fundamental and
practical points of view. On the fundamental side, it will pave the way to a
solution, both in nuclear and atomic physics, of the long-standing three-body
quantum-mechanical problem with three charged particles. As a practical
application, we will use the three-body Coulomb scattering wave function to
estimate both the effect of the post-decay Coulomb acceleration in Coulomb
breakup reactions and the effect of the a third spectator proton (medium) on the
hydrogen burning p-p reaction that involves two protons inside the sun. Nuclear
capture reactions between charged particles in stellar interiors occur at such
small energies (&lt; hundred keV) that their cross sections are very small.
Hence, direct measurements in the lab are extremely difficult or impossible.
Thus indirect techniques have been developed to determine stellar cross
sections. One such indirect technique uses breakup reactions of a projectile in
the Coulomb field of a heavy target. However, the Coulomb field of the target
being a source of the reaction, plays not only a positive but also a negative
role: the positively charged fragments formed from the projectile breakup are
moving in the repulsive Coulomb field of the target. This acceleration effect
due to the Coulomb field, called post-decay Coulomb acceleration (PCA), distorts
the experimental results that are used to extract the radiative capture reaction
rates. Unfortunately, a real quantum-mechanical estimate of PCA has not been
done because the three-particle Coulomb scattering wave function describing the
motion of two fragments in the Coulomb field of the target is unknown. Recently
we have found the leading asymptotic terms of this wave function in the
asymptotic region where two fragments are close to each other and far away from
the third particle. This is just configuration region that contributes to
Coulomb breakup reactions. Hence, the asymptotic Coulomb wave function found in
our earlier work and its extension can be used to estimate, for the first time,
the effect of the PCA on the nuclear astrophysical radiative capture processes
determined from the Coulomb breakup reactions in a full quantum-mechanical
approach. The same wave function also will be used to estimate the impact of the
proton-spectator on the fusion cross section of two protons inside the sun. This
is the first of the hydrogen burning reactions in the sun and hence it defines
the sun's luminosity. Further we will apply the asymptotic normalization
coefficient (ANC) concept to calculate the external region contribution to
radiative capture widths for resonances decaying to bound states that are
important in nuclear astrophysics. In some cases it is difficult to measure the
radiative widths and the calculated ANC's allow us to put the limits on the
possible radiative width values.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;