* 0140605
* Thermal Fatigue of Solder Joints
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Mark Palmer, Kettering University
* Standard Grant
* Yip-Wah Chung
* 12/31/2004
* USD 114,312.00

Funding is provided under this RUI award to permit 8 teams of undergraduate
students over the course of a two-year period to participate in a continuous
research project evaluating the thermomechanical fatigue of solder joints. To
make this experience successful it is proposed to create a unique learning
experience which is a combination of innovative classroom instruction and
research. A master's student will assist in this project, and by doing so have a
unique master's level experience designed to require the evaluation of the work
of others, the synthesis of their work with that of the undergraduates and the
development of leadership skills. There are research and teaching components to
this proposed project.

Research: Thermomechanical fatigue (TMF) is the leading cause of solder joint
failure in electronic assemblies. TMF of solder joints is difficult to model as
there are many complex and interacting factors effecting the progression of
damage to the joint. Because of the high homologous temperatures (0.8 or higher)
significant microstructural evolution occurs during TMF, changing the properties
of the material as TMF progresses. An experimental investigation will be
conducted to 1) identify those more readily measured material properties most
likely to affect TMF resistance, 2) evaluate the various acceleration factors
used in TMF testing, and 3) evaluate the role of wetting in TMF failures.

As a result of this research much insight into TMF failure will be gained - 1)
progress will be made toward the development of an experimentally verified
energy model, and 2) the role of wetting in adhesion will be assessed. This
means that those considering using lead-free solder alloys will be able to use
diagnostic "tools" not currently available -- the combination of material
properties which correlate to TMF resistance.

Teaching: To enable undergraduates to participate in a continuing research
program, a unique "classroom" experience will supplement the research. These
class sessions will embrace interactive learning techniques, and expose the
undergraduates to 1) the necessary theoretical background, 2) the status of the
project, 3) necessary lab techniques including statistical analysis, 4) oral and
written communication skills, and 5) broader issues including ethics and
economic impact. All of these subjects will be context based. The philosophy of
this course is that upper level undergraduates need to perform at the synthesis
level of Bloom's Taxonomy, and their experience is designed to enable them to do
so.

The master's student will be required to perform at the evaluation level of
Bloom's Taxonomy (evaluating the work of the undergraduates) and synthesize this
work with their own study on wetting, thus participating in a unique integrating
experience. Additionally the student will develop leadership skills, and
possibly be persuaded to pursue a doctoral degree and develop a desire to teach.
The master's students experience may also encourage the undergraduates to pursue
a graduate degree.

It is felt that this comprehensive plan will maximize the chances for success
and serve as a demonstration project for others desiring to incorporate research
into the undergraduate experience and developing a novel masters program.

Impact: It is felt that this program can significantly impact undergraduate
education by serving as a proof of concept in the development of research
oriented courses, generating an appreciation of life-long learning, and
demonstrating the value of undergraduate research to the outside community. This
work complements the current work of the PI and lays the foundation for his
future plans.

