* 0140717
* RUI: Design and Fabrication of Components with Optimized Intertwined Lattice Microstructures
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Douglas Stahl, Milwaukee School of Engineering
* Continuing grant
* Judy M. Vance
* 08/31/2006
* USD 281,118.00

The objective of this research is to create a process for the design and
fabrication of structural components with optimized composite microstructures.
Here the term "microstructure" refers to the component's inner structure, the
scale of which is small compared to the scale of the component; the
microstructure is not, for examples relevant to this project, microscopic. The
major phases of the research program include: (1) creating a multi-scale design
process to optimize a component and its microstructure, (the microstructure's
geometry will be a lattice or, for composites with multiple constituent
materials, a set of intertwined lattices and the iterative design process will
address material density, anisotropy, and orientation in distinct steps,
identifying optimal rotations and distortions for the lattice to create an
optimized microstructure), (2) refining and extending hybrid fabrication
techniques, based on Solid Freeform Fabrication, to construct the components
with finely scaled microstructures, and (3) designing, fabrication and testing
example components.

If successful, this research will lead to practical procedures for the design
and fabrication of lightweight, high performance structure and machine parts.
The ability to design the microstructure within a component will provide the
opportunity to adjust material properties where appropriate, and to adjust the
properties via gradients rather than discontinuities. Applying this concept to
composites made from multiple constituent materials, one could design a
component that has two different material properties, for example, stiffness and
thermal or electrical conductivity, optimized independently.