* 0140109
* Nonlinear Optics in Waveguides Coupled With Photonic Band Gap Structures
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2005
* Joseph Haus, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 04/30/2005
* USD 221,854.00

0140109&lt;br/&gt;Haus&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes to design,
fabricate, characterize, and test waveguide-geometry, periodically textured
nonlinear optical devices. Proton exchange and reverse proton exchange processes
will be used to fabricate waveguides in lithium niobate. The superstrate is
patterned over a wide area using UV laser lithography. The PI has developed the
capability to fabricate one- (1D) and two-dimensional (2D) photonic band gap
(PBG) structures with the UV laser facility with lattice constants varied from
150 nm to about 2 microns. Patterning will be done using plasma etching
techniques, especially inductively coupled plasma etching to control reactivity
and retain anisotropy of the etch process. The optical properties of the
waveguides, such as mode index and loss, will be characterized in our
laboratories. The laser diode pumps will be used to make compact, short
wavelength, emission sources. Other spin-off applications will be examined, such
as, terahertz wave generation, PBG-based electro-optic modulators, and
parametric generation or oscillation at infrared
wavelengths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Planned simulations of our complex three-
dimensional propagation geometry will help optimize the design parameters and
minimize the losses. For lithium niobate PBG waveguides his vector coupled-mode
theory calculations predict that the second-harmonic and parametric generation
output efficiency will be enhanced by two orders of magnitude over quasi-phase
matched devices of the same length. His experiments are designed to test these
results. Furthermore, he will explore the properties of 2D photonic crystals to
further improve frequency generation based on the large dispersion, resonant
field enhancement, and low group velocity, which is an ubiquitous feature of
higher dimensional PBGs not related to a band edge. He will conduct a
theoretical study of the resonant mode characteristics of 1D and 2D PBGs to
determine the grating and waveguide fabrication issues and test the designs in
the sample fabrication process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photonic band gap
structures have received wide attention because of their unique properties and
potential for diverse applications. The coherent, PBG sources could impact
future developments in storage technology, imaging, space communications,
xerography, medical photo-therapy, bio-assays, and UV lithography. Students will
be trained with the skills and knowledge to develop future PBG-based
optoelectronic devices. They will fabricate and characterize the devices and
test the accuracy of the designs by comparing with modeling and simulation
results. Hence they will have developed a broad range of laboratory and modeling
experien&lt;br/&gt;