* 0140698
* Collaborative Research:  A Focused Research Group on Multiscale Geometric Analysis--Theory, Tools, Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2002,01/31/2006
* David Donoho, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Rong Chen
* 01/31/2006
* USD 543,002.00

Proposal IDs: DMS-0140698, DMS-0140540, DMS-0140587, DMS-0140623&lt;br/&gt;PIs:
Donoho, Candes, Huo and Jones&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: A Focused Research Group on
Multiscale Geometric Analysis--Theory,&lt;br/&gt;Tools,
Applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
interdisciplinary team, bridging Harmonic Analysis, Statistics, Image Analysis
and Astronomy, proposes a united effort to exploit and extend recent
breakthroughs in computational harmonic analysis. The team will consolidate
several scattered advances into a unified body of theory and methods to be
called Multiscale Geometric Analysis, which can probe the fine structure of 2-,
3- and higher- dimensional functions and point clouds, able to isolate and
manipulate intermediate-dimensional phenomena. Simple examples include edges in
2-d images, filaments and sheets in 3-d point catalogs. Characterizing such
intermediate-dimensional phenomena is essential for fundamental progress in a
wide range of problem areas (including 2-d and 3-d imaging) where traditional
multiscale methods have now run their course. Our united effort has three main
outcomes. 1. Theory. Coherent, comprehensive knowledge, showing what can and
cannot be accomplished with computational harmonic analysis. 2. Tools. A wide
range of practical MGA algorithms and a unified, publicly available software
environment - BeamLab - deploying them. 3. Applications. Our main initial focus
will be on the analysis of 3-d point catalogs in astronomy, such as those coming
on-line soon from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey. We know a priori that the data
contain filaments and sheets, embedded in a scattered background, and MGA
provides a decisive set of tools to resolve the structural properties of such
catalogs, far more sensitive and more comprehensible than any tools currently
available for such analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many new kinds of massive
databases are being created in our era's revolutionary transition to a data-rich
society. Many of these databases contain geometric structures such as surfaces,
and filaments, albeit in a sometimes hidden manner. Databases of this sort can
include galaxy catalogs in astronomy -- in which the filaments and sheets are
predicted by various theories of universe formation -- 3-D scanning of faces and
other objects -- in which filaments and surfaces are caused by structures such
as skin and hair -- and statistical databases in which curves and surfaces arise
from existence of predictable patterns. This Focused Research Group on
Multiscale Geometric Analysis is a research effort bringing together
mathematicians, statisticians, image analysts and astronomers to create new
tools and theories to help extract geometric structure and meaning from such
databases. The participants are skilled at multiscale analysis, which will be a
central organizational principle. We expect multiscale methods to have an impact
here comparable to what wavelets have had over the last twenty years in many
other problems in science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;