* 0140636
* Wavelet Transform and Time Frequency Atoms Based Approach to Power Quality Monitoring
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Alexander Domijan, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Tomsovic
* 05/31/2005
* USD 160,000.00

ABSTRACT (ECS-0140636) An accurate and efficient approach to power quality
monitoring will be developed. A power disturbance is typically a non-stationary
signal with magnitude variance and frequency deviation. The proposed work deals
with constructing the complex Time Frequency Atom (TFA) for power quality
monitoring, in which there is no coupling between the central frequency and
frequency radius. The TFA based Wavelet Transform (WT) approach has the
following advantages over that based on a complex Wavelet function: (1) Since
the central frequency and frequency radius of each filtering channel can be set
or tuned separately and flexibly, the separation of different filtering
channels, which are designated for a fundamental component and harmonics, in the
frequency plane can be achieved, i.e. eliminating the interference between each
other. The concept of "Wavelet Energy Distribution"(WED) is proposed, which is
based on a complex Wavelet function and WT, to fulfill the "spectrum scanning"
by a non-uniform frequency window. Further, novel power quality indices will be
created that use the TFA and WED. The approach will be evaluated by using
simulated power disturbance waveforms, followed by an on-line evaluation in the
laboratory and in industrial sites, based on hardware implementation. The
accurate estimation of magnitudes and frequencies of fundamental as well as
harmonic components is also essential to power system control and protection.
Therefore, the project will promote research and teaching in not only the power
quality field but also power system control, protection, and the development of
power instruments/apparatus.