* 0140497
* Quantum Unique Ergodicity and Rigidity in Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Elon Lindenstrauss, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2004
* USD 111,253.00

PI: Lindenstrauss&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0140497&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum
Unique Ergodicity and Rigidity in Dynamical Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research proposed lies at the interface of dynamical &lt;br/&gt;systems and
several other mathematical disciplines, and &lt;br/&gt;in particular number
theory and the mathematical theory &lt;br/&gt;of Quantum Chaos. It is well known
that the collections &lt;br/&gt;of invariant probability measures and closed
invariant &lt;br/&gt;sets for hyperbolic maps or flows is very large;
remarkably,&lt;br/&gt;in many dynamical systems of algebraic origin where there
&lt;br/&gt;are two (or more) commuting hyperbolic maps or flows it is
&lt;br/&gt;conjectured that there are actually very few measures or
&lt;br/&gt;closed sets invariant under this bigger action. Despite (or
&lt;br/&gt;perhaps because of) important contributions by several
&lt;br/&gt;authors, the mystery of this rigidity property of
&lt;br/&gt;multidimensional actions is still one of the central problems
&lt;br/&gt;in modern ergodic theory.While seemingly unrelated, the
&lt;br/&gt;methodology of the study of rigidity of multiparameter actions
&lt;br/&gt;is very suitable to study the arithmetical case of the Quantum
&lt;br/&gt;Unique Ergodicity Conjecture, regarding the limit of the
&lt;br/&gt;spatial distribution of a free particle on certain manifolds
&lt;br/&gt;in a quantum steady state as the energy of the state tends
to&lt;br/&gt;infinity (the semiclassical limit). This question has been
&lt;br/&gt;considered previously by many authors mostly using tools from
&lt;br/&gt;analytic number theory; the approach proposed, using the
&lt;br/&gt;dynamical approach, is new and has already borne
fruits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory of dynamical systems gives tools to
study complex &lt;br/&gt;systems, for example the evolution of a complicated
deterministic&lt;br/&gt;process over time. There is a rich and distinguished
tradition &lt;br/&gt;of using these powerful tools in other mathematical
disciplines, &lt;br/&gt;most notably in number theory and combinatorics. The
research &lt;br/&gt;proposed is connected to several of the most exciting
possible &lt;br/&gt;applications, including new implications to the theory of
&lt;br/&gt;quantum chaos in mathematical
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;