* 0140484
* International Cooperative Study of Multiphonon Relaxation of Mid IR Transitions in Laser Crystals with Short Phonon Spectra
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Sergey Mirov, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2005
* USD 84,808.00

0140484&lt;br/&gt;Mirov&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is proposed to extend a
collaborative research effort between the University of Alabama at Birmingham
(UAB) and Laser Materials and Technology Research Center of General Physics
Institute RAS (LMT RC GPI). The current cooperation in laser spectroscopy,
investigations of the fundamental optical properties and optical relaxation
processes of the energy of electronic excitation in laser crystals would be
continued and broadened to include a comprehensive study of the relaxation
processes which affect the optically excited state of promising rare-earth and
transitional metal doped laser materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research would combine the expertise of the Russian investigators in lasers and
fundamental physical processes with the expertise in lasers and laser
spectroscopy and state-of-the-art facilities at the University of Alabama at
Birmingham.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigation of the multiphonon relaxation
(MR) at the potential mid- IR laser transitions (4- 7 um) in the fluoride,
chalcogenide, chloride and bromide crystals with short phonon spectra doped with
trivalent rare- earth ions like Pr 3+ , Nd 3+ , Dy 3+ , Ho 3+ , Er 3+ and Tm 3+
and divalent transient metals ions like Ti 2+ , V 2+ , Cr 2+ , Mn 2+ , Fe 2+ ,
Co 2+ and Ni 2+ will be done. A search of doped crystal matrixes with highly
efficient radiative transitions in the mid IR spectral region minimally by-
passed by multiphonon relaxation will be provided.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In doing
so the normal modes of vibrational spectra of crystal matrixes and electronic
transitions selections rules for possible types of optical centers of different
rare- earth dopants will be considered theoretically. Their influence on both
radiative and nonradiative transition rates will be analyzed. After theoretical
study the crystal matrixes having the electronic transitions in the mid- IR
spectral region with large radiative and low multiphonon relaxation rates will
be grown. Site- selective spectroscopic studies and temperature dependent
fluorescence kinetics measurements using highly sensitive correlated photon
counting technique and highly sensitive in the mid- IR spectral region fast
photodetectors will be provided at the potential mid IR laser transitions. The
temperature dependencies of multiphonon relaxation rates of practically all
optical RE transitions perspective for mid IR lasing will be measured and
analyzed. Spontaneous (without temperature simulation) multiphonon relaxation
rates will be measured at helium temperatures and calculated theoretically. The
calculations will be provided considering nonlinear mechanisms of multiphonon
relaxation taking into account the real phonon spectra of crystal matrix and
partial level- to level inter- multiplet spontaneous multiphonon relaxation
rates. These results will be compared with the simple single frequency
approximation of lattice vibrations. Comparison of the theory and experiment
will be provided. The quantum yield of fluorescence and absorption and emission
cross- sections of corresponding optical transitions will be determined and
compared with the predicted ones. The general regularities of the radiative and
the multiphonon relaxation rates on the anion and cation masses and unit
dimensions of crystal lattice and on the rare- earth ion and optical transition
types will be determined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The anticipated result of this
research effort is a better understanding of relaxation processes which effect
the optically excited states of promising RE and TM doped mid-IR laser
materials. The perspectives of obtaining mid-IR lasing including broadly tunable
for divalent transient metal ions will be analyzed in different types of above-
mentioned crystals.&lt;br/&gt;