* 0140104
* An International Perspective on the Role of Algebra in Elementary School Mathematics
* EHR,DRL
* 12/01/2001,08/31/2003
* James Kaput, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2003
* USD 61,872.00

&lt;br/&gt;The Algebra Problem: US Mathematics Education has an increasingly
difficult in Algebra&lt;br/&gt;Problems to solve. The standard indicators of
student achievements international comparisons, NAEP&lt;br/&gt;and other
national measures, as well as state test results all point in the direction of
lower achievement&lt;br/&gt;as grade levels increase. Well-known TIMSS analyses
of US curricula point in the direction of repetition&lt;br/&gt;of elementary
skill building and superficiality of topic coverage as important contributors to
the problem,&lt;br/&gt;combined with tell-and-drill pedagogy that puts students
in overly passive position as learners. And, of&lt;br/&gt;course, high failure
rates in first year algebra courses contribute to alienation on the part of
students and&lt;br/&gt;low morale among teachers. Responses involve a wide
variety, but largely ineffective tactics involving&lt;br/&gt;middle and early
high school curricula: pre-algebra courses of various kinds, screening and
diagnostic&lt;br/&gt;tests, district and state mandates that all students take
Algebra I, lengthened courses, modifying the&lt;br/&gt;definition of if algebra,
creating different versions of if algebra, end-of-course exams, among
others.&lt;br/&gt;Each adjustment produces small improvements, although, since
the tactics tend to be ad hoc and&lt;br/&gt;implemented independently,
improvements do not accumulate or multiply. NCTM recommendations
for&lt;br/&gt;integrating the development of algebraic reasoning across K-12 are
implemented only in a few of the&lt;br/&gt;standards-based curricula, and these
mainly at the middle school level.&lt;br/&gt;Research Towards Solutions: Several
research teams studying the development of algebraic&lt;br/&gt;reasoning in the
early (K-5) grades, who are represented in this proposal, have formed an
informal&lt;br/&gt;research collaborative, renewing a prior collaboration funded
by the US DoE OERI in the early/mid&lt;br/&gt;1990. These researchers share
broad hypotheses regarding the large positive potential of
building&lt;br/&gt;algebraic reasoning in the context of elementary mathematics,
the need to exploit untapped student&lt;br/&gt;learning capacities among younger
students, the powerful role of generalization and formalization
in&lt;br/&gt;deepening students experience and understanding of elementary
mathematics especially arithmetic&lt;br/&gt;and the potential for using changes
in the curricular relationships between algebra and
elementary&lt;br/&gt;mathematics as a catalyst and vehicle for faculty
development of elementary teachers. These researchers&lt;br/&gt;are engaged in
several complementary lines of work focusing on different aspects of the
challenges&lt;br/&gt;student learning, classroom practice, curriculum
development, professional development, capacity&lt;br/&gt;building, and so
on.&lt;br/&gt;Proposed Combination of Travel, Conferences and Monograph: The
collaborating researchers&lt;br/&gt;have all been invited to present papers to
an important conference to be held December 8-15, 2001, in&lt;br/&gt;Melbourne,
Australia on The Future of the Teaching and Learning of Algebra which is being
sponsored&lt;br/&gt;by the International Commission on Mathematics Instruction.
Professor Kaput has been designated to&lt;br/&gt;Co-Chair the Early Algebra
Group at the conference. We request funds to exploit, in 3 ways, this
unique&lt;br/&gt;opportunity to bring an intensely international perspective to
bear upon our active research program: (1)&lt;br/&gt;To support travel to the
international conference. (2) To hold two meetings in the US, one prior to
and&lt;br/&gt;one following the Melbourne conference, involving a slightly
larger group of mathematics educators&lt;br/&gt;working in this area. (3) To
write and publish a monograph expressing our findings in order to
inform&lt;br/&gt;policy makers, curriculum developers and assessment builders of
the latest developments in this rapidly&lt;br/&gt;changing field. Hence we also
request a small amount of funding for editorial work to pull together
and&lt;br/&gt;publicize the monograph, which in turn will point to additional
web resources illustrating relevant&lt;br/&gt;research.&lt;br/&gt;