* 0140355
* Cavity QED with Localized Atoms
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* H. Kimble, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Charles W. S. Conover
* 07/31/2007
* USD 1,776,573.00

This research program explores quantum dynamical processes for individual atoms
strongly coupled to the field of an optical cavity. The scientific objectives of
the proposed research include investigations of atomic kinetics in a quantized
light field and of the resulting entanglement between atomic motion and the
optical field. The specific setting for the research is that of cavity quantum
electrodynamics (cavity QED) in a domain of strong coupling whereby single atoms
and photons can profoundly impact the evolution of the composite
system.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research builds upon the previously realized
"atom-cavity microscope" for tracking the motion of individual atoms bound in
orbit by single photons inside a high-quality optical resonator. The strong
interaction of atom and cavity field allows atomic motion to be sensed in real
time at the quantum limits, thereby enabling the implementation of quantum
feedback to control atomic motion within the resonator. The proposed program of
research investigates the operating principles for such "quantum servos ",
including probing the quantum limits for observation and control of the
microscopic quantum world. The goal is the coherent manipulation of quantum
motion in ways that are not possible using ordinary feedback control. Although
the proposed&lt;br/&gt;research is principally experimental, a supporting
theoretical effort is also to be undertaken.&lt;br/&gt;Within a more general
context, the significance of the research program lies in its attempt to exploit
the atom-cavity system as a paradigm for the investigation of quantum dynamical
processes for open quantum systems in a regime of strong coupling. Cavity QED
with strong coupling propels optical physics well beyond traditional nonlinear
optics and laser physics into a new regime with dynamical processes now
involving atoms and photons taken one by one. By developing qualitatively new
technical capabilities in optical physics, the research addresses fundamental
issues related to the advancement of quantum information science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;