* 0140239
* Groups and Algebraic Geometry at the Centre de Recherches Mathematiques
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2003
* David Dummit, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia M. Wiegand
* 03/31/2003
* USD 52,000.00

This award will fund U.S. graduate students and post-doctoral
&lt;br/&gt;fellows attending the Centre de Recherches Mathematiques
in&lt;br/&gt;Montreal for periods of several weeks during a semester
of&lt;br/&gt;activities centered on the theme of Groups and Algebraic
Geometry&lt;br/&gt;during Spring, 2002. The activities planned include a
strong&lt;br/&gt;component of training, including 1) a four day workshop
on&lt;br/&gt;Hilbert Modular Varieties and Forms, 2) a one week Winter
school&lt;br/&gt;on Computations in Coxeter Groups, 3) a one week workshop
on&lt;br/&gt;Group Actions on Rational Varieties, 4) a two week workshop
on&lt;br/&gt;Invariant Theory, 5) a one-month concentration period on
the&lt;br/&gt;Langlands Program for Function Fields, 5) a two week workshop
on&lt;br/&gt;Computational Lie Theory, and 6) a one week workshop
on&lt;br/&gt;Algebraic Transformation Groups.&lt;br/&gt; The Centre de
Recherches Mathematiques in Montreal is one of &lt;br/&gt;Canada's three
research centers in the mathematical sciences, and &lt;br/&gt;has a broad
mandate covering all of the various aspects of&lt;br/&gt;development of the
discipline, with activities comprising theme&lt;br/&gt;years in various topics,
a general conference program, an&lt;br/&gt;industrial program, a publications
program in partnership with&lt;br/&gt;the American Mathematical Society, as well
as activities devoted&lt;br/&gt;to education. The themes cover some of the most
exciting areas&lt;br/&gt;of the mathematical sciences and typically alternate
between pure&lt;br/&gt;and applied disciplines. This award will provide support
for&lt;br/&gt;U.S. students and postdoctoral fellows so that they can
attend&lt;br/&gt;the events during the Spring 2002 semester. This semester
is&lt;br/&gt;thematically devoted to Groups and Algebraic Geometry,
a&lt;br/&gt;difficult area of research in which few, if any, universities
can&lt;br/&gt;offer coverage by advanced courses which allow for
adequate&lt;br/&gt;graduate student preparation. This award will allow students
to&lt;br/&gt;take advantage of an exceptional opportunity for education
and&lt;br/&gt;training by the world's leading experts in areas that have
seen&lt;br/&gt;significant numbers of recent breakthroughs.