* 0140602
* Microwave Photonic Modem Techniques for Millimeter Wave Transmitters and Receivers
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2007
* William Jemison, Lafayette College
* Standard Grant
* Rongqing Hui
* 05/31/2007
* USD 124,254.00



0140602 Jemison

This proposal describes a systematic investigation into microwave-photonic
techniques for the direct modulation, downconversion, and demodulation of
millimeter wave signals for high-speed wireless applications such as
telemedicine, multimedia distribution, and advanced satellite and military
communications. Direct modulation eliminates the spurious emissions and
filtering requirements associated with multiple frequency conversions, resulting
in potentially increased modulation bandwidth and greater carrier tuneability.
The use of photonics provides the wide bandwidth needed for direct conversion
from baseband to millimeter wave frequencies and visa versa and offers the
potential to significantly simplify millimeter wave transmitter and receiver
architectures. Photonic transmitter and receiver approaches also are attractive
since they are compatible with low-loss fiber optic distribution of millimeter
wave signals prior to wireless transmission and subsequent to wireless
reception.

Specifically, microwave-photonic modulation/demodulation (MP-Modem) techniques
that work directly at millimeter wave frequencies and can support data rates
approaching 1 Gbs will be developed. The techniques will be assessed via a
combination of theoretical, simulation, and experimental work. Candidate
techniques will be analyzed theoretically to develop models to quantify critical
performance criteria such as link gain, linearity, and bit-error-rate (BER).
These models will be implemented in commercially available microwave and system-
level simulation packages using a recently developed modeling approach for
microwave-photonic systems. Closed loop operation of promising MP-Modem
techniques will be demonstrated experimentally. The experimental work will focus
on proof-of-concept demonstrations using commercially available photonic
components. System-level applications that exploit the inherent wideband nature
of the MP-Modem approach also will be identified and studied. These applications
may include, but are not limited to, support of ultra-wideband frequency hopping
spread spectrum (FHSS); support of other wideband modulation techniques (e.g.
quasi-orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (quasi-OFDM) by simultaneous
operation in multiple wireless bands); support of multiple modulation formats
(e.g. M-ary PSK and M-ary FSK); and support of multiple access. Approaches for
implementing the techniques using advanced technologies such as integrated
optics and/or MEMs also will be explored.

The knowledge gained from these investigations will be applied to develop a new
class of transmitters and receivers that will meet the performance demands of
emerging high-speed digital millimeter-wave wireless communications while
providing implementation simplicity and advanced functionality that cannot be
achieved via traditional electronic design techniques.