* 0140584
* Passivation of Silicon Dangling Bonds by Deuterium Implantation
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Durgamadhab Misra, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 04/30/2006
* USD 264,000.00

This project will obviate the diffusion annealing by introducing deuterium
through ion implantation. In MOS transistors, for example, deuterium will be
implanted on silicon substrate before the thin gate oxide was grown. To achieve
the objective, we will investigate (1) effect of deuterium implantation energy
and dose on oxide growth and its interface. An appropriate dose can reduce
substrate damage or eliminate creation of dislocation loops while satisfy the
dangling bonds even after the subsequent thermal cycles of oxide growth. Thermal
budgets will be optimized to control the physical incorporation and subsequent
electrical characteristics by studying the distribution of deuterium after ion
implantation. (2) Secondly, thermal kinetics of deuterium desorption from the
interface will be studied and its effect on electrical characteristics of
finished device will be evaluated. (3) Thirdly, the mechanisms of deuterium
diffusion in Si/Si02 system due to oxide growth will be investigated. The focus
of the proposal is to conduct an experimental investigation of incorporating
deuterium effectively through ion implantation. Tasks will be undertaken for a
comparative study of this process to other means of interface passivation such
as various annealing treatments, deuterium implantation at a partially completed
device (TI approach) and hydrogen implantation. In addition, we will incorporate
deuterium using ion implantation in silicon nanocrystals used for
optoelectronics applications. Even though the main focus of this research will
be towards Si/Si02 interface, an additional task will study GaAs devices to
investigate behavior of deuterium implantation in optoelectronic devices.
Extensive physical and electrical characterization will be employed. Sub-micron
MOSFETs will be used to achieve a fundamental understanding of the behavior of
implanted deuterium at the ultra-thin silicon-dioxide/silicon interface, which
is, at present, poorly understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Test devices will be
processed at the Microfabrication Center at NJIT with the help of graduate and
undergraduate students. Since NJIT has a significant presence of minority and
women students (~40% and ~18% respectively) it is expected that some of these
students will have the opportunity to contribute to this project. A recently
acquired state-of-the-art device characterization system (NSF supported) will be
used for electrical characterization at NJIT whereas some of the physical
characterization will be carried out at Agere Labs formerly Lucent Technologies.
GaAs samples will be prepared by Anadigics. Deuterium implantation will be
carried out at NJIT and at Ion Implantation Company (IICO). The high national
importance of this cutting edge technology and close involvement of qualified
staff and students at NJIT and researchers at Agere Labs and Anadigics will
significantly impact on advancing knowledge base in this area.&lt;br/&gt;