* 0140490
* Nonlinear Network Structures for Dynamic System Control
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2007
* Frank Lewis, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 05/31/2007
* USD 215,959.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The complexity of modem day aerospace, industrial,
DoD, civil infrastructure, and vehicle systems is increasing, and performance
requirements are becoming more stringent in terms of both accuracy and speed of
response. Such systems are characterized by complex dynamics having
nonlinearities, unmodeled dynamics, flexibility effects, varying parameters,
unknown friction, high amplitude disturbances, and actuators with deadzones,
backlash, and saturation. The control problems associated with such complex
systems are not easy, as they do not satisfy most of the assumptions made in the
controls literature. Therefore, most existing control algorithms do not work
well. Optimal nonlinear control systems hold out the hope of successfully
confronting these problems but are expressed in terms of solutions to the
Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equation. However, HJB is not analytically
solvable for practical systems, and the dynamic programming solution for
discrete-time systems suffers from NP-complexity problems ('the curse of
dimensionality'). Approximate solution techniques for the HJB equation have been
explored and show great promise in reducing NP-complexity issues. However, such
HJB approximate techniques must be tied to real-time on-line feedback control
techniques that simultaneously stabilize the system while adapting to
approximate the HJB solution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent developments show that
nonlinear network structures, both neural network (NN) and fuzzy logic (FL)
systems, hold out the hope of providing approximate solutions to the HJB
equation and other nonlinear design equations. Structured nonlinear networks
hold out the hope for confronting problems of NP-complexity in complex systems
control. The structure inherent in FL systems holds out the hope of designing
new NN architectures of increased structure. Approximate HJB solution also holds
out the hope of bridging the gap between high-level computer science
architectures and servo-level feedback control. This research has three goals:
(1) Nearly Optimal HJB Control Using Neural Networks; (2) 0N0ovel 00002High-
Level Nonlinear Network Control Architectures; (3) and UTA/High School Teams and
Courseware for Nonlinear Network Control. &lt;br/&gt;