* 0140434
* Novel Wavelength Tailorable Heterojunctions For Infrared (IR)Detection
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Unil A. Perera, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Rongqing Hui
* 08/31/2006
* USD 253,000.00

The proposed project involves research on Heterojunctions concepts, for
developing infrared detectors having potential applications in important areas
such as spectroscopy in chemistry and biology, optical communication, plasma
diagnostics, medical and biological imaging systems, and astrophysics. In the
previous NSF program, emphasis was on QWIP detector formats for IR detection and
the improvement of the performance by understanding transient effects. Here the
development of tailorable solid state IR detectors for 3-30 um (100-10 THz)
range (a technologically important region for a wide range of applications) is
proposed. These detectors show better performance (responsivity, efficiency,
operating temperature and D*) than the available detectors. Recent breakthroughs
in THz generation have started bridging the gap between terahertz frequencies
and the frequencies above and below. However, in THz detector development,
extreme cooling capabilities are still a requirement as in superconducting hot
electron bolometers. In order for the field to develop substantially, both
source and detectors should develop at the same pace. The primary goal of this
proposal will he to design and characterize detectors based on a novel concept
[heterojunction interfacial workfunction internal photoemission (HEIWIP)] and
optimize the devices for various frequency (wavelength) ranges. The work will
include both experimental and theoretical effort studying the role of device
parameters on the performance including doping, barrier parameters, layer
thickness, resonance cavity effects and dark current issues. In collaboration
with scientists at other universities (Cornell), national laboratories (NRC -
Canada and U.S. Army Research Lab) and other institutes (Institute for Physics
of Microstructures, Nizhny Novgorod) these problems will be addressed by
exploring structures grown by different groups and different methods. Optimized
designed features, well-doping profiles, energy-selective barriers,
emitter/collector barriers, etc. will be modeled and
incorporated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The high national importance of this cutting-
edge technology, and the close involvement of highly qualified staff and
students at Georgia State with our collaborators will continue to impact
significantly on advancing knowledge, and physics and engineering education,
making a significant contribution to the nation's science and technology base by
supplying the scientific community with leading young scientists. The
collaborations will also ensure effective transfer to emerging high-tech
applications both in commercial and government laboratories. The results of the
proposed research will vastly improve the understanding of detectors and form
the basis for the next generation of THz detectors.&lt;br/&gt;