* 0140338
* Analytical and Geometrical Aspects of Non Linear Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2008
* Luis Caffarelli, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 04/30/2008
* USD 698,514.00

March 11, 2002.&lt;br/&gt;PI: Luis Caffarelli [caffarel@math.utexas.edu],
University of Texas, Austin&lt;br/&gt;DMS-
0140338&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our research focus
in a series of phenomena that bring together&lt;br/&gt;different areas of non
linear PDE. For instance, a flame front propagating in a layered medium brings
together the interaction of the fast phase transition at the edge of the flame,
with the linking of large scales (front speeds) and small scales (possibly
random , thin layering).&lt;br/&gt;Recent models of front formation, bring
together the interaction of&lt;br/&gt;optimal allocation,that provides the "
variational framework" for front&lt;br/&gt;formation (the Monge Ampere equation
) with the issue of how vorticity is&lt;br/&gt;transported within, and affects
the front. Finally, problems in financial engineering, bring together fully non
linear equations ( for instance as "extremals" or intervals of&lt;br/&gt;"trust"
when only rough bounds on volatility and correlations are&lt;br/&gt;available)
with issues of phase transition , when trading strategy&lt;br/&gt;changes
discontinuously at certain values of the parameters,or there
are&lt;br/&gt;constraints on the range of trading, and homogeneisation, when
the&lt;br/&gt;underlying space changes randomly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We plan to
study several models from different sciences that bring&lt;br/&gt;together
interactions of complementary non linear phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;A good example
would be flame propagation in a thinly layered&lt;br/&gt;material: Observed at
short range, the flame front will "wiggle", moving&lt;br/&gt;faster in some of
the layers, depending on their composition.&lt;br/&gt;From far away, the flame
will appear as a homogeneous front.&lt;br/&gt;Its speed , though, will depend in
a very subtle way from both the nature&lt;br/&gt;of the ignition process at the
edge of the flame ( free boundary&lt;br/&gt;problem) and the properties of the
very fine, ( possibly randomly&lt;br/&gt;organized, as it usually occurs in
nature) thin layering.&lt;br/&gt;Another example has to do with the formation of
weather fronts: according&lt;br/&gt;to some models, globally the front organizes
itself trying to " spread its&lt;br/&gt;energy" in an optimal way, and within,
vorticity ( the "rotational&lt;br/&gt;component" of wind) is transported in an
interactive way with the front&lt;br/&gt;organization. A third example comes
from financial engineering when seeking optimal ( or&lt;br/&gt;safest) trading
strategies, but , as in most cases, only a rough knowledge&lt;br/&gt;is
available of the way different ways in which different components
of&lt;br/&gt;the portfolio, or parameters ( interest rates, exchange rates,
etc&lt;br/&gt;) interact.This rough or incomplete knowledge, gives rise to non
linear&lt;br/&gt;strategies, that couple with constraints in the trading
range,&lt;br/&gt;discontinuous trading strategies, etc.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;