* 0140377
* Quantum Coherence
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Yakir Aharonov, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Earle L. Lomon
* 07/31/2005
* USD 277,327.00

A fundamental aspect of quantum phenomena is the non-local coherence of
the&lt;br/&gt;quantum wave that describes the state of a particle, which is
called the&lt;br/&gt;wave-particle duality. A consequence of this is the
Heisenberg uncertainty&lt;br/&gt;principle according to which there is a minimum
to the product of the&lt;br/&gt;uncertainties of the position and momentum or
time and energy of the particle&lt;br/&gt;that is given by the Planck's
constant. We plan to investigate the latter&lt;br/&gt;uncertainty principle in
relation to the general relativistic gravitational&lt;br/&gt;field, using our
earlier work that obtains this uncertainty relation using
only&lt;br/&gt;measurements intrinsic to the system under investigation. We
shall also use new&lt;br/&gt;non-local quantities that we have introduced,
called modular variables, to study&lt;br/&gt;the non-local quantum coherence of
the wave function. This will be used to&lt;br/&gt;investigate the Aharonov-Bohm
effect (discovered by the PI), which is the&lt;br/&gt;non-local interaction of
the wave function with the electromagnetic field. Some&lt;br/&gt;new aspects of
scattering due to the Aharonov-Bohm effect will be studied. The&lt;br/&gt;latter
work is relevant to a wide class of problems involving surface waves
and&lt;br/&gt;polarized light propagating in optical fibers, where various
impurities may be&lt;br/&gt;present.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The quantum coherence
of the wave function also opens up the possibilities for&lt;br/&gt;secure
communication using quantum systems and the construction of a
quantum&lt;br/&gt;computer. Computations which would take a present state-of-
the-art computer more&lt;br/&gt;than the life-time of the universe to do would
be done in less than a second by&lt;br/&gt;a quantum computer. We shall try to
use the weak measurement, discovered by the&lt;br/&gt;PI, to obtain better
quantum communication. We shall also try to use the geometric phase discovered
by the PI and a co-PI towards constructing a
quantumcomputer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;