* 0140345
* SGER: Conflict in Central and South Asia: Improving and Analyzing Data from Event Reporting
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2003
* J. Craig Jenkins, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Joane Nagel
* 09/30/2003
* USD 65,970.00

SES-0140345 Principal Investigator: J. Craig Jenkins Institution: Ohio State
University

This Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) provides funds to supplement
the existing standard sources of international events data (primarily
computerized content analyses of Reuters Business Briefs) with a field reporting
system based on observers in seven Central and South Asian countries
(Afghanistan, Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan, Kyrgzstan and
Pakistan). The field reporters are trained in a systematic event reporting
format that captures many more conflict events than are reported in the Reuters
sources and provides more comprehensive data for subsequent analyses. The grant
would support the training of the field reporters, improve their infrastructure,
and enlarge the geographic coverage of the reporting system. In addition, the PI
will refine the computerized coding of the standard news reports to improve
their reliability. Comparisons between the two sources will be made. The project
will expand the systematic data collection of conflict events in an area of the
world that has been under-reported in past conflict data files but has become an
increasing area of internal and international conflict. The resulting publicly
available data will increase our ability to test and refine theories of
conflict, especially the relationships between internal and international
conflict.