* 0140262
* RUI:  Topics in Planar Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 11/15/2002,10/31/2006
* Dimitra Karabali, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Cooper
* 10/31/2006
* USD 85,055.00

This project involves research on two different topics in (2+1)-dimensional
theories. Increased tractability of these lower dimensional models allows
explicit calculations that cannot be done in higher dimensional theories. These
calculations yield important insights that may also be relevant for higher
dimensional theories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Nonperturbative aspects of gauge
theories.&lt;br/&gt;The PI and collaborators have developed a special matrix
parametrization for the gauge fields in order to develop a gauge invariant
Hamiltonian analysis of Yang-Mills theory in (2+1) dimensions. Recent results
will be extended to analyze higher order corrections to the calculated string
tension, investigate screening versus confinement in this framework, and include
quark degrees of freedom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) Noncommutative theories and
quantum Hall effect (QHE).&lt;br/&gt;There has recently appeared an interesting
connection between QHE and noncommutative field theory. Previous studies by the
PI and collaborator indicate that a (noncommutative) finite matrix model
proposed by Polychronakos to describe fractional quantum Hall fluids of finite
extent (for a filling fracton of 1/m) does not agree at small distances with
standard wavefunctions and calls into question the matrix model approach. The
correspondence between the matrix model and standard approaches will be explored
and extended to include more general filling factors and electron degrees of
freedom.&lt;br/&gt;