* 0140271
* SGER: How Support Organizations Respond to Crises: Middle Eastern and South Asian American Organizations in the Aftermath of September 11.
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2003
* Mehdi Bozorgmehr, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 09/30/2003
* USD 60,000.00

SES-0140271&lt;br/&gt;PI: Mehdi Bozorgmehr&lt;br/&gt;CUNY Graduate
School&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research focuses on the backlash that targets
Middle Eastern and South Asian (MESA) Americans in the aftermath of the
September 11, 20001 terrorist attacks on America. It is a well known
sociological finding that external hostility leads to internal group solidarity
to advance its goals and objectives. Past sociological models of conflict and
solidarity based on studies of Jews, Asians and Cubans are based on assumptions
of different forms of economic or political competition between groups. The
investigator acknowledges that these structural models are useful, but notes
that inter-ethnic relations are often more dynamic and may be dictated by global
forces between the sending and host societies. Thus, the PI proposes to develop
an alternative model of inter-ethnic relations, arguing that the main source of
host hostility of Middle Easterners, unlike the groups listed above, is the
anti-American policies of the Middle Eastern and South Asian regimes (or
terrorists) rather than the action of the exiles and immigrants themselves.
Also, MESA Americans are panethnic and have not created group solidarity, but
are instead represented by various national religious and ethnic organizations.
The investigator will study the current backlash by examining the role of
religious and ethnic MESA organizations in averting, coping and responding to
the backlash against MESA in response to the events of September 11th. The
investigator will interview leaders of approximately 50 of these national ethnic
and religious organizations; presently the only existing organs that can act on
behalf of their respective communities in response to the current crisis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is significant on three levels: (1)
historically because data will be collected on the crisis, as it unfolds; (2)
substantively because our knowledge of a understudied minority groups in
American will be enhanced; and (3) theoretically because the research will
contribute our general understanding of inter-ethnic group conflict.&lt;br/&gt;