* 0140500
* Self Assembly of Biological Lipids and of Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2006
* Michael Schick, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2006
* USD 279,000.00

This theoretical project will study several important biological problems
utilizing powerful methods from polymer physics. This is possible because the
hydrocarbon chains of biological lipids, which make up all membranes within the
body, are short chain polymers. One such problem is the study of "rafts," high
density islands of sphingolipids and cholesterol in the phospholipid sea;
islands which attract, inter alia, signalling proteins. Although there is
unusual excitement about this phenomena, as it requires significant revision of
the standard view of membranes, there is little molecular theory on the unusual
ordered fluid phase typical of the raft. This is a phase in which the chains
have fewer gauche bonds than the normal liquid crystal phase, yet is without the
translational order characteristic of the gel phase. Several methods, including
self-consistent field theory, will be utilized along with a realistic
description of the lipid chains to understand the factors which encourage, or
inhibit, the formation of rafts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A second problem of great
importance is that of membrane fusion, a process necessary for viral infection,
fertilization, and most intra-cell trafficking. The process is not understood.
This group has carried out simulations of this process utilizing models which
have proved of great use in the study of polymers. These simulations reveal a
very different fusion mechanism than that commonly accepted. These studies will
continue in order to elucidate the pathway which is followed during fusion. The
potential impact is great given the connection between fusion and infection, and
fusion and fertilization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another project of note is that
concerning the study of crystallization of membrane proteins. The structure of
these important proteins is not known, in general, as most of them have not been
crystallized, a prerequesite for x-ray analysis. Rather recently crystallization
of such proteins was accomplished using cubic lipid phases. Why such unusual
phases should bring about crystals of proteins is not understood. This problem
fits well with the techniques used by this group, which successfully predicted
the existence, and non-existence, of various bicontinuous cubic phases in block
copoloymers, and have extended these techniques to include interaction between
lipid membranes and proteins. If the basic principles underlying this process
can be understood, it could lead to an increase in the number of such proteins
whose structure can be analyzed.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This theoretical
project will study several important biological problems utilizing powerful
methods from polymer physics. This is possible because the hydrocarbon chains of
biological lipids, which make up all membranes within the body, are short chain
polymers. The projects studied illustrate the great potential of bringing
methods of polymer physics to bear upon important problems in the biological
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;