* 0140554
* Application of Statistical Physics Concepts and Methods to the Study of Science & Technology Systems
* SBE,NCSE
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2004
* H. Eugene Stanley, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Derek Hill
* 03/31/2004
* USD 99,199.00

The definition and implementation of Science & Technology (S &T) policies
requires information that is timely, reliable, and clear. Because of the
character of the production of intellectual knowledge, the development and
measurement of S&T indicators is an extremely complex problem. Namely, there are
many difficulties in developing indicators that are general and robust and can
be applied across (i) the different S&T fields, (ii) for different aggregations
levels (from research groups to entire countries), and (iii) equally well for
input and output measures. Specifically, fields where advances are slower or
where the resources involved are not too large are much easier to quantify and
manage than, for example, the life sciences where Federal investment is nowadays
very large and for which the pace of change is staggeringly fast.

The goal of this interdisciplinary proposal is to address this challenging
research problem by using recent concepts of statistical physics, namely,
scaling and universality. This research has already been applied in other areas,
such as identifying common growth characteristics of countries on the basis of
the size of their economies. In addition, preliminary work by these researchers
in S&T systems suggests that S&T systems exhibit common universal physics
characteristics. The project will try to identify robust, universal,
characteristics of the evolution of S&T systems using a variety of input and
output measures at varying levels of aggregation. For example, the project will
investigate whether national research systems exhibits similar statistical
physics characteristics, based on their level of research and development
expenditures, and will compare publishing output of European and U.S. university
departments using bibliometric data.