* 0140255
* Studies in Astrophysics, Nuclear Physics, and Particle Physics
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/2002,03/31/2007
* Evan Sugarbaker, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 03/31/2007
* USD 375,001.00

A very exciting development of the past decade in nuclear astrophysics has been
that of beams of short-lived nuclides, often those along the pathways of
processes of explosive nucleosynthesis, and sometimes critical to their
progression. Notably, the r-process is thought to occur near thecore of a
supernova in a fraction of a second, and to synthesize half thenuclei heavier
than iron. It occurs in a hot neutron-rich environment, passing through nuclei
that are 20 neutrons beyond stability. One componentof the research will be to
measure half-lives and structure of nuclei along the r-process path, thus
greatly improving our understanding of ther-process. Another process, the
p-process, occurs in a high-temperature hydrogen-rich environment in tens of
seconds, as matter from one star is accreted onto either a white dwarf or
neutron star companion. The result can be a nova or an x-ray burst. This process
proceeds by successive proton-capturenreactions and beta-decays through nuclei a
few protons to the proton-rich side of stability, but has critical points at
which it may require a beta-decay in order to proceed unless the next reaction
proceeds very rapidly. Thus it is important to measure proton-capture reaction
rates on the unstable nuclei along its pathway in order to understand how it
synthesizes nuclei and generates energy. We plan to study several crucial
p-process reactions. The final component of the program involves the Observatory
for Multiflavor NeutrInos from Supernovae. OMNIS will detect several thousand
events, mostly from "e-neutrinos", from the next galactic supernova. But,
because of "neutrino oscillations" recently established by the Super-K and SNO
neutrino observatories, these will actually reflect the energy distributions of
the more-difficult-to-detect mu- and tau-neutrinos just as they emerge from the
very core of the exploding supernova. OMNIS' data will enable a variety of
results, ranging from (1) diagnosis of the stellar collapse process at a level
that will test for several recently hypothesized effects, (2)direct measurement
of neutrino masses several orders of magnitude more accurately than some present
results, (3) determination of poorly determined neutrino oscillation modes, (4)
observation of the signatures of someprocesses of nucleosynthesis, and (5)
possible observation of the sharp neutrino luminosity termination that would
signal the collapse to a blackhole.

