* 0140522
* Equipment for Automated Acquisition of DNA Sequence and DNA Fragment Size Data
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2004
* John Burke, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 04/30/2004
* USD 118,025.00

Abstract for NSF Proposal 0140522 - "Equipment for Automated Acquisition of DNA
Sequence and DNA Fragment Size Data"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been
awarded to Dr. David E. McCauley at Vanderbilt University to support the
purchase of an automated DNA sequencer, a DNA extraction system, and supporting
computer hardware. The BaseStation gathers DNA sequence data from slab gels and
stores it in a form that can be interpreted by sequence analysis software. The
machine can also gather and process other types of DNA fragment size data such
as microsatellite DNA genetic markers. In the case of both DNA sequence and
microsatellite analysis, products of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) are labeled
with a florescent dye and separated by size during electrophoresis. The
advantage of the BaseStation is that its 96 well capacity and automated loading
allows for high throughput, and its configuration makes it equally suited for
gathering sequence and microsatellite data. The associated DNA extraction system
will allow for rapid extraction of genomic DNA from a large number of samples.
The data gathered by these machines will be used by five P.I.'s (D. McCauley, J.
Burke, D. Funk, C. Johnson and N.O. Pellmyr) in a variety of studies in
evolutionary and population biology which rely on large quantities of DNA
sequence and/or microsatellite data.&lt;br/&gt; Some of the specific research
projects that will make use of data generated by the equipment include the
following. 1) A study designed to use both DNA sequence information and
polymorphic microsatellite markers to investigate the population genetics of
Silene vulgaris, a plant invasive in North America. Comparison of the genetic
characteristics of the plant in North America and in its native Europe should
indicate the mechanism or route of invasion. 2) A comparative molecular
systematics study of several species of yucca plants and of the moths that
pollinate them. This phylogenetic study will help document how highly coevolved
plant-pollinator systems develop. 3) A study using polymorphic microsatellite
loci that will help to map genes associated with the domestication of sunflowers
from their wild relatives. 4) A DNA sequence based study of adaptive radiation
and host plant shifts in the Neochlamisus bebbianae beetle complex. 5) A study
of the adaptive significance of biological clock genes that follows changes in
the frequency of molecular markers in model laboratory populations of
cyanobacteria.&lt;br/&gt; All of these studies will contribute to understanding
basic biological processes such as range expansions, coevolution, host plant
shifts and the evolution of the biological clock. However, knowledge coming from
these studies will also contribute to the solution of more applied problems such
as how invasive species might be controlled, how insects shift feeding from
native plant species to plants of economic value, how the genetic manipulation
of domesticated species might be made more efficient, or how we might overcome
health problems associated with biological rhythm disorders. Finally, the
results of all of the studies will contribute to the emerging field of
bioinformatics, in that each study will require the P.I. to refine methods of
gathering, storing, and analyzing a large volume of genetic
information.&lt;br/&gt;