* 0140317
* Nanoscaled deformation and fracture processes in nanolayers
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,12/31/2007
* Jorg Wiezorek, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 12/31/2007
* USD 350,000.00

0140317&lt;br/&gt;Mao&lt;br/&gt;Nanoscale multilayers, composed of sub-
micrometer thick layers of two or more species of materials are of significant
interest for high-technology applications and devices in many fields of
industry, including microelectronics, magnetic recording, optics, and micro-
electro-mechanical systems. The physical performance and reliability of these
devices depend on the structural integrity of the multilayers. Hence, there is
considerable worldwide research interest in the mechanical response of
multilayers, including the deformation and fracture behavior. The development of
viable novel devices based on these advanced multilayer systems and their
further improvement requires a basic understanding of the fundamental processes
that are the agents of the macroscopic deformation and fracture performance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of the proposed project is the investigation
of the processes of micro-plasticity involved in the fracture of carefully
selected model nanoscale multilayer systems by dynamic in-situ straining TEM
experiments as well as static post-mortem TEM. This research will produce new
insights regarding dislocation mobilities and interactions with interfaces and
their relationship to crack growth in multilayers. Hence, the fundamental
relationships between processes of plasticity, local flow and fracture in Cu/Ni,
Cu/Cr and Cu/TiN multilayers with selected interfacial structure and layer
thickness will be elucidated. The project objectives
are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;to investigate the deformation and fracture process of
metal/metal (Cu/Ni, Cu/Cr) and metal/ceramic (Cu/TiN) multilayers by in-situ
straining transmission electron microscopy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;to predict the
fracture resistance and the effect of interfaces on crack tip stresses in the
nanolayers as a function of layer thickness, and crystal orientation using a
dislocation-interface interaction model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both in-situ TEM
fracture experiments and dislocation based modeling of the deformation and
fracture processes in the nanolayers will be performed. Two graduate students
(one in materials science and one in mechanical engineering) will be trained
during the project as the follows: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student 1: in-situ TEM
experiment on microplasticity and fracture in nanolayers (Dr.
Wizorek)&lt;br/&gt;Student 2: dislocation based modelling on the deformation and
fracture process (Dr. Mao).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Mao will be responsible for
the design of the in-situ straining experiments and dislocation-based modeling.
Dr. Wiezorek will be responsible for the performance of TEM characterization and
in-situ TEM testing. Because of the comprehensive and interdisciplinary nature
of the proposed research, the involvement of students in the project will
provide effective means for training of the new generation of materials
scientists for the new century.&lt;br/&gt;