* 0140387
* Island-Scale Circulations over the Island of Hawaii
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2007
* Yi-Leng Chen, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 01/31/2007
* USD 263,345.00

The interactions of atmospheric flows with mountains are an important issue in
atmospheric sciences. Orography plays a role in both local weather as well as
influencing the larger scale flow. The isolation of the mountainous Island of
Hawaii provides a natural laboratory for studies of the impacts of orography.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 1990 a cooperative project among several researchers,
the Hawaiian Rainband Project (HaRP), was executed to study the influence of the
island on local weather and fundamental mountain/atmospheric flow interactions.
To date, most HaRP analyses have focused on the airflow, thermodynamic fields
and radar echoes on the windward side and the evolution of early morning rain
bands offshore of Hilo. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project the Principal
Investigator (PI) will extend analysis to the airflow along the windward coast
and offshore as well as circulations on the lee side. Furthermore, the PI will
simulate the complete diurnal cycle of the island-scale airflow and weather
under different trade-wind conditions (e.g. strong trades vs. weak trades; low
trade-wind inversion height vs. high trade-wind inversion height) using an
advanced mesoscale numerical model. Analysis of observations will be used to
validate model results. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from modeling studies will
improve basic understanding of the diurnal and local effects for the island of
Hawaii under the summer trade-wind weather. These results potentially can have
benefits in helping to interpret airflow in other complex terrain situations.