* 0140412
* A New Complex Mixing Index Based on Entropy for Polymer Process Control and Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Miron Kaufman, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Lynn Realff
* 08/31/2005
* USD 348,000.00

Mixing is an important component of most processing operations. Blending and
compounding also play a major role in the development of new materials. Thus
better understanding of mixing phenomena and development of new criteria to
assess mixing quality are of paramount importance. In previous work we have
defined dispersive and distributive mixing criteria for process control and
optimization and for machine scale-up. However, we expect additional fundamental
insight and enhanced applicability can be gained by defining a new complex
mixing index based on entropy, which synthesizes both dispersive and
distributive mixing components. Entropy is a rigorous measure of disorder or
system homogeneity used in several sciences such as statistical mechanics and
information theory. This new index can be applied in a variety of technologies
in polymer processing including fabrication of nanocomposite materials.
Furthermore, understanding the influence of machine geometry and processing
conditions on mixing as reflected through correlations between flow features and
the new complex mixing index can point out to new directions in equipment
design. The proposed mixing characterization methodology can be applied in other
engineering processes beyond the polymer processing industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is an interdisciplinary effort involving a
chemical engineer whose expertise lies in polymer processing and a physicist
with expertise on statistical mechanics. This collaboration between Case Western
Reserve University and Cleveland State University will enable application of
concepts from theoretical physics to problems relevant to the manufacturing
engineering community. Moreover, such collaborative efforts have also an
educational impact with the potential of inducing student interest for
interdisciplinary research projects dealing with complex problems. Students at
both the graduate and undergraduate levels will benefit from this collaborative
research project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;