* 0140164
* Uniaxial and Hydrostatic Stress on Group III-nitride Heterojunctions and Schottky Barriers
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2006
* P.Paul Ruden, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Olufemi Olowolafe
* 04/30/2006
* USD 225,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Abstract-0140164&lt;br/&gt;M. Nathan, U of Minnesota-Twin
Cities&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Devices based on III-nitride semiconductors have
great potential for many applications in optoelectronics and power electronics.
Polarization effects in these materials provide new opportunities for new device
designs and raise challenges for existing ones. At present, while a qualitative
understanding of these effects exists to some extent, a complete quantitative
model and experimental characterization is lacking. The main thrust of this
proposal is directed at a quantitative understanding of polarization effects in
III-nitride compounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polarization effects and nitride-
based devices are inextricably connected with dominant effects in heterojunction
FETs, heterojunction bipolar transistors, and lasers. Consideration of
spontaneous and piezoelectric effects is therefore imperative in device design.
In addition to high-power, high-temperature electronic devices, we envision
possible applications of these phenomena in stress (or force) sensors, such as
those needed for accelerometers and seismic detectors intended to operate in
caustic environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose a coordinated experimental
and theoretical investigation of electric polarization effects in III-nitride
heterostructures and Schottkv barriers. Our study will address lattice
polarization effects on charge carrier transport at heterojunction interfaces in
structures with currents either parallel or perpendicular to the interfaces.
Examples of structures to be fabricated and tested will include n- and p-channel
single heterostructures, metal/semiconductor Schottky contacts on III-nitrides,
and n+- and p+Si/III-nitride Schottky contacts. To avoid possible surface
contamination, Al/III-nitride and Si/III-nitride contacts will be fabricated in
situ, i.e. without removing the samples from the ultra-high vacuum environment.
For reasons discussed in this proposal, we view these latter structures (with
the non-polar/polar interface grown in situ following III-nitride epitaxy) as
particularly promising for the study of III-nitride surface polarization
charges. We will measure the uniaxial and hydrostatic stress dependences of the
electrical characteristics of these structures. Exploring different stress
geometries will advance the understanding of piezoelectric effects in III-
nitride compounds. Our physical model development will address band structure
and electric polarization effects and their consequences for the terminal
characteristics of the devices under uniform and non-uniform, uniaxial and
hydrostatic stress. The characterization and modeling work builds on
capabilities developed by the PIs over the last 11 years in the context of their
past and ongoing joint exploration of piezoelectric effects in conventional
III-V heterostructures. The crystal growth for this program will performed by
Professor Hadis Morkoq's group at Virginia Commonwealth
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will involve both
graduate and undergraduate students, and will enhance the PIs ongoing course
development with focus on large gap semiconductor materials and
devices.&lt;br/&gt;