* 0140710
* Innovative Signal Analysis Techinques for Health Monitoring Systems and Sensing Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Jann Yang, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 09/30/2006
* USD 285,695.00

One important link in the health monitoring system is the data processing
techniques, including the corresponding theory and algorithms, to extract
relevant information for a rapid assessment of the state of the structure from a
large amount of measured data. Such a link has been pointed out during many
conferences as one of the weakest link in the sensor-based health monitoring
system of civil infrastructures. This project is aiming at the development of
innovative and efficient data processing techniques, based on the Hilbert-Huang
spectral analysis, for the damage detection, condition assessment and integrity
evaluation of civil infrastructures. New and efficient methodologies will be
developed for: (i) damage detection and system identification of linear
structures, (ii) determination of the optimal placement of sensors, (iii) damage
detection and system identification of nonlinear structures, including
conservative (elastic) and nonconservative (hysteretic) nonlinear structures,
and (iv) preliminary assessment of structural damages after an extreme event,
such as strong earthquakes, all based on the Hilbert-Huang spectral analysis.
Further, Hilbert-Huang spectral analysis computer software modules for
incorporating into the sensor-based monitoring systems of civil infrastructures
will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is a part of an integrated
collaborative research effort among U.S.A., Hong Kong and P.R.C., under the US-
China Protocol for Scientific and Technical Cooperative Research on Earthquake
Engineering and Hazard Mitigation. Basically, advanced health monitoring system
research for civil infrastructure systems will be conducted at Hong Kong
Polytechnic University (HPU); advanced sensor technology will be developed at
Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT), China; sensing materials for sensors will
be investigated at Institute of Engineering Mechanics (IEM), China; advanced and
smart damping and devices will be developed at University of Notre Dame (UND);
and novel data processing techniques will be developed at the University of
California, Irvine (UCI). In addition, Dr. N. E. Huang of NASA Goddard Flight
Center, who is the pioneer of the Hilbert-Huang spectral analysis, will
collaborate with us in the proposed research efforts to develop novel data
processing techniques for sensor-based monitoring systems for civil
infrastructures.&lt;br/&gt;The research proposed herein is unique, which is
different from all the data analysis techniques currently available. The
Hilbert-Huang spectral analysis can be used to develop powerful techniques with
which intrinsic nonstationary and nonlinear characteristics of the measured
response signals can be extracted. The results of this research are expected to
have a significant impact not only on the state-of-the-technology in data
analyses for the sensor-based health monitoring systems of structures but also
on the sensor technologies to be developed by the collaborative research
institutions in U.S.A., Hong Kong and China.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;