* 0140578
* Linear and Permutation Representations of Groups and Coverings of Curves
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2008
* Robert Guralnick, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2008
* USD 383,656.00

The investigator and his colleagues study permutation and
linear&lt;br/&gt;representations of finite and algebraic groups. The focus
is&lt;br/&gt;on primitive permutation representations and
irreducible&lt;br/&gt;linear representations. These results will be applied
to&lt;br/&gt;monodromy groups of coverings of curves and higher
dimensional&lt;br/&gt;varieties over finite fields and to various questions
in&lt;br/&gt;probabilistic group theory. The investigator expects to
make&lt;br/&gt;significant progress on outstanding conjectures about
automorphism&lt;br/&gt;groups of curves in positive characteristic, the size of
images&lt;br/&gt;of rational points for maps between varieties over finite
fields&lt;br/&gt;and monodromy groups of coverings of curves of small
genus.&lt;br/&gt;In characteristic zero, the investigator and collaborators
plan&lt;br/&gt;to obtain a complete classification of the possible
monodromy&lt;br/&gt;groups of indecomposable rational functions. This is a
much&lt;br/&gt;more ambitious project than the solution of the Guralnick-
Thompson&lt;br/&gt;conjecture that was recently solved. The techniques
involve&lt;br/&gt;detailed analysis of properties of simple groups and
translating&lt;br/&gt;problems in arithmetic algebraic geometry to group
theory.&lt;br/&gt;Many of these results will give detailed information
about&lt;br/&gt;questions in probabilistic group theory as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the classification of finite simple groups was
announced&lt;br/&gt;in the late 1970's, there have been some remarkable
applications&lt;br/&gt;of this theorem in many areas of mathematics. This
proposal&lt;br/&gt;continues in this tradition. There is also a long history
of&lt;br/&gt;translating problems in number theory and geometry
(particularly&lt;br/&gt;over finite fields) to group theory. The investigator
intends&lt;br/&gt;to obtain quite detailed results about finite simple
groups&lt;br/&gt;and their subgroups. Some of the investigation into finite
simple&lt;br/&gt;groups is quite natural but other aspects are motivated by
applications&lt;br/&gt;to curves and varieties over finite fields. This will
give insight into&lt;br/&gt;various problems about maps over finite fields -- in
particular, about&lt;br/&gt;polynomials and rational functions. This has
applications to&lt;br/&gt;coding theory and cryptography as well as answering
basic&lt;br/&gt;questions in the field. A special case of this is the
study&lt;br/&gt;of "exceptional" polynomials. These were first studied
by&lt;br/&gt;Dickson in his thesis in the 1890's. The major result
in&lt;br/&gt;the area, using the classification of simple groups, was
only&lt;br/&gt;obtained in 1993 by Fried, Saxl and the proposer. The
investigator&lt;br/&gt;intends to classify all such polynomials. These results
about&lt;br/&gt;simple groups will also give detailed information about
probabilistic&lt;br/&gt;generation of finite groups. These kinds of questions
have become&lt;br/&gt;increasingly important in the design of algorithms in
computational&lt;br/&gt;algebra. These results show that by following certain
recipes, one&lt;br/&gt;can be reasonably sure of picking a generating set for
your&lt;br/&gt;favorite finite group.&lt;br/&gt;