* 0140094
* Diffusion and Kinetics of Reaction Models:   Theory and Selected Applications
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Daniel ben-Avraham, Clarkson University
* Continuing Grant
* Earle L. Lomon
* 07/31/2006
* USD 162,000.00

Research will be conducted into models of diffusion-limited reactions
and&lt;br/&gt;the method of empty intervals which we introduced originally for
the &lt;br/&gt;treatment of coalescence, A + A -&gt; A. We have extended the
method of &lt;br/&gt;intervals to annihilation, A + A -&gt; 0, the branching-
and double &lt;br/&gt;branching-annihilating process, and the q-state Potts
model in the T=0 limit. &lt;br/&gt;The method yields detailed information: we
derived explicit expressions for &lt;br/&gt;the n-point correlation functions of
coalescence and annihilation, for all n.&lt;br/&gt;Different research groups
have recently adopted the method of intervals for &lt;br/&gt;the analysis of
models not amenable to the complementary method of free&lt;br/&gt;Majorana
fermions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research will be conducted into several abstract
open questions, including&lt;br/&gt;the kinetics of reactions with anomalous,
subdiffusive transport; exactly &lt;br/&gt;solvable models of nonuniversal
kinetic phase transitions; and the shielding &lt;br/&gt;effect in coalescence,
as a basis for more exact solutions and for novel &lt;br/&gt;approximation
methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research will be conducted also into a number of
practical questions motivated &lt;br/&gt;by our work so far. These include: (1)
A new method, due to Fokas, for&lt;br/&gt;solving PDEs in convex domains with
arbitrary boundary conditions; (2) Speedy &lt;br/&gt;computer algorithms for the
simulation of reaction-diffusion systems; &lt;br/&gt;(3) Stability of networks,
such as the Internet, in the face of random failure &lt;br/&gt;or a coordinated
attack; (4) Mechanisms of signal transduction in eukaryotic &lt;br/&gt;cells;
and (5) Statistical physics interpretation of various experiments in
&lt;br/&gt;contemporary chemistry. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project is
particularly well-suited for educational purposes. One student &lt;br/&gt;has
completed a M.Sc. in physics and another is graduating with a
Ph.D.&lt;br/&gt;degree. Several undergraduate students have already been
involved (mainly with &lt;br/&gt;computer simulations), and their effort has
resulted in at least three&lt;br/&gt;publications in refereed journals. We
forsee many more opportunities for &lt;br/&gt;students involvement.&lt;br/&gt;