* 0140557
* Modeling the Frictional Contact Geometry in Machining Using Fractals
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2007
* Shivakumar Raman, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 03/31/2007
* USD 135,000.00

This grant will research friction at the tool-chip interface in machining and
will attempt to quantify the extents of seizure and sliding islands. Preliminary
analysis conducted through a prior exploratory grant will be extended to better
examine the non-Euclidean nature of frictional contact. The role of cutting
conditions, tool and work materials, tool preparation and atmospheric oxidation
will be determined in evaluating map areas and perimeters. The primary objective
of this research is to develop a fractal model of the frictional contact
geometry at the tool rake face in machining. The physics and mathematics of
friction will be investigated using a fractal geometric approach, to determine
relationships for cutting variables such as area of contact, cutting forces,
energy consumed, tool temperatures and wear, extending on preliminary work.
These models will be validated and improved with data obtained from conventional
as well as specialized experiments. Seizure will be examined at a fundamental
level and the role of physical mechanisms in its creation and extinction at the
interface quantified. Seizure will be studied by varying tool surface
preparation, oxidation, controlled tool coatings, work material prior processing
and tool wear. The material and cutting conditions leading to different fractal
dimensions will be physically modeled and validated experimentally. Issues of
similarity, scaling and stationarity will be suitably studied to develop
predictive models of the cutting process.&lt;br/&gt;This project is expected to
lead to improved models of the cutting process and consequently to its imminent
automation. This research will be useful in cutting tool design, tool coating
evaluation, and process optimization. The scalability of frictional models to
finer scales of machining will also result from this treatment.