* 0140620
* Conference:  Student Paper Competition at the 2002 IEEE MTT-S International Microwave Symposium, Seattle, WA, June 2-7, 2002
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2003
* Branimir Pejcinovic, Institute of Electrical & Electronics Engineers, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Kawthar A. Zaki
* 03/31/2003
* USD 9,900.00

This project requests travel support for 18 participants from U.S. universities
in the Student Paper Competition at the 2002 IEEE MTT-S International Microwave
Symposium (IMS). The IMS is the annual meeting of the Microwave Theory and
Techniques Society (MTT-S) of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers. Inc. (IEEE). The IMS is also the major international symposium in the
microwave field and a focus of research results in wireless telecommunications.
The 2002 IMS will be held in Seattle, WA, USA on June 2-7,
2002.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each year, the Microwave Theory and Techniques
Society promotes student education in microwave theory and techniques through a
number of mechanisms. One of the most important is the Student Paper Competition
at the IMS. This selective program brings the best students from around the
world together in an integrated program in which they present their work not
only to a technical audience but also to a group of judges. The program helps
develop the technical acumen of the students as well as their communication and
presentation skills. It also helps introduce them to the international technical
community and helps to build a community of students who will lead the next
generation of microwave engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IMS provides
financial support of various forms but does not reimburse travel expenses.
Travel support from NSF will ensure that the program is open to the widest range
of interested applicants from U.S. universities.&lt;br/&gt;