* 0140604
* Qualitative Studies of Some Partial Differential Equations and Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Changfeng Gui, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2005
* USD 70,999.00

PI: Changfeng Gui, University of Connecticut&lt;br/&gt;DMS-
0140604&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will work on
two projects on qualitative properties of partial differential equations. In the
first project, he will study phase transitions modeled by the Allen-
Cahn&lt;br/&gt;equation and its generalized vector equations, which are the
gradient flows of the Allen-Cahn energy with either double-well potentials or
multiple-well potentials of equal depths. The objectives are to determine the
existence, uniqueness and stability of some special configurations, and then to
further study the fine structure near the interfaces or near&lt;br/&gt;the
triple junction and the dynamics of these sharp interfaces and&lt;br/&gt;triple
junctions. One of the immediate goals is to classify the
optimal&lt;br/&gt;configurations of anti-phases. This is indeed to solve a
conjecture of&lt;br/&gt;De Giorgi which concerns the one dimensional symmetry
of&lt;br/&gt;certain entire solutions of the Euler-Lagrange equations of
the&lt;br/&gt;Allen-Cahn energy. The De Giorgi conjecture is also related to the
study&lt;br/&gt;of minimal surfaces, and is still open in dimensions bigger than
three.&lt;br/&gt;In the second project the PI will study the Gierier-
Meinhardt&lt;br/&gt;systems of equations arising in biological pattern
formations and chemical&lt;br/&gt;reactions. In particular, the proposor will
try to show mathematically&lt;br/&gt;the existence of some special concentration
patterns and to understand&lt;br/&gt;their
stabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diffusion is a very common
phenomenon, and it generates very&lt;br/&gt;complex structures when several
different substances are involved.&lt;br/&gt;Phase transitions, pattern
formations are well observed in material&lt;br/&gt;sciences, in biological and
chemical reactions, and they are closely&lt;br/&gt;related to diffusions.
Special nonlinear partial differential equations&lt;br/&gt;and systems are used
to model these phenomena mathematically. The&lt;br/&gt;proposor hope to develop
analytic techniques to obtain good&lt;br/&gt;qualitative properties for
solutions of these equations, which will lead&lt;br/&gt;to better numerical
methods for simulations. The study will help to&lt;br/&gt;understand the finer
structures and long time behaviors of phase&lt;br/&gt;transitions, pattern
formations, and other similar
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;