* 0140362
* Phenomenology of Hadrons and Fundamental Particles
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Richard Lebed, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 07/31/2006
* USD 170,195.00

0140362&lt;br/&gt;Lebed&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three topics will be investigated
under this grant, spanning both nuclear and particle
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Flavor Symmetries. The PI and his graduate
dissertation student (partially funded by this grant) will investigate possible
"flavor" symmetries among the three fermion generations, especially the
constraints imposed upon them by recent and forthcoming experimental results on
neutrino masses and mixing. Additional constraints to be taken into account
arise from limits on flavor-changing neutral current processes and proton decay.
These studies are designed to work toward answering the question of why there
are three replicated generations of fermions with nonetheless widely differing
masses and mixings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) Baryons in the Large N Limit. The PI
will build upon the numerous successes of QCD with a large number N of color
charges (large N) to study the dynamics of baryon resonances. These particles
are now being produced in huge numbers at Jefferson Lab, but the theoretical
tools currently used to study them are limited. In particular, the PI will seek
model-independent results that respect not only the large N expansion, but also
the chiral symmetry implied by coupling among pions and nucleons (to which the
resonances decay).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) Rigorous QCD Constraints on Hadronic
Quantities. The imposition of constraints from dispersion relations allows one
to make precise statements about QCD amplitudes even in the nonperturbative
regime. One obtains relations between fundamental quantities such as quark and
gluon parameters on one hand, and measured quantities such as form factors on
the other. These relations can provide subtle and highly nontrivial information
on the way that the strong interaction works, and form the motivation for this
work. The PI will continue this successful program to consider such cases as
expanding the range of applicability and including additional information from
the region of asymptotic freedom.&lt;br/&gt;