* 0140503
* Some Problems on the Edge of Descriptive Set Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,12/31/2008
* Greg Hjorth, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 12/31/2008
* USD 419,350.00

The specifics of this project concern three directions which arose out of a
general interest in definable equivalence relations. The first of these
directions relates to the treeable equivalence relations. Following work of
Adams and Kechris, we know that there is a mass of countable Borel equivalence
relations which are mutually incomparable. No such result is known for the
treeable Borel equivalence relations. We do not know whether there are
infinitely many distinct examples, and we basically have only one established
example which is not hyperfinite. More generally we do not know whether the
implicit involvement of measure theoretic examples involving free actions of the
free group is the sole obstruction to hyperfiniteness. The second direction of
Hjorth's project concerns issues in the fine study of Borel complexities of
countable isomorphism types in the topology of quantifier free logic, and may be
connected with a translation of some basic concepts from first order logic into
a quantifier free context. The third direction of the proposal is to investigate
some combinatorial questions, such as having a model with a certain partition
property for definable partitions, for infinitary sentences, especially those
arising as the Scott sentence of some countable structure; this may be related
to a still open problem posed by Shelah in the 1970's on the Hanf number up to
the continuum for countably infinitary logic.

In very general terms, this project can be located inside the branch of
mathematics known as "descriptive set theory". This area arose around the end of
19th century as part of an effort to better understand the basic objects -- such
as the real number line, real valued functions, subsets of the reals, subsets or
regions of two dimensional and three dimensional space, the area or volume of
such subsets -- which appear in calculus, and which are needed for applications
in engineering, physics, and differential equations. Descriptive set theory does
not itself actually address any of these eventual applications, but is rather
preoccupied with purely foundational issues. Following Silver's theorem in the
1970's, many descriptive set theorists have become interested in equivalence
relations on spaces such as the real number line, or two dimensional space, or
similar classes of "topological spaces". The study of such equivalence relations
leads to quotient objects which arise by considering the collection of all
equivalence classes. For instance if we set two real numbers to be equivalent
when the result of subtracting one from the other is an integer (i.e. a "whole
number"), then the collection of equivalence classes may be naturally identified
with the result of basically wrapping the real number line around itself, to
obtain circle of circumference one. In this simple example the quotient object
is easily understood, and has a geometrical representation. Most of the work in
Hjorth's area deals with the so called "non-smooth" equivalence relations whose
quotient objects do not admit such a representation, and the study of these
quotient spaces is known to have connections with a variety of mathematical
disciplines, such as "dynamics", and "ergodic theory", and some of the more
abstract branches of "analysis", such as "infinite dimensional group
representations".