* 0140326
* Black Hole Mergers: from simulation to detection
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Carlos Lousto, The University of Texas at Brownsville
* Standard Grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 08/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

Gravitational waves are ripples of gravity thrown off by violent interactions of
astrophysical bodies. They were first predicted to exist by Einstein in 1916,
but because they are weakened by traveling incredibly large distances before
reaching Earth, they have not yet been detected. Presently, a number of
countries are completing the construction of detectors which might finally see
gravitational waves, including the NSF-funded LIGO detectors. The gravitational
waves which should be most easily detected by such instruments will come from
colliding black holes. Unfortunately, even these events are likely to be
undetectable without powerful techniques to extract the gravitational wave data
from the instrumental noise. The research funded by this award will use cutting-
edge computer simulations to provide partial, but vital, information about the
gravitational waves from colliding black holes. This information will then be
used to develop powerful new techniques for detecting the gravitational wave
signals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The confirmation of Einstein's prediction of
gravitational waves is a laudable scientific objective in itself. However, there
is also a much greater promise. Gravitational waves can be produced by objects,
like black holes, that cannot be directly observed in any other way. Because so
little is known about such objects, it is almost certain that new insights into
their origins and workings will result from observing them directly for the
first time. Furthermore, it is widely believed that gravitational waves will
reveal aspects of the universe that have not yet even been conceived of, thus
revolutionizing the current picture of the nature of the cosmos itself. While
this revolution will take years to realize, this award enables the
important&lt;br/&gt;first step of predicting what should be sought and how to
seek it.&lt;br/&gt;