* 0140629
* Micro Grids with Distributed Generation in an Open Access Environment
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2002,11/30/2003
* Chen-Ching Liu, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* James Momoh
* 11/30/2003
* USD 50,000.00

This proposal is submitted under the Small Grants for Exploratory Research
(SGER) program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Distributed generation is emerging as an
important part of the power grid. The smaller generating units and renewable
energy, e.g., micro turbines, wind and solar power, fuel cells and diesel
generators, provide the resources that are critical at the peak load conditions.
The availability of such generators also helps industrial, commercial or
residential users avoid power outages caused by problems of the power grid.
These distributed generators need to be connected to the grid in order to
increase the flexibility of utilization. Small generators can also participate
in the electricity market in an environment where the transmission access is
open. After the recent energy crisis in California, distributed generation or
distributed power has attracted even more attention. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many
technical and economic issues are involved in distributed generation. The
voltage and frequency of the generating units need to be regulated. Protective
devices are needed to ensure that the faulted devices can be isolated and such
protective functions must be coordinated with the grid. There are also economic
issues from the suppliers' point of view such as market monitoring and decision
support for buying and selling. These economics related tools allow the
distributed generation to be able to respond to the market needs, leading to a
larger pool of available resources for the grid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
will develop an intelligent multi-agent system that is able to handle the
technical and economic functions of a control center for a micro grid. If each
generating device and load has the ability and intelligence to communicate with
the micro grid control agent and work together to solve technical and economic
problems, then the grid can be managed by a multi-agent system. A Micro Grid
Agent (MGA) works with generation, load and other control agents to manage the
grid and maintain the grid security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New micro grid
phenomena related to distributed generation and their integration into the power
grid will be explored. This study will also explore the new dynamic phenomena
and the protection concepts associated with the micro grids. The other goal is
to develop an intelligent system method that allows the micro grid to be
operated by intelligent hardware and software tools without the sophistication
and costs associated with a control center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of
this exploratory research grant to serve as a roadmap for researchers interested
in the important and futuristic area of distributed generation. These
researchers may come from the communities of power engineering, power
electronics, and intelligent systems, optimization, control and
economics.&lt;br/&gt;