* 0140481
* Wavelet Frames and Bases, and Fourth Order "thin film" Eigenproblems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Richard Laugesen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2006
* USD 110,949.00

Proposal Number: DMS-0140481 PI: Richard Laugesen

ABSTRACT

Wavelet expansions are a mathematical tool that enable functions and data to be
analyzed at multiple scales and locations simultaneously. The investigator seeks
first to characterize all (non-tight) wavelet frames - these frames permit more
flexibility than the widely-used orthonormal wavelets. Then he aims to
characterize and find examples of wavelets whose dilation matrices expand in
some directions but not in others. Another goal is to prove that the "Mexican
hat" wavelet family is dense in all Lebesgue spaces, so that this family can be
used to approximate data in more than just the mean-square sense. On a different
topic, the investigator will also pursue questions about the fundamental model
equations that underlie motion of thin fluid films. The proposed research aims
to mathematically determine the stability of steady states of these equations.
In particular, "droplet" steady states will be studied. The existence of such
stable steady states would signal the possibility of creating a pattern in the
film.

Wavelet theory draws on fundamental mathematics and on engineering disciplines
such as signal processing to create tools for efficiently analyzing and storing
information. The two-way street between basic research and practical
applications has been particularly effective in recent years. Abstract
mathematical theories from harmonic analysis have been transformed into large
scale engineering solutions (for example the FBI uses a wavelet compression
technique to store its fingerprint images), while engineering challenges
continue to stimulate fundamental research in mathematics. Many questions about
the mathematical equations of fluid flow are famously difficult. In view of this
difficulty, much research has concentrated on special situations, such as a thin
film of fluid either sitting on or hanging from a flat surface. These films
arise in many industrial coating situations, such as the manufacture of
photographic film, or the coating of magnetic disk drives. The mathematical
understanding of these problems became substantial only in the 1990s, and even
now, much more is known in one space dimension than in the physically relevant
case of two space dimensions, where this research will concentrate.

