* 0140149
* Dissertation Research:  Between Politics and Pedagogy: Constructions of Theoretical Physics in Imperial Germany
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2004
* Angela Creager, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 01/31/2004
* USD 7,530.00

This dissertation research project provides a cultural history of theoretical
physics in Imperial Germany (1871-1918). The general problem considered is that
of examining and describing the development of the "discipline", from its
multiple origins to the beginnings of its "golden-age." Within the boundaries
set by this general framework, the project deals in turn with three major
problems: that of defining theoretical physics; that of determining the
importance of a single understudied research school (the Sommerfeld School); and
that of exploring the complex interlinkages between classical and modern
physics. The dissertation is divided into three corresponding sections. NSF
funding provides support to collect data for two of these sections. In the
first, the researcher seeks to define the term "theoretical physics" in the fin-
de-siecle, a time when the "discipline" was not yet coherent, when it lacked
research or pedagogical centers, central texts and common histories. By focusing
on the debate over the so-called "failure" of the mechanical world-view, the
researcher will elucidate the practice of theoretical physics research, while a
concentration on the teaching of the subject in both universities and Technische
Hochschulen will provide a novel insight into the importance of both industrial
applications and pedagogy on the growth of what would become the most
prestigious scientific field of the twentieth century. This latter work will
require the examination of course listings (Vorlesungs-Verzeichnisse), lecture
notes and examination questions at university and Hochschule archives in Aachen,
Berlin, Dresden, Karlsruhe and Munich. In Section 2 the focus is narrowed, as
attention turns to the means by which disciplinary coherence was achieved. The
central part of the project involves a detailed study of the Sommerfeld School,
looking both at Sommerfeld's own research as well as his pedagogical style.
Research for this section will be centered on the Sommerfeld archive at the
Deutsches Museum, Munich, and will include not only a technical analysis of the
work done by both Sommerfeld and his students in Munich, but also a similar
examination of research content for his students early on in their own
professional careers. &lt;br/&gt;