* 0140108
* Elastic Proton Form Factor Measurements
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Charles Perdrisat, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Ani Aprahamian
* 07/31/2006
* USD 434,177.00

The first experiment to measure the ratio of the elastic and magnetic
form&lt;br/&gt;factors of the proton at large four-momentum squared, Q^2 with
good&lt;br/&gt;accuracy produced unexpected results. This experiment realized in
1998 at&lt;br/&gt;Jefferson Lab used the recoil polarization technique, which
takes advantage&lt;br/&gt;of the fact that the transverse component of the
recoil proton polarization&lt;br/&gt;is proportional to the product of the 2
form factors, thus allowing accurate&lt;br/&gt;determination of the small
electric form factor. In a second experiment at&lt;br/&gt;JLab in 2000, the
measurement was extended to 5.6 GeV^2 , the results&lt;br/&gt;confirmed the
intrinsically different Q^2-dependence of the electric and&lt;br/&gt;magnetic
form factors of the proton beyond any doubt. The data from these
2&lt;br/&gt;JLab experiments have been a challenge for theoretical models which
attempt&lt;br/&gt;to describe the proton structure in the non-perturbative
domain of Quantum&lt;br/&gt;Chromo Dynamics (QCD). As the simplicity of
perturbative QCD may not be&lt;br/&gt;encountered at accessible laboratory
energies, an understanding of the&lt;br/&gt;structure of the proton (and
likewise of the other nucleon, the neutron)&lt;br/&gt;requires the use of
phenomenological models which depend in parts on data.&lt;br/&gt;Nucleons are
the building blocks of the matter we are made of and in which&lt;br/&gt;we live.
A full understanding of the structure of the nucleon in terms of&lt;br/&gt;its
quark and gluon constituents will be achieved only when we accumulate
a&lt;br/&gt;complete data base of its response to the electromagnetic probe,
electrons&lt;br/&gt;and photons, over a large enough Q^2-range; such experiment
represent&lt;br/&gt;the main part of the research program at JLab. We now have a
third&lt;br/&gt;experiment, recently approved with highest priority; it will
extend the&lt;br/&gt;range of Q^2 probed to 9 GeV^2.This grant will make it
possible for&lt;br/&gt;me to continue leading this project to and through the
next phase, which&lt;br/&gt;require new detectors (a new polarimeter to measure
the recoil proton&lt;br/&gt;polarization, and a new calorimeter to measure the
associate scattered&lt;br/&gt;electron) and will take 3 years to
prepare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;