* 0140035
* Fellowships for Seventh US National Congress on Computational Mechanics to be held August 4-6, 2002, in Albuquerque, New Mexico
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2002,12/31/2003
* Jacob Fish, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 12/31/2003
* USD 20,000.00

ABSTRACT Seventh US National Congress on Computational Mechanics

Albuquerque Convention Center Albuquerque, New Mexico, August 4-6, 2003

The U.S. Association for Computational Mechanics, USACM, has asked a group of
scientists from academia and government to organize the 7th National Congress on
Computational Mechanics, to take place in the Albuquerque Convention Center,
August 4-6, 2003. The Albuquerque meeting will occur at a time of increasing
interest in computational mechanics, spurred by innovative approaches in
materials engineering, nanotechnology, biology and medical science and by the
availability of powerful new parallel and distributed computing systems.

The biannual Congresses of the U.S. Association for Computational Mechanics are
major scientific events that attract an international audience. The seventh U.S.
Congress, hosted by Sandia National Laboratories, will highlight the latest
developments in all aspects of computational mechanics - from new applications
in nanotechnology and bioengineering to recent advances in numerical methods and
high-performance computing. The technical program features invited plenary
lectures by distinguished experts as well as minisymposia that focus on topics
of current scientific interest. Participants will have a special opportunity to
experience the unique scientific environment of Sandia National Laboratories
through interactions with research staff and to envision its future in
initiatives such as the Center for Integrated Nanotechnologies (CINT) and the
Microsystems and Engineering Sciences Applications Complex (MESA).

The 7th Congress will be the first where a National Laboratory is taking the
lead organizational role. Dr. Bickel, director of the Engineering Sciences
Center of Sandia National Laboratories, and Professor Fish, vice-president of
USACM, will be the Congress general co-chairs. Dr. Bickel will exploit Sandia's
many contacts in industry, academia, and government in planning and promoting
the conference. Sandia will also provide administrative support, drawing on its
extensive experience in planning scientific events. Dr. Christon from Sandia and
Professor Haber from the University of Illinois will co-chair the technical
program. The Local Organizing Committee is comprised of Tom Bickel, Mark
Christon, Jacob Fish (RPI) and Robert Haber (University of Illinois). The
Congress organizers are working closely with the Executive Committee of USACM,
which is currently composed of twenty distinguished computational mechanicians,
including the past presidents Ted Belytschko, Thomas Hughes, Tinsley Oden, Ahmed
Noor, J.N. Reddy and Mark Shephard.

Our main objective is to bring together the diverse communities that are active
in computational mechanics and to promote interactions between government,
academia and industry. We will make a concentrated effort to attract new
participants from consulting engineering firms and from key computer and
software companies, while retaining the Congress's core constituency of
scientists from academia and government laboratories. We also plan to support
the participation of young researchers, especially graduate students, affording
them a unique opportunity to disseminate their research results, to contact
potential employers, and to learn about the latest advances in this rapidly
developing field. Complete information about the meeting is available at the
Congress web <http://www.esc.sandia.gov/usnccm.html>.