* 0140194
* Analysis on Fractals
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2007
* Robert Strichartz, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2007
* USD 300,000.00

Proposal Number: DMS-00140194 PI: Robert Strichartz

ABSTRACT

Research will be conducted in analysis on fractals. Analysis on fractals studies
the properties of functions defined on fractals, centering on certain analogs of
differential equations. Over the past few years, the P.I. has been actively
involved in developing this area, in particular establishing connections with
more traditional areas of mathematical analysis, including harmonic analysis,
analysis on manifolds, partial differential equations, and numerical analysis.
On a limited class of self-similar fractals it is possible to construct
operators that play the role of the Laplacian, one of the central objects in
traditional analysis on Euclidean spaces and manifolds. The work of the P.I. has
led to a deeper understanding of these Laplacians. At the same time he has
studied certain related nonlinear problems on these fractals, and has worked on
extending the scope of the theory to include a wider class of fractals. This
project will build on and continue this work. A second area of research is the
study of harmonic analysis of fractal measures and functions with fractal
spectrum. Previous research has shown that for a special class of fractal
measures there is a generalization of the theory of Fourier series. By duality
this yields a sampling theorem for functions whose spectrum lies in certain
special fractals. The proposed research will attempt to find out what happens
outside this narrow class of examples.

Analysis on fractals is an emerging area with tremendous potential in both pure
and applied mathematics. Scientists in diverse areas have realized that many
objects in the real world can be modeled by fractals, and mathematicians have
been exploring the properties of fractal sets and measures. This project will
enhance the mathematical theory, both by making connections with more
traditional areas of mathematics, and by developing numerical tools that could
be used by applied mathematicians and scientists in the future. This project
includes collaborative work with undergraduate students (REU) on computer
experiments to explore examples and generate conjectures. It is expected that
this experimental work will lead to deeper theoretical understanding of the
subject.