* 0140408
* Complex Dynamics in Higher Dimensions
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Jeffrey Diller, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2005
* USD 112,301.00

&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0140408&lt;br/&gt;Complex Dynamics in Higher
Dimension&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal
investigator proposes to study the dynamics of meromorphic&lt;br/&gt;self-maps
of compact complex manifolds. If such a map expands some&lt;br/&gt;cohomology
class of the manifold, then the main idea is that there ought&lt;br/&gt;to be a
distinguished invariant current representing this class.&lt;br/&gt;Intersections
between invariant currents should in turn give rise to&lt;br/&gt;invariant
measures that describe the distribution of orbits where the&lt;br/&gt;action of
the map is most complicated. Hence the linear action of a&lt;br/&gt;meromorphic
map on cohomology should go a long way toward determining
a&lt;br/&gt;probabilistic picture of the pointwise dynamics of the map. To
justify &lt;br/&gt;these ideas, the investigator proposes to use a combination
of techniques&lt;br/&gt;from complex geometry, smooth ergodic theory, and
pluripotential&lt;br/&gt;analysis. Various problems in physics and mathematics
reduce to questions&lt;br/&gt;about the dynamics of particular meromorphic maps.
The investigator&lt;br/&gt;proposes to use some of these as starting points and
test cases for his&lt;br/&gt;research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of
dynamical systems has grown increasingly important in the&lt;br/&gt;past several
decades. Put briefly, a dynamical system is anything--e.g. &lt;br/&gt;the
weather, the stock-market, the solar system, etc--that evolves in&lt;br/&gt;time
according (at least theoretically) to definite and codifiable
rules.&lt;br/&gt;The general goal in studying a dynamical system is to make
predictions&lt;br/&gt;about its future state given its present one. If the
future is very&lt;br/&gt;far off then this, as any honest forecaster will admit,
is typically quite &lt;br/&gt;difficult. Small changes in the present state of
the system can imply &lt;br/&gt;huge differences in eventual outcome. The
research proposed here is&lt;br/&gt;devoted to better understanding instability
in dynamical systems--when&lt;br/&gt;it occurs, why it occurs, and how to
recognize it. The research is also&lt;br/&gt;devoted to attaining partial
control over instability by making&lt;br/&gt;statistical predictions about the
eventual behavior of an unstable system&lt;br/&gt;that do not depend on perfect
understanding of its present state. The&lt;br/&gt;dynamical systems that the
investigator proposes to study are mathematical&lt;br/&gt;in nature, but they
are also archtypes for the systems that one analyzes&lt;br/&gt;in connection
with real-world phenomena. The idea is that weather and&lt;br/&gt;the
stockmarket and the solar system ought not be treated as a
separate&lt;br/&gt;and totally unrelated dynamical systems but as particular
examples&lt;br/&gt;of the same general phenomena and subject to similar kinds of
analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;**********************************&lt;br/&gt;&lt;
br/&gt;