* 0140350
* Field Studies of Raindrop Axis Ratio and Orientation Distributions Using an Improved 2D-Video Disdrometer and Dual-Polarized Radar
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2006
* V. Bringi, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew G. Detwiler
* 04/30/2006
* USD 378,450.00

Polarimetric radar measurements of precipitation contain information about the
shape of the precipitation particles. For raindrops, the shape may oscillate
with time, but the average shape is approximately spheroidal, and the larger the
drop the greater the deviation from spherical. Hence polarimetric measurements
of rain contain information about drop size - information in addition to what is
provided by the radar reflectivity alone. This is the basis for improved
estimates of rainfall rate using polarimetry. This project contributes to radar
polarimetry by directly measuring the sizes, shapes, and canting angles of
individual drops at the ground. It employs an upgraded version of a video
disdrometer manufactured by an Austrian firm, Joanneum Research. This instrument
records the front and side view of each individual drop as it falls through a
square, horizontal sampling area about 10 cm on the side. It measures the
particle size, shape, canting angle, and fall speed. The data enable the
calculation of a parameter relevant to polarimetric measurements, called
"effective beta," which depends on the relation between size, shape, and canting
angle. A recent theory shows that this parameter can also be inferred indirectly
from radar observations of three polarimetric quantities, the reflectivity at
horizontal polarization, the ratio of the reflectivities at horizontal and
vertical polarization, and the differential propagation phase between the two
polarization components. Furthermore, knowing the effective beta enables more
accurate estimation of the rainfall rate. The purpose of the experiments is to
test the theory by comparing radar estimates of beta with the values of this
parameter determined directly from the disdrometer-measured properties of the
drops. Experiments will be conducted at two sites: in Colorado, using the CSU-
CHILL radar, and in Darwin, Australia, in collaboration with the Bureau of
Meteorology Research Center. Using these sites will enable the evaluation of the
theory in two climatic regimes with possibly different rainfall characteristics.
The work should improve the accuracy of rainfall estimation by radar.