* 0140682
* GOALI:  Polarization Mode Dispersion Compensation in the Spectral Domain Using Liquid Crystal Modulator Arrays
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Andrew Weiner, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Rongqing Hui
* 05/31/2006
* USD 267,000.00

High-speed fiber optics plays a key enabling role in today's information
technology revolution by providing a means for high bandwidth communications.
Commercial optical transmission bandwidths are increasing at an impressive rate.
In light of these advances, new effects which were previously considered
insignificant are now viewed as key limiting factors in high performance
lightwave systems. In order to sustain the growth in bandwidth, new technologies
are needed to compensate new transmission impairments that arise with rapidly
growing data rates. One such impairment, which has become a key factor limiting
transmission rates and distances in high-speed fiber systems, is an effect
called polarization-mode dispersion (PMD). PMD arises due to small, spatially
varying random birefringences in optical fibers, which lead to decorrelation of
the input and output polarization states and pulse spreading in the time domain.
The latter effect can cause errors in digital communication systems. This
problem is especially acute in the embedded fiber base where many fibers exhibit
strong PMD.

This proposal describes a university-industry collaborative project which aims
to demonstrate a novel and advantageous method for compensation of PMD. The
concept is to exploit and extend technology developed in the field of ultrafast
optical pulse shaping to compensate PMD of wide-band optical signals in parallel
on a wavelength-by-wavelength basis and under computer control. This improves on
current approaches that only allow compensation of so-called first order PMD for
a single wavelength and which do not apply to situations with wide-band optical
signals where the distortion caused by PMD varies substantially across the
optical bandwidth.

This research project will encompass several aspects. One goal is to perform
experiments demonstrating the validity of the proposed new PMD compensation
scheme. Research will also target programmable generation of PMD for use in test
equipment. Both of these activities will be backed up by numerical simulations.
Additionally, new PMD measurement strategies will be devised in order to provide
the data necessary to suitably control the proposed wavelength-by-wavelength PMD
compensators. This should also result in a major advance in instrumentation for
state-of-polarization sensing applicable to multiple-wavelength systems.