* 0140608
* TRAVEL GRANT:  AIChE Women's Initiative Committee Session for "Women Engineering Success from the Inside Out"
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2001,01/31/2003
* Karen High, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 01/31/2003
* USD 2,600.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Karen A. High&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Oklahoma
State University&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0140608&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Woman's Initiative Committee Session entitled "Women Engineering Sucess from the
Inside Out" will be held at the annual American Institute of Chemical Engineers
(AIChE) meeting in Reno, Nevada. It will be a full morning session from 8:30
a.m. to 1:30 p.m. with speakers including women from industry, academia
government. Some of the presentations include:&lt;br/&gt; - Barbara Todd, from
Phillips Petroleum, presenting "A History of Four Female &lt;br/&gt;Chemical
Engineering Graduates from the 1930's."&lt;br/&gt;- Carol Muller, from
MentorNet, discussing "Opening the 'Black Box' of Mentoring".&lt;br/&gt;-
Valerie Young, from Making Waves, detaling "Overcoming the Imposter Syndrome:
&lt;br/&gt; A workshop for Women."&lt;br/&gt;- Peggy Layne, from the National
Academy of Engineering, describing the "NAE Program on Diversity in the
Engineering Workforce."&lt;br/&gt;The presentations will be followed by a
luncheon sponsored by corporate sponsors, hopefully to attract 50 to 75 chemical
engineering professionals, faculty members and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The session is a part of a more comprehensive
program to help women at all stages of their careers - from graduate student to
tenured faculty as well as women in various industrial positions in the chemical
process industries - to advance in their careers. Some of the women are pregnant
and can not attend the meeting. Arrangements have been made for two-way video
conferencing. Philips Petroleum is covering half of the expense, NSF the other
half.&lt;br/&gt;