* 0140459
* Development of T-Ray Microscope
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Xi-Cheng Zhang, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 04/30/2005
* USD 245,103.00

This project will develop a terahertz (FHz) wave microscope for microscopic
sensing and imaging applications. A THz pulse (T-ray) contains information for
both sensing and imaging applications. Biological and organic compounds have
distinct signatures within the THz region of the electromagnetic spectrum, such
as molecular vibrational and rotational levels, and their chemical compositions
can be examined by this proposed T-ray system. This T-ray microscope is capable
of sensing and imaging structures at the cell level with a 0.5-p.m spatial
resolution (1/1000 of one THz wavelength), and it is an exciting new way to
carry out research projects for biomolecular spectroscopy and T-ray imaging.

The microscope will generate and detect picosecond electromagnetic pulses (T-ray
signal) by using nonlinear optical crystals, ultrafast laser pulses and computer
analysis. To overcome the wavelength diffraction-limit, this approach uses a
near-field imaging modality by focusing the optical beams into an electro-optic
crystal to generate (by optical rectification) and detect (by the electro-optic
effect) the T-ray to a sub-micron resolution. The imaging area of the biomedical
tissue, which is attached to the top of the electro-optic crystal, is comparable
to the optical focal spot, and is independent of the THz beam wavelength. This
microscope will have a superior throughput of THz radiation when compared to any
other T-ray microscope. Moreover, this device will make significant
contributions to student education, academic research, instrumentation
development, and medical sensing and imaging applications.