* 0140499
* Harmonic Analysis and Hyperbolic Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Hart Smith, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2007
* USD 221,943.00

PI: Hart Smith, University of Washington&lt;br/&gt;DMS - 0140499&lt;br/&gt;&lt;b
r/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;-------------------------------------------
-------------&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator's research focuses on the
behavior of solutions to&lt;br/&gt;hyperbolic equations in the setting of
metrics of low regularity.&lt;br/&gt;The key tool is the construction, through
wave packet techniques, of&lt;br/&gt;approximate solutions for linear wave
equations with minimally regular&lt;br/&gt;metrics, which are then used to
establish Strichartz and related estimates&lt;br/&gt;for exact solutions. One
application of this work is to well-posedness&lt;br/&gt;for quasi-linear
hyperbolic equations with initial data of low Sobolev&lt;br/&gt;regularity. In
joint work the investigator has established a best possible&lt;br/&gt;result for
general quasi-linear equations with quadratic growth in
the&lt;br/&gt;inhomogeneity; proposed work investigates relaxing the regularity
assumption&lt;br/&gt;in special cases such as the Einstein vacuum equation,
where a null condition&lt;br/&gt;indicates that better results should hold. Wave
packet techniques are&lt;br/&gt;also being used to establish norm estimates for
eigenfunctions on&lt;br/&gt;Riemannian manifolds with metrics of limited
differentiability.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research includes establishing best
possible bounds&lt;br/&gt;for compact manifolds with Lp pinched curvature. The
investigator&lt;br/&gt;is also adapting the above methods to establish norm
estimates&lt;br/&gt;on solutions to mixed-type wave equations with Dirichlet
conditions on a&lt;br/&gt;convex obstacle. This is carried out by reflecting the
metric across the&lt;br/&gt;boundary to obtain a Lipschitz metric on an open
set. The geometry of&lt;br/&gt;the resulting geodesic flow suggests that wave
packet techniques can be&lt;br/&gt;used to establish the same norm estimates on
solutions as hold in the&lt;br/&gt;non-obstacle case.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research involves the study of waves traveling in rough
media;&lt;br/&gt;a rough medium being one where the physics which governs the
speed of waves&lt;br/&gt;changes abruptly from point to point. By studying the
properties of a&lt;br/&gt;special family of localized solitary waves, the
investigator is able to&lt;br/&gt;answer questions about the possible
concentration of energy that can occur&lt;br/&gt;for general waves traveling in
such media. This work has important&lt;br/&gt;applications in the study of
nonlinear wave equations; that is, situations&lt;br/&gt;where the wave can be
considered to interact with itself. One such example&lt;br/&gt;is the
gravitational field equation arising from Einstein's general theory&lt;br/&gt;of
relativity, where the geometry of space itself is the object of
the&lt;br/&gt;equation. Rough solutions, and thus a rough media, necessarily
arise when&lt;br/&gt;considering what kind of singularities the theory can lead
to. The research&lt;br/&gt;also has implications for investigating the
fundamental vibrational modes&lt;br/&gt;in rough media. It is known that
refraction in such media can lead to high&lt;br/&gt;concentrations of energy
that can be detected by examining these modes.&lt;br/&gt;Work is being done to
relate the possible degree of concentration of energy&lt;br/&gt;to the roughness
of the underlying media. The research finds applications&lt;br/&gt;as well in
studying the reflection of waves off obstacles. The
techniques&lt;br/&gt;developed to study rough media are being used to show that
waves reflecting&lt;br/&gt;off of convex obstacles must diffuse to the same
degree as do waves&lt;br/&gt;traveling without reflection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;