* 0140568
* A Hybrid Atomic/Continuum Model for Mechanical Behavior of Multiwalled Carbon Nanotubes
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2007
* Qing Jiang, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Ken Chong
* 09/30/2007
* USD 150,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbon nanotubes have long been expected to be the
ultimate fibers because of the theoretical predictions that their elastic
modulus along the tube axis is about five times larger than that of steel. These
fibers are not only expected for applications as constituents in composite
materials but also as components in nanoscale instruments, such as the GHz
molecular oscillator recently predicted by the PI and reported by the Scientific
American (&lt;http://www.sciam.com/news/012302/2.html&gt;). These expected
applications have led to numerous investigations, both experimental and
theoretical, on determination of the mechanical properties of carbon nanotubes.
The experimentally determined values of the elastic modulus of carbon nanotubes
are not only often inconsistent with theoretical predictions but also scattered
in a wide range. All the experimental measurements to date are indirect because
the difficulties associated with handling such samples of extremely small
diameters have prevented researchers from obtaining reliable data through direct
measurements. The primary causes for the wide scattering of measured values of
mechanical properties and the inconsistency with theoretical predictions are the
quality variations of experimental samples and the inaccuracy of the mechanics
theory used in deriving these values from the measurements. The carbon nanotube
samples usually contain defects, which inevitably affect the mechanical
properties, and there have been intensive efforts towards further understanding
and improving the current synthesis methods and developing new methods, which
are expected to lead to nanotubes of increasingly superior quality. Most
theoretical studies to date are computer simulations based on either molecular
dynamics or atomistic modeling. These studies have provided many insights into
some experimentally observed fascinating phenomena, such as super-flexibility of
carbon nanotubes in bending, but they are severely limited by the system
complexity of multiwalled carbon nanotubes. Physicists have recently turned to
the continuum theories of beams, shells and columns for effective modeling, and
the predictions based on the continuum theories and the molecule dynamics are
compared amazingly well for a few mechanical phenomena, namely buckling
instabilities and bending instabilities. However, the general applicability of
the continuum theories of mechanics to multiwalled carbon nanotubes is not
possible because of the strong evidence that the intermolecular interactions
between adjacent walls in multiwalled carbon nanotubes have a crucial effect on
the mechanical behavior of these nanotubes. The primary objective of this
investigation is to develop a hybrid atomic/continuum inter-length-scale model
to characterize the mechanical behavior of multiwalled carbon nanotubes. In this
model, each wall is modeled as a continuum with their mechanical behavior being
characterized by their effective mechanical properties determined by the
atomistic and molecular models, and the interactions between adjacent walls are
characterized using the existing theories of intermolecular interactions. A
detailed analysis for a multiwalled carbon nanotube, subject to
tension/compression, torsion and bending as well as their combinations, will be
carried out and comparisons with experimental measurements will be made using
the available data in the literature and through a collaborative experimental
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;