* 0140232
* Development of Procedures to Analyze Queueing Models with Heavy-Tailed Interarrival and Service Times
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Donald Gross, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 08/31/2006
* USD 299,741.00

This study is concerned with developing procedures for modeling queues with
heavy-tailed distributions for interarrival and/or service times. These type of
probability distributions decay much slower than exponential. Distributions of
this type render queueing analyses very difficult, in that the Laplace-Stieltjes
transforms (LSTs) of interarrival and/or service times, which play such a
crucial role in analytical queueing theory, often do not have closed form.
Previous researchers, to get around this, have approximated these heavy-tailed
distributions by families of exponentials. The approaches proposed herein avoid
the problems and pitfalls of finding approximating distributions by using the
actual heavy-tailed distributions themselves. One method approximates the LSTs
needed to produce the output measures (waiting-time and system-size
distributions) of interest by directly approximating the LSTs using a
discretized version of the heavy tailed distribution itself (transform
approximation method [TAM]). Another method avoids using the LST directly by
solving an integral equation involving the complementary cdf of the heavy-tailed
distribution (level crossing method [LC]). While discrete-event simulation is an
alternative to analytical queueing analyses, this also has its limitations in
that it usually can only produce mean measures of output performance. It also
has difficulty simulating certain of the heavy-tailed distributions, especially
with large coefficients of variation (standard deviation divided by mean). New
procedures for discrete-event simulation involving quantile estimators are also
proposed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The usual assumptions that made queueing analyses
so productive (Poisson arrivals and exponential-type holding times) clearly do
not hold when arrivals and holding times are heavy-tailed. These distributions
are important, however, in modeling some important situations. The impact of
this research can benefit a variety of areas where heavy-tailed distributions
come into play, such as the analysis of extreme events in insurance claims and
risk models and some Internet traffic situations. Developing analytic/numeric
queueing theoretic procedures and better ways of simulating traffic congestion
for general distributions (heavy-tailed as well as any other type) can provide
very effective additional tools in the queueing modeler's arsenal. &lt;br/&gt;