* 0140180
* Collaborative Research: Innovations in Net-Shape Composite Fabrication through Microscale Modeling of Melt Infiltration
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Brian Mitchell, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Joycelyn S. Harrison
* 06/30/2007
* USD 102,881.00

Many important composite materials are made by melt infiltration, in which
polymers or metals are infiltrated into fibrous preforms. To minimize post-
processing and machining, it is desirable to create parts directly from the
impregnation step, a procedure called net-shape fabrication. While numerical
simulation is a crucial part of process design, standard models operate at the
continuum scale (i.e., the underlying fiber matrix is viewed as a continuum
phase). This approach is necessary for practical reasons, but it requires
significant empiricism to generate spatially averaged constitutive equations and
parameters. Furthermore, current empirical techniques do not effectively account
for important microcscale phenomena such as fiber anisotropy, wetting effects,
and void formation during impregnation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
collaborative research project conducted by researchers at Louisiana State
University and Tulane University, state-of-the-art microscale modeling
techniques will be applied to the impregnation process, which will allow
analyses to be performed using first principles. Experiments will be performed
to aid in the model development and to validate its quantitative capabilities.
In a second phase of the research, results from the microscale simulations will
be scaled up and transferred to continuum-scale models for net-shape
fabrication. The ultimate goal is for this multiple-scale approach to replace
much of the empiricism associated with current methods, thereby improving
fabrication techniques. The collaborative nature of this project will provide
unique learning opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, with
graduate students from LSU participating in experimental aspects of the research
at Tulane, and undergraduates from both institutions being included in research
meetings at LSU. In addition, active participation in the Louisiana Alliance for
Minority Participation is planed to provide summer research opportunities for
students from under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;