* 0140300
* Theoretical Nuclear Structure Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Jerry Draayer, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 07/31/2006
* USD 185,000.00

0140300&lt;br/&gt;Draayer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nuclear theory
program at Louisiana State University (LSU) in Baton Rouge is focused on
understanding the structure of atomic nuclei; specifically, we examine key
ingredients of the strong interaction that binds nucleons (neutron and protons)
in the nucleus. There is both a basic science and an applied aspect to what we
do: On the basic science side we probe the "nuclear soup" - trying to understand
how the strong interaction, which can be drilled down to a consideration of the
structure of the nucleons themselves, manifests itself in the nuclear medium.
This is important since we cannot claim we really understand an object unless we
can tear it apart and put it back together again. We know, for example, that
nuclear display certain characteristic features, such as independent particle
behavior near closed shells and collective rotations - like that of a quantum
top - away from closed shells. The drivers of these simple characteristics,
which the composite system filters from the complex nucleon-nucleon interaction,
remain elusive and hence a roadblock to a deeper understanding of the structure
of atomic nuclei. On the complementary applied science side, one can gain a
better appreciation for practical implications of what we do by asking a very
general but important question: "Is it important to understand systems and
related processes that are responsible for most of the energy stored in the
universe?" If it is important to understand at a deeper level this "ultimate
source of energy", then the study of nuclear physics, as well as the training of
students who will shepherd future developments in this area, has real value to
our nation and humankind. It is within this larger framework that we see and do
our work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We are particularly interested in the structure
of rare earth and actinide nuclei because in these nuclei that the collective
modes are strongly enhanced through the involvement of a large fraction of the
total number of constituent nucleons. Such studies require theoretical tools
beyond those of the usual shell and collective models, which nonetheless by
virtue of their successes provide guidance and limits on all new approaches. Our
research exploits symmetry methods, from point groups to q-deformed and
infinite-dimensional algebras, as well as non-linear dynamics. The proposed
work, which will continue our ongoing program, is organized into three areas: 1)
shell-model and related investigations; 2) group theory and algebraic methods;
and 3) collective motion and nonlinear dynamics. Recent successes in each of
these areas include, respectively: 1) the articulation of "twist" and "scissors
+ twist" modes as collective M1 transitions in strongly deformed nuclei; 2) an
algebraic solution of the generalized pairing problem, inclusive of non-
degenerate single-particle energies; and 3) the evolution of deformation in
nuclei to solitons (dubbed rotons) on the surface of a liquid drop. The training
of graduate students, most from abroad, has been and will continue to be an
important complementary educational and out-reach feature of our program. To
date, the PhD student profile in theoretical nuclear physics program at LSU is:
1 African- American (the first in physics to graduate from LSU), 1 Korean, 1
Pakistani, 4 Germans, 1 Indonesian, 1 Ukrainian, 1 Romanian, 4 Bulgarian, and 2
Armenian.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;