* 0140603
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Hydrophilic/Hydrophobic Membrane Development via (TIPS) Thermally Induced Phase Separation
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Douglas Lloyd, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 04/30/2006
* USD 49,500.00

0140603&lt;br/&gt;Lloyd&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a three-year
collaborative research project between Professor Douglas Lloyd at the University
of Texas, Austin and Professor Hideto Matsuyama of the Kyoto Institute of
Technology in Japan. The researchers will undertake a study of
hydrophilic/hydrophobic membrane development via thermally induced phase
separation (TIPS). A great deal of valuable research has been done on the
thermodynamics of polymer systems that undergo phase separation. However, a more
thorough understanding of the kinetics of phase separation and structure
development is necessary to complete the picture and allow membrane manufactures
to control the porous characteristics of the membranes. Specific goals are to:
1) conduct kinetics studies of membrane structure formation; 2) to form a series
of membranes using TIPS with various copolymers and diluents; and 3) to measure
performance parameters such as flux and solute rejection.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project brings together the efforts of two
laboratories that have complementary expertise and research capabilities. The
U.S. scientists have considerable expertise in membrane formation and the
kinetics of structure development and the Japanese researchers have a greater
mastery of membrane characterization techniques, especially in terms of fouling
and protein adsorption. In addition, the U.S. group has the optical microscopy
equipment to do some of the kinetics experiments and the Japanese group has the
light scattering equipment to extend the studies into the range of smaller
domains and earlier times in the phase separation process. It is anticipated
that the results of this research will enable membrane manufactures to control
the microstructure of the membranes (that is, pre size and pore size
distribution). Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will
broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and
cooperation. The project advances international human resources through the
participation of a graduate student. The researchers plan to make their research
results available to membrane scientists through the open literature, oral
presentations at meetings of professional society meetings, and Professor
Lloyd's web site. &lt;br/&gt;