* 0140045
* Recent Progress in Langlands Functoriality Conference, June 17-28, 2002, Luminy, France
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2003
* Freydoon Shahidi, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia M. Wiegand
* 03/31/2003
* USD 15,000.00

To recognize and build upon recent advances within the Langlands program, a
conference with the above title has been approved by CIRM for June 17-28, 2002.
The investigators, who are among the organizers, feel that such a conference
will serve to advance the careers of any young researchers who are in
attendance. We are proposing that ten junior people receive funds to support
their participation in these proceedings. The amount requested will be
sufficient for travel as well as local expenses. In administering these funds we
shall make every effort to support those who have no other means of funding.

The focus of this conference is to survey recent results within a branch of
mathematics referred to as the Langlands program. The underlying philosophy of
this program is that there should be deep, and in some sense, fundamental
connections between three seemingly disparate mathematical fields: Algebraic
Geometry, Number Theory, and Harmonic Analysis. The Shimura-Taniyama conjecture,
which posited the equivalence of the theory of elliptic curves (geometric
objects) and a certain classes of automorphic forms (analytic objects with
number theoretic applications) is just a ``simple'' (that is simple within the
context of the program) example of what the Langlands program is expected to
produce. By proving this conjecture, Andrew Wiles delivered a long sought proof
of Fermat's Last theorem, that for integers larger than 2, there is never a
choice of two non-zero integers whose n-th powers sum to the n-th power of
another non-zero integer. More general conjectures within the Langlands program
can be stated with some more technical language, but have a similarity to the
Fermat problem in that the proofs are much harder than the statements. The last
several years have witnessed a series of remarkable breakthroughs in the
Langlands program. Wiles's work is one of many examples of these exciting
results. As outlined in the proposal, this is critical point in the history of
the program, in that new ideas must be found to build upon this recent momentum.
Thus, providing funding for relatively new researchers to attend a high level
conference, such as the one being sponsored by CIRM, will serve the field, and
the greater mathematical community greatly. It is through such development that
mathematics continues to play a critical role in our society, both culturally
and technologically.

