* 0140179
* Experimental Study of Adaptation to the Edge of Chaos and Critical Scaling in the Self-adjusting Peroxidase-Oxidase Reaction
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Alfred Hubler, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Earle L. Lomon
* 06/30/2005
* USD 167,908.00

0140179 Hubler

One aspect of biocomplexity is the ability of biota to self-adjust to their
environment. Previous studies of adaptive behavior have shown that adaptive
systems will evolve over time to states that are weakly chaotic, a condition
known as the edge of chaos. These studies typically use a genetic algorithm
(computer-based evolution) to implement adaptation. It is conjectured that most
self-adjusting dynamical systems that initially have chaotic behavior will also
adapt toward the edge of chaos. A model for self-adjusting dynamical systems is
introduced which treats the control parameters as slowly varying, rather than
constant. The dynamics of these parameters is assumed to be governed by some
low-pass filtered feedback from the dynamical variables of the system. Under the
influence of noise, at least in numerical models, the probability of chaotic
breakout shows a universal scaling with the duration of the breakouts.

Applications of the model to biochemical oscillators as the simplest possible
adaptive system relevent to environmental dynamics will be investigated. A high
degree of interdisciplinarity is required, as the research involves expertise in
dynamical systems, plant biology, instrumental measurements, cybernetics,
enzymology, chemistry, and physics. The system is chosen to be "biocomplex," yet
simple enough that meaningful measurements can be made and quantitative models
can be evaluated.

We intend to experimentally demonstrate adaptation using the peroxidase-oxidase
oscillator as an example. This system is known to exhibit non-linear, complex,
and even chaotic behavior. We will explore if the in situ behavior of this
enzyme provides the first experimental evidence for adaptation to the edge of
chaos in a naturally occurring system. Detailed chemical models are available to
guide our experiments. We will experimentally implement low-pass filtered
feedback from the dynamical variables to the control parameters through: 1. a
computer based probe-actuator system, and 2. the comparatively slow response of
the metabolism of a thin section of horseradish root tissues suspended in a
reactor, and check for adaptation to the edge of chaos, and critical scaling of
chaotic outbreaks of chemical oscillations.

Outreach activities to local secondary schools will be incorporated into our
existing collaborations with high school science teachers. If our initial
experiments on plant peroxidases show the anticipated complexity, we will then
explore the related complexity in the behavior of peroxidases and oxidases in
human neutrophils, cells associated with anti-bacterial activity and response to
systemic afronts.