* 0140388
* Participant Support for the 65th Annual Meteoritical Society Meeting, July 22-26, 2002
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2003
* Kevin McKeegan, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 04/30/2003
* USD 10,000.00

0140388 McKeegan

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
Office of Polar Programs, supports student participation in the 65th Annual
Meeting of the Meteoritical Society which will be held on the campus of the
University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), from July 22-26, 2002. The
principal scientific focus of this international meeting is deciphering the
clues to the origin and evolution of the solar system that are contained within
the chemical, petrologic, and isotopic properties of meteorites. Meteorites made
available to researchers through the US Antarctic meteorite program sponsored by
the National Science Foundation, the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA), and the Smithsonian Institution are an important aspect
of international meteoritical research. This award will provide travel support
to enable students to participate in the meeting. The student travel awards will
be made on a competitive basis and will support primarily U.S. and also some
foreign students. Additional financial support for the meeting is anticipated
from NASA, The Barringer Foundation, and a number of scientific instrument
manufacturers (JEOL USA, Inc., Cameca, Inc., Finnigan, Inc., and Micromass,
Inc.). This award will provide a scientifically enriching experience to the
student recipients of the travel support