* 0140488
* Testing a Model of Instructional Strategies to Enhance Prekindergarten Children's Language, Literacy, and Math Skills
* EDU,DRL
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2003
* Karen Smith, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 01/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This proposal seeks funds to implement and evaluate a model of instructional
strategies for&lt;br/&gt;prekindergarten teachers in order to enhance their
ability to support young childre's &lt;br/&gt;learning in language, early
literacy, and math. The model will be experimentally tested &lt;br/&gt;across
Head Start and public school educational settings and is guided by a strong body
of &lt;br/&gt;recent research. As the two settings have different goals for
children, funding of this &lt;br/&gt;proposal will provide important information
on the conditions under which the model is &lt;br/&gt;effective. The outcomes of
this research will determine critical elements for models of
&lt;br/&gt;instructional approaches such as intensity and duration, teacher
background characteristics,&lt;br/&gt; role of mentor teachers, and the
importance of including a home literacy component. The &lt;br/&gt;model is based
on research that has clearly established a group of key elements for
&lt;br/&gt;prekindergarten language/literacy programs (e.g., expressive
language, vocabulary, early &lt;br/&gt;reading skills). Results will answer a
critical remaining question regarding how a model &lt;br/&gt;of instructional
strategies can support teachers to implement a comprehensive set of
&lt;br/&gt;teaching practices supporting language/literacy development in ways
that are sensitive to &lt;br/&gt;the broadest range of social, emotional, and
cognitive needs of young children.&lt;br/&gt;