* 0140274
* Nonlinear Shape Oscillations in Compact Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Andrei Ludu, Northwestern State University Louisiana
* Standard Grant
* Earle L. Lomon
* 04/30/2005
* USD 20,000.00

PHY-0140274&lt;br/&gt;Ludu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This 2-year research plan is
focused on modeling and understanding some classes of nonlinear phenomena at the
surface of fluid objects, namely large amplitude shape oscillations like
solitary waves on compact surfaces. Solitary waves are the only singular
traveling stable excitations known in quantum field theory. However, the
existence of such special solution on compact (sphere-like) objects is still an
open question. These topics are related with PI's long experience in nonlinear
physics, especially with the successful introduction of the "roton" model in
order to explain spontaneous alpha- and cluster-decay of heavy ions (Phys. Rev.
Lett. 80 (1998) 2125). The aim here is to extend this theoretical model and to
apply it to any compact (almost spherical) system, in order to explain and
predict its shape, modes, patterns, and its strange nonlinear behavior. In
nonlinear science, finding an exact solution, or even formal classification of
possible evolution paths of a system, is rather the exception than the rule.
This is the basic reason to investigate such new exact solitary wave solutions
for spherical objects, of different space scales from heavy nuclei, atomic
clusters, biological cells, macroscopic liquid drops, shells, bubbles to neutron
stars. Last but not the least, these results will be applied to the recently
discovered new form of matter, Bose Einstein-Condensates (BEC drops). All in all
we'll try to predict the evolution of such systems, their modes of motion,
possible catastrophes, break-up processes, fission, etc., beyond the limits of
linear approximation. This will be described theoretically in terms of causal
fluid equations (also called Hamiltonian systems). Exact traveling singular
stable solutions will be investigated (soliton theory) and later on the
equations will be solved numerically using large computer
codes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The behavior of the free surface of such compact
fluid systems, that is drop-like objects or fluid layers is of special interest
in many natural and industrial processes, from cell division in biology or
spraying and atomization to exotic nuclear shapes, exotic radioactivity, or
impact between stellar objects. The basic aim in the study of such nonlinear
collective modes is the understanding of the interaction of the bulk with the
boundaries. Another aim is the understanding of the transitions between
different modes and patterns. A generalized KdV equation, valid for different
geometries, including viscoelastic properties and damping is introduced and
solved. The theoretical tools used in this research will have a certain degree
of novelty, since there will be used self-similarity techniques in order to
solve such NPDE. This research is expected to impact the teaching and learning
enterprise through the student research, and through building international
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;