* 0140378
* Euler Systems and Elliptic Curves
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Karl Rubin, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2007
* USD 234,474.00

The investigator and his coworkers study elliptic curves, special
values&lt;br/&gt;of L-functions, and related topics. Some of the most
interesting open&lt;br/&gt;questions and conjectures in arithmetic algebraic
geometry relate&lt;br/&gt;arithmetic invariants with special values of
L-functions. Iwasawa theory&lt;br/&gt;and Euler systems have proved to be among
the most successful tools for&lt;br/&gt;attacking these problems, by serving as
a bridge between the algebraic&lt;br/&gt;world and the analytic world. The
investigator continues to pursue this&lt;br/&gt;approach, by extracting
additional information from Euler systems and&lt;br/&gt;their "derivative"
Kolyvagin systems. In another direction, the&lt;br/&gt;investigator and his
colleagues study ranks of elliptic curves,&lt;br/&gt;especially the asymptotic
distribution of ranks in families of
quadratic&lt;br/&gt;twists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Elliptic curves play a central
role in many parts of mathematics&lt;br/&gt;including its most applied areas.
For example, elliptic curves are used&lt;br/&gt;in algorithms to encrypt data
for transmission, and for efficient digital&lt;br/&gt;signatures. In its most
basic form, an elliptic curve is a special kind&lt;br/&gt;of polynomial equation
in two variables. Historically number theorists&lt;br/&gt;are interested in
finding solutions of these equations in which the&lt;br/&gt;variables take
values which are either whole numbers, or fractions. The&lt;br/&gt;rank of an
elliptic curve is a basic invariant which measures the size of&lt;br/&gt;the set
of solutions. The investigator and his coworkers study ranks
of&lt;br/&gt;elliptic curves and their interrelations with other mathematical
objects&lt;br/&gt;and concepts. These questions are related to the
cryptographic&lt;br/&gt;applications of elliptic curves, which come about by
considering&lt;br/&gt;solutions in which the variables take values in finite
fields.