* 0140441
* Collaborative Research:  Procedures for Efficient Cycle Time-Throughput Curve Generation
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2005
* Gerald Mackulak, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 04/30/2005
* USD 197,363.00

This grant provides funding for the development of efficient and effective tools
for the estimation of cycle time-throughput (CT-TH) curves via computer
simulation. Unlike analytical queueing models, computer simulation can be used
to represent almost any manufacturing system regardless of how complex.
Unfortunately, simulation allows for the evaluation of only one point at a time
on the CT-TH curve, so tools are needed to guide the simulation for development
of the full curve. Since the CT-TH curve for real manufacturing systems is
subject to variability, this research will identify and derive appropriate
models and tools to represent not only the mean of the curve, but also its
variance and selected percentiles, especially in the region of maximum system
capacity. The tools for constructing the CT-TH curves will be adaptive and
selective both in terms of the models used and the precision required by the
user. Accurate model determination will be directed under both fixed-budget and
fixed-precision settings. Experiments to evaluate the methods developed will be
conducted on a test bed of tractable queueing models and a large-scale
simulation of a semiconductor manufacturing facility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the results of this research will provide methods for efficiently
generating the CT-TH curves associated with simulation models of semiconductor
manufacturing facilities. Since CT-TH curves can be used to quantitatively
evaluate different scenarios of product mix, production targets and capital
expansion, the primary goal of this work will be to develop simulation methods
for generating accurate CT-TH curves given finite resources. Compared to
existing methods, this work will increase the number and complexity of
manufacturing system evaluations that can be conducted leading to improvements
in production facilities. Production improvements will lead to subsequent
reductions in production cost and/or increases in throughput. The proposed work
will also contribute to the tools available for model fitting, variance
reduction and fixed sample allocation in large-scale simulation models.