* 0140047
* GOALI: Nanocomposite magnetic materials for multifunctional microwave devices with integrated EMI suppression
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Hariharan Srikanth, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rongqing Hui
* 07/31/2006
* USD 259,999.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0140047&lt;br/&gt;Hariharan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&g
t;Electromagnetic interference (EMI) and high frequency noise are major sources
of signal loss and data corruption in electronics, communication and mass
storage devices. In addition, there have been major advances in areas like high-
speed, high-density memories and computer processor speeds. For example,
nowadays, CPUs operate at frequencies over 1GHz. Rapid progress in
microelectronics fabrication processes have led to miniaturization of electronic
device modules. Space is at a premium and this causes power sources and IC
components to be packed very close to each other. Moreover, there are major
efforts to design and develop solid-state quantum computers that would be
inherently highly susceptible to EMI. These advances place stringent
requirements and underscore the critical need for improved materials that
combine optimal device characteristics and excellent EMI--suppression properties
particularly at RF and microwave frequencies. To obtain these new materials
exhibiting desirable properties, a combinatorial approach involving materials
synthesis and electromagnetic characterization is
necessary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conducting materials, capacitors, ferrites have
all been popular choices for near-field and far-field EMI suppression at
frequencies in the low RF (few MHz) to the microwave (up to 100 GHz) range.
While these materials individually are somewhat effective over different
frequency bands, they are often tagged on to circuits as additional components.
The PIs propose a novel scheme using layered composite materials where wideband
EMI--suppression functionality is integrated into the base materials that are
used in devices for RF and microwave circuits. Their primary target will be to
achieve integrated functionality and improved shielding effectiveness over the
frequency range of 1 MHz to 10 GHz.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs proposed
research includes development of the following three
strategies:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;[1] Synthesize a series of nanocomposite
materials comprised of magnetic nanoparticles embedded in doped intrinsically
conducting polymers. Study the fundamental magnetic properties, complex
impedance and shielding effectiveness up to 10 6Hz.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;[2]
Investigate the RF response in variable thickness layered nanocomposite
materials processed using thick film spin coating
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;[3] Monitor the device performance and EMI-
suppression of a PC mother board and a microwave circulator coated with the
downselected nanocomposite materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The synthesis of
nanoscale materials will be carried out in collaboration with Materials
Modification Inc. (MMI) using a patented microwave plasma technique. Systematic
magnetic and electromagnetic characterization will be done using resonant and
non-resonant methods developed in their laboratory at University of South
Florida. This GOALI project will contribute to extensive training and education
of graduate students at USF in two major topical areas: Nanomaterials technology
and Electromagnetic measurement methods. It also affords a direct opportunity
for Applied Physics PhD students at USF to travel and work on-site at MMI and
gain industry experience.&lt;br/&gt;