* 0140316
* Microscopic Theory of Quantum Fluids and Nuclear Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2002,09/30/2005
* John Clark, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 09/30/2005
* USD 393,000.00

PHY-0140316 Clark

This award supports research on a broad spectrum of quantum many-body problems.
The primary objective is prediction, from first principles,of the properties of
strongly correlated systems of fundamental and technological importance,
assuming realistic interactions and dealingwith realistic conditions of density
and temperature. The main focus is on outstanding questions in the theory of
nuclei and nuclear matter. However, the research also crosses disciplinary
boundaries into many-body problems in neutron-star matter, helium and other
quantum liquids, strongly correlated electron systems, spin-lattice models, and
lattice-gauge systems. Much of the work involves application of two highly
developed semi-analytic methods, namely the self-consistent Green's function
approach and correlated-basis theory. In addition to their quantitative accuracy
and ab initio character, these methods are capable of providing information on
important system properties associated with quantum coherence that are not yet
accessible to brute-force computer simulation. Two themes of current and
enduring interest will be emphasized during the period of the grant, namely the
contrasting roles of short- and long-range correlations in nuclear systems and
the occurrence of quantum phase transitions in a rich variety of physical
settings. Within the latter theme, pairing phenomena are being studied with new
techniques that promise unique insights into superfluidity in neutron stars,
exotic nuclei, and liquid Helium-3 as well as high-temperature
superconductivity. The selection of problems and goals is motivated by the
potential for impact facilities and observations of compact astrophysical
objects from orbiting observatories. Specific highlights of the project include
(i) a comparison of pionic long-range excitations in nuclear matter and in
finite nuclei to determine whether such correlations should be excluded in the
calculation of nuclear saturation properties, (ii) an improved description of
collective features of Oxygen-16 that will permit quantitative evaluation of
spectroscopic factors for single-nucleon knockout and cross sections for two-
nucleon removal, (iii) analysis ofexperimental data to deduce the properties of
the highest-momentum protons in the nucleus (the "last missing protons"), (iv)
application of incisive new methods of analysis and computation in pairing
theoryto elucidate the superfluid phase diagrams of neutron matter, symmetrical
nuclear matter, liquid Helium-3, and quantum chromodynamics, (v)exploration of
the breakdown of Fermi-liquid theory, as manifested in fermion condensation and
other rearrangements of single-particle degrees of freedom in strongly
correlated systems, and (vi) investigation of mathematical and many-body aspects
of quantum control relevant to laser control of chemical reactions and to
quantum computation. Continuing a long tradition, the preparation of graduate
students for productive careers in teaching and research plays a central role in
the program, essential to its success.

