* 0400268
* Economic Reliability of Deregulated Power Markets: A Machine Learning Model for Design and Assessment
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Ralph Fehr, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Dagmar Niebur
* 04/30/2008
* USD 210,000.00

One of the main reasons behind power market design flaws is the lack of
comprehensive quantitative models that take into account important market
features. This deficiency coupled with an absence of computationally viable
methods for solving stochastic games (e.g., obtaining Nash Equilibrium) that can
be used to model market behavior has resulted in lower economic reliability for
power markets. The objectives of this research are: 1) to develop a stochastic
game theoretic modeling framework consisting of features like energy bidding and
price settlement policies, FTR auction, demand elasticity and other evolving
market rules, 2) to formulate a reinforcement learning (RL) based solution
methodology and develop its convergence analysis, 3) to conduct testing and
benchmarking with power market industry data, and 4) to develop plans to train
students and also offer continuing education for power market professionals. The
proposed model and its solution methodology would allow us to identify the
equilibrium state of a market, which is characterized by steady state bidding
strategies of the market participants and the resulting energy prices. Thus the
economic reliability of alternative market designs can be assessed before
implementation. The RL based solution methodology can also be extended to
problems in other sectors of economy. The broader impacts would include 1)
enhanced economic reliability of power markets through dissemination of
knowledge gained from the research, 2) increased competition due to better
market design resulting in process innovation and price reduction, and 3)
development of a diverse group of professionals capable of designing and analyze
deregulated power markets.