* 0400768
* Characterizing Neuropeptides with Chiral Modifications
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2009
* Jonathan Sweedler, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2009
* USD 590,000.00

Professor Jonathan Sweedler of the U of Ill Urbana-Champaign is supported by the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program to analyze a chiral post-translational
modification in neuropeptides, namely, an L to D isomerization thought to
activate the peptide biologically. The biological system under study is the
single neuron of Aplysia californica. There are three proposed approaches:
instrumental, enzymatic and immunological. In the first, chiral separation
methods will be used to try to resolve diastereomeric peptides that differ by
D/L isomerization of one of the amino acids. Secondly, N-terminal peptidases
that cleave only L-amino acids will be used followed by analysis of fragments by
matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization mass spectrometry (MALDI). A third
approach is to attempt to grow antibodies to peptides containing D-amino acids.
The goal is to discover new D-amino acid containing peptides that function
neurologically. Students in this laboratory are trained in analytical chemistry
and neurobiology.

Signaling in the brain and nervous system is accomplished to a large extent by a
vast number of peptides, many as yet undiscovered. The well studied Aplysia
snail system gives researchers one model system that a great deal is already
known about. Success of this project will allow a better understanding of
peptides in neurochemistry, as well as in neurological diseases such as
Alzheimer's, and will also contribute to advances in analytical methods for
other questions in biology and pharmacy.