* 0400134
* GOALI:      Multiresolution Algorithms for Virtual Prototyping of Massive CAD Models
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Dinesh Manocha, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Christina L. Bloebaum
* 06/30/2008
* USD 382,823.00

The research is expected to lay the scientific foundation for human centric,
simulation-based engineering design through a novel "multiresolution" framework
that incorporates virtual prototyping. Virtual prototyping is often used to
reduce design time, lower production cost, and improve the level of innovation
in developing mechanical parts of varying scale: from nanometer-sized objects
such as nanoscale robots, to large man-made computer aided design of complex
systems such as airplanes, power plants and submarines composed of millions of
parts. This project focuses on advancing the fundamental understanding of the
design process through the creation of novel algorithms and systems that are
based on the "multiresolution" framework. This framework describes geometry,
spatial arrangements, numerics, and physical simulation across different scales.
Key issues to be addressed include the realization of visualization, modeling
and simulation techniques, new level-of detail representations and novel
multiresolution algorithms for interactive display, proximity query and physics-
based simulation and manipulation of massive CAD models. To ensure the relevance
of the framework and incorporated algorithms to engineering design, tests and
validation will be conducted through the virtual prototyping of highly complex
or massive CAD models provided by the industrial collaborators and GOALI
partner. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the increasing complexity of engineering
design, it is expected that this approach could potentially offer robust and
efficient solutions to large size problems by adequately modeling across the
scales, providing mutual interaction among the multiple entities in mechanical,
physical or biological systems. The system is envisioned to not only reduce the
time and costs associated with the design and review process of complex
mechanical systems; it also has the potential of generating effective animation
sequences for electronic maintenance training. Outreach to middle and high
schools students, linked through the power of the visualization tools where
students could experience virtual manipulation of structures within a complex
system such as an airplane is expected to raise the interest in engineering
design education. The collaboration with Boeing will provide both the ability to
validate the framework and to capture the interest of K-12 students through the
introduction to real engineering design problems. &lt;br/&gt;