* 0400785
* Workshop on "Geometry and Representation Theory"
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,01/31/2006
* Philip Foth, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 01/31/2006
* USD 16,500.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0400785&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Philip A. Foth, Paul Bressler, Kirti N.
Joshi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A powerful influx of methods and ideas from geometry
into the&lt;br/&gt;representation theory led to significant breakthroughs
and&lt;br/&gt;stimulated the emergence of geometric representation theory as
an&lt;br/&gt;important area of research in modern mathematics.
Geometric&lt;br/&gt;methods have been utilized to explore many significant
problems&lt;br/&gt;in representation theory. The Langlands program provides
an&lt;br/&gt;example of the synthesis of representation theory, arithmetic
and&lt;br/&gt;geometry. In its arithmetic avatar the Langlands
correspondence&lt;br/&gt;envisages a description of certain kinds of
representations of&lt;br/&gt;the Galois group of a number field or a function
field in terms&lt;br/&gt;of automorphic representations. The geometric avatar of
the&lt;br/&gt;Langlands correspondence pioneered by Drinfel'd and Laumon
has&lt;br/&gt;also attracted a lot of attention and has turned out to be
a&lt;br/&gt;confluence of several areas of mathematics:
representation&lt;br/&gt;theory, D-modules, Kac-Moody and vertex algebras and
integrable&lt;br/&gt;systems, Hitchin maps to name a few. Representation theory
has&lt;br/&gt;been omnipresent in theoretical physics and conversely,
problems&lt;br/&gt;and developments in physics motivated much progress
in&lt;br/&gt;representation theory which, in turn, was a significant
input&lt;br/&gt;into other branches of mathematics. Conformal Field Theory
led&lt;br/&gt;to intensive study of the representation theory of the
Virasoro&lt;br/&gt;algebra, Kac-Moody algebras and vertex operator algebras.
Results&lt;br/&gt;in representation theory have had a significant impact on
the&lt;br/&gt;understanding of the structure of moduli spaces. In the
theory&lt;br/&gt;of integrable systems it has been observed long ago in
numerous&lt;br/&gt;examples that physically meaningful completely integrable
systems&lt;br/&gt;as well as explicit formulas for the integrals of motion
are&lt;br/&gt;intimately related with the geometric representation theory.
All&lt;br/&gt;these developments serve as our motivation to organize
a&lt;br/&gt;conference on geometric representation theory, a forum where
the&lt;br/&gt;majority of participants will be young researchers and
advanced&lt;br/&gt;graduate students, learning from leading specialists and
further&lt;br/&gt;advancing their research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Representation theory is a quintessential branch
of modern&lt;br/&gt;mathematics which studies symmetries of various
algebraic&lt;br/&gt;systems. The results and ideas from representation theory
found&lt;br/&gt;many important applications in pure and applied mathematics
as&lt;br/&gt;well as quantum physics, biology, economics, just to name
a&lt;br/&gt;few. More recently a powerful merge of ideas from geometry made
a&lt;br/&gt;significant impact on the discipline and led to
important&lt;br/&gt;breakthroughs. The main goal of our conference is to
gather&lt;br/&gt;leading specialists in representation theory as well as
beginning&lt;br/&gt;researchers and advanced graduate students, to create a
forum&lt;br/&gt;where participants can exchange new ideas, communicate
recent&lt;br/&gt;advances and assist younger participants in developing
successful&lt;br/&gt;research strategies. A special emphasis is made on
attracting&lt;br/&gt;women and underrepresented minority participants,
especially&lt;br/&gt;those at the dawn of their
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;