* 0400370
* Chaotic mixing in liquid microdroplets
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2010
* Roman Grigoriev, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2010
* USD 271,000.00

This project explores basic mechanisms of introducing chaotic advection to
enhance mixing in a hydrodynamic model of a nanoliter-scale batch reactor. A
combined analytical, numerical and experimental approach will be used, which
brings together two novel features: (1) a non-contact experimental method of
precisely moving, merging, and mixing nanoliter-sized droplets using
temperature-induced surface tension gradients, and (2) a convenient theoretical
model based on the Stokes equation for the fluid coupled with the advection
equation for the solute concentration that is suitable for making quantitative
predictions of mixing behaviors observed in the experiments. The central focus
of this research is on fundamental understanding of nonperturbative effects in
time-dependent flow, which are most likely to lead to effective mixing in
practical applications. The main idea of our approach is based on using the
invariants, or functions preserved along the streamlines of the flow, which
arise due to a high symmetry of typical flows in microdroplets. As streamlines
cannot cross the invariant surfaces, destruction of all invariants is the key to
achieving good mixing. The nonperturbative corrections that arise naturally from
non-ideal aspects of any experimental implementation are therefore essential
ingredients in the mixing process as they change the symmetry of the flow and
thus affect the existence and number of invariants. The obtained results will be
used to design an effective procedure for controlling mixing that should be
applicable to a broad class of flows involving the mixing of discrete quantities
of fluid.

Miniaturization holds great promise for novel applications, such as chemical and
biological sensors, drug discovery, and clinical tests, bringing radical
improvements in speed, throughput, and sensitivity. This project focuses on the
fundamental problem of fluid mixing, which plays a crucial role in most
microfluidic technologies, yet becomes increasingly difficult at small scales.
The study of chaotic mixing in liquid microdroplets is an integral part of a
broader study of opto-microfluidics, a novel approach for handling liquids at
the microscale using optical methods. This approach will allow construction of a
new generation of microfluidic devices free of many drawbacks of conventional
microchannel-based technology. Such highly integrated dynamically reprogrammable
reusable devices could be used to design complete "labs-on-a-chip" with a
potential to revolutionize the way chemical and biological assays are done.