* 0400386
* Explicit Approaches to Modular Forms and Modular Abelian Varieties
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2005
* William Stein, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 12/31/2005
* USD 125,458.00

ABSTRACT for the award DMS-0400386 of Stein &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Birch and
Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture and Mazur's notion of&lt;br/&gt;visibility of
Shafarevich-Tate groups motivate the computational and&lt;br/&gt;theoretical
goals of this research project. The computational goals&lt;br/&gt;are to develop
new algorithms, tables, and software for studying&lt;br/&gt;modular forms and
modular abelian varieties. The PI hopes to create&lt;br/&gt;new computational
tools, including a major new package for computing&lt;br/&gt;with modular
abelian varieties over number fields, and enhance the&lt;br/&gt;modular forms
database, which is used by many mathematicians who study&lt;br/&gt;modular
forms. The theoretical goals are to prove new theorems that&lt;br/&gt;relate
Mordell-Weil and Shafarevich-Tate groups of elliptic curves
and&lt;br/&gt;abelian varieties. These investigations into Mazur's notion
of&lt;br/&gt;visibility, and how it links Mordell-Weil and Shafarevich-Tate
groups,&lt;br/&gt;may provide new insight into relationships between different
cases of&lt;br/&gt;the Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer
conjecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Elliptic curves and modular forms play a
central role in modern number&lt;br/&gt;theory and arithmetic geometry. For
example, Andrew Wiles proved&lt;br/&gt;Fermat's Last Theorem by showing that the
elliptic curve attached by&lt;br/&gt;Gerhard Frey to a counterexample to
Fermat's claim would be attached&lt;br/&gt;to a modular form, and that this
modular form cannot exist. Our&lt;br/&gt;understanding of the world of elliptic
curves and modular forms is&lt;br/&gt;extensive, but many questions remain
unresolved. The first goal of&lt;br/&gt;this project is to provide theoretical
and computational tools to make&lt;br/&gt;modular forms and objects attached to
them very explicit, so that&lt;br/&gt;mathematicians can compute with them, test
their conjectures on&lt;br/&gt;them, and gain a better feeling for them. The
second goal is to use&lt;br/&gt;these tools and other ideas to gain a deeper
understanding of the&lt;br/&gt;conjecture of Bryan Birch and Peter Swinnerton-
Dyer about the arithmetic of elliptic curves.&lt;br/&gt;