* 0400034
* RUI: Multivariate Calibration as a Harmonious and Parsimonious Problem
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* John Kalivas, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2007
* USD 118,800.00

Professor John Kalivas of Idaho State University is funded for a statistical
study aimed at improving, for example, quantitative structure activity
relationships (QSAR) calculations, and analysis of spectroscopic data. These
activities fall in the specialized field called "chemometrics." The idea is to
develop multivariate calibration, which is of interest when the number of
predictors exceeds the number of samples (p&gt;n, rather than the usual
assumption n&gt;&gt;p). The PI is using the regression vector LASSO (least
absolute shrinkage and selection operator) and other norms (with constraints) to
fit such data. Comparisons to other methods such as ridge regression, partial
least squares and multiple linear regression, are being performed. The work is
being done by undergraduate students using the program MATLAB. Collaboration
with Dr. Karoly Heberger of the Central Research Institute for Chemistry of the
Hungarian Academy of Sciences will extend the QSAR
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Analytical and
Surface Chemistry program of the Chemistry Division and the Statistics program
of the Division of Mathematical Sciences under the umbrella of the NSF-wide
Mathematical Sciences Priority Area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Efficiency and
effectiveness of data analysis is becoming increasingly important in all of the
quantitative sciences, including biology. The integration of state of the art
statistical methods within the natural science disciplines is required for
advancement in these fields. Education of undergraduates in these advanced
methods prepare them for any type of scientific professional pursuit.&lt;br/&gt;