* 0400887
* Investigations into Set Theory and Ergodic Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Matthew Foreman, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2008
* USD 199,999.00

Foreman will investigate the descriptive set theoretic&lt;br/&gt;aspects of the
classification problem for ergodic measure preserving&lt;br/&gt;systems. He has
partial results showing, for example, that they cannot be&lt;br/&gt;classified
by countable structures. He conjectures that the isomorphism&lt;br/&gt;problem
is provably complex, e.g. analytic but not Borel. The second&lt;br/&gt;aspect of
Foreman's proposal is to study ``canonical structure" in set&lt;br/&gt;theory.
This is structure that requires the Axiom of Choice for its&lt;br/&gt;existence,
but is independent of the choices made in it construction.
Of&lt;br/&gt;particular interest are PCF objects and relations with squares
and&lt;br/&gt;diamonds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Foreman will investigate two areas
of mathematics. The first has to do&lt;br/&gt;with the evolution of complex
systems in time. These systems appear to&lt;br/&gt;show random behaviour, but of
qualitatively different sorts. Foreman's&lt;br/&gt;project is to show that
various behavior types are not distinguishable by&lt;br/&gt;concrete
observations. The second project has to do with the assumptions&lt;br/&gt;that
the study of mathematics is based on. The usual assumptions are
not&lt;br/&gt;strong enough to be able to find the answers to all
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;questions. For this reason it is necessary to investigate
strengthenings&lt;br/&gt;of the ordinary assumptions. Foreman proposes to do
this by focussing on&lt;br/&gt;``canonical structure" in set theory.