* 0400231
* Nuclear Physics from QCD
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Silas Beane, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 06/30/2007
* USD 193,112.00

An important intellectual challenge of our time is to understand how the
complexities of hadronic and nuclear structure arise from a QCD description in
terms of quarks and gluons. In the absence of nonperturbative methods for
solving QCD, one may formulate an effective field theory (EFT) to describe
hadronic and nuclear physics. The basic idea of EFT is to develop a perturbative
expansion in ratios of widely separated scales, which are plentiful in hadronic
and nuclear systems. The undetermined parameters that appear in this expansion
can be fit to data, or constrained using symmetries and large-Nc methods, and
ultimately computed using lattice QCD. This methodology has led to a rich
interplay between nuclear theory and experiment and is currently indispensable
to the extrapolation of unphysical lattice QCD simulations to nature. We propose
to develop new links between hadronic and nuclear physics and QCD, and to
facilitate the first links between lattice QCD and nuclei, using effective
quantum field theories constrained by QCD symmetries. Our objectives are: (i) To
further develop the vibrant relationship between nuclear theory and experiment
and to continue the pioneering efforts currently underway to understand basic
properties of simple nuclei using lattice QCD. We propose to study processes
involving external probes of two- and three-body systems at low energies and to
investigate the relevance of isospin violation for the extraction of nucleon
parameters. The problem of developing a mass-independent regulator - like
dimensional regularization - for nuclear EFT will be pursued. We intend to
develop an EFT for hypernuclear physics which will aid in describing strange
matter and in extracting hypernuclear observables from lattice QCD. Heavy-hadron
potentials offer a theoretical laboratory for exploring the intermediate-range
nuclear force in lattice QCD. We therefore propose to study the long-distance
potential between two heavy mesons and other simple systems using EFT. (ii) To
develop new tools to allow extrapolation of forthcoming lattice QCD data. We
propose to investigate the role of finite lattice spacing corrections both in
the baryon and heavy meson sectors. The role of finite-volume effects will be
studied both for the purpose of extrapolating hadronic observables to infinite
volume and as a tool to extract S-matrix elements from lattice simulations.
(iii) We propose to study the algebraic relevance of chiral symmetry for strange
hadrons, including the recently observed "pentaquark" and to further understand
the role of chiral symmetry in: (a) constraining quark-hadron duality and (b)
decrypting the large-Nc structure of the excited mesons and baryons. The long-
term goal of this project is to develop a description of hadrons and nuclei that
is consistent with QCD and which has a rigorous accounting of theoretical
errors. We expect our research to have significant impact, both in bringing
nuclear physics into the fold of effective field theories of the standard model,
and as part of the global effort to bring hadronic and nuclear physics under
theoretical control for the purpose of searching for physics beyond the standard
model. This project marks the beginning of a program in nuclear theory at the
University of New Hampshire. The universal character of the methodology renders
the proposed research ideal for the education of graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;