* 0400433
* A New Capillary Sequencer for the Evolutionary Genetics Core Facility at Cornell University
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2006
* Carl Hopkins, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 04/30/2006
* USD 123,745.00

This award provides partial support for purchase of a modern capillary DNA
sequencer and supporting computer equipment for the Cornell Evolutionary
Genetics Core Facility (EGCF). The instrument will be equipped for both sequence
determination and fragment analysis. The facility supports research by
evolutionary biologists, population biologists, behavioral ecologists, and
systematists. Research in these areas increasingly depends on variation in the
DNA sequences of individual organisms to provide information on mating systems,
population structure, genealogy, and phylogeny. Automated DNA sequencing and
genotyping are critical to studies employing such variation. The facility is
used by 19 faculty in seven departments across the Cornell campus, and
contributes significantly to their research programs and the educational
experience of their graduate and undergraduate students. Their research programs
address various aspects of biodiversity, including the origins and maintenance
of plant and animal diversity, and the management of taxa of conservation
concern or of economic importance. Aside from the impact of each individual
user, the facility plays an important role in teaching and training on the
Cornell campus. The new equipment will increase throughput and data quality for
all users, improve the training of students, and catalyze interactions among
evolutionary biologists and ecologists with diverse taxonomic and disciplinary
interests.