* 0400306
* Stability of Switched Dynamical Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2008
* Kumpati Narendra, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 03/31/2008
* USD 186,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;The objective of control is to in .uence the behavior of dynamical
systems.Achiev-&lt;br/&gt;ing fast and accurate control under di .erent
environmental conditions,even while&lt;br/&gt;assuring stability and
robustness,is the aim of all control system design.When&lt;br/&gt;environmental
changes are signi .cant (e.g.faults o subsystem failures)the
design&lt;br/&gt;may equire the use of multiple controllers,each of which is
appropriate in a speci .c&lt;br/&gt;context.By a switching system we mean a
hybrid dynamical system with a decision&lt;br/&gt;mechanism which orchestrates
the switching between di .erent controllers.With great&lt;br/&gt;advances in
computer technology,and the concomitant increase in the complexity
of&lt;br/&gt;dynamical systems,switching system are becoming ubiquitous.The
analysis and&lt;br/&gt;synthesis of such systems is consequently assuming major
importance.&lt;br/&gt;Stability is the primary equirement of any control
system.Once this is assured,&lt;br/&gt;optimization of the performance of the
overall system can be undertaken within a&lt;br/&gt;framework of
stability.Following this,modi .cations in the control laws can be
un-&lt;br/&gt;dertaken to make the system robust under di .erent
perturbations.This is the basic&lt;br/&gt;philosophy used in conventional
control system design as well as in this proposal.&lt;br/&gt;Even though
research on switching systems has been in progress for many years
and&lt;br/&gt;numerous contributions have been made to the .eld,basic questions
still remain unan-&lt;br/&gt;swered.For example the stability of many classes of
linear,nonlinear,and adaptive&lt;br/&gt;switching systems still remains to be
answered,and very little progress has been made&lt;br/&gt;in shaping the
transient response resulting from the switching action.Both of
these&lt;br/&gt;important issues are included in the proposal.&lt;br/&gt;The
proposal consists of three parts.Since stability is undoubtedly the most
impor-&lt;br/&gt;tant unresolved issue,the .rst part of the proposal is devoted
to it.Switching between&lt;br/&gt;general linear time-invariant systems and
positive linear systems is treated in this con-&lt;br/&gt;text.Special attention
is given to systems with diagonal Lyapunov functions in view&lt;br/&gt;of their
importance to switching in decentralized systems.Also treated are
piecewise&lt;br/&gt;linear systems which are practically important and
theoretically tractable.Following&lt;br/&gt;this,in the second part of the
proposal,the performance that can be achieved by&lt;br/&gt;switching is
considered.The third and last part of the proposal is devoted to
switch-&lt;br/&gt;ing in adaptive systems.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The PI
believes that the research proposed addresses funda-&lt;br/&gt;mental questions
whose solutions are essential for a better understanding of
switching&lt;br/&gt;systems.This in turn is vital for the design of future
control systems.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The esearch proposed will enhance
collaboration between the&lt;br/&gt;PI and other international esearchers
(particularly Dr.Robert Shorten at the Hamil-&lt;br/&gt;ton Institute,Ireland
and Dr.Jens Kalkuhl of Daimler-Chrysler Research),lead to&lt;br/&gt;increased
interaction with industry,and most important of all,provide training
to&lt;br/&gt;both graduate and undergraduate students on advanced control
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;1