* 0400424
* Operation of the Milagro Gamma Ray Observatory
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2004,11/30/2008
* Jordan Goodman, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 11/30/2008
* USD 1,795,000.00

Very high energy gamma ray astronomy probes some of the most extreme
environments in the known universe. Known sources of TeV gamma rays contain
compact objects (black holes or neutron stars) with intense gravitational and/or
magnetic fields. Known sources of TeV gamma rays include supernova remnants
within our galaxy and active galactic nuclei outside of our galaxy. Other
possible sources include gamma-ray bursts, micro-quasars, diffuse emission from
cosmic rays interacting with matter in our own galaxy, and more exotic objects
such as primordial black holes and weakly interacting massive particles. Six
sources of TeV photons have been detected in the northern hemisphere. The
paucity of known sources is due to both the available instrumentation and the
sources. The combination of transient sources and narrow field instruments makes
the detection of new sources difficult. Milagro is the first detector capable of
continuously monitoring the entire overhead sky at energies above a few hundred
GeV. Milagro is a water Cherenkov extensive air shower detector located near Los
Alamos, NM at 2630m above sea level, consisting of a ~5,000 m2 central (pond)
detector surrounded by an array of 175 instrumented water tanks, (outriggers)
that span an area of roughly 40,000 m2. The Milagro pond is a 6-million gallon
water reservoir, which measures 80m x 60m x 8m deep and is covered with a light-
tight cover. The reservoir is instrumented with 723 20-cm PMTs on a 2.8m x 2.8m
grid. The PMTs are deployed in two layers. The top layer of 450 PMTs is under
1.5 meters of water and the bottom layer of 273 PMTs is under 6 meters of water.
Timing of the arrival of the shower particles is used to determine the direction
of the primary air shower.&lt;br/&gt; During the three years we have been
operating we have developed a robust method for reducing the cosmic ray
background and used this rejection method to detect TeV gamma rays from the Crab
Nebula, Mrk 421, and to see the first evidence for diffuse TeV emission from the
galactic plane. In addition, we have monitored the northern hemisphere for both
transient and steady sources of TeV photons. To date we have observed emission
only from the three sources mentioned above. We have now set the best limits on
TeV sources in the northern hemisphere over all timescales from 1 millisecond to
2.5 years. During the past year we have implemented a real-time analysis system
that allows us to detect a gamma-ray burst within 4 seconds of its occurrence
and to send an alert to other observatories. We have not yet detected
significant emission from any region within our field of view on timescales from
1ms to 2hrs. During this period there were relatively few bursts detected by the
HETE and INTEGRAL satellites. Later this year the launch of SWIFT will provide
us with a rich dataset to search for coincident TeV emission from gamma-ray
bursts. Just as Milagrito, our prototype, observed significant emission from one
GRB detected by BASTE we expect the advent of SWIFT to prove a fruitful period
for Milagro. This proposal will allow us to continue to operate Milagro for the
next three years.&lt;br/&gt; During the past two years several improvements have
been made to the detector. We have implemented an intelligent triggering system
that has enabled us to substantially lower the trigger threshold of Milagro.
This has increased the effective area at 100 GeV four-fold - critical for
detecting gamma-ray bursts. Most importantly, we have just completed the
construction of an array of 175 water tanks that surround the pond. These tanks
improve the energy and angular resolution and the background rejection
capabilities of Milagro. We have obtained a 3-fold increase in sensitivity now
that these detectors are incorporated into our event reconstruction.&lt;br/&gt;
Milagro data are easy to explain to students and the general public, who often
have difficulty understanding how we claim to see particles that they don't. The
collaboration has been very active in exposing students and the general public
to the excitement of the particle astrophysics (PA) field. Each year we bring
undergraduate students to work on Milagro and generally involve students in
analysis. In addition, we give on average eight talks each year at high schools
and at least two public lectures on the subject of PA. He also works with the US
Physics Olympics team. In addition, he works with the Maryland program for 8th
and 10th grade girls. He also started the physics "Question of the Week" (see it
at www.physics.umd.edu) that is used by many teachers world-wide.&lt;br/&gt;