* 0400264
* Parallel Fabrication of Photonic Crystals: Towards Photonic Areas Lithographically Mapped (PALM) Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2006
* David Klotzkin, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mary Lynn Realff
* 06/30/2006
* USD 149,999.00

The objective of this research is to devise novel fabrication technology for
optoelectronic circuits based on photonic crystals which can produce entire
wafers of devices simultaneously. Photonic crystals are recently discovered
structures which offer the potential to guide and control light with
unprecedented precision, but fabrication of these crystals has required the
individual definition of each element (typically a ~300nm hole in a Si
substrate). The proposed approach is to use either holographic multi-exposure
lithography, or self-aligned templating of polystyrene spheres, to form arrays
of photonic crystals in parallel. This will allow wafers full of devices to be
formed in parallel, just as integrated circuits and lasers are fabricated now.
Although some flexibility is lost with these methods, many of the novel
capabilities of these photonic crystals are still available. Realization of a
practical, parallelizable way to fabricate photonic crystal lightwave circuits
will transform them from a scientific curiosity into a commercial technique.
These circuits address many of the device needs of telecommunications and will
lead to more efficient use of fiber bandwidth and cheaper and faster information
transfer. This technology can make photonic crystal manufacturing commercially
feasible and contribute to the United States' global competitiveness in
optoelectronics technology. The educational benefits include hands-on graduate
student training and direct classroom dissemination. In addition, laboratory
demonstrations of this exciting technology will also be an exceptional
recruiting tool in attracting undergraduates unsure of their major, or graduate
students unsure of their area of interest, to the fields of Electrical
Engineering and optoelectronics.