* 0400860
* Combinatorial Methods in Free Probability
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,02/28/2006
* Michael Anshelevich, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 02/28/2006
* USD 74,999.00

Intellectual merit: Anshelevich's research lies at the interface between
functional analysis, probability, and combinatorics. He will use combinatorial
methods to obtain new results in free probability theory. For example, he will
develop a theory of free Appell polynomials, and use it to obtain new results
about limiting behavior of averages of stationary correlated random sequences.
He will also use methods from functional analysis to obtain new results in
probability theory. For example, he will investigate the chaos decomposition for
general Levy processes using the machinery of Fock spaces. Finally, he will use
methods from non-commutative probability to obtain new results in combinatorics
and special functions theory. For example, he will investigate the linearization
coefficients for the q-analogs of the Meixner orthogonal polynomials. Matrices
do not commute. The importance of this fact in our interpretation of nature was
realized with the invention of quantum mechanics. That theory has also used
probabilistic ideas and language since its inception. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
commutative probability is the probability theory of non-commuting objects, such
as matrices and operators. In the 1980s Voiculescu introduced free probability
theory, which is a particular type of such a non-commutative theory. Its origins
lie in the, currently quite abstract, theory of von Neumann algebras of free
groups, but also in the theory of random matrices, directly applicable in an
number of areas of physics and signal processing. Anshelevich's expertise lies
primarily in functional analysis, thus one of the consequences of this research
will be to gain a deeper understanding of a number of fields with potential
connections to free probability. Also, some of the combinatorial problems
considered are well-suited for undergraduate research, and will be used to
encourage interest in mathematics among students.