* 0400583
* Polarized Electron Scattering from Nucleons
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Todd Averett, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 07/31/2008
* USD 1,200,000.00

We propose a program of polarized electron scattering experiments, to use the
weak neutral&lt;br/&gt;current and electromagnetic probes to study the flavor
content and spin structure of the nucleon,&lt;br/&gt;and to conduct a search for
new physics beyond the Standard Model. The experiments will
be&lt;br/&gt;conducted primarily at the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator
Facility (Jefferson Lab).&lt;br/&gt;A series of experiments using parity
violation in electron scattering at Jefferson Lab are&lt;br/&gt;focused on
determining the elusive strange quark contribution to the nucleon ground state.
These&lt;br/&gt;experiments include measurements in Hall A of the parity-
violating asymmetry in forward-angle&lt;br/&gt;scattering from the proton, 4-He,
and 208-Pb, at low momentum transfer. The G0 experiment in&lt;br/&gt;Hall C will
measure parity-violating scattering from the proton at both forward and
backward&lt;br/&gt;angles, and for a range of momentum transfers, and thus will
definitively map out the strange&lt;br/&gt;quark vector form factors for the
nucleon as a function of four-momentum transfer.&lt;br/&gt;A groundbreaking
experiment has recently been approved at Jefferson Laboratory
to&lt;br/&gt;measure the weak charge of the proton. The Qweak experiment will
provide a precision test of&lt;br/&gt;the energy scale dependence of the weak
mixing angle by precisely measuring the Weinberg&lt;br/&gt;angle at low momentum
transfer and comparing to data from high-energy experiments. This
will&lt;br/&gt;provide a uniquely sensitive probe of physics beyond the Standard
Model. We are thus&lt;br/&gt;addressing possibly the single most important
question in fundamental physics: how and where&lt;br/&gt;does the Standard Model
break down? We have taken on an important component of the
Qweak&lt;br/&gt;experiment, the Region III tracking chambers, the construction
of which has been recently&lt;br/&gt;funded by an NSF Major Research
Instrumentation grant.&lt;br/&gt;Another series of polarized electron scattering
experiments at Jefferson Lab are focused&lt;br/&gt;on determining the spin
structure of the nucleon using polarized 3-He targets. The
GEN&lt;br/&gt;experiment will make the first measurement on the neutron electric
form factor at large&lt;br/&gt;momentum transfers. This is particularly relevant
given the recent controversial results for the&lt;br/&gt;electric form factor of
the proton and new theoretical work on two-photon exchange&lt;br/&gt;mechanisms.
In support of this program, research into promising new technology
involving&lt;br/&gt;hybrid K-Rb cells is underway in the W&amp;M polarized
target lab.&lt;br/&gt;This physics program has a large educational component;
eleven PhD graduate students&lt;br/&gt;are working on group-related activities,
and support is requested from the NSF for five of these&lt;br/&gt;students. Each
year we supervise an average of seven undergraduates in summer or senior-
thesis&lt;br/&gt;research. Support for 1.5 post-doctoral positions is also
requested from the NSF. The proximity&lt;br/&gt;of our group to Jefferson Lab,
its strong ties to Jefferson Lab through affiliated faculty, and
its&lt;br/&gt;ability to attract excellent William and Mary undergraduate
students, ensure the success of the&lt;br/&gt;proposed research.