* 0400411
* Topics in Algebraic Design Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Qing Xiang, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2007
* USD 110,000.00

The project addresses several problems of central importance &lt;br/&gt;in the
areas of designs, codes and association schemes. The &lt;br/&gt;emphasis will be
on the use of algebraic and number theoretic &lt;br/&gt;methods in the above
areas. Topics of the proposed research &lt;br/&gt;include Smith normal forms of
subspace-inclusion matrices (q-analogues &lt;br/&gt;of the subset-inclusion
matrices); connections between difference sets and &lt;br/&gt;maximal arcs in
projective spaces; strongly regular graphs, two-weight &lt;br/&gt;codes and
association schemes. Number theoretic tools, such as Gauss and &lt;br/&gt;Jacobi
sums, have been used with success by the PI and others in all of the
&lt;br/&gt;afforementioned topics. It is expected that deeper p-adic number
theory &lt;br/&gt;and representation theory of the general linear group will be
necessary in &lt;br/&gt;the further investigations of these topics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combinatorial designs first arose in recreational
mathematics problems, &lt;br/&gt;such as Kirkman's 15 schoolgirls problem, and
later in the design of &lt;br/&gt;statistical experiments. They found many
applications in coding theory, &lt;br/&gt;finite geometry, cryptography,
computer science, and electrical engineering. &lt;br/&gt;Designs and codes are
intimately related. Many efficient error-correcting &lt;br/&gt;codes are
constructed from designs. These codes are used nowadays in our &lt;br/&gt;daily
life, for example, in CD players, high-speed modems, and cellular
&lt;br/&gt;phones. This proposal investigates several problems in the interface
of &lt;br/&gt;designs and codes, and gives summer support for a graduate student
who will &lt;br/&gt;study and work in the areas of design theory and coding
theory related to the &lt;br/&gt;above mentioned applications.&lt;br/&gt;