* 0400942
* Transcendence and Geometry on Shimura Varieties in the Commutative and non-Commutative Case
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Paula Tretkoff, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2007
* USD 119,997.00

This is an abstract for award DMS-0400942 of Paula B.
Cohen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on studying various aspects of
moduli spaces of &lt;br/&gt;abelian varieties, including the transcendence of
special values of functions &lt;br/&gt;defined on them, hyperbolic
equidistribution of their subvarieties, as well as &lt;br/&gt;questions related
to their noncommutative geometry. The problems we study will &lt;br/&gt;include
the development and application of results on the distribution of
&lt;br/&gt;special points on Shimura varieties to questions in transcendence,
and the &lt;br/&gt;exploration of the notion of the noncommutative boundary of
Shimura varieties. &lt;br/&gt;We also propose to complete, in collaboration with
F. Hirzebruch, a book of &lt;br/&gt;lecture notes on complex surfaces and line
arrangements that will include &lt;br/&gt;material related to the above
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The algebraic numbers are those
complex numbers that are roots of non-zero &lt;br/&gt;polynomials with rational
number coefficients. The transcendental numbers are &lt;br/&gt;those complex
numbers that are not algebraic. Inspired by the seventh of &lt;br/&gt;Hilbert's
famous list of 23 problems coined in 1900, some celebrated research
&lt;br/&gt;in the first half of the 20th century uncovered the first significant
links &lt;br/&gt;between transcendental numbers and important phenomena in the
arithmetic of &lt;br/&gt;geometric objects. Our research focuses on the modern
development of these &lt;br/&gt;ideas. We also pursue these ideas in the context
of recent research on &lt;br/&gt;relations between classical number theory and a
modern variant of geometry &lt;br/&gt;inspired by quantum physics, so-called
noncommutative geometry. In addition, &lt;br/&gt;we propose to complete a book
of lecture notes for graduate students and &lt;br/&gt;researchers, with an
emphasis on certain special functions called &lt;br/&gt;hypergeometric
functions, and their relation to geometry in complex dimension
&lt;br/&gt;2.&lt;br/&gt;