* 0400966
* Modular representations and cohomology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Leonard Scott, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2008
* USD 240,000.00

Abstract for award DMS-0400966 of Parshall and Scott&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There
are three great classes of representations of the finite groups of Lie type.
First, in the defining characteristic theory, the underlying module is taken
over a field with the same characteristic as the defining characteristic of the
group. Second, in the cross-characteristic theory, modules are taken over fields
of characteristic different from the defining characteristic. Cross-
characteristic studies are unavoidable if one wants to understand all ways that
one finite Lie group might embed in another. The third class involves the
representation theory in all characteristics of the underlying Weyl group. In
all cases, representations of continuous Lie groups provide starting point for
representations. This is most apparent in the defining characterstic case, where
an ambient algebraic group is available. In cross characteristic, quantum groups
plays a similar role, but, so far, only for the finite general linear groups.
Arguably, there is fourth class of "finite group of Lie type," viz., the Hecke
algebras associated to Weyl---or even Coxeter---groups. These algebras often
connect the three classes; e.g., in the cross-characteristic theory, they
provide a link between the finite general linear groups and quantum groups.
Though an analogous role for quantum groups in other types has yet to appear,
the Hecke algebra "link" remains, often with interpretations in continuous
geometry. This project will advance research in these areas, both in current
investigations and in focusing anew on finding a unified approach to the
representation theory of the finite Lie groups. For example, can everything be
reduced to Hecke algebras in a suitably rich sense (allowing homological or
geometric structure)? Recently, the authors "reduced" the defining
characteristic Lusztig conjecture for finite general linear groups to proposed
symmetric group cohomology properties. Is there a similar reduction for other
types or analogous cross-characteristic conjectures? Progress on these questions
will involve much further development of the authors' recent work on Hecke
algebra cohomology, as well as continued pursuit of Parshall's nullcone
research. Other continuing projects, including Scott's computer work with
undergraduates, fit in well with these themes.&lt;br/&gt;The groups and
representations studied here comprise the most important basic ingredients for
creating a general theory of all finite group representations. Over the past
century, similar theories for continuous groups played a large role in quantum
theory and the theory of elementary particles. Their finite analogs have already
proved valuable in the design of communications and data storage devices, though
this finite theory remains very incomplete. In the future, one expects that the
finite discrete worlds of computers and communications will become even more
important. The task of creating a viable general theory of finite group
representations-the investigators' long-term goal-is, thus, a central problem
for the future.&lt;br/&gt;