* 0400932
* Implementation of a Self-Evaluation Indicator System [SEIS] and  Academic Indicator Report [AIR] for NSF's Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program
* EHR,HRD
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2007
* Jason Kim, Systemic Research, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Caesar R. Jackson
* 02/28/2007
* USD 1,205,660.00

Title: Implementation of a Self-Evaluation Indicator System
and&lt;br/&gt;Academic Indicator Report for NSF's HBCU-UP
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Systemic Research, Inc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;HRD -
0400932&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Jason Kim&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Systemic
Research, Inc. will continue the implementation of a Self-Evaluation Indicator
System (SEIS) and Academic Indicator Report (AIR) for the National Science
Foundation's (NSF) Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate
Program (HBCU-UP). Systemic Research has successfully completed a 24 month grant
(11/1/01 - 10/31/03), "Development and Implementation of an Indicator Monitoring
System for NSF's Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate
Program" (HRD-0136117) to design, develop, and implement SEIS and
AIR.&lt;br/&gt;SEIS is an instrument designed to collect both quantitative and
qualitative progress indicators, and AIR presents both HBCU-UP individual
institutions' and overall progress report based on SEIS. Each year Systemic
Research will develop and deliver a customized annual SEIS instrument to each
individual HBCU-UP site, host a SEIS workshop, compile collected SEIS data to
produce AIR, conduct two site visits to gather additional information to publish
case stories, and manage the SEIS web management system and HBCU-UP Open Forum.
Other activities will include presentations at NSF PI/PD meetings, and
participating in the HBCU-UP National Research
Conference.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The customized SEIS will
provide common measures of performance across all HBCU-UP projects while
considering uniqueness of each institution. The site visits and case stories
will identify best practice models. Systemic Research will provide comprehensive
technical assistance to HBCU-UP sites regarding academic indicator management
and evaluation capacity building through numerous workshops, site visits, and
on-going communication. Individual institutions' AIRs will be returned to the
respective institutions for their on-going project
review.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;For wide dissemination and
broad impact, all publications will be available in three different formats;
printed copy, CD-ROM, and web-based publications. The AIR overall progress
report, program highlights, and case stories will be disseminated nation-wide.
Systemic Research will provide technical assistance to both implementation and
planning HBCU-UP grantees. The program impact and best practice models will be
disseminated to the HBCU community, higher education institutions, education and
research communities, other stakeholders and federal agencies.&lt;br/&gt;