* 0400752
* Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometers for Biological and Environmental Research and Training at the University of Wyoming
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2006
* Robert Hall, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 04/30/2006
* USD 270,042.00

This award provides partial support of the of two new stable isotope ratio mass
spectrometers to be placed in the University of Wyoming Stable Isotope Lab. This
will be the only facility in the state capable of analyzing stable isotope
ratios of the light elements (H, C, N, O,and S). The two isotope ratio mass
spectrometer systems will be coupled with peripheral devices for automated and
rapid sample processing and will be fully capable of accepting additional
peripheral systems as needed in future applications. The instrumentation will
augment the capabilities of this lab by providing the means for analysis of the
isotopic composition of atmospheric trace gases and of organic substances and
microwater (<1mL) samples. The new instruments will enable the Stable Isotope
Lab to meet a growing demand for stable isotope ratio analyses from researchers
at the University from elsewhere in the state and region. Among the immediate
uses of the new instruments will be investigation of the physiological responses
of plants and animals to environmental change, organism-environment interactions
across space and time, food-webs and feeding patterns in terrestrial, aquatic,
and marine systems, biogeochemistry in terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems,
hydrological flow paths in arid and semiarid landscapes and biosphere-atmosphere
interactions. In addition to their use in research, the instruments will be used
to enhance the training and educational experiences of undergraduate and
graduate students, postdocs, and visiting scientists at the University of
Wyoming. The users of the facility are committed to bringing cutting-edge
analytical approaches to traditionally underrepresented student, advanced
researcher, and faculty groups on campus.