* 0400535
* Accurate Calculation of Bit Error Ratios in Optical Fiber Communications Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* John Zweck, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 08/31/2007
* USD 232,800.00

0400535&lt;br/&gt;Menyuk&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the invention of the erbium-
doped fiber amplifier and the advent of long-haul optical fiber communications
systems, it has not been possible in general to accurately calculate the bit
error ratios (BERs). Nonlinearity in the optical fiber transmission line is the
ultimate source of this difficulty. Nonlinear interactions between the signal
and the noise can significantly affect the noise distribution prior to the
receiver, invalidating simple analytical approaches. At the same time, the low
BERs that one must calculate -on the order of 10 -15 in some cases - make
standard Monte Carlo simulations impractical.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transmission
nonlinearity also leads to pattern dependences and a spread in the received
marks and spaces that is not due to noise and must be taken into account. In
wavelength-division-multiplexed (WDM) systems, thousands of bits can interact,
so that accurately accounting for the pattern dependences is
difficult.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, it is critically important to
model the receiver accurately, including receiver-&lt;br/&gt;induced intersymbol
interference, and one must be able to take into account the impact of forward
error correction and signal processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the past few
years, the PIs have developed a set of theoretical tools that are capable of
addressing all these issues and have put the accurate calculation of BERs within
reach. For each of these issues, they have developed at least two different
methods, one deterministic and one statistical, that are in excellent agreement
for the most part and are mutually self-validating. However, considerable
further development is needed to test these methods in practical contexts, to
validate reduced approaches that might be useful in certain contexts, and to
validate results experimentally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
the proposal resides in their taking sophisticated mathematical tools that have
been applied primarily to idealized settings and developing them into effective
computational methods that can be used to calculate BERs in real-world
experimental systems with significant complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad
impacts of the proposed research lie in its potential to substantially impact
information technology and in its educational features. They expect that after
further development, these tools will impact system design, lowering both
development and systems costs and encouraging innovation. By careful comparison
to experiments, they expect these tools to provide new insights into how these
complex systems work. These methods that the PIs develop will be disseminated in
courses taught at UMBC and short courses that they teach externally, as well as
in publications. Interdisciplinary interactions between students in Mathematics
and students in Engineering is a key feature of the proposal. Graduate research
assistants will carry out most of the proposed work as part of their education,
and outreach to under-represented groups is another key feature of the
proposal.&lt;br/&gt;