* 0400337
* A Novel EBM Process Utilizing Renewable Biopolymers to Manufacture Natural Fiber Reinforced Thermoplastic Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,03/31/2005
* Frank Loge, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Jian Cao
* 03/31/2005
* USD 200,000.00

The objective of this research is to produce plastics in microorganisms that
grow naturally in wastewater treatment plants and then to mix these plastics
with wood fibers to create wood-composite products that are used in door,
window, decking, siding, and roofing applications. The approach to this research
will be undertaken in three discrete tasks. Task 1 will characterize PHA-rich
biomass from selected WTFs, develop a time cycle assessment of PHA within WTFs,
and establish a biopolymer properties matrix based on lab-scale biopolymer
production. Task 2 will evaluate critical biopolymer properties that impact the
production and end-use performance of wood-composite products manufactured with
wastewater biosolids. Findings from Task 1 and 2 will be used to develop a
virtual manufacturing model in Task 3.

This project will develop an environmentally benign manufacturing process that
utilizes thermoplastics biologically derived on renewable carbon sources
(sewage); the bacterial biomass would otherwise be disposed, often in a manner
that produces greenhouse gases. The process will reduce (1) our nation's
reliance on fossil fuels, (2) additions to the global carbon budget, and (3)
resource utilization in both the petroleum and timber industries. The proposed
study will advance discovery while promoting teaching, training, and learning
through actively involving college students and K-12 teachers in research
related activities. Significant educational and research related findings
generated as part of the project will be disseminated by all participants in
peer-reviewed science and educational journals; local, regional, and national
conferences; local school districts; and a website constructed as part of this
project.

