* 0400580
* A Single Photon Confocal Laser Scanning Microscope for Multi-Spectral Imaging of Plant Cellular Processes
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2007
* Gregory May, Noble Research Institute, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 04/30/2007
* USD 361,647.00

The award provides support for purchase a new single photon multi-
fluorescence/spectral confocal laser-scanning microscope to be operated in a
shared resource serving multiple users at the Samuel Roberts Noble Foundation.
This existing core cellular imaging facility provides researchers and their
postdoctoral fellows &amp; students access to instrumentation and training in
their use in modern cell biological imaging techniques. The major focus of the
cellular imaging facility is the application of fluorescent probes to the
investigation of plant cellular processes with emphasis on the integration of
modern light microscopy techniques with molecular, biochemical and genomic
approaches. This new confocal microscope provides significantly improved
capabilities over existing equipment by allowing the use of a wider range of
fluorescent probes for multicolor imaging of cellular structures and proteins,
of fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) methods for studies on protein-
protein/nucleic acid-protein interactions, of green fluorescent protein (GFP)
based ion imaging, and of fluorescence recovery after photobleaching
(FRAP)/photoactivation techniques for studying membrane and organelle dynamics.
Among the planned uses of the new equipment are studies on plant secondary
metabolism; the dynamics and function of the cytoskeleton during root growth and
gravitropism; virus accumulation, movement and disease induction; mechanisms of
DNA repair in plants; cell biology of virus-induced programmed cell death; and
molecular mechanisms of polar auxin transport. In addition, the instrument will
be available for educational uses and for training of undergraduate and graduate
students at universities in the North Texas/South Oklahoma with which the Noble
Foundation has close ties. The expanding outreach activities of the Foundation,
which include a Noble Scholars program for undergraduate students and
partnerships with high school teacher educational initiatives will also benefit
from the requested instrument.