* 0400167
* GOALI:  Development of a PVD Crystalline Alumina Coating for Cutting Tools by  a Novel Inverted Cylindrical Magnetron Sputtering Process
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2009
* Deepak Bhat, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 05/31/2009
* USD 464,821.00

The research objective of this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with
Industry (GOALI) project is to develop an advanced hard coating process for
improved wear resistance of metal-cutting tools. The approach to be used in this
research is to investigate the critical process parameters for the deposition of
a crystalline aluminum oxide coating using a novel physical vapor deposition
process called inverted cylindrical magnetron sputtering. This work will be
carried out in a collaborative effort between University of Arkansas,
Fayetteville, AR, and Kennametal Inc., Latrobe, PA. The researchers will also
work in close collaboration with the manufacturer of the deposition equipment,
Isoflux, Inc., Rochester, NY, to develop and implement improved hardware designs
and process modeling solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful development and
implementation of this research will directly assist the U.S. manufacturing
sector in significantly reducing manufacturing costs by providing them with
improved, wear-resistant tools. The new coating technology has the potential to
significantly reduce energy and environmental costs of machining, and to improve
manufacturing productivity. The technology also has significant potential for
applications in other fields, such as biomedical and corrosion protection
applications. The university-industry collaboration also provides an outstanding
opportunity for the education and training of students, by involving them in
hands-on research in the laboratory combined with practical application training
in the industrial research laboratory. The implementation of this research
program will also provide a strong impetus to spawn new research efforts in
cross-cutting research in new surface engineering technologies.