* 0400754
* Computability Theory, Reverse Mathematics and Countable Algebraic Structures
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* David Solomon, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2007
* USD 86,005.00

In computable algebra, one applies the methods of classical
&lt;br/&gt;computability theory to study computational properties of algebraic
&lt;br/&gt;structures. Solomon proposes to study several questions concerning
the members of&lt;br/&gt;these and other classes of algebraic structures. Do the
members of a &lt;br/&gt;given class display the most general forms of
ineffectiveness found in &lt;br/&gt;computable algebra? Are instances of
ineffectiveness caused by the &lt;br/&gt;coding methods (and hence can be
removed by a reasonable coding) or by &lt;br/&gt;some inherent property of the
underlying algebra (and are therefore &lt;br/&gt;unavoidable)? How does adding
structure (such as an ordering) to the &lt;br/&gt;members of a class effect the
computational properties? These &lt;br/&gt;questions aim toward a deeper
understanding of the connection between &lt;br/&gt;computation and algebraic
behavior in mathematics. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many theorems in
mathematics state that given certain conditions, a &lt;br/&gt;particular
mathematical object must exist. There are numerous ways to &lt;br/&gt;study the
effectiveness of such a theorem. One method, called &lt;br/&gt;computable or
recursive mathematics, uses an idealized model of a &lt;br/&gt;computer in which
computations are allowed to run for arbitrarily long &lt;br/&gt;(but finite)
amounts of time and to use arbitrarily large (but finite) &lt;br/&gt;amounts of
memory. The fundamental question is whether such an &lt;br/&gt;idealized
computer can construct the desired mathematical object from &lt;br/&gt;the
theorem. If the answer to this question is no, then the theorem &lt;br/&gt;uses
a method of construction that cannot be performed on an actual
&lt;br/&gt;computer no matter how much technology increases computer speed and
&lt;br/&gt;memory size. Because this question requires that mathematical objects
&lt;br/&gt;be coded into the binary language of computers, the answer sometimes
&lt;br/&gt;depends on the type of coding used. Solomon proposes to study a
number &lt;br/&gt;of algebraic constructions from this point of view and in
particular to &lt;br/&gt;study when ineffectiveness is caused by a poor choice
of coding (and &lt;br/&gt;hence can be fixed by a better choice of coding) and
when it is caused &lt;br/&gt;by inherent conflicts between mathematical
structure and computation &lt;br/&gt;(and hence cannot be removed by clever
coding). Solomon also proposes &lt;br/&gt;to use a second method, called reverse
mathematics, to study the &lt;br/&gt;effectiveness of numerous mathematical
theorems. In this approach, one &lt;br/&gt;isolates the mathematical axioms
required to prove the theorem. &lt;br/&gt;Reverse mathematics and computable
mathematics are closely related. If &lt;br/&gt;only simple axioms are required
to prove a theorem, then it is likely &lt;br/&gt;that a computer can carry out
the construction, while if complicated &lt;br/&gt;axioms are required, then a
computer probably cannot perform the &lt;br/&gt;construction.&lt;br/&gt;