* 0400539
* Cellular Transport Agents: Applications and Mechanism
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* David Smithrud, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 07/31/2008
* USD 228,000.00

The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program support Professor David B
Smithrud, of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Cincinnati for
research that expands on a recent accomplishment in his group that created
artificial transporters to deliver materials into cells via host-guest
complexes. The hypothesis that hosts adjust their recognition elements to
maximize favorable interactions with a guest to accommodate the change in
evironment will be tested by experiments described in the proposal. Professor
Smithrud will explore the transfer mechanism and the ability of hosts to act as
transporters by delivering various peptides into eukaryotic cells. The transport
agents are a breakthrough in the field of cellular delivery agents. This
efficient delivery system will benefit research groups that investigate
intracellular interactions between biomolecules. This research program is a
natural fit with research groups who design and discover peptides or
peptidomimetics that are bioactive through cell surface targeting or
intracellular inhibition. Once these peptides are available, the transporters
can be linked to the targeting peptides and deliver the inhibitors. Medical
research will benefit greatly once the transporters have an operational cell
targeting mechanism.

With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor
David B Smithrud of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Cincinnati
is developing a research program that may become a key component to the recent
initiative launched by the State of Ohio to develop biotechnology in the
Cincinnati region. The projects are designed to quickly provide students skills
in a wide variety of current techniques and instrumentation, and knowledge in a
variety of disciplines, such as synthetic chemistry, molecular recognition, and
biochemistry. Projects have also been designed to fit with Professor Smithrud's
"Introducing Students to Novel Experimentation" (ISNEx) project, an outreach
program devoted to encouraging high school students, especially ones who are
currently underrepresented in the sciences, to pursue a career in science and
increase their science-literacy.