* 0400615
* Wave-chaotic Microlasers with Resonant Nonlinearity
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Evgeniy Narimanov, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Rongqing Hui
* 05/31/2007
* USD 210,000.00

0400615&lt;br/&gt;Narimanov&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project, which
includes both theoretical and experimental research, will leverage
the&lt;br/&gt;methods from nonlinear dynamics and quantum chaos and quantum
cascade laser technology to develop a new type of mid-wave infrared
optoelectronic device - a wave-chaotic microlaser with resonant nonlinearity.
Taking advantage of a wave-chaotic optical microresonator and using the giant
resonant nonlinearity, especially for second harmonic generation, of asymmetric
quantum wells integrated into the quantum cascade laser active region, this new
device will bring the advantages of quantum cascade technology to the short-wave
infrared spectrum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To optimize the performance of these
novel devices, the project will study the fundamental&lt;br/&gt;interplay of the
optical nonlinearity with ray chaos, dynamical Anderson localization
and&lt;br/&gt;chaos-assisted tunneling. The research topics will also include
the development of the theory of nonlinear optical processes in partially
chaotic resonant cavities, as well as the description of mode competition and
lasing mode selection in wave-chaotic microlasers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact resulting from the proposed activity, will include: (i) the
education of students, both at the graduate and undergraduate level, in some of
the most versatile and efficient methods of experimental measurements and device
fabrication, as well as cutting-edge theoretical analysis and numerical
simulations -exposing them to a range of exciting problems which include
fundamental issues of the dynamics and wave mechanics of non-linear systems, a
great deal of basic and applied optics and photonics, and a substantial amount
of forward-looking device engineering - via their involvement in the research
program as well as new curriculum development; (ii) a substantial impact on the
local research and engineering infrastructure, via the development of new tools
and the methods of device fabrication and characterization at the Princeton
Institute for the Science and Technology of Materials, which is available to
both the University community and industry members; (iii) active efforts on the
dissemination of the research results to the academic and industrial
communities, as well as to a broader audience in a joint program with the
Princeton - Central New Jersey Chapter of the IEEE Lasers and Electro-Optics
Society, which will include the development of a lecture series on Recent
Advances in Optics, a research seminar series, and web and other electronic
media publications.&lt;br/&gt;