* 0400452
* Concentration Phenomena in Diffusion and Cross-Diffusion Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Wei-Ming Ni, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2008
* USD 183,300.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal DMS-0400452&lt;br/&gt;Title: Concentration
phenomena in diffusion and cross-diffusion systems&lt;br/&gt;PI: Wei-Ming Ni
(University of Minnesota- Twin Cities)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(I) Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Ni plans to continue his research in
understanding&lt;br/&gt;mathematically the effects of various diffusion-related
mechanisms. Using&lt;br/&gt;variational approach and techniques in classical
analysis, Professor Ni&lt;br/&gt;and his collaborators have established the
spike-layer steady states for&lt;br/&gt;an activator-inhibitor system in
morphogenesis proposed by Gierer and&lt;br/&gt;Meinhardt based on the celebrated
idea - diffusion-driven instability - of&lt;br/&gt;Turing in 1952. The method
exploits the gap between the diffusion rates&lt;br/&gt;for the two chemical
substances, and stability results in one space&lt;br/&gt;dimension have also
been obtained. Very recently, progress has been made&lt;br/&gt;for concentration
phenomena on multi-dimensional subsets. However, the&lt;br/&gt;complete dynamics
is still far from being fully understood. It has been&lt;br/&gt;noted that the
gap between the diffusion rates alone is insufficient to&lt;br/&gt;create
patterns. Thus, the notion of "cross-diffusion," introduced
by&lt;br/&gt;theoretical biologists in 1979 in modeling segregation phenomena
in&lt;br/&gt;population dynamics, deserves systematic studies. Cross-diffusion
systems,&lt;br/&gt;which have also been used in recent years to model singular
phenomena&lt;br/&gt;including dendritic growth of bacteria colonies, are both
nonlinear and&lt;br/&gt;strongly-coupled in highest order terms, thus are
mathematically very&lt;br/&gt;challenging. Professor Ni and his collaborators
propose to study the&lt;br/&gt;effects of cross-diffusion by first obtain
necessary and sufficient&lt;br/&gt;conditions for cross-diffusion to help create
patterns, and then to&lt;br/&gt;investigate their qualitative behavior as well
as their stability&lt;br/&gt;properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(II) Non-technical
Descriptions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Ni plans to continue his research
in understanding, in a&lt;br/&gt;mathematically rigorous manner, the phenomena
and effects of various&lt;br/&gt;diffusion-related mechanisms and hopefully
thereby to have some impact in&lt;br/&gt;both improving our ability in modeling
more complicated and/or realistic&lt;br/&gt;phenomena in applied sciences, as
well as in creating new and significant&lt;br/&gt;mathematics. In this proposal,
from the viewpoint of pattern formation,&lt;br/&gt;Professor Ni intends to
investigate the various "concentration phenomena"&lt;br/&gt;in diffusion and/or
cross-diffusion systems. These, in particular, include&lt;br/&gt;Turing patterns
in chemical reactions (e.g. the CIMA reaction),&lt;br/&gt;Gierer-Meinhardt's
activator-inhibitor systems in modeling the&lt;br/&gt;regeneration phenomena of
hydra in morphogenesis, a nonlinear diffusion&lt;br/&gt;system modeling
dendritic growth of bacteria colonies, and the&lt;br/&gt;Lotka-Volterra
competition systems with inter-specific population&lt;br/&gt;pressures taken
into considerations."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;