* 0400457
* Cognitively-Based, Multimedia Support for a Balanced Approach to the Development of Early Reading in School and Home Contexts
* EDU,DRL
* 11/01/2003,02/28/2005
* Susan Goldman, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 02/28/2005
* USD 67,378.00

This project explores how a cognitive-representational approach to early reading
can lead to new and efficient instruction that will impact learning across the
curriculum. The research questions addressed are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Which
design principles are most important for a balanced approach to literacy
instruction that uses multimedia environments for integrated, efficient
instruction of decoding and word recognition skills?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Will
design principles suggested by research help teachers better understand and
integrate decoding skills into their classroom literacy
environments?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Can a combination of video and print
materials linked to multimedia environments be effective tools for improving
children's home environments and parental support for early reading
instruction?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate these questions
by developing an understanding of design principles for children's word
recognition fluency and decoding skills using current cognitive theories of
mental representations of language. Within-subject designs will be used to see
how different variations of prototype software affect children's word
recognition fluency and decoding skills. These initial studies will also include
between-subject controls that use no software. At-home reading of both decodable
text and rich, high-quality children's literature will be linked to the content
and structure of the decoding and word recognition software. This at-home
reading will be supported by video exemplars. The children with at-home access
to these materials and the software in school will be compared with those
children with just the software at school. Additionally, software based on
recent cognitive theories will be compared to commercially available software
designed to aid children in developing decoding skills by comparing the reading
development of children using research software vs. commercially available
software. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;