* 0400085
* IDEA:    Integrated Decomposition for Enterprise Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,09/30/2006
* Julia Higle, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 09/30/2006
* USD 195,715.00

This project identifies a new class of stochastic programs referred to
as&lt;br/&gt;"Distributed Stochastic Programs," and develops computational
approaches&lt;br/&gt;for their solution. The methodology to be studied involves
a marriage of the&lt;br/&gt;"Lagrangean Decomposition" method of Guignard and
Kim with the "Stochastic&lt;br/&gt;Decomposition" methods of Higle and Sen. The
primary motivation is the study of&lt;br/&gt;integrated models and solution
methods for enterprise-based decision making &lt;br/&gt;under uncertainty. An
enterprise-based model is one that couples a variety of &lt;br/&gt;component
problems that are associated with different entities within the
&lt;br/&gt;enterprise. Of necessity these component problems, which will
typically reflect &lt;br/&gt;operational concerns,are finely detailed. Their
individual solutions often &lt;br/&gt;require highly specialized computational
approaches that challenge current &lt;br/&gt;computing resources. As a result,
their direct incorporation within an&lt;br/&gt;enterprise-based model would
likely lead to a model that greatly exceeds&lt;br/&gt;current computational
capabilities. To remedy this situation, this&lt;br/&gt;project advocates the use
of surrogate models of the component problems&lt;br/&gt;that reflect the
uncertainty associated with the day-to-day operations,&lt;br/&gt;and are
combined in a manner that permits guidance for strategic decisions. &lt;br/&gt;A
primary goal of this project is the development of solution methods for
&lt;br/&gt;the resulting class of problems based on decomposition schemes that
exploit &lt;br/&gt;the general structure of the enterprise
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past few years, the need to
incorporate uncertainty&lt;br/&gt;within complex business environments has
become increasingly&lt;br/&gt;obvious. Many firms have invested a great deal of
time and&lt;br/&gt;resources in developing models that can be used to assist
with&lt;br/&gt;operational decision making. For example, airlines typically
use&lt;br/&gt;sophisticated models to assist with their air fleet assignments,
crew&lt;br/&gt;scheduling, maintenance schedules, etc. In addition to
these&lt;br/&gt;types of operational decisions, firms also undertake strategic,
or&lt;br/&gt;long-term, decisions, such as when an airline
determines&lt;br/&gt;what markets it will serve. In general, these strategic
decisions&lt;br/&gt;impact the operational decisions, although neither this
impact nor &lt;br/&gt;the uncertainty associated with day-to-day operational
decisions is&lt;br/&gt;typically captured within the enterprise's strategic
decision model. &lt;br/&gt;This project involves an exploration of integrated
models and &lt;br/&gt;solution methods for enterprise-based decision making
under uncertainty.&lt;br/&gt;