* 0400413
* Nonsmooth Measurement Feedback Control of Genuinely Nonlinear Systems with Applications to Biologically-Inspired Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Wei Lin, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 06/30/2008
* USD 210,000.00

This proposal aims to address some of the most fundamental and challenging
issues in the field of nonlinear control. The main objectives are to develop
nonsmooth feedback design approaches achieving global stabilization, adaptive
regulation and output tracking, via measurable signals, for a significant class
of nonlinear systems with unstabilizable/undetectable linearization, which
cannot be dealt with by any smooth feedback, even locally. Nonsmooth feedback
designs ofer the potential to overcome certain topological obstacles that cannot
be addressed by smooth controls, for example, to globally stabilize a nonlinear
system that is not stabilizable by any linear or smooth state feedback, because
the linearized system has uncontrollable modes associated with eigenvalues on
the right-half plane. The basic research components of this proposal are to
design nonsmooth partial state or output feedback controllers that achieve
global strong stability and do so in a robust fashion, that is, in a manner
which is not sensitive to perturbations and parametric uncertainties in the
system. The other focal points of this proposal will be the development of a new
output tracking theory for inherently nonlinear systems by measurement feedback.
The objective is to make the controlled plant track a desired reference signal.
A key feature of the classical servomechanism theory is the ability to absorb
the effect of modeling errors and to secure asymptotic tracking in the presence
of uncertainties. A nonlinear analogue of these robustness properties was
developed via center manifold theory, under the assumption that the linearized
system is controllable and observable, at least partially. However, little
result is known on the output regulation of nonlinear systems whose
linearization is unobservable and uncontrollable. Our preliminary analysis
suggests that a new formulation to the nonlinear reg- ulator problem is needed.
Indeed, some dramatic examples in the proposal indicate that while asymptotic
output tracking is usually not possible, even locally, practical output tracking
is achievable. One of important components of this project will be to establish
a general theory for global practical output tracking of nonlinear systems with
uncontrollable/unobservable linearization, in the presence of nonlinear
parameterization. The theoretical research will be complemented by several novel
applications. In particular, the nonsmooth control theory to be developed will
be used to address diffcult control problems including output feedback
stabilization of underactuated mechanical systems and output tracking/regulation
of antagonistic biomimetic actuation systems, by nonsmooth measurement feedback.
Intellectual Merits: This program will not only provided a general framework for
the control of nonlinear systems with uncontrollable/unobservable linearization
by nonsmooth measurement feedback, but also make a fundamental contribution to a
number of important and challenging open problems such as output feedback
stabilization, output tracking and regulation, for genuinely nonlinear systems
that cannot be controlled by existing smooth synthesis tech- niques. The
proposed research will yield new insight, advance the state-of-the-art of
nonsmooth control theory, and further facilitate the development of nonsmooth
design methods and their applications for a large class of inherently nonlinear
systems. Broader Impact: The proposed research will have enormous impact on
developing a new generation of nonlinear control technologies, with emphasis on
the development of computationally efficient and practically feasible nonsmooth
control tools and algorithms, for critical biomedical control applications and
for achieving high-performance operation of engineering systems (e.g. mobile
robots, underactuated mechanical systems, and biomimetic or biologically-
inspired systems). Applications of the nonsmooth control methods to biomimetic
systems have the potential to overcome some fundamental diffculties in designing
biologically-inspired robots (e.g. cockroach-like hexapod robots), functional
elec- trical stimulation muscles, and other man-made devices whose embedded
control systems can function autonomously in the real world, thus improving
significantly performance of the first generation biomimetic systems. The
outcomes of this program are envisioned to provide new avenues for a significant
improvement of operability and efficiency of engineering and biologically-
inspired systems, to create commercial or biomedical application opportunities,
and eventually to result in economic benefits. 1