* 0400588
* Mathematical Physics for Gravitational Wave Astronomy
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Christopher Beetle, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 07/31/2007
* USD 30,000.00

The NSF's two LIGO gravitational wave detectors are among a number of new and
planned facilities around the globe designed to detect gravitational waves. Once
operating at their optimal design sensitivities, these detectors are expected to
open a new vista in high-energy astrophysics, gravitational wave astronomy, in
which gravitational radiation incident on Earth could be analyzed to extract
previously inaccessible information about its sources. A great deal of work must
yet be done to make gravitational wave astronomy a reality. This award sponsors
the development of mathematical techniques needed to calculate approximations to
the gravitational wave signals arising from an astrophysical in-spiral of pairs
of black holes or neutron stars. These are likely to be among the strongest
signals for detection and are consequently among the most critical to understand
theoretically. The research funded here will be conducted in concert with three
other groups around the U.S., and will tightly integrate the development of new
mathematical techniques and the generation of computer codes implementing them.
In addition to the main goal of &lt;br/&gt;producing a reliable template for the
gravitational wave signal arising from binary systems, this work aims to produce
new, astrophysically-realistic initial-data sets describing binary systems for
other numerical relativity efforts around the country and around the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mathematical terrain underlying this project is
largely unexplored. As a result, there are many educational opportunities for
under-graduate and graduate students participating in this work.
&lt;br/&gt;Students need little preparation beyond their course work to begin
contributing, and the chance to become involved in timely and important research
in relativity theory --- a prominent sub-field of physics in the popular
imagination --- could help attract young people to the field. In addition, this
research will be conducted by a young PI in a young relativity effort at a young
research institution, Florida Atlantic University. The award will help establish
a new group in gravitational theory and foster close research ties between it
and established groups around the U.S. This new group will help raise the
profile of physics research, particularly in relativity theory, throughout
southern Florida via its members' planned vigorous public outreach
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;