* 0400420
* Lie Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2007
* Joseph Wolf, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2007
* USD 129,859.00

Abstract Wolf

The investigator proposes seven intertwined research projects, all on the
interface between group theory and geometry. For the most part these proposals
are geometrically motivated approaches to specific problems in modern harmonic
analysis connected to the representation theory of semi- simple Lie groups. The
first is an approach to construction and analysis of singular unitary
representations of real reductive Lie groups, in two steps: (i) geometric
construction of those representations, as Frechet space representations on
cohomology of homogeneous vector bundles over flag domains, and (ii)
transforming the representation space to a space of functions on a Stein
manifold defined by a system of differential equations, by means of a double
fibration transform (the complex Penrose transform is a particular case) from
the flag domain to its linear cycle space. The second project is an approach to
construction and analysis of unitary and other representations for a class of
infinite dimensional Lie groups, the direct limits of finite dimensional Lie
groups, especially strict direct limits of finite dimensional real and complex
reductive Lie groups, both in the analytic category and in the algebraic
category. The third project is to complete the investigator's work on the
Harish-Chandra Schwartz space of a general semisimple Lie group, by synthesizing
structural analyses of the relative Schwartz spaces. The investigator's fourth
project is to extend the notion of Dirac cohomology to a notion of partial Dirac
cohomology so that it applies to all the representations of a semisimple Lie
group that appear in the Plancherel formula. The fifth project is to extend the
investigator's isospectral group method from the setting of spherical space
forms to the setting of locally symmetric Riemannian spaces. The sixth project
is to investigate certain restrictions of discrete series representations to a
class of subgroups of great geometric interest. And, seventh, the investigator
will continue his development of a method for direct reading of the character
and growth properties (asymptotics) of admissible representations of finite
dimensional real reductive Lie groups from the basic data that specify their
construction on cohomology spaces of homogeneous vector bundles over flag
domains. One goal here is to do this in such a way that is directly applicable
to the first and second projects.

These seven research projects all depend on the use of symmetry to clarify
analytic (and in one case geometric) problems. Traditionally symmetry
considerations are used to simplify matters by decreasing the number of
variables, but here they are used to enable the use of insight, tools and
results from geometry and analysis. The symmetries are embodied in group theory,
which is the algebraic abstraction of the notion of symmetry. But modern Lie
group theory incorporates classical analysis (calculus, differential
equations...) and is closely tied to the geometry (Riemannian, symplectic,
Kaehler, ...) of the configurations on which the groups act as symmetries. An
important aspect of this synthesis of geometry and analysis is a geometric form
of quantization that is particularly well suited to the sorts of finite
dimensional groups considered in several of the projects. This geometric
quantization, originally inspired by physics and developed in some detail by
mathematicians, has in turn been very useful in a variety of settings in
mathematics and physics. This is very much the case in six of the seven
projects, where the geometric quantization is combined with modern differential
geometry to understand various analytic problems. This is especially evident in
the first and fourth projects, whose objectives can be viewed as a sort of
dequantization.