* 0400962
* Problems in Function Theory and Operator Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Richard Rochberg, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2008
* USD 227,459.00

This project involves research on several related problems in function theoretic
operator theory and in commutative harmonic analysis. One main goal is to
understand better the interaction of function theory and operator theory in the
context of the Dirichlet space and related potential spaces. One of the major
tools will be the recent results of the Principal Investigator (jointly with
Arcozzi and Sawyer) characterizing the Carleson measures on the Dirichlet space.
However other basic analytical tools that are available in classical contexts
are not yet available for these spaces, and part of the project is to develop
those tools. Two newer, and still relatively unexplored, areas will also be
studied. The first is the function theoretic ramifications of the body of work
that has grown from the results of Lacey and Thiele on the bilinear Hilbert
transform. The second is the question of the relationship of matricial BMO to
the class of matricial Muckenhoupt weights. Essentially the only thing currently
known about that relationship is that it is fundamentally different than in the
scalar case.

This work will advance the understanding of the function theoretic operator
theory on spaces of holomorphic functions and of operators arising in Euclidean
harmonic analysis. It will develop new viewpoints and techniques that will have
general applicability in those areas. At their hearts, such viewpoints and
techniques focus on the mathematical analysis and synthesis of information. Such
questions of analysis and synthesis pervade mathematics and are often central to
the development of new uses of mathematics in science and engineering.