* 0400674
* Properties of Absolutely Minimizing Functions
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Michael Crandall, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2008
* USD 117,000.00

DMS-0400674 Title: Properties of absolutely minimizing functions PI: Michael
Crandall, UCSB

ABSTRACT

The problem of finding an extension of a function given on the boundary of an
open set into the interior of the set in a way which achieves the least possible
value of some functional defined on such extensions is pervasive in mathematics
and its applications. If the functional is the Dirichlet integral, one is led to
the Dirichlet problem for the Laplace equation. If the functional is, instead,
the supremum norm of the length of the gradient, uniqueness of minimal
extensions is lost unless the problem is reinterpreted - the resulting notion is
here called "absolutely minimizing". Owing to work of Aronsson in the 60's and
Jensen in the 90's, one knows that, upon this proper reinterpretation, there is
an associated Dirichlet problem which has a unique solution. However, the
partial differential equation involved is now a highly degenerate quasilinear
elliptic equation, the "infinity-Laplace" equation. Moreover, the infinity-
Laplace operator must be understood in the generalized sense of viscosity
solutions. In the original works, the "length of the gradient" was the Euclidean
length. For some other notions of length, such as the natural maximum norm,
there is only an existence theory and uniqueness is unsettled. This is one
simple example of a basic question in this arena as yet unresolved. Others
include, even in the case of the Euclidean length, uniqueness in unbounded
domains, the famous problem of differentiability of infinity harmonic functions
(recently settled in two space dimensions by Savin), and the possibility of
other more refined results - perhaps generic - on the structure of solutions.
These issues will be studied in this project.

The infinity-Laplace equation is an archetypal object in the subject called
"calculus of variations in L-infinity" by its founders. Roughly speaking, it
corresponds to designing for the worst case, clearly an important issue with
potential relevance to many fields. One well established area of application of
absolutely minimizing functions is in image processing. While this project is
primarily mathematical, the questions asked are basic and aimed at archetypes
(as opposed to technically complex generalizations). Success will illuminate the
general theory and thereby its current and future applications.