* 0400643
* Mathematical Analysis of Vortex Sheet and Water Wave Motion
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2009
* Sijue Wu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2009
* USD 103,501.00

Proposal DMS-0400643&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Mathematical analysis of vortex
sheet and &lt;br/&gt;water wave motion&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Sijue Wu,
University of Michigan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
vortex sheet problem serves as a prototype for the evolution
of&lt;br/&gt;vorticity in fluid flows. One can think for example of the wake of
an &lt;br/&gt;airfoil as a typical problem&lt;br/&gt;of this type. This problem
can be described by the incompressible Euler &lt;br/&gt;equations,
where&lt;br/&gt;the initial vorticity is ideally a finite Radon measure
supported on a &lt;br/&gt;curve. The issue is to determine&lt;br/&gt;the
evolution of this curve. A further assumption that the vortex sheet
&lt;br/&gt;remains a&lt;br/&gt;curve at a later time leads to the Birkhoff-Rott
equation. The PI's &lt;br/&gt;initial study&lt;br/&gt;shows that a vortex
sheet&lt;br/&gt;in general can not be a curve of reasonable regularity. On the
other &lt;br/&gt;hand, Delort's result shows that vortex sheet&lt;br/&gt;fits as
a weak solution of the Euler equation (for initially &lt;br/&gt;non-negative
vorticity). However weak&lt;br/&gt;solutions seem to be a class too big to
describe the&lt;br/&gt;specific nature of the vortex sheet evolution. The
proposed research &lt;br/&gt;focuses on further pin point the&lt;br/&gt;nature
of the vortex sheet evolution, through studying similarity &lt;br/&gt;spiral
solutions, understanding the viscosity effects and&lt;br/&gt;the evolution of
vortex layers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water wave is one of our most familiar
experiences in daily life. A &lt;br/&gt;mathematical description&lt;br/&gt;is
the incompressible, irrotational Euler equation, defined in the
&lt;br/&gt;moving water domain. Study of water&lt;br/&gt;wave can be traced back
to more than 150 years, in which the PI &lt;br/&gt;recently
established&lt;br/&gt; the well-posedness of the problem locally in time, that
is, the wave &lt;br/&gt;will evolute&lt;br/&gt;without breaking for a finite
time period, from&lt;br/&gt;any initially non-self intersecting wave surface.
The proposed research &lt;br/&gt;focuses on the large time
behavior:&lt;br/&gt;the global existence of smooth solutions, the wave
breaking-- the &lt;br/&gt;mechanisms that cause the&lt;br/&gt;wave breaking and
breaking profiles. The proposal is to initiate from &lt;br/&gt;existing theories
on limit equations.&lt;br/&gt;Through comparisons of the full water wave
equation with the limit &lt;br/&gt;equations, the&lt;br/&gt;PI aims at
developing enough&lt;br/&gt;machinery and understanding&lt;br/&gt;that lead to
further research with greater generality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will further our understanding of the nature
&lt;br/&gt;phenomena such as the water wave&lt;br/&gt;motion and wave breaking,
the mixing of fluids, separation of boundary &lt;br/&gt;layers, generation
of&lt;br/&gt;sounds and coherent structures&lt;br/&gt;in turbulence models. It
will have a direct impact on the science and &lt;br/&gt;technology that
influence our daily life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;