* 0400611
* Mappings of Finite Distortion
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Jani Onninen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2006
* USD 89,001.00

DMS 0400611&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Jani
Onninen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;University of
Michigan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mappings of Finite
Distortion&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geometric function
theory is largely concerned with generalizations of the theory of analytic
functions to higher dimensions. It turns out that the category of maps with the
same geometric and function theoretic properties of analytic functions are the
mappings of bounded distortion, also called quasiregular mappings, or, if
injective, quasiconformal mappings. Both kind of mappings solve uniformly
elliptic partial differential equations in the plane. Moreover, these mappings
preserve the natural Sobolev spaces which arise in the study of function theory
and partial differential equations on subdomains of Euclidean
n-space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years there has been another well-known
theory of mappings whose ideas have gotten to the core of geometry and analysis,
non-linear elasticity theory. The mappings which naturally occur
there&lt;br/&gt;are not always quasiregular, but the governing
partial&lt;br/&gt;differential equations are the same. This forces us to move
from the&lt;br/&gt;classical setting of uniformly elliptic partial differential
equations to degenerate elliptic equations. Usually, however, some control of
the ellipticity bounds will be necessary to achieve concrete results. These
often take the form of integral estimates in some Lebesgue or Sobolev spaces.
This is the theory of mappings of finite distortion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this proposal we focus mainly on mappings of finite distortion between subsets
of the Euclidean n-space. We also emphasize the fundamental role of the Jacobian
determinant, which already has led to&lt;br/&gt;a very productive study of
mappings of finite distortion. The PI&lt;br/&gt;studies together with Haj\l asz,
Iwaniec and Mal\'y, the Jacobian&lt;br/&gt;determinant (the pullback of the
Riemannian volume forms) of&lt;br/&gt;mappings between Riemannian n-manifolds.
This study makes it&lt;br/&gt;possible to discover new phenomena about such
mappings. Also in&lt;br/&gt;this proposal, we investigate the Hardy-Littlewood
maximal&lt;br/&gt;operators on Sobolev spaces, one of the most important tools
in&lt;br/&gt;analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geometric function theory
has been quite a successful theory, with&lt;br/&gt;many diverse applications.
The theory of non-linear elasticity for&lt;br/&gt;example was based on practical
problems from mathematics and&lt;br/&gt;physics. It is necessary to study non-
linear equations to&lt;br/&gt;understand certain physical phenomena such as
bifurcation and&lt;br/&gt;phase transition. Our main motivation in the theory of
mappings of&lt;br/&gt;finite distortion is to examine degenerate elliptic
equations&lt;br/&gt;where important applications lie.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;