* 0400811
* Instrumentation for High-Throughput Genotyping, Fingerprinting, and Sequencing Projects
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Esther Van der Knaap, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 05/31/2006
* USD 199,240.00

This award provides support for purchase of several instruments used in analysis
of plants and microbes. The equipment includes a 16 capillary DNA sequencer, PCR
machines, a liquid robotic handler, and necessary software. The instrumentation
has the increased throughput capacity needed for several ongoing research
projects of faculty and students at the OSU campus in Wooster, and at nearby
Hiram College. The instruments will be placed in the Molecular and Cellular
Imaging Center (MCIC), a multi-disciplinary core facility on the campus.
Research programs expected to use the instruments include studies of variation
in tomato fruit morphology, studies of the molecular basis of interactions
between oomycete fungi and their plant hosts, molecular studies of quantitative
variation in plant resistance to disease and abiotic stress, and high throughput
genotyping and sequencing of microbial genomes. In addition to its role in
research, the equipment will be integrated into a broad range of ongoing
outreach and training activities for which the MCIC is currently a focal point.
Graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, faculty and technical staff from more
than 28 laboratories in ten different departments use the facility for studies
related to their thesis work or research. In addition, undergraduate students
from private, state, community, and minority colleges participate in summer
research programs on the Wooster campus . These students will have access to
training and use of the requested instrumentation. The MCIC hosts frequent tours
for high school students and teachers, K-12 students, as well as area residents
to provide a greater understanding of plant, animal and microbial research and
to engage the broader community in science-related activities .