* 0400359
* Nuclear, Particle, and Weak Interaction Physics of the Big Bang and Stellar Collapse
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* George Fuller, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 06/30/2007
* USD 305,915.00

The intellectual merit of this project rests on its principal goal: to probe the
fundamental physics of nuclei and neutrinos by exploiting the exciting synergy
between nuclear physics and neutrino physics on the one hand, and the
dynamics/nucleosynthesis of astrophysical environments on the other. The
interrelated physics of neutrinos and strong interaction physics/nuclei is at
the heart of current theories for the origin of the light nuclei and the
baryon/lepton numbers in the early universe, the origin of the heavy nuclei in
stellar collapse-based events, the dynamics of supernovae, and potentially even
the dark matter/energy problems. Nuclear physics and nuclear astrophysics stand
at the contact point of two great current trends in science: (1) the ongoing
experimentally driven revolution in neutrino physics; and (2) the startling
recent advances in the capabilities of observational astronomy, especially in
cosmology. This represents a tremendous opportunity for advancing both
fundamental neutrino/nuclear physics and astrophysics and cosmology through
their interconnection. The work supported by this project will aim at exploiting
this opportunity. In fact, the PI and his graduate students over the last three
funding cycles have discovered a number of these connections between fundamental
weak interaction/neutrino/nuclear physics and the frontiers of astrophysics, in
early universe physics, the physics of gravitational collapse, nucleosynthesis,
and especially the possible connections between neutrino ?avor transformation
and dynamics/nucleosynthesis. This has proven to be an excellent training ground
for graduate students (7 PhD's in 9 years, all of whom have positions in nuclear
physics research, and 5 have tenured or tenure track positions) and
undergraduates (6 REU undergraduates). This project will enable the continuing
training of excellent students. Coupled with the PI's seminars/outreach and
publications, this constitutes the broader impact of this project beyond the
scientific product. Arguably, the mass-squared differences and vacuum mixing
angles (save for 13) of the neutrinos are now measured. A key goal of this
project is to assess and calculate the impact of this new knowledge on models
for the physics of the early universe, gravitational collapse, and
nucleosynthesis. Some neutrino properties, like the CP-violating phase(es) and
13 remain unmeasured. A goal here will be to assess the role of these quantities
in astrophysical environments with an eye toward constraints. Ultimately, the
full extent of the neutrino mass and mixing spectrum, especially regarding
right-handed states remains mysterious. Because the cosmological parameters
(e.g., as derived from the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) anisotopies) and
neutrino properties are so tightly constrained, a positive result in the on-
going mini-BooNE experiment, for example, could signal the existence of a light
SU(2) singlet 'sterile' neutrino which mixes with active species. This might
also signal the existence of a large net lepton number(s) as well as call for a
radical overhall of existing models for stellar collapse, heavy element
nucleosynthesis, the role of neutrinos in dark matter/energy, and the origin of
the baryon number. Observations of Ultra Metal Poor halo stars recently have
given us new insight into the r-process which challenge existing models (e.g.,
the solar system abundance pattern seems to be universal for nuclear masses &gt;
100). &lt;br/&gt;The PI and his students will direct analytic and numerical
calculations toward: (1) an understanding of active-active and active-sterile
channel neutrino flavor transformation in the early universe as regards big bang
nucleosynthesis and lepton number generation/destruction/limits, CMB derived
neutrino mass limits, supernova shock re-heating, r-process nucleosynthesis, the
supernova neutrino signal, and all with emphasis on insight into the newly
discovered fixed point solution for the nonlinear neutrino-neutrino forward
scattering 'background' potential in the active-active neutrino/antimeutrino
conversion channel; (2) a further study of neutrino-nucleus interactions in
stellar collapse/heavy element nucleosynthesis, including de-excitation of hot
nuclei into neutrino pairs and neutrino capture-induced fission, as well as a
consistent treatment of the relationship between the high temperature nuclear
partition function and the weak strength distribution in nuclei; (3) studies
directed toward better constraints on sterile neutrino dark matter from better
knowledge of the physics of the QCD epoch in the early universe, from future
x-ray observatories, and from the effects of these particles in post-supernova
explosion neutron stars, especially the way in which the neutrino potentials
which the govern de-coherence production of these heavy states evolve with time;
(4) exploring the role of dynamical neutrino mass generation in cosmology; (5)
studies of high neutron excess r-process nucleosynthesis with fission
cycling.&lt;br/&gt;