* 0400391
* State Estimation and Diagnosis for Electric Power Systems Under Adverse Conditions
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Harry Kwatny, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 05/31/2008
* USD 119,942.00

This project addresses power system state estimation and diagnosis as part of a
control strategy for power systems that will maintain continuity of service in a
hostile environment. The goal is to determine a precise knowledge of the system
state, i.e., to establish 'situational awareness.' The 'state' to be estimated
is composed of both a continuous system state and a discrete event state.

A power system involves discrete events and highly nonlinear continuous
dynamics. It is of large scale and uncertain. When a power system operates in a
stressed state, i.e., near operating limits (bifurcation points), control system
properties like controllability and observability deteriorate. At bifurcation
points the system typically fails to be linearly controllable and/or observable.
Conventional estimation methods fail, resulting in poor decisions based on
inaccurate information

Observability of nonlinear dynamics involves aspects that have no counterpart in
linear systems. There are entirely new paradigms for observer construction that
enable state determination even when the system's linearization is not
observable. One consequence of this is that problems of parameter identification
and fault detection may be cast in an (nonlinear) observer design setting. These
constructs are quite complicated, and are certain to become more so when
discrete events are included.

The project has three goals: 1) adapt advances in nonlinear system
observability/observer theory to power systems, using a nonlinear DAE hybrid
system formulation, 2) develop and implement symbolic/numeric computational
tools to evaluate observability and to design observers, 3) validate
observability tests and new observer designs in a laboratory experiment.