* 0400889
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Microbial Biology for FY 2004
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2006
* Jacob Russell, Russell                 Jacob          A
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 12/31/2006
* USD 100,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Microbial biology for
FY2004. The fellowship supports training and research on the basic biology of
protozoan, microalgal, fungal, archaeal, bacterial and viral species that are
not generally considered to be model organisms. Further, it provides
opportunities for recent doctoral recipients to obtain additional training in
microbial biology, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
established scientists, and to broaden their scientific horizons beyond the
research experiences during the undergraduate and graduate training. These
fellowships are further designed to assist new scientists to direct their
research efforts across traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves
of unique research resources, sites, and facilities, including foreign
locations.

The research and training plan is entitled "Multispecies interactions in
associated bacterial pathogens, insect vectors, and their host plants." Plants
suffer from attack by numerous parasites, including insects and bacterial
pathogens. The bacterial pathogen Spiroplasma citri, and its leafhopper vector,
Circulifer tenellus, are known to attack citrus and crucifer crops. This study
investigates interactions between these organisms, revealing the potential for
mutualism or parasitism between pathogens and their insect vectors and the
abilities of plants to coordinate multiple defense responses. The Fellow is
developing skills in microbiology, including microscopy and culturing
techniques, while learning to use microarrays for the analysis of gene
expression.

