* 0400633
* Studies in Commutative Algebra and Algebraic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2010
* Melvin Hochster, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2010
* USD 305,000.00

Several central open questions concerning tight closure in
positive&lt;br/&gt;characteristic, such as whether tight closure commutes
with&lt;br/&gt;localization, and whether the tight closure of an ideal of a
domain&lt;br/&gt;coincides, in good cases, with the contracted expansion of the
ideal&lt;br/&gt;from the absolute integral closure of the domain are proposed
for study.&lt;br/&gt;Another main thrust is to explore several notions of
closure&lt;br/&gt;in rings that do not contain a field, such as finitely
generated algebras&lt;br/&gt;over the integers, with the hope of extending tight
closure theory to such&lt;br/&gt;rings, thereby solving many open questions. A
new approach to the&lt;br/&gt;problem of proving existence of big Cohen-Macaulay
modules in&lt;br/&gt;mixed characteristic will be pursued, as well as several
lines of&lt;br/&gt;research aimed at solving the long standing and important
question&lt;br/&gt;of whether regular rings are direct summands of their module-
finite&lt;br/&gt;extensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Commutative rings are abstract
systems in which one can perform&lt;br/&gt;addition, subtraction and
multiplication. The integers and&lt;br/&gt;real or complex numbers are examples,
but there are vastly&lt;br/&gt;different sorts of rings as well, including
finite rings. One&lt;br/&gt;can introduce variable elements into any ring,
forming a larger&lt;br/&gt;ring. Ring theory can be used to study the behavior
of large systems&lt;br/&gt;of equations in many variables. There are methods of
transition&lt;br/&gt;from the study of equations with real or complex
coefficients to the&lt;br/&gt;study of related systems with coefficients in a
finite ring. These&lt;br/&gt;methods produce qualtitative information about the
solutions of&lt;br/&gt;the original systems of equations: sometimes one can
determine whether&lt;br/&gt;there exist solutions and, if so, what the dimension
of the solution&lt;br/&gt;space is. Most of the problems in the proposal can be
viewed as&lt;br/&gt;problems about solving equations. The projects in the
proposal&lt;br/&gt;will provide fundamental information about the nature of
the&lt;br/&gt;solutions for many sorts of systems of equations.&lt;br/&gt;