* 0400869
* Inverse Anisotropic Problems and Resonances
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2007
* Plamen Stefanov, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 04/30/2007
* USD 111,600.00

Proposal DMS-0400869

Title: Inverse anisotropic problems and resonances PI: Plamen Stefanov, Purdue
University

ABSTRACT

The PI will work in the areas of Inverse Problems and Resonances. The PI will
study mainly inverse problems of recovering a Riemannian metric from boundary or
inverse scattering data. The central problem is the boundary rigidity problem
for Riemannian metrics (called also inverse kinematic problem), where one has to
recover a Riemannian metric in a bounded domain from the lengths of geodesics
connecting every two boundary points. This problem is closely connected to the
inverse problem of recovering a metric from the associated hyperbolic Dirichlet-
to-Neumann (DN) map on the boundary, and also to an associated inverse spectral
problem. The PI plans to study the problem of generic uniqueness for simple
metrics and stability estimates. Related problems in integral geometry will be
studied, like the linearized problem: recovery of tensors from integrals along
geodesics and stability estimates. The PI will also work on the elliptic
anisotropic inverse boundary value problem, the inverse backscattering problem
for the acoustic equation, and related inverse problems where one has to recover
the coefficients of the principal symbol of the differential operator from
boundary or scattering data. In the area of Resonance Theory, the proposer plans
to study the location and asymptotic distribution of resonances for various
systems. Both scattering systems and semi-classical Schroedinger type of
equations will be considered. Among the problems that will be studied are sharp
upper bounds of the number of resonances in a disk or sector in the complex
plane, upper and lower bounds connected with various characteristics of the
trapped sets of the associated classical mechanics problem. Mathematical
justification of numerical methods for computing resonances will be also
considered. The properties of the scattering amplitude near resonances will be
studied as well, which is related to the problem of observability of resonances.

Inverse Problems, and in particular the problems in this proposal, is a
mathematical tool of great importance to other sciences. Applications are
numerous: they are used in medicine for imaging the internal structure of a
human body and for medical diagnostics, in non-destructive material testing, in
geophysics for obtaining information about the inner structure of the earth from
seismic waves, in oil exploration, etc. Riemannian metric models anisotropic
media, where the speed of wave propagation may depend not only on the position
but also on the direction. The boundary rigidity problem is of interest not only
to scattering theory but also to Riemannian geometry, its linearized version is
a problem of independent interest in integral geometry as a generalized Radon
transform. Resonance Theory is part of Scattering Theory for quantum mechanical
and wave equation type of systems in unbounded domains. Resonances are certain
frequencies that can be observed in a variety of situations in Quantum
Chemistry, Physics, Acoustics, etc. Besides being motivated by applications in
other natural sciences, Resonance Theory uses tools from and encourages further
development of mathematics areas as Microlocal Analysis, Dynamical Systems, and
Geometry.