* 0400639
* Singular Integrals, Smoothness Spaces, and Optimal Estimates for Elliptic and Parabolic Boundary Value Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Marius Mitrea, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2007
* USD 76,034.00

DMS 0400639&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;M Mitrea&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;University of
Missouri&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Singular Integrals, Smoothness Spaces and Optimal
Estimates &lt;br/&gt;for Elliptic and Parabolic Boundary Value
Problems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent
developments in harmonic analysis have facilitated a
deeper&lt;br/&gt;understanding of large classes of partial differential
equations,&lt;br/&gt;modeling a variety of physical problems, including those
arising in&lt;br/&gt;elasticity, hydrodynamics and electromagnetism. This
proposal is&lt;br/&gt;concerned with regularity aspects of solutions to these
equations. &lt;br/&gt;Most notably, the PI intends to develop new tools, as well
as broaden the scope of more traditional methods, in order to be able to study
how the smoothness of the data influences the smoothness of the solution, in the
presence of boundary&lt;br/&gt;irregularities. The natural borderline is the
case when the domains in&lt;br/&gt;question are Lipschitz, i.e., satisfy a
uniform (interior/exterior) cone&lt;br/&gt;condition. Informally speaking,
Lipschitz domains make up the most general&lt;br/&gt;class where a rich function
theory can be developed, comparable in power&lt;br/&gt;and scope with that
associated with the upper-half space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scales of Besov
and Triebel-Lizorkin spaces offer a natural functional&lt;br/&gt;framework
within which the issue of smoothness can be analyzed. They&lt;br/&gt;encompass
both the Sobolev and Hardy classes and, otherwise, exhibit&lt;br/&gt;features
which are generally harder to take advantage of (or are
even&lt;br/&gt;completely lost) when working on the more classical Lebesgue
scale.&lt;br/&gt;One of the main questions addressed in this proposal is the
regularity&lt;br/&gt;of Green potentials on Lipschitz domains (with Dirichlet
and Neumann&lt;br/&gt;boundary conditions) on Besov and Triebel-Lizorkin spaces.
The PI proposes&lt;br/&gt;to investigate this issue both in the elliptic and
parabolic setting, via&lt;br/&gt;singular integral
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;