* 0400980
* Applications of operator K-theory in topology, harmonic analysis, index theory
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Gennadi Kasparov, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 04/30/2008
* USD 247,819.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;Kasparov&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this
project are applications of operator &lt;br/&gt;K-theory to a number of well
known problems in topology, harmonic &lt;br/&gt;analysis and index theory. These
problems are the Novikov conjecture on &lt;br/&gt;higher signatures of smooth
manifolds, the Baum-Connes conjecture in &lt;br/&gt;K-theory of group
C*-algebras, the problem of multiplicities of &lt;br/&gt;automorphic forms,
index theory for transversally elliptic operators. &lt;br/&gt;Operator K-theory
has its origins in the index theory of elliptic &lt;br/&gt;operators, and it is
most natural to study elliptic operators, &lt;br/&gt;including transversally
elliptic operators, using operator K-theory. &lt;br/&gt;Also operator K-theory
is a very suitable tool in applications related &lt;br/&gt;to geometric group
actions, which makes it exceptionally useful for &lt;br/&gt;problems like the
Novikov and the Baum-Connes conjectures. &lt;br/&gt;Multiplicities of
automorphic forms is another topic where operator &lt;br/&gt;K-theory gives new
approaches to old problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of quantum
mechanics in the 20th century has led to the &lt;br/&gt;creation of the theory
of operators in Hilbert space and later to the &lt;br/&gt;creation of the theory
of C*-algebras. The theory of C*-algebras is &lt;br/&gt;closely related with the
contemporary field theory in physics, as well &lt;br/&gt;as with geometry,
topology, Lie group representation theory, etc. &lt;br/&gt;Operator K-theory
came to the C*-algebra theory from topology and grew &lt;br/&gt;out into a
highly powerful tool. Nowadays, operator K-theory is part of &lt;br/&gt;the non-
commutative geometry which is a synthesis of analysis and &lt;br/&gt;geometry
with wide applications in many areas of mathematics and &lt;br/&gt;theoretical
physics. The emphasis of the present project is on the &lt;br/&gt;applications
of operator K-theory to several well known problems in &lt;br/&gt;analysis and
topology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;