* 0400140
* Minimax Sensor Location and Bayesian Estimation of the Probability of Detection
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Tom Cavalier, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Robert L. Smith
* 02/29/2008
* USD 275,610.00

This grant provides funding for the development of mathematical techniques for
the problem of locating a finite number of sensors to detect an event in a given
region. The overall problem consists of two main tasks: the sensor location
problem and the estimation of the probability of detection. In the sensor
location problem, the objective is to minimize the maximum probability of non-
detection and the underlying region consists of a line or curve in the plane.
These results will then be extended to develop tractable mathematical models and
solution algorithms for a continuous planar region or a 3-dimensional region.
Optimization techniques such as simulated annealing, genetic algorithms, and
differential evolution will be studied as possible solution strategies for this
class of nonlinear programming problems. Estimation of the probability of
detection involves testing for complete spatial randomness. If events exhibit
this property, then a uniform distribution may be appropriate. Otherwise,
historical event data will be modeled as a spatial non-homogeneous Poisson
process defined on the region. The mean rate of event occurrences will be
estimated using a Bayesian approach that incorporates prior beliefs about the
likelihood of events in different subregions within the region to be
monitored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will
make available an integrated set of tools and solution methodologies for solving
sensor location problems, including tools for the visualization of the resulting
optimal sensor configurations. The sensor location problem has a multitude of
applications. For example, the location of aircraft detection sensors, the
placement of sentries along a border to detect enemy penetration, the detection
of nuclear tests, the detection of natural and hazardous man-made events, as
well as the monitoring of contaminants in streams and rivers. The proposed work
will also contribute to the numerical tools available for nonlinear optimization
and Bayesian estimation.&lt;br/&gt;