* 0400831
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Microbial Biology for FY 2004
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Eric Allen, Allen                   Eric           E
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 06/30/2006
* USD 100,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Microbial biology for
FY2004. The fellowship supports training and research on the basic biology of
protozoan, microalgal, fungal, archaeal, bacterial and viral species that are
not generally considered to be model organisms. Further, it provides
opportunities for recent doctoral recipients to obtain additional training in
microbial biology, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
established scientists, and to broaden their scientific horizons beyond the
research experiences during the undergraduate and graduate training. These
fellowships are further designed to assist new scientists to direct their
research efforts across traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves
of unique research resources, sites, and facilities, including foreign
locations.

The research and training plan is entitled "Tetraether lipid synthesis in
Archaea." Archaeal lipids are unique in their structure and function and
represent an important evolutionary marker. The proposed studies are directed
towards elucidation of key enzymatic steps in the later part of the tetraether
lipid synthesis pathway. Bioinformatic, molecular genetic, DNA microarray, and
analytical chemical techniques are being employed to interrogate candidate gene
functions using the extremely acidophilic archaeon Ferroplasma acidarmanus. The
focus of the proposed research is how archaeal extremophiles are able to thrive
in environments characterized by extremes in pH, temperature, and ionic strength
by revealing the mechanism by which Archaea synthesize membrane lipids.

