* 0400479
* Scalable Decentralized Control over Ad Hoc Sensor Actuator Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Michael Lemmon, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Scott F. Midkiff
* 08/31/2008
* USD 210,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Title: Scalable Decentralized Control over Ad Hoc Sensor-Actuator
Networks&lt;br/&gt;Summary: This project studies the extent to which ad hoc
networks of sensors and actuators&lt;br/&gt;may be used to implement large-scale
feedback control systems. Dense ad hoc networks suffer
from&lt;br/&gt;significant capacity limitations that suggest scalability may
only be achieved if we restrict ourselves&lt;br/&gt;to localized network traffic
patterns. Moreover, such sensor-actuator networks have a large
number&lt;br/&gt;of clients sharing the same communication channel, so that
contention between different clients will&lt;br/&gt;greatly reduce the amount of
data that can be streamed between sensors and actuators. Maintain-&lt;br/&gt;ing
specified levels of overall control system performance in such a non-
deterministic environment is&lt;br/&gt;extremely challenging and we feel that it
can only be achieved if we adopt a cross-layer approach in&lt;br/&gt;which
application (i.e., control) algorithms and networking protocols are intimately
aware of each&lt;br/&gt;others capabilities and limitations. This project
investigates fundamental relationships between&lt;br/&gt;control system
performance and network quality-of-service (QoS). The project will use these
rela-&lt;br/&gt;tionships to develop decentralized control algorithms and
supporting network middleware services&lt;br/&gt;that can guarantee application
(control) performance over extremely large ad hoc sensor-
actuator&lt;br/&gt;networks. The intellectual merit of the proposed work lies in
its precise characterization of the&lt;br/&gt;way in which network middleware
impacts control system performance. The project will demon-&lt;br/&gt;strate
these algorithms and services on a physical testbed in which a spatially-
distributed physical&lt;br/&gt;plant is controlled in a decentralized manner
over an ad hoc radio (RF) network of
embedded&lt;br/&gt;processors.&lt;br/&gt;The project's broader impacts will be
felt through its impact on undergraduate education at&lt;br/&gt;Notre Dame as
well as through on-going collaborations with civil, environmental, and
mechanical&lt;br/&gt;engineering researchers both in and out of Notre Dame. In
particular, the project's proposed testbed&lt;br/&gt;will be tied to
undergraduate courses in electrical and mechanical engineering, thereby
providing&lt;br/&gt;students with a novel opportunity to contribute to an on-
going research program. Moreover we&lt;br/&gt;are collaborating with
civil/environmental engineers to develop sensor-actuator networks that
can&lt;br/&gt;address the combined-sewer overfow (CSO) problem faced by a number
of municipalities across&lt;br/&gt;the Midwest and Eastern United States. The
results from this project have the potential to reduce&lt;br/&gt;anticipated
costs associated with solving the CSO problem. The results from this project
will&lt;br/&gt;therefore have a broad societal impact extending well beyond the
immediate project objectives.