* 0400587
* Rigidity in Homogeneous Dynamics with Connections to Number Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2004,03/31/2005
* Manfred Einsiedler, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 03/31/2005
* USD 71,359.00

The project involves measure rigidity of higher rank
partially&lt;br/&gt;hyperbolic abelian actions and applications thereof. It
is&lt;br/&gt;conjectured that under certain circumstances there are very
few&lt;br/&gt;probability measures both invariant and ergodic under such
actions&lt;br/&gt;(Furstenberg, Margulis). So far all of the current work relies
on&lt;br/&gt;the additional assumption of positive entropy (Johnson,
Rudolph),&lt;br/&gt;and sometimes on additional ergodicity along critical
directions&lt;br/&gt;(Kalinin, Katok, Spatzier). Substantial progress has been
made&lt;br/&gt;recently in avoiding unnecessary ergodicity-type assumptions
as&lt;br/&gt;well as in applications of measure rigidity (Einsiedler,
Katok,&lt;br/&gt;Lindenstrauss). Einsiedler will continue his study of
invariant&lt;br/&gt;measures avoiding additional ergodicity-type assumptions,
work on&lt;br/&gt;disjointness properties of various higher rank dynamical
systems,&lt;br/&gt;further applications of rigidity, and related algebraic
topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory of dynamical systems is a relatively
new, but important&lt;br/&gt;mathematical theory with many connections to other
parts of&lt;br/&gt;mathematics as well as other sciences such as
physics,&lt;br/&gt;meteorology, or computer sciences. Historically it developed
from&lt;br/&gt;the study of the evolution of a deterministic but
complicated&lt;br/&gt;physical process (for instance in celestial mechanics)
over time.&lt;br/&gt;Especially if this process is too complicated to predict
long term&lt;br/&gt;outcomes precisely, the theory of dynamical systems is
important&lt;br/&gt;because it can give qualitative predictions. More
recently&lt;br/&gt;symbolic dynamics turned out to be crucial to find efficient
and&lt;br/&gt;safe coding algorithms in computer sciences. There is also a
long&lt;br/&gt;tradition of using dynamics to solve problems in other areas
of&lt;br/&gt;mathematics. The study of higher rank dynamical systems
(where&lt;br/&gt;time has more than one dimension) has received much
attention&lt;br/&gt;during the last years, in part again because of its
connections to&lt;br/&gt;physics (in particular statistical mechanics) and
computer&lt;br/&gt;sciences (higher dimensional data storage methods). The
proposed&lt;br/&gt;research links three separate areas of mathematics, namely
ergodic&lt;br/&gt;theory, Lie theory, and algebra. The rich interplay among
these&lt;br/&gt;fields helps to attack problems by using tools from
different&lt;br/&gt;areas. The most prominent connection is between dynamics
on&lt;br/&gt;homogeneous spaces and number theory, which holds the key
to&lt;br/&gt;problems in the theory of Diophantine approximation. However,
the&lt;br/&gt;theory of dynamical systems can benefit from this interaction
too&lt;br/&gt;since dynamical systems of algebraic origin are often
more&lt;br/&gt;amenable to a detailed study of their dynamical properties
while&lt;br/&gt;the phenomena encountered are interesting in the larger context
of&lt;br/&gt;general dynamical systems.&lt;br/&gt;