* 0400631
* Ergodic-Theoretic Properties of Actions of Discrete Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,04/30/2005
* Alexander Gorodnik, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 04/30/2005
* USD 90,001.00

In this project, the PI will study the actions of Lie groups and their
discrete&lt;br/&gt;subgroups from ergodic-theoretic point of view. Note that
only few results&lt;br/&gt;about statistical properties of orbits of large
nonamenable groups are known.&lt;br/&gt;A part of this project addresses the
question about the distribution of&lt;br/&gt;orbits of lattices in Lie groups
acting on homogeneous spaces. The methods,&lt;br/&gt;which utilize the
equidistribution properties of unipotent flows (due to Ratner&lt;br/&gt;and
others), apply to a large variety of natural actions of lattices.
Since&lt;br/&gt;the methods based on the Ratner theory do not provide effective
estimates&lt;br/&gt;on the rate of convergence, it is intended to develop a
different approach&lt;br/&gt;that gives effective error terms. The expected
results of the proposal have&lt;br/&gt;several potential applications to number
theory. In particular, we plan to&lt;br/&gt;investigate distribution of values
at integer points of systems consisting&lt;br/&gt;of linear and quadratic forms.
Another direction of research is the study&lt;br/&gt;of mixing properties of
large groups of automorphisms of nilmanifolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
objective of this project is to investigate distribution of orbits&lt;br/&gt;of
large discrete and continuous groups of motions on various
spaces.&lt;br/&gt;Questions about asymptotic distribution of families of
mathematical objects&lt;br/&gt;appear in many different areas of mathematics:
ergodic theory, number theory&lt;br/&gt;(e.g., distribution of prime numbers),
geometry (e.g., distribution of closed&lt;br/&gt;geodesics on a compact
surface), PDE (e.g., distribution of eigenvalues of the&lt;br/&gt;Laplace
operator), and others. When a family of the objects exhibits
very&lt;br/&gt;complicated behavior, statistical properties of this family
provide important&lt;br/&gt;insights into its structure. In this project, we use
methods of the theory of&lt;br/&gt;dynamical systems to derive results in number
theory on the distribution of&lt;br/&gt;integer points. Our study uncovers
promising interplay between ergodic theory&lt;br/&gt;and number theory
simultaneously enriching both of these areas of research.&lt;br/&gt;This subject
and its connections with many other branches of mathematics&lt;br/&gt;provide an
excellent introduction for graduate as well as undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;students
to active research and can be used for presentations accessible
to&lt;br/&gt;audiences of different levels.&lt;br/&gt;