* 0400696
* Microcircuit and MEMS Package Survivability during Shock and Accidental Drop
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Pradeep Lall, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2008
* USD 180,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop fundamental understanding of
failure mechanics of microcircuit packaging and MEMS packaging at high strain
rates. The objective will be achieved through three major thrusts including,
characterization of initiation and progression of failure mechanisms in
integrated circuits during drop impact, study of materials and interfaces under
high strain rates encountered during drop, and development of models for
prediction of failure. Materials and material interfaces of microcircuit and
MEMs packages will be studied including, SnPb and Pb-free solders, copper
metallization and pads, printed circuit laminates, semiconductors, and molding
compounds. Test structures will be developed to study material constitutive
behavior, and damage threshold relationships. Strain rates in the range of 101
to 102 sec-1 will be used for characterization. Computational models will be
developed for prediction of microcircuit survivability in shock and accidental
drop environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit of the proposed
research is the fundamental structured approach to design damage tolerant
electronics which will be available for system designers, based on
predictability in design performance of microcircuits in shock and accidental
drop environments. An advanced design framework will reduce dependence on
experimental methods for evaluation of system performance and help reduce cost
and time. The proposed research will be a significant advancement over the
state-of-the-art. The broader impact and outreach activities of this project
will target course development, focused sessions at conferences, special issues
in electronic packaging journals, and introduction of elementary school children
and undergraduates to portable electronics through lab tours and in-class
presentations. &lt;br/&gt;