* 0400647
* Zeta Functions and Algorithms
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Daqing Wan, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2009
* USD 299,892.00

Abstract for award DMS-0400647 of Wan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central aim of
this proposal is to give a systematic &lt;br/&gt;study of the p-adic variation
of zeta functions of toric hypersurfaces over &lt;br/&gt;finite fields. This
naturally has three aspects: theory, applications and &lt;br/&gt;algorithms. We
expect to make significant progresses on all three fronts. &lt;br/&gt;On the
theoretical side, the PI previously proved that Dwork's unit root zeta
&lt;br/&gt;function is p-adic meromorphic but no information about its zeros is
known &lt;br/&gt;except in the simpler abelian rank one case. We propose to
obtain effective &lt;br/&gt;information about zeros of the unit root zeta
function in the general &lt;br/&gt;non-abelian higher rank case, settling this
basic problem. This should be &lt;br/&gt;related to the conjectural non-abelian
p-adic L-functions and geometric &lt;br/&gt;Iwasawa theory. As a consequence, we
shall give a detailed in-depth &lt;br/&gt;study of some important examples such
as a family of Kloosterman sums and &lt;br/&gt;a family of Calabi-Yau
hypersurfaces, settling some open problems in the area. &lt;br/&gt;On the
application side, we propose to investigate the arithmetic mirror symmetry:
&lt;br/&gt;the relation between the zeta function of a Calabi-Yau variety and
the zeta function &lt;br/&gt;of its mirror variety. An
experimental/computational study along this direction has already
&lt;br/&gt;been made by Candelas etc who disovered some interesting structures
about such &lt;br/&gt;zeta functions via the study of the periods of the Picard-
Fuch equations. &lt;br/&gt;We propose to give a rigorous mathematical proof of
their conjectures. &lt;br/&gt;Recently, along this line, we proposed several
apparently harder arithmetic mirror &lt;br/&gt;conjectures, including the
generic slope mirror conjecture and the small slope &lt;br/&gt;mirror
conjecture. We plan to make these conjectures precise in a general form
&lt;br/&gt;and provide substantial evidence to them, opening new areas of
research.&lt;br/&gt;Along the way, the link between our decomposition theorems
for generic Newton &lt;br/&gt;polygons and the GKZ principal discriminant would
be established, obtaining &lt;br/&gt;arithmetic information about the GKZ
discriminant. For the algorithmic side, &lt;br/&gt;we plan to exploit some of
the finer p-adic theory and computational commutative &lt;br/&gt;algebra to
obtain faster and better p-adic algorithms for the zeta functions,
&lt;br/&gt;including the harder singular case. The proposed research would
involve several &lt;br/&gt;colloborators and graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental problem in number theory is to understand
the number of solutions &lt;br/&gt;of a polynomial equation over a finite field.
In addition to its intrinsic &lt;br/&gt;theoretic interest, this problem has
connections to several major branches of &lt;br/&gt;mathematics. It also has
important applications in coding theory, crpyptography, &lt;br/&gt;and
combinatorics. We propose to give a systematic study of this fundamental
&lt;br/&gt;problem and obtain an improved understanding. We expect to make
significant progresses &lt;br/&gt;on both the theory, application and
algorithmic aspects of the problem. As &lt;br/&gt;a consequence, we would settle
several open problems in the area, establishing &lt;br/&gt;new links with other
areas such as p-adic L-function, computational commutative &lt;br/&gt;algebra,
toric geometry and mirror symmetry. Due to the diversity and the scope
&lt;br/&gt;of this proposal, the proposed research would involve several
colloborators and &lt;br/&gt;graduate students. It is hoped that the proposed
research would also lead to &lt;br/&gt;several monographs or books which would
make this beautiful subject coherent and &lt;br/&gt;accessible. &lt;br/&gt;