* 0400840
* Can Nanoscale Inclusions Effectively Reduce the Viscosity and Modulus of Polymer Melts?
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2007
* Michael Mackay, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Marc S. Ingber
* 04/30/2007
* USD 262,845.00

Proposal Title: Can Nanoscale Inclusions Effectively Reduce the Viscosity and
Modulus of Polymer Melts?&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
CTS-0400840&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Michael E.
Mackay&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Michigan State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this project, the flow and physical properties of a suspension or slurry is
being &lt;br/&gt;investigated. However, the particles are smaller than the
fluids molecules in which they &lt;br/&gt;are dispersed and this produces
unusual effects. We have found that nanoparticles with a &lt;br/&gt;size of
order 5-10 nm suspended in a polymeric liquid with molecules of size 15-40 nm
&lt;br/&gt;produce a liquid that has a viscosity lower than the neat polymeric
liquid itself. A &lt;br/&gt;viscosity reduction is at odds with Einsteins
century old prediction that Brownian &lt;br/&gt;particles increase the viscosity
of liquids. Indeed all observations suggest that a viscosity &lt;br/&gt;increase
is always present in particulate suspensions. A recent publication on this
effect is &lt;br/&gt;in press in the journal Nature Materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the particles are so small it is believed they
influence the dynamics of the &lt;br/&gt;polymeric liquid on a local scale. The
nanoparticles apparently increase the free volume &lt;br/&gt;in the polymeric
liquid as well as confine the polymer molecules to produce the viscosity
&lt;br/&gt;decrease. Further, contemporary methods to quantify entanglements
suggest no change in &lt;br/&gt;the entanglement density. It is the purpose of
this work to further elucidate the &lt;br/&gt;phenomenon and resolve this
quandary. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A recent discovery, included in the preliminary
results, is that very chemically &lt;br/&gt;different nanoparticle
(polyethylene). polymer (polystyrene) systems can be molecularly
&lt;br/&gt;dispersed as long as the particle is smaller than the polymer. The
polyethylene. &lt;br/&gt;polystyrene system is a model phase separating system
and it has been discovered that &lt;br/&gt;changing the molecular topology of
one component into a particle-like conformation &lt;br/&gt;affects its
solubility and stability in a polymeric liquid. This is a unique result, not
fully &lt;br/&gt;understood at present and represents one aspect of the proposed
research. This could &lt;br/&gt;create a new class of molecular alloys. Further
research will be conducted with &lt;br/&gt;fullerenes, as a model system whose
size is much smaller than available nanoparticles, &lt;br/&gt;and single wall
carbon nanotubes, as a model system to introduce a new particulate
&lt;br/&gt;geometry. These systems will be utilized to generalize the viscosity
reduction effect. &lt;br/&gt;We will use a variety of techniques in the proposed
work to measure the dispersion &lt;br/&gt;of the nanoparticles as well the state
of the suspending fluids. chain-like molecules. &lt;br/&gt;These techniques
include: rheological characterization, thermal analysis, mechanical
&lt;br/&gt;testing, electron optics evaluation and small angle neutron
scattering. All this &lt;br/&gt;instrumentation exists in the group, is on
campus or is available at Argonne National &lt;br/&gt;Laboratory. Graduate and
undergraduate students in the research group will be exposed &lt;br/&gt;to these
results and in some cases will gather results together as we have done when
&lt;br/&gt;performing neutron scattering. There are three females and three
males in the research &lt;br/&gt;group and through teamwork participation of an
underrepresented group will broaden &lt;br/&gt;their learning experience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dissemination of these results will be presented through
the scientific literature and &lt;br/&gt;conferences as well as through
undergraduate and graduate level lectures. The principal &lt;br/&gt;investigator
sets aside one lecture every semester in the introductory (sophomore) course
&lt;br/&gt;he teaches to introduce his research to the students. This lecture is
well received and &lt;br/&gt;gives students an introduction to the research
process as well as the results of research. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is
unique and is at odds to contemporary observations. Inclusion &lt;br/&gt;of this
topic in the research lecture will demonstrate how science and engineering is
&lt;br/&gt;continuously evolving and not stagnant. Many underrepresented
students attend this &lt;br/&gt;lecture and immediately after, as well as for
many months thereafter, they show interest &lt;br/&gt;in research and wish to
undertake research with the principal investigator or other
&lt;br/&gt;professors. &lt;br/&gt;