* 0400292
* Multi-layered Nanocoating of Nano and Submicron Sized Particles at Large Scale
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2010
* Alan Weimer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Charalabos C. Doumanidis
* 07/31/2010
* USD 403,000.00

Atomic Layer Deposition (ALD) processing will be carried out to modify the
surface chemistry of ultrafine particles at large scale and to investigate the
utility of the modified particles for UVA/UVB transmittance and self assembly.
In one aspect of the research, multilayered and nanolaminated ceramic films will
be placed on the surface of individual primary submicron and nanosized inorganic
particles using a fluidized bed process. The research effort includes an
understanding of the fluidization behavior of the submicron and nanosized
particles that are affected by interparticle forces and that fluidize as dynamic
aggregates, and the subsequent ability to nanocoat individual primary particles
fluidizing as light aggregates. This is a first attempt to place nanothick
multilayers on fluidized particles by ALD. A sunscreen UVA/UVB system (ZnO/TiO2)
has been selected to provide for a well characterized application with
definitive methods for testing the composite powder behavior in non-aqueous
formulations (sunscreen lotions). In another aspect of the research, inorganic
nanofilms will be placed on the surface of nanospherical particles by ALD to
control their surface charge (anionic and cationic). Solutions containing equal
concentration of oppositely charged nanospheres will be investigated for ionic
self-assembly into nanospherical "salts". The investigation will be extended to
bilayered coatings on nanosized substrate particles where the inner layer
imparts optical functionality on the nanoparticles and the outer layer imparts
charge functionality for ionic self assembly. In this manner, the self assembly
of photonic crystalline arrays with controlled diffraction patterns will be
investigated. The overall goal of the project is to demonstrate multi-layered
films on ultrafine particles by ALD and the utility of such surface modified
particles in formulations and nanofabricated arrays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
novel research provides for the large scale control of nanoparticle surface
chemistry to facilitate the use of functionalized nanoparticles in formulations
and for fabricating novel components. The nanoparticle surface coating method to
be investigated is enabling and widely applicable to many systems. This research
provides for a unique educational experience for two Ph.D. students and
approximately 20 undergraduates over the three year program. A local industrial
partner, ALD Nanosolutions, has agreed to work with the students (e.g., through
capstone design projects) to better understand both the scientific and applied
aspects of the research and to facilitate technology transfer.&lt;br/&gt;