* 0400730
* Mathematical Theory of Aeroelasticity
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* A Balakrishnan, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2008
* USD 193,866.00

Purpose and Intellectual Merit The objective of this research is the systematic
development of a mathematical theory for Aeroelasticity drawing on Abstract
Functional Analysis -- in particular nonlinear Aeroelasticity -- centered on the
canonical problem of flutter: the instability endemic to aircraft at high enough
air speed in the subsonic range, M < 1. In particular this would mean the
development of mathematical models for aeroelastic phenomena of interest on
their own and also explore analytically the design of feedback controllers --
including self-straining actuators, "intelligent controllers" for Flutter
Boundary Expansion. Broader Impact We should point out that while aircraft wings
(including UAV's) are the primary domain of the theory, there is a new emerging
area of application: Alternate Sources of Energy such as Wind Turbines -- where
the aeroelastic stabilization of the blades is an increasingly important issue.
Longer blades are apparently more efficient but reducing weight implies higher
flexibility, just as with UAV's. Specific Tasks: First Year Analytical study of
the effect of nonzero angle of attack and nonzero camber on flutter speed as a
function of Mach number, especially in the transonic range -- a currently
unsettled problem. This would mean in particular studying the linearized version
of the nonlinear aeroelastic equation, leading to generalization of the Possio
Integral Equation. In turn we will need to study the root locus problem for the
corresponding convolution-evolution equation, including the performance of self-
straining actuator models -- still using the Goland cantilever beam model for
the wing. Specific Tasks: Second Year Extend the theory to where the structure
is a uniform thin plate rather than a beam so that we can consider controls on
the leading and/or trailing edge of the wing. We could then investigate self-
straining actuators -- piezo-strips chordwise as well as spanwise, eliminating
ailerons. For a high-aspect-ratio wing we could still work with typical-section
aerodynamics -- so that the nonlinear aerodynamic theory we have developed can
be used without additional effort. Specific Tasks: Third Year Extend the
aeroelastic theory to finite wings finally eliminating the high-aspect-ratio
constraint.