* 0400839
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Microbial Biology for FY 2004
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Jenny Baeseman, Baeseman, Jenny L
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 08/31/2006
* USD 100,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Microbial biology for
FY2004. The fellowship supports training and research on the basic biology of
protozoan, microalgal, fungal, archaeal, bacterial and viral species that are
not generally considered to be model organisms. Further, it provides
opportunities for recent doctoral recipients to obtain additional training in
microbial biology, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
established scientists, and to broaden their scientific horizons beyond the
research experiences during the undergraduate and graduate training. These
fellowships are further designed to assist new scientists to direct their
research efforts across traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves
of unique research resources, sites, and facilities, including foreign
locations.

The research and training plan is entitled "Microbial Diversity and Nitrogen
Cycling in Stream Sediments of the McMurdo Dry Valleys, Antarctica." Algal
communities of the McMurdo Dry Valleys greatly impact the biogeochemical cycling
of nutrients in streams entering the permanently frozen lake ecosystems. These
communities remain freeze-dried for most of the year and within 20 minutes of
receiving water are active communities affecting water quality of the system.
Understanding the diversity and metabolic capabilities of the algal mats and
associated microbial communities will provide a better understanding of
processes in this extreme polar desert. Presently very little is known about the
genetic diversity of these mats and stream sediments. A detailed study of the
hyporheic zones will be conducted to assess the interactions between nitrogen
species and microbial communities, using various techniques, including 16s rRNA
and molecular enzyme analysis. This research anticipates identifying novel
organisms that may be important for water and wastewater treatment of nitrate-
containing waters in cold temperature regions. This project will also provide
more information on the microbial diversity of cold environments, which may be
important to the field of exobiology.