* 0400061
* Collaborative Research:  Efficient Fabrication of Microelectromagnetic Devices by Micromolding
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2008
* Glenn Sinclair, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Joycelyn S. Harrison
* 04/30/2008
* USD 306,000.00

This collaborative project from Louisiana State University (LSU) and University
of Wisconsin (UW) proposes a hybrid approach to further advance the technology
of high temperature metal micromolding. By combining elements of LiGA,
microscale electrical discharge machining, high density plasma etching and
smoothing, and high temperature nanostructured ceramic coatings, we aim to
achieve high temperature micromolding of Ni-Fe alloys and build Ni-Fe based
electromagnetic microactuators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: Pushing
the technology of metal micromolding to much higher temperatures (~800 oC)
entails undertaking significant research in a number of areas:&lt;br/&gt;1)
Developing new means of efficient fabrication of complex, high-aspect-ratio,
microscale patterns out of high temperature materials&lt;br/&gt;2) Understanding
critical factors controlling high temperature structural and chemical stability
of nanostructured ceramic coatings&lt;br/&gt;3) Understanding high temperature
tribochemistry of sliding contacts between ceramic nanocomposites and Ni-Fe
alloys&lt;br/&gt;4) Understanding mechanics of the high temperature micromolding
process&lt;br/&gt;5) Improving design of microelectromagnetic devices for
manufacturing by micromolding&lt;br/&gt;Completion and integration of these
research elements lay the scientific foundation of high temperature
micromanufacturing of metal-based HARMs devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impact: The ability to inexpensively replicate metal and alloy based HARMs by
molding offers the potential for commercialization of numerous
microelectromagnetic, micromechanical, and microchemical devices. Through joint
LSU-WU workshops, interactions between students from both institutions will be
promoted. The planned research exposes graduate students to diverse disciplines.
Through ongoing interactions between LSU and Southern University (SU), we will
interest minority students in micromanufacturing research, and recruit them into
graduate programs at LSU and SU.&lt;br/&gt;