* 0400760
* Multi-Area Monitoring and Transfer Capability Calculations in Restructured Power Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Ali Abur, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Tomsovic
* 06/30/2006
* USD 166,000.00

This project is concerned about the issues of security monitoring and ATC
calculations for a multi-area large power system where an independent grid
operator has limited access to the network data and measurements of individual
areas. The goal is to develop a general computational framework which can be
used for any multi-area system application regardless of the data base and
software requirements of individual area operators and the applications
themselves. The distributed nature of the proposed approach has the advantage
that it will remain valid as the system size and the number of areas increase
for more complex interconnected systems. Furthermore, it allows each area to
improve its software and monitoring capabilities at its own pace without the
need to coordinate this activity with the other areas in the system. The project
focuses on two applications, namely the state estimation and the ATC
calculations. These applications are formulated within the proposed multi-area
two level computational framework. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to its
technical impacts, the project is expected to have broader impacts on education,
training of graduate students and mentoring of students from under-represented
groups. The project will employ two graduate students who will pursue their
graduate degrees during the project. They will be trained both technically and
also via laboratory teaching assignments to become future instructors in their
specialties. They will also be involved in the development of teaching materials
which will then be used in undergraduate teaching laboratory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;