* 0400526
* Quantum and Classical Evolution.
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Israel-Michael Sigal, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2006
* USD 219,370.00

Proposal DMS-0400526 PI: Israel-Michael Sigal, University of Notre Dame Project
title: Quantum and Classical Evolution Project abstract: In this project the PI
addresses problems of long-time and asymptotic evolution in quantum and
classical field theories. More specifically, he aims to (A) Determine the
resonance structure of and construct the scattering theory for systems of non-
relativistic particles such as atoms and molecules interacting with the
quantized electromagnetic field; (B) Construct scattering theory and the theory
of periodic/quasiperiodic motion of solitons (or solitaty wave solutions) for
the nonlinear Schroedinger equation with an external potential; (C) Construct
theory of tunneling for solitons in the nonlinear Schroedinger equation with an
external potential and in the (second) quantized version of this equation.
Mathematically, these problems deal with linear partial differential equations
in an infinite number of variables (A) and with nonlinear partial differential
equations with interplay between the nonlinearity and geometry of the external
potentials (B) as well as with the problems bridging both frameworks (C). The
problems above originate in our trying to describe some basic physical phenomena
such as emission and absorption of radiation by quantum, non-relativistic
systems (e.g., atoms and molecules) and dynamics of Bose-Einstein condensates.
They also play an important role in technological applications, e.g. optical
communication. It is hoped that the results the research to be undertaken will
provide conceptual and unifying underpinning to a more quantative
(phenomenological, numerical and experimental) physical treatment. In selecting
the research projects above the PI was guided by their importance, possibility
of the emergence of new mathematics and by the availability of tools and ideas
to start probing them. These projects will also provide fertile ground for
excellent entry problems for graduate students, postdocs and beginning faculty
whom the PI will supervise and mentor.