* 0400640
* Arithmetic and Representation Theory of Reductive Groups over Local and Global Fields
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Gopal Prasad, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2008
* USD 135,000.00

Abstract for NSF-award number DMS-0400640 of
Prasad&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract: Gopal Prasad's primary focus has been
study of reductive Lie&lt;br/&gt;and algebraic groups--mostly on problems which
have either geometric or&lt;br/&gt;number theoretic origin. He has been
investigating questions about certain&lt;br/&gt;interesting subgroups, for
example, arithmetic subgroups or other large&lt;br/&gt;(Zariski-dense) subgroups
which arise in geometry or number theory. It&lt;br/&gt;would be important to
determine all normal subgroups of these groups. Over&lt;br/&gt;interesting
fields like local and global fields, there are conjectures of&lt;br/&gt;Kneser-
Tits and Margulis-Platonov which provide a description of
normal&lt;br/&gt;subgroups. These conjectures have been settled in the
affirmative for many&lt;br/&gt;class of groups. However, there still remain some
very interesting groups&lt;br/&gt;for which these conjectures are open. Prasad
plans to study these groups.&lt;br/&gt;For arithmetic groups, the famous
"congruence subgroup problem" is the&lt;br/&gt;question whether any normal
subgroup of finite index contains a congruence&lt;br/&gt;subgroup. The most
successful approach to settling this problem has two&lt;br/&gt;parts: (1)
Computation of the "metapectic kernel". (2) Centrality of
the&lt;br/&gt;congruence subgroup kernel. A very precise computation of the
metaplectic&lt;br/&gt;kernel for all groups has been done in Prasad's joint work
with&lt;br/&gt;M.S.Raghunathan and A.S.Rapinchuk. On the other hand, the
centrality of&lt;br/&gt;the congruence subgroup kernel is still unknown for some
important class&lt;br/&gt;of groups. Prasad's goal is to investigate these
groups and also find a&lt;br/&gt;conceptually better proof of the centrality in
the known cases. He will&lt;br/&gt;continue his collaboration with A.S.
Rapinchuk on this project. Another&lt;br/&gt;topic on which Prasad will work on
is the representation theory of&lt;br/&gt;reductive p-adic groups. Prasad has
been interested in classification of&lt;br/&gt;irreducible admissible
representations where his goal is to obtain a&lt;br/&gt;classification in terms
of theory of "types". A begining in this&lt;br/&gt;direction, for general
reductive groups, was made in his joint work with&lt;br/&gt;Allen Moy--the
geometric techniques which they introduced in&lt;br/&gt;representation theory
have turned out to be very useful. Prasad plans to&lt;br/&gt;continue his
research towards classification of
admissible&lt;br/&gt;representations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The set of
symmetries of many geometric and number theoretic objects form&lt;br/&gt;a
group. For studying these geometric and number theoretic objects, it
is&lt;br/&gt;important to study their groups of symmetries. Prasad has been
studying&lt;br/&gt;problems related to these groups and their subgroups. These
problems have&lt;br/&gt;number theoretic or geometric origins and therefore
their solution will&lt;br/&gt;have important applications to these areas. Prasad
proposes to work on the&lt;br/&gt;Kneser-Tits and Margulis-Platonov problems
which provide conjectural&lt;br/&gt;description of normal subgroups; both the
problems have been settled for a&lt;br/&gt;large class of groups but some
challenging cases remain open. Prasad also&lt;br/&gt;proposes to continue his
work on the famous congruence subgroup problem&lt;br/&gt;where he and his
collaborators Raghunathan and Rapinchuk have made many&lt;br/&gt;important
contributions. In another direction, Prasad proposes to work on&lt;br/&gt;the
representation theory of reductive p-adic groups. Representations
of&lt;br/&gt;these groups arise naturally in various contexts and their study is
an&lt;br/&gt;important component of the Langlands program in modern number
theory. The&lt;br/&gt;geometric methods which Prasad and Allen Moy introduced in
the area have&lt;br/&gt;turned out to be very useful. Prasad proposes to refine
these methods to&lt;br/&gt;give a complete classification of all admissible
representations.&lt;br/&gt;