* 0400877
* Arithmetic Algebraic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Douglas Ulmer, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2008
* USD 129,750.00

Abstract of DMS 0400877&lt;br/&gt;PI: Douglas Ulmer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr.
Ulmer proposes to work on three projects ultimately related to
the&lt;br/&gt;arithmetic of abelian varieties over function fields. In the
first&lt;br/&gt;project, he plans to prove that there exist abelian varieties
of&lt;br/&gt;arbitrary dimension whose L-functions vanish to arbitrarily high
order&lt;br/&gt;at the center of their critical strips. This generalizes his
previous&lt;br/&gt;work on elliptic curves. In the second and third projects, he
plans&lt;br/&gt;to generalize his previous construction of local points on
the&lt;br/&gt;universal elliptic curve over a modular curve to the context of
an&lt;br/&gt;arbitrary non-isotrivial elliptic curve over a function field and
to&lt;br/&gt;study the extent to which this construction may be used to
construct&lt;br/&gt;global points. This research is intimately connected with
the&lt;br/&gt;conjecture of Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer in the function field
context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Ulmer works in the general area of
Arithmetical Algebraic&lt;br/&gt;Geometry, an area of fundamental mathematics
that was previously&lt;br/&gt;thought to be beyond application. However, it is
now known to be of&lt;br/&gt;crucial importance to many important technologies,
such as coding&lt;br/&gt;theory and cryptography, which affect our everyday
lives. CD and DVD&lt;br/&gt;players, mobile telephones, and secure internet
communication all rely&lt;br/&gt;on mathematics originally created in the
pursuit of&lt;br/&gt;questions in arithmetical algebraic geometry. The field
also has deep&lt;br/&gt;and mysterious links to other areas of science such as
quantum field&lt;br/&gt;theory. Dr. Ulmer's work does not appear to have
immediate&lt;br/&gt;application, but his knowledge of this area provides a
broad&lt;br/&gt;perspective on modern mathematics and forms the basis for
many&lt;br/&gt;education, outreach, and training activities which he is engaged
in.&lt;br/&gt;These include the Southwestern Center for Arithmetical
Algebraic&lt;br/&gt;Geometry, initiatives in training and mentoring of new
graduate&lt;br/&gt;students, and numerous undergraduate research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;