* 0400829
* A DNA Sequencer, Real-time PCR Machine, Gradient Thermal Cycler, and Auxiliary Equipment for Research and Training in Molecular Evolution and Ecology
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* John True, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 05/31/2006
* USD 159,113.00

This award provides partial support for the purchase of a 16-capillary DNA
sequencer, real-time PCR machine, gradient PCR thermal cycler, and data analysis
system - all to be housed in a shared facility. The instrumentation will be used
in studies of molecular-level variation in nature, and the evolutionary
implications of that variation. Several capabilities that are crucial to current
evolutionary and ecological research programs will be developed, including: (1)
analysis of highly polymorphic genotypes (microsatellite, SNP, AFLP, TRFLP); (2)
quantitative PCR analysis of gene expression; and (3) DNA sequencing. The six
major users of the instrumentation represent a diverse set of research programs
in which understanding the basis of biological diversity, through the use of
these molecular tools, is a principal goal. In addition, the inclusion of a
sample preparation facility and center for computational analysis of molecular
data will enable many other Stony Brook research groups to address important
ecological and evolutionary questions with novel forms of data. Establishment of
this central laboratory for molecular studies of adaptation and diversity will
also have significant broader impacts on life sciences research and teaching at
Stony Brook and in the larger community. First, the instrumentation will
substantially augment the training capabilities of our department and enable new
interactions and collaborations among biologists throughout the Stony Brook
community. Additionally, the laboratory will be used for undergraduate training
in basic molecular biology techniques, vital to many careers in the life
sciences. This represents a novel and tangible benefit to the Stony Brook
undergraduate community, which is one the most diverse in the nation. Finally,
by synergizing with the activities of the Long Island Group for Advancing
Science Education (LIGASE), the proposed facility will augment outreach to local
K-12 students and educators, representing a new and important means for
presenting ecological and evolutionary ideas and information to the public at
large.