* 0400679
* Certain Algebraic Varieties Related to Finite and Affine Flag Varieties
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Venkatramani Lakshmibai, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2007
* USD 108,080.00

Flag varieties form an important class of varieties in Algebraic Geometry.
Schubert varieties form an important class of subvarieties inside flag
varieties. The principal investigator developed a ``Standard Monomial Theory"
(henceforth abbreviated SMT) in collaboration with Musili and Seshadri for flag
varieties and their Schubert varieties. This theory has led to very many
important geometric & representation-theoretic consequences. The principal
investigator's recent research shows that once there is a good SMT for an
algebraic variety, much information could be inferred about the variety (using
SMT); for instance, SMT throws light on the degenerations of the variety. The
degenerations of a variety in turn facilitate the understanding of the geometric
aspects of the variety. This technique has been used very recently in the area
of Complexity Theory in Computer Science, esp., in the context of the ``P not
equal to NP-conjecture". There is yet another interesting and important class of
algebraic varieties related to Flag varieties, namely, the class of orbit
closures for the Adjoint action of a semi-simple algebraic group on the variety
of nilpotent elements in its Lie algebra. While there are very many interesting
algebraic varieties - the determinantal varieties, Ladder determinantal
varieties, quiver varieties - which get identified in a natural way with certain
open subsets in Schubert varieties, the above-mentioned orbit closures (and more
generally orbit closures arising from cyclic quivers) get identified in a
natural way with certain open subsets in affine Schubert varieties, i.e.,
Schubert varieties in the generalized flag variety associated to a Kac-Moody
algebra. The research project considered in this proposal aims at developing a
SMT for the above-mentioned orbit closures via the fore-said relationship with
Schubert varieties ; it also aims at developing a SMT for other interesting
classes of varieties - large Schubert varieties, Spherical varieties etc., as
well as determining in an explicit way the multiplicative structure of the
equivariant Grothendieck ring and the equivariant cohomology ring of flag
varieties.



Modern Algebraic Geometry (developed in the later half of the 20-th century) has
proved itself (beyond any doubts) to be indispensable in various disciplines
within Mathematics as well as in other areas outside Mathematics: Examples:
Topology, Representation Theory, Combinatorics (within Mathematics). The modern
Quantum Theory (especially Quantum & Conformal field theories) in Physics.
Robotics, Complexity Theory, Computer vision in Computer Science. This proposal
is at the cross-roads of Commutative Algebra, Algebraic Geometry, Combinatorics
& Representation-theory. The varieties studied in this proposal form an
important class of varieties in Algebraic Geometry; for example, the theory of
Schubert varieties (over finite fields) is closely linked to Coding theory. The
principal investigator believes that this proposal is bound to have significant
impacts on the above-mentioned disciplines.