* 0400298
* GOALI: Scanning Probe Recognition Microscopy
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Alan Rice, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Shaochen Chen
* 07/31/2008
* USD 391,000.00

The family of Scanning Probe Microscopy techniques has revolutionized studies of
semiconductors, polymers and nanostructures, with recent dramatic impacts in
biomedicine. The key capability of Scanning Probe Microscopy is that, through a
controlled combination of feedback loops, detectors and piezoelectric actuation,
it enables direct investigations of atomic to nanometer scale phenomena. Due to
positioning and actuation issues, current Scanning Probe Microscopy systems do
not have the power to reliably return to and directly interact with a specific
nanoscale feature of interest. The present research will add this important
capability to the already powerful Scanning Probe Microscope family. Our key is
to give the Scanning Probe Microscope system itself the power to return to a
specific nanoscale feature of interest by recognizing the way that site feels to
the Scanning Probe Microscope system rather than by the way the site looks to a
human operator. It is a recognition-driven and learning approach, made possible
through combining Scanning Probe Microscope piezoelectric implementation with
on-line image processing and dynamically adaptive learning algorithms. The human
operator is eliminated except for high-end commands; therefore this approach has
tremendous potential for widespread implementation. This approach works with the
interaction sensing capability of a Scanning Probe Microscope, which has
inherently nanometer to atomic resolution. The technique is named Scanning Probe
Recognition Microscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful implementation of
Scanning Probe Recognition Microscopy will bring all nanotechnology fields a new
level of investigative capability and ease of use. The impact could be
especially significant in enabling direct nano-biomedical investigations, since
key issues in biology and medicine revolve around regulatory signaling cascades
that are triggered through the interaction of specific macromolecules with
specific surface receptor sites. The results of applications of Scanning Probe
Recognition Microscopy in nano-medicine could be a revolution in newly available
direct information from nanoscale living units investigated under nearly life-
like conditions. Scanning Probe Recognition Microscopy is co-funded through the
NSF GOALI program (Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry). A key
element in its success is a strategic partnership with Veeco Metrology /Digital
Instruments, the leading developer and manufacturer of Scanning Probe Microscope
systems world wide. The partnership will provide a very direct path to make the
Scanning Probe Recognition Microscopy capability quickly available throughout
the nanotechnology communities, and a unique opportunity for the students
involved in the research, which will prepare them to become leaders within the
next generation of nanotechnology researchers. &lt;br/&gt;