* 0400507
* Combinatorial Structures for Permutation Enumeration and Diagonal Harmonic Modules
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Jeffrey Remmel, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2007
* USD 105,000.00

The PI plans to pursue research in three different areas. First the PI
&lt;br/&gt;plans to extend the work of Brenti, Remmel, Beck, Langley, Wagner and
&lt;br/&gt;others who have used certain homomorphisms from the ring of symmetric
&lt;br/&gt;functions to a polynomial ring F[x], for an appropriately chosen
field F, &lt;br/&gt;to find new generating functions for permutations
statistics. Recently &lt;br/&gt;discovered methods by the PI and his students
have produced many new &lt;br/&gt;applications of these methods which allow one
to find generating functions &lt;br/&gt;for 321-avoiding permutations,
alternating permutations, and permutation &lt;br/&gt;enumeration statistics for
various subgroups of the wreath product of a &lt;br/&gt;finite group with the
symmetric group. The PI plans to systemize and extend &lt;br/&gt;such methods.
Second, the PI plans to study the combinatorics of various &lt;br/&gt;submodules
of the ring of diagonal harmonics which is intimately connected &lt;br/&gt;with
the theory of Macdonald polynomials. The work of Garsia, Haiman,
&lt;br/&gt;Haglund, Loehr and the PI have lead to combinatorial interpretations
of the &lt;br/&gt;Hilbert series and the generating function for the occurrences
of the &lt;br/&gt;alternating representation in the character of such submodules
under the &lt;br/&gt;diagonal action in terms of counting various classes of
labeled Dyck paths &lt;br/&gt;according to certain statistics. More recently,
Haiman, Haglund, Loehr, &lt;br/&gt;Remmel and Ulyanov have given a conjectured
combinatorial interpretation of &lt;br/&gt;the coefficient of a monomial
symmetric function in the Frobenius series of &lt;br/&gt;the ring of diagonal
harmonics. The goal of the PI's research in this area &lt;br/&gt;is to prove
some of these conjectures and to give a full combinatorial
&lt;br/&gt;interpretation of the Frobenius series of the ring of diagonal
harmonics. &lt;br/&gt;Finally the PI also plans to work on (p,q)-analogues of
rook theory and &lt;br/&gt;various extension of rook theory and the theory of
enumeration of spanning &lt;br/&gt;forests of various directed graphs studied by
Egecioglu, Williamson and the PI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is concerned
with various problems which arise in the study of &lt;br/&gt;algebraic
combinatorics. In particular, the goal of this project is to &lt;br/&gt;increase
our understanding of how various classical combinatorial &lt;br/&gt;structures
such as permutations, lattice paths, spanning trees and &lt;br/&gt;placements of
non-attaching rooks on generalized chess boards play a &lt;br/&gt;fundamental
role in helping us understand certain algebraic structures.
&lt;br/&gt;Conversely, in algebraic combinatorics, one wants to understand how
various &lt;br/&gt;algebraic structures can give new insights into the theory of
these &lt;br/&gt;classical combinatorial structures. The three main areas of
research &lt;br/&gt;proposed in this project, namely the theory of permutation
enumeration, the &lt;br/&gt;theory of the ring of diagaonal harmonics and rook
theory are all active &lt;br/&gt;areas of research were there is a beautiful
interplay between algebraic and &lt;br/&gt;combinatorial methods.&lt;br/&gt;