* 0400400
* Support of Travel to the 28th  International Congress of Psychology
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2004,12/31/2004
* Elaine Lawson, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 12/31/2004
* USD 20,000.00

The U.S. National Committee for IUPsyS is sponsoring a travel grant program to
partially support international travel for U.S. psychology graduate students and
early career scientists participating in the scientific program of the 28th
International Congress of Psychology, which will take place August 8-13, 2004,
in Beijing, China. This congress is considered the most important international
meeting on psychological science. This travel grant provides graduate students
and early career scientists, many of whom do not have the institutional funding
for such travel, an opportunity to present their science, learn of important new
advances in an international arena, and establish contacts for future
international collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;The travel grant program will be widely
publicized and open to all interested U.S. graduate students and early career
scientists whose research falls within the purview of the topics covered by NSF
funding programs, including those in psychology, linguistics, learning, and
development. Applicants must provide an abstract of their paper or poster and a
short nomination letter from their advisor or another faculty member
recommending their participation. The goal of the program is to maximize the
impact of U.S. graduate student researchers and early career scholars at the
meeting, as well as the impact of the meeting on those participants. In support
of this goal, the committee will balance the awards geographically and by
institution. Consideration will also be given to ensuring the representation of
American science with women and minorities. &lt;br/&gt;When ranking the
applicants, the screening subcommittee will consider: 1) the potential
contribution of each participant to the Congress and the return each will
receive from the Congress to apply to his/her research; 2) the quality and
timeliness of his or her paper or poster; 3) the need for travel grant money to
assure the individual's attendance; and 4) the expected ability of the
individual to increase his or her potential scientific productivity through
attendance. All successful applicants must provide a meaningful trip report
within two months after the Congress. The trip reports should feature benefits
that have accrued both to the grantees and to American psychological
science.&lt;br/&gt;