* 0400684
* A Plant Growth Facility for Enhancing Interdisciplinary Plant Science Research and Training at Virginia Tech
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Lynn Adler, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Nily R. Dan
* 08/31/2008
* USD 285,142.00

This award provides partial support for acquisition of 6 plant growth bays
(walk-in growth chambers) and three reach-in growth chambers that will benefit
ten plant science research groups. An existing bay is limited in capacity and in
the quality of its environmental controls. Existing reach-in chambers are
outdated and unreliable. This new plant growth facility will allow up to 6
simultaneous research projects to be independently conducted in the separate
walk-in bays. A long-term management plan for the new facility has been
developed, including a protocol for allocating space among researchers. Research
on topics including plant-animal interactions, root foraging behavior, evolution
of adaptive traits, cross-talk in the flavonoid biosynthesis pathway, and
signaling processes in plant-pathogen interactions will be enabled. Moreover,
the additional growth chamber space will improve the ability for research on
phenotypic plasticity of adaptive traits. The new growth facilities will lift a
severe constraint on the research productivity of plant scientists in the
Biology Department and foster interdisciplinary research with faculty of the
Virginia Bioinformatics Institute. The modernization of the plant growth
facility will also enrich the education and training of students by providing
increased research potential and experience with modern equipment. Increased
space for our teaching collection will improve our plant-based classes and
facilitate outreach activities with the broader community. &lt;br/&gt;