* 0400559
* Geography-Based Exposure Assessment for Urban Metals
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2003,10/31/2005
* Daniel Griffith, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 10/31/2005
* USD 322,054.00

Although lead is a naturally occurring element present in many parts of the
environment, human activities have dramatically increased lead levels in many
locales, especially older parts of urban areas. Whereas lead normally
constitutes about 0.002 percent of the Earth's crust, in cities, soil lead
levels can be from five to 25 times as great. The heightened presence of lead
translates into significantly increased exposure to lead contamination among
urban residents, especially children. The average background lead level of the
U.S. population is 2.8 micrograms per deciliter, but in many cities, substantial
numbers of children have baseline blood lead levels in excess of 10 micrograms
per deciliter. This research project will develop new methods for exploring
spatial dimensions of pediatric lead poisoning. A multidisciplinary
investigative team will study spatial relationships among urban environmental
contaminants, the biogeochemical processes of their origin in soils and dust,
and the potential for adverse public health risks associated with human exposure
to them. A primary goal of this project is to quantitatively assess the
community health risks associated with exposure to soils and interior household
dusts that have been contaminated by heavy metals. A second major goal is to
determine the feasibility of carrying out such assessments through the use of
non-intrusive, ecological techniques. To accomplish these goals, the
investigators will develop a geography-based lead-exposure assessment model for
Syracuse, New York. Inputs to this model will be the blood lead monitoring
results, population and housing census data, heavy-metal measurements for soils
and dust, and other georeferenced data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
make a number of contributions to the spatial analysis literature. For example,
it will extend small area estimation techniques to a nesting situation and
establish a trade-off curve between effective sample size and accuracy/precision
of sample statistics. It will improve understanding of geographic dimensions of
lead dispersal, and it will test new approaches for monitoring contamination.
This project also will have a significant policy impacts for the public health
arena. In particular, it will provide a widely applicable, cost-effective,
childhood lead poisoning assessment tool for urban environments; it will foster
a geographically explicit interpretive framework for evaluating intervention
measures; and it will help contribute to improvements in EPA exposure modeling
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;