* 0400945
* Simplified Versions of Hilbert 16th Problem and Related Topics in Complex Dynamics and Analytic Foliations
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Yulij Ilyashenko, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2007
* USD 138,515.00

The project deals with numerous topics in the theory of planar differential
equations related to Hilbert's 16th problem and continues two previous projects.
It considers both real and complex equations. There are two major achievements
in the work over the previous project that will be developed in the current one.
First, rather unexpectedly, the Kupka-Smale (KS) property was proved for
polynomial automorphisms both of real and complex planes. The proof is based on
"persistence theorems" and "Petrovski-Landis (PL) strategy". Generally speaking,
persistence theorems claim the possibility of global extension of some geometric
properties of polynomial dynamical systems over the whole parameter space. PL
strategy makes use of persistence theorems to prove or disprove such geometric
properties. New persistence theorems for heteroclinic points of polynomial
automorphisms of a complex space are expected. Genericity of Kupka-Smale
property for such automorphisms is suggested as a consequence. The main tool
would be the PL strategy. Another achievement is an upper estimate by Glutsyuk
and the PI of the number of zeros of Abelian integrals both in real and complex
domains. This estimate is the best amidst other estimates of this kind due to
Yakovenko and his students. On the other hand, it provides an approach to the
complete solution of the restricted version of the Infinitesimal Hilbert 16th
Problem. Together with the PL strategy, this gives an approach to the
Infinitesimal Hilbert 16th Problem itself: give an upper bound of the number of
real zeros of an integral of a polynomial one-form over the ovals of another
polynomial in the plane. The project suggests numerous problems on the
persistence properties for polynomial dynamical systems, simultaneous
uniformization and topological properties of polynomial foliations. Study of the
relations between these branches of the theory is an important part of the
project. Moreover, new simultaneous uniformization theorems, together with new
generic properties of polynomial and analytic foliation of the complex space are
expected. Theory of dynamical systems is split into two parts: multidimensional
systems (realm of chaos); two-dimensional systems (realm of order). Hilbert 16th
problem is a central one in the theory of two-dimensional systems. The problem
itself persists the efforts of mathematicians during more than a hundred years.
Centennial history of investigations related to Hilbert 16th problem is reviewed
in a survey article by the PI published in the Bulletin of the AMS in 2002. The
survey contains, in particular, many results of the previous NSF projects, as
well as problems that are subject to the current project. Note that two-
dimensional dynamical systems provide models for various problems in physics,
engineering and biology (predator-prey models). Understanding of real two-
dimensional dynamics is therefore a subject of general scientific interest. On
the other hand, study of complex extensions of real dynamical systems provides
important new information about real systems and is interesting in itself.

