* 0400155
* Hybrid ARQ Symbol Mapping In Digital Wireless Communication Systems Based on the Quadratic 3-Dimensional Assignment Problem (Q3AP)
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Monique Guignard-Spielberg, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Robert L. Smith
* 08/31/2009
* USD 365,168.00

This grant provides funding for the development of algorithms for efficient
solution of the Quadratic 3-dimensional Assignment Problem (Q3AP), a difficult
combinatorial optimization problem that arises in the design of a broad class of
sophisticated digital wireless communication systems. The first effort will be
improving a branch-and-bound algorithm based on the level-1 Reformulation
Linearization Technique (RLT) formulation. Considerations to be addressed
include computational strategies, choice of branching rules, frequency of bound
computations, and the methods for data storage and retrieval. Additionally,
investigations of heuristic solution methods including Tabu Search, Iterated
Local Search, and Simulated Annealing will be pursued. Two focal points of this
project are code parallelization and communication application generation.
Parallelizing will allow larger problem instances to be solved, but will also
permit rapid experimentation with alternatives to the sequential structure of
enumerative and heuristic algorithms. Communication applications will be
generated to assure adequate algorithm performance
testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Q3AP is one of the most difficult
combinatorial optimization problems yet posed. If successful, the Q3AP will be
solved for practical problem instances involving a symbol-mapping diversity
scheme for wireless communication nodes that employ higher-order modulations
such as phase-shift keying (PSK) or quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM). By
varying the bit-to-symbol mapping in hybrid Automatic Repeat request (ARQ)
packet (re) transmission by each communication node, the frame error rate and
the average number of packet retransmissions will be dramatically reduced,
thereby enhancing the capabilities of the target communication network. Wireless
sensor networks typically operate in noisy, channel-distorting, and
interference-laden environments and thus are targets for the optimizations
pursued. The practicality of this framework becomes evident, as the optimal
mapping only needs to be found for various signal to noise ratio (SNR) under a
few common fading scenarios. Once determined, any practical system can implement
the resulting optimal mapping through a simple lookup
table.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;