* 0400416
* Materials Processing for ZnO
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2007
* Stephen Pearton, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 03/31/2007
* USD 245,477.00

This project focuses on two research areas related to utilization of ZnO as a
technological mate-rial-ohmic contact formation, and the exploration and
potential exploitation of ferromagnetism in doped ZnO. Greater understanding of
fundamental materials science associated with stable, low resistance ohmic
contacts to ZnO; plasma chemistries for dry etching of ZnO; implanta-
tion/isolation needed in selective area doping for contact formation and for
intra-device electrical and optical isolation; and the role of hydrogen on
electrical and magnetic properties of ZnO is sought. Rationale for the project
includes potential ZnO application to UV light emitters, varistors, transparent
high power electronics, surface acoustic wave devices, piezoelectric
transducers, gas-sensing and as a window material for display and solar cells.
It has advantages relative to GaN because of its availability in bulk, single
crystal form and its larger exciton binding energy (~60meV, cf. ~25meV for GaN).
In addition, ZnO is lattice-matched to InGaN at an In composition of ~22%,
raising the possibility of integration of the two materials to provide enhanced
functionality. This may have applications in high-density data storage systems,
solid-state lighting (where white light is obtained from phosphors excited by
blue or UV light-emitting diodes), se-cure communications and biodetection. The
properties of ZnO compare well with those of GaN. ZnO is a direct bandgap
semiconductor with Eg = 3.2 eV. The bandgap can be tuned via divalent
substitution on the cation site. Cd substitution leads to a reduction in the
bandgap to ~ 3.0 eV. Substituting Mg on the Zn site can increase the bandgap to
approximately 4.0 eV while still maintaining the wurtzite structure. The
electron Hall mobility in ZnO single crystals is on the order of 200 cm2/V-sec
at room temperature. The electron mobility is slightly lower than for GaN, but
ZnO has a higher saturation velocity. %%% This project addresses basic research
issues in a topical area of materials science with significant technological
relevance, and places emphasis on the integration of research and education. At
least two undergraduates will be included in this project. Persons from under-
represented groups (women, minorities) will be particularly encouraged to
participate. Additionally, as part of this grant activity, the PI will host 2
students attending the U. FL Student Science Training Program, which is run
during the summer by the U. FL Center for Precollegiate Education and Training.
This program, now in its 41st year, brings in 10th and llth grade students to
actively participate in science and engineering research. The Center for
Precollegiate Education and Training at the University of Florida also runs an
NSF Teacher Research Update Experience (TRUE) program during the summer. The PI
will present a lecture on ZnO at the program and will collaborate with
interested teachers to translate the research experience here into modules,
which can be taken back to the middle and high schools. ***