* 0400461
* Moduli spaces for wildly ramified covers of curves
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Rachel Pries, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2007
* USD 80,878.00

Project Summary for award DMS-0400461 of Pries

The theory of Galois covers of the complex projective line (Riemann sphere) with
given branch locus is well-understood; namely, one can describe the inertia
groups of such a cover with Riemann's Existence Theorem and study families of
such covers via their moduli spaces, which are called Hurwitz spaces. These
techniques extend to covers of the projective line over an algebraically closed
field k as long as the ramification is tame. However, if the ramification is
wild, i.e. if the characteristic of the field k divides the order of some
inertia group, new phenomena occur which are much less understood. There are
major open problems involving the inertia groups and deformation theory of
wildly ramified covers. The PI proposes to study wildly ramified covers of
curves, with the goal of answering some of these problems; in particular, the PI
expects to compute the dimension of the deformation space of a cover in terms of
its ramification invariants. The PI also proposes to construct moduli spaces for
wildly ramified Galois covers of curves in characteristic p and to investigate
some of their properties.

Galois theory has high appeal to a broad audience. Several open problems in this
area can be explained to non-mathematicians and the topic connects diverse areas
of math. Galois theory arose classically as a means of understanding symmetries
of equations and of classifying extensions of the rational numbers. Some of the
early applications were that it is impossible to trisect an angle, double the
volume of a cube, or solve a quintic equation. The PI proposes to develop a new
course on Galois theory, to introduce graduate students to the fundamental
background and active research problems of this topic. The PI would like to
continue to lead research programs for students; the program which the PI led in
2002 motivated several students (including students from underrepresented
groups) to pursue graduate study in mathematics. An application of Galois theory
in characteristic $p$ to data-transfer codes was recently discovered. These
codes can be constructed using curves of low degree which have many points
defined over finite fields. The PI would like to develop the connection between
Galois theory and coding theory further. Finally, the PI will continue
collaborating with mathematicians in Germany and New York and will disseminate
the results from this research through conferences and papers.

