* 0400445
* SGER:     Cost Effective Retrofit for Blast Mitigation
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2004,04/30/2005
* Arup Maji, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 04/30/2005
* USD 64,914.00

Abstract The proposed research will investigate the feasibility of using Wire
Mesh Reinforced Inorganic Matrix (WMRIM) as blast-resistant retrofits for
unreinforced masonry walls. The proposed work is part of full-scale blast tests
based on Glass Fiber Reinforced Polymer (GFRP) retrofits. Through full-scale
blast testing, we will experimentally validate a methodology for designing WMRIM
retrofits as a cost- effective solution to blast resistant retrofits. The
results of this research will enable retrofit techniques to be designed based on
simple static tests on structural components rather than more expensive blast
tests on full-scale structures. The hypothesis of the research is that the
initial blast wave causes significant damage to masonry walls. This phenomenon
and the subsequent stiffening of the wall due to arch action need to be
characterized to adequately model blast effect on structures. The key elements
of this research are: i) Wire-mesh Reinforced Inorganic Matrix (WMRIM ii) Static
Flexure Tests and iii) Blast Pressure Response Model Broader Impact
Approximately 40% of the budget will leverage planned full-scale blast tests by
EMRTC to obtain test data for our WMRP retrofits. Over 70% of the remaining
budget for this research will directly support graduate student training. The
University of New Mexico is a minority institution (Hispanic and American
Indian). The PI has always had a significant ( 40%) number of minority graduate
students in his research program. The full-scale explosive test facilities are
located in Socorro, 1 hour drive from the University of New Mexico campus. This
synergy couldallow the university to build a strong reputation in the design and
testing of hardened (blast-resistant) structures and provide needed information
for blast resistant design.

