* 0400474
* Determination of Nitride Semiconductor Parameters Using Light-Induced Transient Gratings
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2004,06/30/2007
* Michael Shur, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Olufemi Olowolafe
* 06/30/2007
* USD 150,000.00

We propose experimental and theoretical investigations of light
generated&lt;br/&gt;electrons and holes in GaN-based ternary and quaternary
materials and&lt;br/&gt;devices, including compounds with band gap in UV range.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will use Light-Induced Transient Gratings (LITG)
system, which exploits&lt;br/&gt;nondestructive techniques including the quasi-
steady-state and time-resolved&lt;br/&gt;photoluminescence spectroscopy in the
temperature range from 8 K to 600 K&lt;br/&gt;under laser excitation at
different wavelengths. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Our studies will include studies
of luminescence at different temperatures,&lt;br/&gt;excitation intensities and
wavelengths, time-resolved luminescence,&lt;br/&gt;investigations of stimulated
emission, and LITG measurements. This will&lt;br/&gt;allow us to determine
carrier densities, lifetimes, diffusion coefficients,&lt;br/&gt;and surface
recombination rates (mapping large area wafers) throughout the&lt;br/&gt;visible
range into UV.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Comparison of results obtained by the new
technique based on LITG with the&lt;br/&gt;results of the conventional
luminescence spectroscopy will provide a new&lt;br/&gt;insight into the
problems, which are of the primary importance for&lt;br/&gt;exploitation of the
wide-band-gap nitrides in light emitting and
detecting&lt;br/&gt;devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Physics of nitride-based wide
band gap semiconductors is dramatically&lt;br/&gt;different in many key areas
from that of more conventional semiconductors,&lt;br/&gt;such as silicon or
GaAs. This is linked to a different (and more complex)&lt;br/&gt;symmetry that
allows for spontaneous polarization. Determining basic&lt;br/&gt;semiconductor
parameters for nitrides and relating them to the materials&lt;br/&gt;growth and
fabrication process, where appropriate, is crucial for developing&lt;br/&gt;new
wide band semiconductor science and for supporting industry
with&lt;br/&gt;applications ranging from solid state lighting to ultra high
power radars,&lt;br/&gt;from water purification to biological hazard
detection.&lt;br/&gt;