* 0400938
* Electro-Optic Studies of Charge Density Wave Conductors
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Joseph Brill, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 06/30/2009
* USD 329,036.00

Charge-density-wave (CDW) materials in which the CDW can be depinned with a
small electric field serve as model systems studies of the interactions of a
periodic medium with quenched disorder. This single-investigator award supports
the continued investigation of an unusual electro-optic effect, associated with
CDW polarization in an applied field. The effect was discovered by the P.I.'s
group several years ago. This effect is unlike conventional electro-optic
effects. It occurs over a wide spectral range (at infrared energies below the
CDW gap), occurs at very low electric fields (less than 0.1 V/cm, corresponding
to the fields needed to depin the CDW), and varies spatially within the sample,
changing sign in the sample's center. The emphasis of this project will be to
more fully characterize the effect with the aim of obtaining a better
understanding of its underlying physics. In the process an increased
understanding of CDW interactions with phonons and uncondensed electrons, and
the dynamics of CDW polarization will be obtained. Materials to be studied are
the quasi-one dimensional CDW conductors tantalum trisulfide, niobium
triselenide, and potassium molybdate ("blue bronze"). Electro-reflectance and
electro-transmittance experiments at the University of Kentucky, carried out
with tunable diode lasers, will be complemented with measurements at the
Advanced Light Source, providing a broad educational experience for the students
working on the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Materials whose optical properties
are modified by application of a voltage are known as electro-optic materials.
They are the basis of optical communications and therefore are of increasing
technological importance. Recently, the P.I.'s group at the University of
Kentucky discovered that "charge-density-wave" (CDW) conductors, materials in
which the electron density oscillates with a typical wavelength of one nanometer
(one billionth of a meter), exhibit a number of very unusual electro-optic
properties. In particular, voltage dependent changes in the transmittance and
reflectance of electro-magnetic waves occur over a very wide infrared spectral
range. These changes occur at very small voltages (e.g. 0.01 V across a 1 mm
long sample), and vary with position within the sample.. This award supports a
project to continue characterization of the effect in a few CDW materials, with
the goal of better understanding its underlying physics and the properties of
CDW's in general. Experiments will be carried out using tunable infrared diode
lasers, representing one of the few applications of these devices for solid
state spectroscopy. These studies will be complemented with experiments at the
Advanced Light Source at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, providing a
broad instructional experience for the students working on the
project.&lt;br/&gt;