* 0400718
* Calculus of Variations in L-infinity, Fully Nonlinear Subelliptic Equations on Carnot Groups, Analysis of Biharmonic Maps and Harmonic Maps
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Changyou Wang, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2007
* USD 72,340.00

&lt;br/&gt;Proposal DMS 0400718&lt;br/&gt;Title: Calculus of variations in
L-infinity, fully nonlinear&lt;br/&gt;subelliptic equations in Carnot groups,
analysis of biharmonic and&lt;br/&gt;harmonic maps&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI:
Changyou Wang, University of
Kentucky&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal
consists of problems in four main areas. In part 1,&lt;br/&gt;the PI plans to
continue his study on analytic issues of calculus&lt;br/&gt;of variations in
L-infinity consisting of the relation between absolute&lt;br/&gt;minimizers of
L-infinity functionals and viscosity solutions of their&lt;br/&gt;Aronsson-Euler
equations which are fully nonlinear degenerate pdes,&lt;br/&gt;and uniqueness of
viscosity of Aronsson-Euler equations. In part 2,&lt;br/&gt;based on his recent
works on uniqueness of viscosity solutions to&lt;br/&gt;the subelliptic
infinity-Laplace equation on Carnot groups, the PI&lt;br/&gt;aims to establish
the comparison principle for fully nonlinear&lt;br/&gt;subelliptic pdes
including subelliptic Isaas-Bellman&lt;br/&gt;equations and horizontal Hessian
equations on Carnot-Caratheodory spaces.&lt;br/&gt;In part 3, the PI plans to
further study partial regularity of&lt;br/&gt;stationary biharmonic maps such as
the optimal size and possible&lt;br/&gt;structures of the singular set of
biharmonic maps and the heat flow&lt;br/&gt;of biharmonic maps in four dimension
and its applications.&lt;br/&gt;In part 4, the PI plans to continue his study on
weak&lt;br/&gt;sequential compactness and energy quantization of harmonic
maps&lt;br/&gt;and the heat flows of harmonic maps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed problems lie in the field of nonlinear pdes which&lt;br/&gt;provide
basic laws and play crucial roles in studying problems&lt;br/&gt;from analysis,
geometry, applied sciences. Variational problems of&lt;br/&gt;supernorm are not
only mathematically important but also of&lt;br/&gt;great practical interests.
There are many problems from control&lt;br/&gt;mechanisms, risk managements in
operation research, extreme value&lt;br/&gt;engineering where one must design
for the worst case&lt;br/&gt;(e.g. determine a control to minimize the cost
functional which is the&lt;br/&gt;maximum of a function). On the other hand,
since supremum norm&lt;br/&gt;functionals lack strong differentiability and
their associated pdes&lt;br/&gt;are degenerate fully nonlinear equations, many
new techniques must be&lt;br/&gt;developed for the study. Underlying many
physical phenomena is a least&lt;br/&gt;energy principle where certain
configurations or geometric shape are&lt;br/&gt;distinguished by having less
energy or area than competing objects.&lt;br/&gt;The nonlinear target
constraints often lead to singularities. For example,&lt;br/&gt;domain walls in
magnetized materials, point, curve, and surface&lt;br/&gt;defects in various
liquid crystal materials, and vortices in&lt;br/&gt;superconductivity. We need
to develop new mathematical structures&lt;br/&gt;and theories in order to
explain and predict such phenomena. The&lt;br/&gt;proposed study on harmonic
maps and biharmonic maps is certainly&lt;br/&gt;motivated by these
considerations. The research findings in these&lt;br/&gt;directions shall be
very important to our knowledge of second (or higher)&lt;br/&gt;order nonlinear
elliptic systems with borderline nonlinearities&lt;br/&gt;and many potential
applications as well.&lt;br/&gt;