* 0400451
* Motives and D-modules
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Spencer Bloch, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2008
* USD 288,476.00

DMS-0400451&lt;br/&gt;Spencer J. Bloch&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal focus
of this grant will be the period determinant, or global epsilon factor,
associated to a linear differential equation on a curve. This global epsilon
factor is analogous to the determinant of frobenius acting on cohomology of a
sheaf on a curve over a finite field. In both cases, the main result is a
product formula expressing the global factor as a product of local epsilon
factors depending on the choice of a meromorphic differential form. The
investigator will focus on analogies between these two theories. In particular,
he will consider whether there exists a Langlands style correspondence between
irregular formal connections and suitable automorphic Gauss sum style D-modules
on reductive groups over power series fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many numbers
of mathematical interest, for example pi, arise as periods, i.e. suitable
integrals of rational functions. Others, for example e, apparently do not. If
one permits integrals where the integrand is not necessarily rational but
satisfies a linear differential equation with rational coefficients, one is led
to a larger collection of periods (including e). The modern theory of motives is
a powerful tool for studying periods of the first sort. This grant focuses on
what sort of motivic structure one might expect for periods of differential
equations. The main questions concern a surprising analogy between these periods
and certain numbers called local epsilon factors associated to the study of the
arithmetic of polynomial equations mod p.&lt;br/&gt;