* 0400467
* Core Models and Combinatorial Set Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Ernest Schimmerling, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2007
* USD 104,360.00

&lt;br/&gt;This is a mathematical research project on core models and their
fine&lt;br/&gt;structure, which is a subfield of set theory that was pioneered
by Jensen.&lt;br/&gt;Core models are generalizations of Goedel's constructible
universe, L,&lt;br/&gt;that arose in the the study of large cardinal axioms. The
field today&lt;br/&gt;builds on the fundamental discoveries of Dodd, Jensen,
Martin, Mitchell,&lt;br/&gt;Steel and Woodin. The project is on pure core model
theory as well as its&lt;br/&gt;interactions with other areas, such as
descriptive set theory and&lt;br/&gt;infinitary combinatorics. Several of the
research problems are on&lt;br/&gt;combinatorial principles such as Diamond and
Square, which were isolated&lt;br/&gt;by Jensen in his work on L. They are among
the most commonly used tools in&lt;br/&gt;set theoretic constructions and have
applications in neighboring fields&lt;br/&gt;such as model theory and topology.
Other research problems have their&lt;br/&gt;origins outside of core model
theory. These include open questions about&lt;br/&gt;descriptive set theory,
forcing, singular cardinal combinatorics and&lt;br/&gt;cardinal
invariants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The axioms of set theory are the foundation of
mathematics. Core model&lt;br/&gt;theory addresses some of the most fundamental
questions in set theory in&lt;br/&gt;direct and highly sophisticated ways. Ideas
are constantly exchanged&lt;br/&gt;between core model theory and other parts of
set theory. The research&lt;br/&gt;problems to be addressed in this project are
central in these respects. &lt;br/&gt;Some ask for further development of the
basic tools of core model theory,&lt;br/&gt;while others are about applications
to neighboring fields.&lt;br/&gt;