* 0400168
* Collaborative Proposal: Manufacturing of Nanocrystalline Bulk Materials by Field Activated Sintering
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Antonios Zavaliangos, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Shaochen Chen
* 07/31/2008
* USD 199,244.00

A scientific framework will be established for field processing of nanosize
particulate materials. In particular, a detailed theoretical-experimental
program will be pursued with specific goals to: (a) evaluate and clarify the
interdependence of material properties, geometry of microstructure and
processing parameters of nanosize powders, (b) quantify the conduction of
electric current through sintering nanopowder compacts and relate them to
manufacturing and properties, and (c) develop a process design/characterization
methodology for this technology that is applicable to nanocrystalline materials
for large and net shape parts.&lt;br/&gt;This project will: (a) generate
fundamental knowledge of the role of size scale in field processing, (b)
elucidate specific mechanisms responsible for the enhanced performance of field
sintering, (c) provide a rational basis for process design and optimization of
this process, (d) provide guidance for the development of new models for design
of complex shape processing in terms of optimization of current application, as
well as die design. In addition, we will generate sizable specimens of
nanocrystalline materials that will be extensively characterized for structure,
defects and mechanical properties.&lt;br/&gt;Structural materials with grain
size less than 100 nm are characterized by unusually high strength, hardness and
wear resistance, as well as good fatigue resistance. This project focuses on the
manufacturing and characterization of bulk nanocrystalline materials produced by
field assisted sintering that can produce near net-shape bulk components
starting from nanosize powders, and retains the scale of the microstructure
during processing. &lt;br/&gt;The development of a scientific processing base
for manufacturing of bulk nanoscale materials will be a major step towards
commercialization of this exciting new class of materials which preserve
nanometric grain size and combine unusual properties. &lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative proposal between two Universities will provide a synergistic
effect to enhance both modeling performed at Drexel University and nano-process
understanding by experiments at University of California Davis.&lt;br/&gt;The
integration of education and training within the research program will be
achieved by developing a seminar course for Drexel and UCD students on
"Manufacturing of bulk nanomaterials". We will continue involving undergraduate
students in research by REU supplements. &lt;br/&gt;