* 0400102
* Collaborative Research:  The hydrogeological architecture of basaltic ocean crust: CORK experiments for the initial IODP expedition on the flank of the Juan de Fuca Ridge
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2010
* Hans Jannasch, Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Rodey Batiza
* 01/31/2010
* USD 304,920.00

Title: The Hydrogeologic Architecture of Basaltic Oceanic Crust: CORK
Experiments for the Initial IODP Expedition to the Flank of the Juan de Fuca
Ridge

PI/Institution: Keir Becker, University of Miami-RSMAS; Earl Davis, Pacific
Geoscience Center; Geoff Wheat, University of Alaska, Fairbanks; Hans Jannasch,
Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute

Abstract:

The eastern flank of the Juan de Fuca spreading ridge is among the best studied
sites for understanding crustal hydrothermal processes in a ridge-flank
environment. The researchers seek to resolve primary questions about this
hydrogeologic system through the installation of new geophysical and geochemical
monitoring equipment during a summer 2004 expedition of the Integrated Ocean
Drilling Program (IODP) and through later submersible visits to the borehole
observatories to download data and recover fluid samples. To monitor pressure
and temperature, CORKs that permit isolation of multiple zones within the
formation will be deployed in two existing Juan de Fuca boreholes and a new IODP
borehole. The data acquired in these closely-spaced boreholes will constrain the
three-dimensional hydrogeologic structure of highly hetereogeneous and fractured
oceanic crust. Following the CORK installations in mid-2004, the researchers
will use a submersible platform to retrieve data and fluid samples during visits
in 2005 and 2007. During these submersible operatins, data will also be
downloaded from 3 other existing CORKs in the area (ODP holes 1024C, 1025C, and
857D).