* 0400958
* Extending the Langlands-Shahidi Program to the non-generic spectrum and related problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* David Goldberg, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2008
* USD 120,000.00

Abstract for award DMS-0400958 of Goldberg

The primary goal of this project is to extend the Langlands-Shahidi method to
non-generic cusp forms of certain classical groups. This is joint work with S.
Friedberg. Our plan is to use Bessel models to play the role Whittaker models
play in the generic case. This work should lead in the direction of establishing
the automorphic transfer of cusp forms from classical to general linear groups,
generalizing the generic case established by Cogdell - Kim - Piatetski-Shapiro -
Shahidi. It should also allow for the completion of the work of Jiang - Soudry
on the local Langlands correspondence for special orthogonal groups of odd
dimension. Even establishing the transfer in low rank cases would give
significant results. For example, we anticipate results on Hilbert-Modular forms
with trivial central character from the most primitive example. In the course of
this project we expect to address the local theory for the Archimedean case, as
well as refining our earlier results in the non-Archimedean case. Additional
goals of this project are to understand the poles of intertwining operators for
maximal parabolic subgroups of quasi-split reductive groups over non-Archimedean
fields (joint with F. Shahidi), construction of types, in the sense of Bushnell
- Kutzko for the non-cuspidal spectrum of classical groups over non-Archimedean
fields (joint with P. Kutzko and S. Stevens), and understanding reducibility of
parabolically induced representations of Spin groups over non-Archimedean fields
via Knapp - Stein theory.

Among the most powerful results in mathematics are those that display a
connection between seemingly disparate ideas. These connections tend to improve
our understanding of both ideas, and are interesting both as a matter of
philosophy and application. For example, the power of Calculus lies not in our
understanding of differential and integral calculus separately, but in the
connection between the two via the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus. This is what
lends the subject to the myriad applications which have impacted upon society,
but also makes the subject a great achievement in human thought. This project is
designed to address certain problems within what is known as the Langlands
Program, which seeks to unify three major areas within mathematics. Namely,
Number Theory, Harmonic Analysis, and Algebraic Geometry. Our work concentrates
on one aspect of the conjectural connection between the first two areas.
Tremendous progress has been made in recent years, and we hope to contribute to
furthering our understanding of these subjects. This project will have broader
impact not only through its contribution to mathematics (and more specifically
number theory), but through raising the level of research at a public university
with a diverse student population.

