* 0400187
* Integrating Theory and Methods for Operational Performance Assessment
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Wen-Chih Chen, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 08/31/2007
* USD 100,000.00

This grant supports research on innovative approaches to assessing relative
efficiency of industrial operations and identifying best practices. The
assessment approach simultaneously considers all the important resources
consumed and all the important products or services produced, in an analysis of
a single operation compared to the best practical performance estimated from a
large sample of similar operations. The method is based on economic production
theory and requires careful specification of the resources and products common
to all operations in an industry segment. The benchmarking approach utilizes the
relative efficiency assessments of a large sample of operations, along with
their potential explanatory attributes. The benchmarking method looks for
statistical correlations between attributes and relative efficiencies, and
requires both careful specification of the explanatory attributes and
application of statistical methods. Both assessment and benchmarking methods
will be deployed for experimentation using readily available internet
technologies, and a focused case study will be performed for publishing
warehouses.

If successful, the immediate practical impact is to provide firms in an industry
a fast and economical method to determine their overall efficiency relative to
other firms in their industry, and also to identify "best practices" within
their industry. In the case of warehousing, for example, preliminary results
show an average relative efficiency of only 73 percent in an industry accounting
for 2.5 percent of GDP. If a broader deployment of best practices could improve
the industry relative efficiency to only 80 percent, the potential savings
approaches $25 billion per year. The theoretical impacts take several forms.
First is the creation of a unique data resource upon which a better
understanding of operational modeling can be developed. In the case of
warehousing, such a model would begin to associate specific practices with
specific types of warehouse requirements. The research also will contribute to
the tools and methods for economic analysis of performance.