* 0400637
* Wireless Miniature Dosimeters for In-Situ Radiation Measurement
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,10/31/2005
* Babak Ziaie, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Vittal S. Rao
* 10/31/2005
* USD 140,000.00

Intellectual Merit: This sensor proposal focuses on the development of a novel
microtransponder for wireless in-situ radiation dosimetry. The proposed sensor
is totally passive, i.e., do not require an on board power source, and thus
avoid problems associated with radiation damage to active electronics
(transistors, etc). The transponder is based on a novel device structure
combining the quasi-permanent electric field produced by an electret with
silicon micromachining. The micromachined LC dosimeter incorporates an array of
cantilever beams deflected by the electric field produced by an electret. This
array is connected to an on-chip spiral coil, thereby forming a passive LC
resonant circuit. Upon exposure to the ionizing radiation, the surface charge of
the electret is reduced hence decreasing the force on the cantilever beams (and
therefore decreasing their deflection). This decreases the capacitance between
the beams and the bottom electrode of the electret, which can be detected
remotely by monitoring the resonant frequency of the LC transponder.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The ability to use wireless techniques for
radiation measurement in conjunction with a miniature dosimeter will provide a
valuable tool in many areas such as radiation therapy, personnel, and
environmental monitoring. The out come of this research will lead to a family of
cost effective, small sized wireless in-situ radiation sensors. The techniques
developed during the course of this project will also have a broad impact on
many applications and devices that require the integration of electrets with
MEMS microstructures (e.g., electromechanical transducers, particle filters, and
infrared sensors). &lt;br/&gt;