* 0400852
* Combinatorics, Dynamics, and Geometry of Postcritically Finite Rational Maps
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Kevin Pilgrim, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 04/30/2008
* USD 40,961.00

DMS 0400852&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;K Pilgrim&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Indiana
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In many instances, a dynamical system
$f: X \to X$ having good metric expanding properties can be shown to be
determined by purely combinatorial data. That is, there is a computable model
$f^{comb}: X^{comb} \to X^{comb}$ and a homeomorphism $h: X^{comb} \to X$
conjugating $f^{comb}$ to $f$. A recent new construction shows that for a very
wide class of examples, one may take $X^{comb}$ to be the &lt;br/&gt;Boundary at
infinity of a certain associated infinite Gromov hyperbolic one-complex and
$f^{comb}$ to be a simplicial covering map from this complex to itself. The
construction is analogous to describing the action of a Kleinian group on its
limit set via its action on the&lt;br/&gt;boundary of its Cayley graph.
Techniques from geometric group theory imply the existence of a natural class of
metrics on $X^{comb}$ such that the system becomes ``uniformly quasiregular'',
i.e. iterates of $f^{comb}$&lt;br/&gt;distort the roundness of balls by at most
a constant factor independent of scale and of iterate. Succintly: this process
uniformizes $f: X \to X$ by providing a metric on $X$ for which $f$ is nearly
conformal. The PI proposes to apply this new point of view to the study of
rational &lt;br/&gt;maps of the Riemann sphere to itself. The PI will develop a
unified framework with which to describe the dynamics of rational maps, Kleinian
groups, and their natural generalizations. The PI will thereby (i)reinterpret
Thurston's characterization of rational functions from this&lt;br/&gt;point of
view; (ii) bring new methods into the study of dynamical systems; (iii) further
the development of the ``dictionary'' between rational maps and Kleinian groups,
focusing on those aspects related to Cannon's conjecture and the regularity of
the new metric; (iv) suggest&lt;br/&gt;new directions for the study of dynamical
systems by formulating and developing a self-contained theory of uniformly
quasiregular expanding dynamical systems, and (v) connect several areas of
mathematics of current active interest, namely conformal dynamics, geometric
group&lt;br/&gt;theory, geometric topology, and analysis on metric
spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;