* 0400294
* Collaborative Research:  Interdisciplinary Center for Radiation Treatment Planning
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2007
* Robert Meyer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 08/31/2007
* USD 377,796.00

This collaborative research grant awarded to a multidisciplinary team aims to
develop algorithmic tools and a corresponding cyberinfrastructure for the
development, coordination, utilization, and dissemination of knowledge regarding
the application of optimization-based inverse methods for radiation treatment
planning. The PIs bring to this research cross-disciplinary proficiency in
Industrial Engineering, Computer Sciences, and Radiation Oncology, building on
their recent research in the areas of information technology, optimization, and
treatment planning. The algorithm development is based on their newly developed
methodologies including slicing approaches and the Nested Partitions framework.
Along with the development of algorithms for Radiation Treatment Planning, the
PIs also plan to develop a website that will provide an infrastructure to
researchers worldwide for the development, coordination, utilization, and
dissemination of optimization methods in Radiation Treatment Planning research.

Approximately one million new cases of cancer are reported each year in the
United States, with many times that number occurring worldwide. It is reported
that more than 40 percent of people diagnosed with cancer in the US will undergo
treatment with radiation therapy. Given the aging population, these numbers are
expected to increase rapidly in coming years. It is expected that research
results developed in this project will accelerate the development and
understanding of efficient and effective automated Radiation Treatment Planning
methods and software, resulting in clinical treatments of significantly higher
quality, thereby enhancing both the quality of life and the longevity of cancer
patients treated with radiation.