* 0400477
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science:  Integrated Research on Magnetic Reconnection in Solar Corona and Magnetosphere
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Kenichi Nishikawa, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 06/30/2005
* USD 16,235.00

9981508&lt;br/&gt;Nishikawa&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a three-
year collaborative research project between Professor Ken-Ichi Nishikawa of
Rutgers University in New Jersey and Professor Kazunari Shibata of Kyoto
University in Japan. The researchers will be undertaking a study of integrated
research on magnetic reconnection in solar corona and magnetosphere. Magnetic
reconnection is widely believed to be a crucial process in solar,
magnetospheric, and astrophysical plasmas, being the means by which their
magnetic topologies are determined and by which energy stored in magnetic fields
is released rapidly to produce such phenomena as magnetospheric storms, solar
flares, and particle acceleration in astrophysical jets. Recent solar physics
missions launched into space provide the ability to observe magnetic
reconnection in the solar atmosphere to a degree not before possible. The goal
of the U.S. and Japanese researchers is to directly compare results from
particle simulations with (1) MHD simulations, (2) low dimensional dynamic
models, and (3) direct observations. These studies will reveal unsolved problems
in magnetosphere, solar corona, and astrophysical jets. Simulation studies for
the research will require intensive computing resources, which the researchers
have available to them in both countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
brings together the efforts of two laboratories that have complementary
expertise and research capabilities. The ability to use such simulation
techniques would be critical to a full understanding of the physics underlying
important processes in space weather. The project advances international human
resources through the participation of postdoc and graduate students. Through
the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our base of
basic knowledge and promote international understanding and cooperation. Results
of the research will be published in international scientific journals and will
also be presented at scientific meetings in the U.S. and abroad. The research
will also be available on their Web site as follows:
http://www.physics.rutgers.edu/~kenichi &lt;br/&gt;