* 0400666
* The Fontaine-Mazur conjecture via p-adic modular forms
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Mark Kisin, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2007
* USD 107,328.00

Abstract for award of Kisin DMS-0400666&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Fontaine-Mazur
conjecture via p-adic modular forms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most
fundamental objects of arithmetic is the absolute Galois group of a number
field. A rich source of representations for such groups is the p-adic cohomology
of algebraic varieties. The Fontaine-Mazur conjecture predicts precisely which
p-adic Galois representations ought to arise in this way. What is remarkable
about the conjecture is that the most subtle condition in its formulation
involves only the restriction of the Galois representation to the decomposition
groups of primes above p. In certain situations Fontaine-Mazur combine their
philosophy with that of Langlands, and predict which Galois representations come
from modular eigenforms. A few years ago Coleman and Mazur, building on work of
Hida, discovered that modular eigenforms tend to move in p-adic families. The
aim of the project is to approach the Fontaine-Mazur conjecture using the
geometry of these families, and corresponding families of Galois
representations: The modularity of some Galois representations can be proved
following ideas of Wiles and Taylor-Wiles, and then one hopes to deduce the
modularity of the rest by p-adic interpolation style
arguments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Almost ten years ago Wiles proved Fermat's Last
Theorem. He did this by relating elliptic curves to modular forms. The latter
are complex functions which admit an incredibly large number of symmetries.
Wiles' breakthrough involved the use of the p-adic Galois representation
attached to an elliptic curve. His result can be viewed as a special case of a
more general philosophy due to Fontaine and Mazur, which predicts that a certain
class of p-adic Galois representations always arise from modular forms. My aim
is to approach this conjecture by exploiting the fact discovered by Hida and
Coleman-Mazur - that modular forms tend to move in p-adic families. This is
rather surprising given that they are complex valued functions. It serves as a
striking illustration that although modular forms are defined as analytic
objects, they are of a profoundly arithmetic
nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;