* 0400143
* GOALI:  Theoretical and Experimental Investigation of Electromagnetically Formed Aluminum
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2004,12/31/2007
* Nicolas Triantafyllidis, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Joycelyn S. Harrison
* 12/31/2007
* USD 221,999.00

The objective of the proposed work is a systematic investigation of
Electromagnetic Forming (EMF) of aluminum alloys, which is expected to: a)
understand the mechanisms for the experimentally observed increased ductility in
aluminum, b) establish the modeling capability required for the design of
realistic such processes and c) educate students in this new research area and
disseminate the knowledge created in the most efficient way.&lt;br/&gt;The
approach has a theoretical and an experimental component and involves Industry -
University collaboration. The novel element of the proposed work is the modeling
of the fully coupled thermo-mechanical and electromagnetic problem with large
strain, viscoplastic and inertia effects included. Modeling capability is an
indispensable ingredient for the design of EMF processes, since, unlike the
design of standard sheet forming operations (which are currently highly
developed due to the use of specialized commercial FEM packages), the design of
EMF processes is presently non-existent due, in good measure, to the lack of
appropriate coupled-physics models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact and
Benefits of the work: EMF technology is an environmentally friendly, flexible
and cost-effective method of implementing high-velocity sheet metal forming that
has considerable advantages over conventional techniques. It is an advanced
technology that is finding an increasing number of automotive and aerospace
applications. The work is expected to benefit the field by providing predictive
capability for realistic EMF processes through the formulation of the fully
coupled problem and the development of reliable numerical solution algorithms,
backed by experimental validations. The existing collaboration in this research
area between Alcoa and GM (who provided the seed funding for the preliminary
work reported here) and Michigan, provides a natural network for the
dissemination of the knowledge created, while the students will work in both
academic and industrial environments.&lt;br/&gt;