* 0400458
* SGER:  Experimental Investigation Into the Thermal Transport in Individual Carbon Nanotubes Along the Atomic Layer Direction
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2006
* Xinwei Wang, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Patrick E. Phelan
* 03/31/2006
* USD 49,732.00

&lt;br/&gt;The unique structure and dimension of carbon nanotubes (CNTs) lead to
novel physical properties that promote a wide variety of potential applications
such as high-performance field-effect nanotransistors, novel tips for scanning
probe microscopes, and high-efficiency nanotube-based field-emission devices.
The objectives of this one-year SGER project are to: (1) conduct exploratory
experimental investigation into the high thermal conductivity of CNTs along the
atomic layer in the axial direction, and (2) explore the thermal contact
resistance between CNTs and the substrate. The proposed project is considered
high risk because the unknown thermal conductivity of CNTs and the thermal
contact resistance between CNTs and the substrate could be unusually highly to
make the proposed technique unable to sense the thermal transport in CNTs with
high accuracy. The project will provide important guidance on nanoscale
manipulation of CNTs, leading to greater control of thermal transport at the
nanometer level. The knowledge that will result from this project will also
advance the step toward optimizing the thermal management of CNT devices and
systems, thus improving system performance and prolonging device lifetime. Our
quantitative investigation into the thermal contact resistance between CNTs and
the substrate is a first and important step towards the thermal design of joints
between CNTs and micro/nanodevices to achieve desired system performance and
stability. &lt;br/&gt;