* 0400554
* U.S.-France Collaborative Research: High-Resolution U-Channel Magnetic Study of Late Quaternary Sediment Cores From the East Antarctic Margin.
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,10/31/2004
* Stefanie Brachfeld, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 10/31/2004
* USD 9,676.00

0129155&lt;br/&gt;Brachfeld&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This two-year award for
U.S.-France cooperative research involves Stefanie Brachfeld of Ohio State
University and Catherine Kissel and Carlo Laj of the Laboratory for Climate and
Environmental Sciences at the French National Center for Scientific Research
(CNRS), Paris, France. The objective of the research is the construction of a
proven, millennial-scale correlation and dating tool for Antarctic glacial-
marine sediments beyond the range of radio-carbon dating. Researchers will
utilize an established geomagnetic method of dating sediment cores in which
paleointensity records from an undated core are correlated with high-resolution
paleointensity target curves in order to import absolute ages to one's core
site. The analyses will be conducted on nine late Pleistocene through Holocene
kasten cores and jumbo piston cores from sites in the East Antarctic land
margin. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The construction of the paleointensity records
requires investigation of the remanence vector recorded by the sediments
(paleomagnetism) and investigation of the magnetic mineral assemblage in the
sediments (rock magnetism). The US investigator is an expert in rock magnetic
analyses. This is complemented by French expertise in paleomagnetism and access
to the French lab's high-resolution pass-through magnetometer that will be used
to measure u-channel samples. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award represents the US
side of a joint proposal to the NSF and the French National Center for
Scientific Research (CNRS). NSF will cover travel funds and living expenses for
the US investigators and graduate students. The CNRS will support the visits of
French researchers to the United States. &lt;br/&gt;