* 0400403
* Community Science Workshops: Beginning a National Movement
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2009
* Paul Fonteyn, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Continuing grant
* Sylvia M. James
* 08/31/2009
* USD 3,243,782.00

"Community Science Workshops: Beginning a National Movement" is an extension of
a successful, NSF-funded project that created a network of community science
centers in California. The San Francisco State University will now take this
successful venture to a national level by working with the American Association
for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) and Quality Education for Minorities (QEM)
to establish a new Community Science Workshop (CSW) 8-10 in underserved
communities over the next four years. Once sites are selected, CSW directors
participate in an intensive two-week training program. This is followed by
visits by site mentors, and ongoing support through the WWW and other media,
which contributes to the establishment and eventual sustainability of the
centers. Each site partners with larger, established museums and science centers
locally to gain much needed assistance with exhibits and education programs.
Community Science Workshops contain permanent exhibit space, a workshop area for
student projects and classroom/storage space. They serve a variety of audiences
through after school, family, school and summer science programs. Potential
locations include Arizona, Florida, Louisiana, Michigan, Montana, Nebraska, New
York, Tennessee, Texas, Washington and the District of Columbia.