* 0400071
* GOALI: Processing, System Modeling and Process Control for Complicated Functional Data
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Jye-Chyi Lu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 06/30/2008
* USD 235,110.00

This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award provides
funding for the development of methodology and algorithm for processing large-
size functional data with sharp changes and nonstationary patterns from
manufacturing systems. The developed methods will integrate wavelet-based
signal-processing techniques and neural-networks oriented system-modeling
procedures to develop an in-situ process control tool for manufacturing
processes such as ultra-thin semiconductor-film deposition. The research will
optimize a generic data-reduction objective function balancing data-compression
goals and modeling accuracy requirements for various types of data analysis and
decision-making use. The developed statistical process control algorithm aiming
to study process deviates at selective wavelet parameters will be more effective
in detecting local changes in monitoring complicated functional data.
Experimenting the developed procedures on various testing data curves obtained
from the literature by simulating different amount of data noises and signal-
change patterns will provide insights of the strength and weakness of the
proposed methods against extensions of existing work for data-reduction
purposes. Our industry partner from PDF Solutions, Inc. will work with us in
providing insights for tuning the researched methods in solving real-life
problems and in testing the developed methods and tools in practical
applications.

If successful, the results of this research will lead to improvement in
algorithms for in-situ process control and a locally focused neural network, and
new development in analysis and modeling of large-size complicated functional
data. The primary goal of this work is to provide a generic data-reduction tool
with a wide range of applications in mining knowledge from massive and complex
functional data. Getting the relevant knowledge will help practitioners identify
process problems more efficiently and improve the quality of manufacturing
systems more effectively. The experience learned in this interdisciplinary
project will nourish our integrated education and research program for training
the next generation of manufacturing enterprise system engineers.