* 0400879
* Multilinear and Nonlinear Harmonic Analysis
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Christoph Thiele, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2008
* USD 317,617.00

ABSTRACT

DMS: 0400879

Ch Thiele

'Multilinear and Nonlinear Harmonic Analysis' :

The scientific purpose of this project is to study three interrelated subjects
in harmonic analysis: 1) Wave packet analysis. Initiated by the proof of
boundedness of the bilinear Hilbert transform, this type of analysis has been
studied intensely and has led to a series of results on multilinear operators
and maximal operators. 2) Arithmetic number theory, in particular the study of
arithmetic progressions, sum - and difference sets etc. The link between
arithmetic number theory and the type of analysis discussed above has recently
be reinforced be several results on multilinear operators. Arithmetic number
theory is also related to other problems in harmonic analysis such as the famous
Kakeya problem. 3) Nonlinear Fourier analysis or scattering theory. Via
multilinear expansions of nonlinear operators in scattering theory, the latter
is linked to multilinear operators. While the algebraic aspects of scattering
theory in one dimension have been widely studied over the past thirty years, a
number of basic analytic questions remain open and will be studied in this
project.



Wave packet analysis is a discipline in mathematics that can readily be
explained to anyone familiar with musical scores. A musical score is the
decoding of a complicated musical composition into its most elementary parts,
the notes, each described by duration, pitch, and volume. Wave packet analysis
is the mathematical analogue of this, which can be used to decode a large
variety of mathematical data into its elementary pieces, each described by the
analogue of duration, pitch, and volume. This type of analysis has had a
tremendous impact on the way computers deal with large sets of data coming from
acoustic signals, images, radar, internet and other telecommunication, etc. This
project studies basic mathematical questions associated to wave packet analysis,
fundamental research that is likely to improve our understanding not only of the
types of processes described above, but also of many different applications
within Mathematics as well. This project will also help to maintain an active
research group in harmonic analysis at UCLA.

