* 0400702
* Qualitative Studies of Parabolic Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Peter Polacik, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2007
* USD 90,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Proposal DMS-0400702&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Qualitatitve studies
of parabolic partial differential equations&lt;br/&gt;PI: Peter Polacik,
University of Minnesota (Twin
Cities)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The abstract
follows:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop along the following
central themes: symmetry &lt;br/&gt;properties of positive solutions of
parabolic PDEs, principal Floquet &lt;br/&gt;bundles and exponential separation,
large time behavior of solutions of &lt;br/&gt;parabolic PDEs and the dynamics
of quasilinear competition-diffusion
&lt;br/&gt;systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Symmetry (radial or reflectional) plays
an important role in &lt;br/&gt;qualitative analysis of solutions of PDEs. By
now, a fairly general &lt;br/&gt;understanding of symmetry of positive solutions
has been achieved for &lt;br/&gt;second order elliptic equations on both bounded
and unbounded domains, &lt;br/&gt;and for parabolic equations on bounded
domains. For nonautonomous &lt;br/&gt;parabolic equations on unbounded domains
the symmetry problem has not &lt;br/&gt;been addressed so far. This problem is
more intriguing; standard &lt;br/&gt;methods used in earlier symmetry results do
not give desired &lt;br/&gt;conclusions. Exponential separation, associated with
the principal &lt;br/&gt;Floquet bundle of linearized parabolic equations, is
among new &lt;br/&gt;techniques that can facilitate the analysis. The principal
Floquet &lt;br/&gt;bundle is an interesting topic in its own right. It is a
natural &lt;br/&gt;extension of the concept of principal eigenfunction of
elliptic &lt;br/&gt;operators to nonautonomous parabolic operators which has
already proved &lt;br/&gt;very useful in the study of nonlinear equations. Both
its basic &lt;br/&gt;properties and applications are to be further investigated.
A better &lt;br/&gt;understanding is needed to make this tool applicable to
problems on &lt;br/&gt;unbounded domains, however, ideas related to this concept
have already &lt;br/&gt;triggered progress in the symmetry problem. The next
topic, large-time &lt;br/&gt;behavior, includes in particular a basic question
on the semilinear &lt;br/&gt;heat equation, as to whether all bounded solutions
on multidimensional &lt;br/&gt;domains converge to an equilibrium. This has been
already been answered &lt;br/&gt;(negatively) for spatially inhomogeneous
equations. For homogeneous &lt;br/&gt;equations, this long standing open problem
will require new ideas. &lt;br/&gt;Competition-diffusion systems that are to be
considered in the project &lt;br/&gt;have their origins in ecology. Bifurcations
of steady states, their &lt;br/&gt;stability and as complete as possible an
understanding of global &lt;br/&gt;dynamics is expected to shed light on
coexistence of species (of &lt;br/&gt;phenotypes) with different dispersal
rates. While a large class of &lt;br/&gt;semilinear systems has already been
successfully treated, more realistic &lt;br/&gt;quasilinear systems call for a
new approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In less technical terms, the project can be
characterized as &lt;br/&gt;qualitative or geometric analysis of solutions of
nonlinear evoution &lt;br/&gt;equations, such as reaction-diffusion equations.
As a rule, such &lt;br/&gt;nonlinear equations can "never be solved". Letting
aside exact solutions &lt;br/&gt;which are very rarely available, approximate
methods, even with the &lt;br/&gt;presently available computation power, can
seldom provide answers to &lt;br/&gt;questions of global nature, for example,
questions on the behavior of &lt;br/&gt;solutions on infinite time intervals or
collective behavior of solutions &lt;br/&gt;(structural stability). Yet, for the
internal development of the theory &lt;br/&gt;of PDEs as well as for improvement
of their modeling relevance in other &lt;br/&gt;sciences, such questions are
important to ask and answer. For this &lt;br/&gt;purpose, many methods of
qualitative analysis of nonlinear PDEs have &lt;br/&gt;been developed, mainly in
the last 2-3 decades. The present project &lt;br/&gt;relies on these methods,
combining classical PDE techniques with &lt;br/&gt;dynamical systems ideas, and,
at the same time, attempts at development &lt;br/&gt;of new techniques. Among
main objectives of the project is the &lt;br/&gt;description of the large time
behavior of the solutions. Spatial &lt;br/&gt;profiles (symmetries) and temporal
behavior (asymptotic periodicity, &lt;br/&gt;stabilization to equilibria) will
both be examined. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;