* 0400465
* International Conference on Complex Systems 2004
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2005
* Yaneer Bar-Yam, New England Complex Systems Institute
* Standard Grant
* Earle L. Lomon
* 05/31/2005
* USD 25,000.00

The Fifth International Conference on Complex Systems (ICCS) is being organized
for May 16-21, 2004. This event will build on the successes of four previous
conferences: (a)International Conference on Complex Systems (September 26-30,
1997), (b) Second International Conference on Complex Systems (October 25-30,
1998) and (c) Third International Conference on Complex Systems (May 21-26,
2000) and (d) Fourth International Conference on Complex Systems (June 9-14,
2002). This conference series, which is organized by the New England Complex
Systems Institute (NECSI), is the main international conference dedicated to the
unified study of complex dynamical systems. Central to the purpose of the
conference is building an international community that is devoted to this new
field. NECSI is an educational and research institution with the participation
of faculty from major academic institutions from New England, around the United
States, and internationally. It is dedicated to interdisciplinary communication
and collaboration on complex systems. &lt;br/&gt;There is a new and growing
effort to understand complex systems and complexity that has attracted a lot of
interest in the scientific community. Various conferences and workshops have
addressed aspects of these growing efforts. However, this is the only major
international conference series to bring the wide diversity of researchers
together, demonstrating the interdisciplinary but coherent nature of these
efforts. The excitement of research in this field and its diverse applications
has been expanding and the conferences have been growing and we anticipate a
much larger conference than the previous ones. Interest among students and
postdoctoral fellows continues to grow and the International Conference on
Complex Systems provides essential exposure for them to reviews of historical
progress and new advances. &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the conference
include interdisciplinary cross-fertilization among physicists, computer
scientists, engineers, mathematicians, biologists, ecologists, psychologists,
sociologists, anthropologists, linguists, managers and physicians. The contact
extends beyond the academic community to include professionals as well as the
public. The new scientific effort to understand complex systems has attracted
the attention of professionals in diverse areas -- high technology,
biotechnology, health care, financial services, and corporate management
generally. It has also attracted significant public attention because it
addresses topics such as individual psychology, dynamics of social and economic
change, and ecology, that are of general concern; and can address new problems
as they arise, like global terrorism and homeland security. The ICCS conference
will include educational sessions that are appropriate for professionals and the
public. &lt;br/&gt;The conference will be located in Boston and will be
accessible to public transportation. The ICCS has in past and is expected to
continue to serve as a vehicle for public awareness of the importance of science
to society.&lt;br/&gt;