* 0400277
* PREMISE II:  Comparative Life Cycle Impacts of Bio- and Petro-based Lubricants
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Thomas Theis, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 06/30/2008
* USD 599,535.00

The principal goal of this Product Realization Environmental Manufacturing
Innovative Systems for Eco-Efficiency (PREMISE) Phase II research is to perform
a holistic evaluation of the substitution of bio-based lubricants for
traditional petroleum-based lubricants (mineral oils) in industrial
applications, addressing the technical, economic, societal, and workplace
complexities of this issue. It will provide a comprehensive analysis of the
steps involved in bringing bio-based lubricants into the marketplace, relying on
a comprehensive life cycle approach in which the materials, energy, and costs
involved with bio-based lubricants are compared with those of petroleum-based
lubricants currently in use. It contains five parts: evaluation of the
performance of bio-based lubricants, including pollutant emissions, at large
scale (aluminum rolling), life cycle economic analysis, assessment of the
effects of regulatory factors on differential pricing, an analysis of the
factors involved in the decision-making process regarding bio-based lubricants,
and the potential for changes in agricultural markets as a result of the
widespread adoption of bio-lubricants. This project involves researchers from
academia, government, and the private sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
industrial lubricant market in the US (not including automotive applications) is
approximately 100 million gallons per year. If successful, this research will
provide several benefits to society. First, bio-based lubricants, in most
applications, are inherently less polluting and their manufacture uses less
energy than petroleum-based alternatives. Second, bio-based products in general
emit fewer greenhouse gases during their manufacture and life cycle than
products made from fossil fuels. Third, soy-based lubricants have superior
lubricity properties in comparison with petroleum-based lubricants, thereby
offering the possibility of improved industrial throughput. Fourth, to the
extent that bio-based lubricants displace petroleum-based lubricants in the
marketplace, the US reliance on imported oil is lowered. Finally, although
focused soybean oil, both because of its availability in US markets and past
experience in adapting soy-based products to new uses, the results from this
proposal will also provide an evaluative framework that can be used for other
vegetable bases.