* 0400501
* Single Wall Carbon Nanotube Architectures for Molecular-Scale Spin Injection Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2007
* Sang-Wook Cheong, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Olufemi Olowolafe
* 03/31/2007
* USD 179,478.00

In magnetoelectronics the spin of the charge carriers is exploited. In molecular
electronics the circuits possess precision at the atomic level. We aim to
integrate these two fields by fabricating heterostructure devices that will
integrate half-metals (such as manganites) with single wall carbon nanotubes
(SWNTs). The ferromagnetic manganites are a particularly effective source of
spin-polarized electrons (polarization?100%). Carbon nanotubes display exotic
properties (Kondo physics, Luttinger liquid behavior and superconducting
fluctuations) that we will explore and exploit with spin polarized injection.
Significantly, spin-injection will be across nanoscale interfaces. Therefore
device performance could far exceed the performance of planar tunnel junctions
in which the interfaces are imperfect and span several
microns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific merit of the proposed work arises
firstly from its materials science impact. The in-situ growth of SWNT
architectures has yet to be achieved. Secondly, the use of SWNTs as the non-
ferromagnetic layer in the architecture offers intriguing possibilities arising
from the fact that the SWNT-magnetic interface is brought down to molecular
dimensions. This combined with the intrinsic one-dimensionality and extremely
long elastic- and phase- scattering lengths of SWNTs allows progress towards a
new generation of molecular-scale functional devices. The broader impact of this
proposal is in the training and mentoring of graduate students, in particular
minority and women students, to be future professionals. Another key is the
continuing collaboration between NJIT and Rutgers, two public institutions with
high (over 40%) percentage of underrepresented minority students. The continuing
collaboration will provide more opportunities for training larger number of
undergraduate and graduate students at both institutions and sharing of
resources.&lt;br/&gt;