* 0400585
* Workshop:  Pathways to the Future Workshop 2004
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2005
* Lynne Billard, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 05/31/2005
* USD 12,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; In August 1988 a small Workshop of approximately
twenty women researchers was held immediately prior to the Annual Meeting of the
Institute of Mathematical Statistics and its Special Symposium on Probability
and its Applications. Encouraged by the enormous success of this first Workshop,
one has been run in subsequent years prior to the major joint annual meeting of
American Statistical Association, regions of the International Biometric Society
and the Institute of Mathematical Statistics, except that in 1994 it ran in
conjunction with the World Congress of the Institute of Mathematical Statistics
and the Bernoulli Section of the International Statistical Institute and in 2000
it ran in conjunction with the International Biometric Conference in Berkeley.
The Workshops have been a huge success with laudatory thanks proferred each
time. The need for such avenues for young researchers is still present.
Therefore, this proposal is for a similar Workshop to be held in 2004 to be
targeted at newly graduating young researchers who have not as yet had the
opportunity to participate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The Workshop is proposed to
assist young women researchers in probability and statistics who have received
their doctorates in the last five years. A senior researcher will give a major
presentation on what where and how to ensure a successful and productive
research career. Another senior will give a presentation on publishing - where
and what to publish and how to write up research results. A third senior
researcher will give a presentation on grant opportunities and how to pursue
them. Workshop participants would give a brief presentation of their research
interests and research environment. The opportunity to meet and interact with
each other as well as a few established researchers will be invaluable as the
participants learn to promote their own research and to decrease their
professional isolation. As a result of the Workshop, attendees should be more
successful in their own research careers, and thus, for example, survive the
promotion and tenure process so that these women become role models for the
students at all levels (undergraduate and graduate) in their own training
programs.&lt;br/&gt;