* 0400867
* Symposium: Behavior as a Way of Knowing Science February 2004,  Seattle, WA
* BIO,IOS
* 12/15/2003,11/30/2004
* Stephen Shuster, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Jerry  O. Wolff
* 11/30/2004
* USD 3,500.00

&lt;br/&gt;Lay Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Behavior as a Way of Knowing
Science&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will support travel and
meeting costs for 3 behavioral scientists to participate in a symposium entitled
"Behavior as a Way of Knowing Science," scheduled for presentation at the 12-16
February 2004 meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science
(AAAS) in Seattle, WA. The goal of this symposium is to demonstrate that animal
behavior is a powerful and effective way to teach science to students at all
levels. We will show that studies of animal behavior are simple, inexpensive and
integrate diverse systems. Behavioral science allows students to engage in
hands-on activities. It allows students to work in groups. It provides a means
for collecting statistically tractable data sets and, it provides an interesting
subject on which students can discuss and present their results. In short, by
studying animal behavior, students at all levels can learn science by doing it
themselves. This symposium will be directed toward a wide audience that can be
reached through resources sponsored and encouraged by AAAS. Our primary audience
will include practicing K-12 and university educators who can benefit directly
by using animal behavior to teach science in their classrooms and
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;