* 0400552
* Towards the Development of Magnetic Provenance Tracers in Antarctic Glacial Marine Sediments: A Pilot Study in the Antarctic Peninsula Region.
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Stefanie Brachfeld, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 02/28/2006
* USD 29,937.00

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
Office of Polar Programs, provides funds for a pilot study designed to test the
potential of using rock magnetic properties as sediment provenance tracers for
Antarctic glacial marine sediment. A means of tracing sediment provenance would
enable more meaningful interpretation of transport and depositional processes
recorded in sediment cores. One could conceivably determine which parts of the
continental ice sheet were advancing and supplying till, or disintegrating to
create debris-laden icebergs. One could conceivably trace the paleocurrents that
carried IRD-laden bergs, or identify wind patterns that carried the eolian
material. Rock magnetic methods have the advantage of being inexpensive, rapid,
non-destructive analyses using highly sensitive instrumentation capable of
working with small amounts of material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chosen test
area is the Antarctic Peninsula (AP) region. The AP region is the subject of
intense interest to the paleoclimate-global change community in light of the
recent warming trend, disintegration of ice shelves, and rapid ecological and
physical changes presently taking place. The tectonic setting and petrology of
the AP region have been studied extensively, and this region is site of on-going
marine geology and LTER research. Thousands of pre-existing samples from the
major rock types (and supporting published petrologic and chemical data) are
housed at the Byrd Polar Research Center and are available for
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rock magnetic methods provide a rapid, sensitive,
inexpensive means of identifying iron-bearing minerals in rocks and sediment.
This project will systematically investigate the material properties and
magnetic properties of the major bedrock formations exposed on the Antarctic
Peninsula along with selected surface and historic sediment samples. The steps
in developing reliable magnetic provenance tracers are:&lt;br/&gt;o Confidently
linking sediments with their source materials via their materials properties
such as precise chemical composition, oxidation parameter, lattice parameter,
and grain morphology&lt;br/&gt;o Determining if a unique magnetic signature can
be used to identify those material properties&lt;br/&gt;o Testing if the
magnetic signature is recognizable in the sediment, thus providing a rock
magnetic means of tracing sediments back to their source rocks&lt;br/&gt;o
Verifying the success of the magnetic method by using existing petrologic and
chemical data&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Igneous rocks and sediment from Graham Land
contain magnetite, titanomagnetite, and hematite. Initial studies indicate that
the magnetite and titanomagnetite grains in the AP rocks are affected by varying
degrees of oxidation and impurity content, which generates a reproducible,
measurable magnetic signature. All magnetite is not the same. Even small
deviations from metal-oxygen stoichiometry and deviations in cation
distributions can have large effects on the physical and magnetic properties of
metal oxides. This is the basis for suggesting that magnetic methods may be
effective tracers. No single magnetic parameter is sufficient to uniquely
characterize a sample or to serve as a link between sediment and source rock.
Therefore, by following the steps outlined above it is hoped that a link based
on quantifiable material properties can be established, and then magnetic
signature of those properties can be determined. This work will test the concept
that combinations of magnetic parameters can be used to identify material
properties. If it can be demonstrated that distinctive magnetic properties in
sediments are indicative of material states, and these states can be matched
with their parent material, then rock magnetism may provide a rapid, inexpensive
means of tracing sediment provenance.&lt;br/&gt;