* 0400301
* Collaborative Research: Intra- and Inter-Enterprise Collaborative Procurement
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Lee Marston, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Russell Barton
* 08/31/2010
* USD 109,717.00

This project will develop and analyze supply chain models to better understand
the impact of collaboration on improving the efficiency and effectiveness of
interactions between (potentially competitive) enterprises in supply chains.
With a primary focus on collaborative procurement, the research goals of this
project include the following: (1) Analyze the dynamics of horizontal inter-
enterprise collaborative procurement. By studying the underlying economics
behind collaborative procurement among competitor firms, the project will
examine the effects of collaboration on buyer and supplier profitability, and
derive conditions under which collaboration will be beneficial to each
participant. (2) Develop models and decision support tools for coordinating
intra-enterprise collaborative procurement with logistics, to simultaneously
optimize the "net landed cost" across different functions of an enterprise. (3)
Study how buyers should procure in the face of quantity discounts under demand
uncertainty. The outcomes of this research will be used to develop and offer a
variety of undergraduate and graduate courses covering the issues, and basic
tools and concepts in collaborative supply chains, as well as to develop case
studies based on research and industry experiences.

Overall, advances in these areas promise tremendously improved efficiencies in
all stages of a supply chain. Intra- and inter-enterprise collaborative
procurement would not only decrease the inefficiencies in the supply chain but
also increase the social welfare. In industries like retailing, which represents
about 40% of the economy, such improvements would be remarkable.