* 0400833
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Microbial Biology for FY 2004
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Jeffrey Klemens, Klemens                 Jeffrey        A
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 08/31/2006
* USD 100,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Microbial biology for
FY2004. The fellowship supports training and research on the basic biology of
protozoan, microalgal, fungal, archaeal, bacterial and viral species that are
not generally considered to be model organisms. Further, it provides
opportunities for recent doctoral recipients to obtain additional training in
microbial biology, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
established scientists, and to broaden their scientific horizons beyond the
research experiences during the undergraduate and graduate training. These
fellowships are further designed to assist new scientists to direct their
research efforts across traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves
of unique research resources, sites, and facilities, including foreign
locations.

The research and training plan is entitled "Beneficial root-associated fungi in
the maintenance and regeneration of a tropical oak forest in northwest Costa
Rica." Ectomycorrhizal (EM) fungi are beneficial plant-associated fungi that are
common in nature but relatively rare in tropical forests. When they do occur in
the tropics, EM fungi are often associated with dominant plant species. The
purpose of this study is to determine the role the EM fungal community plays in
maintaining a Costa Rican oak forest dominated by the species Quercus oleoides.
Direct sequencing is used to identify and classify the EM fungal species.

