* 0400387
* Fourier Analysis:     Old Themes, New Perspectives
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2010
* Loukas Grafakos, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2010
* USD 170,905.00

DMS 0400387&lt;br/&gt;PI: Loukas Grafakos&lt;br/&gt;Unviersity of Missouri
Fourier Analysis: Old themes, new
perspective&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many problems in
Fourier Analysis are as old as the subject itself.&lt;br/&gt;The quest to
understand some of these problems has pushed the research to such extraordinary
developments&lt;br/&gt;that new connections with many other scientific
areas&lt;br/&gt;have been discovered and&lt;br/&gt;new perspectives revealed.
One of these new perspectives&lt;br/&gt;is the multilinear point of view that
has significantly refined and enriched our classical approach of studying
&lt;br/&gt;problems via the method of freezing variables. The basic idea in
multilinear analysis is that linearly independent functional parameters are
treated as linear variables, allowing a higher degree of freedom and greater
flexibility, which often results in a deeper and more far-reaching
understanding.&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator proposes to embark on an
extensive study of translation-invariant multilinear operators, both broad
enough to cover most known examples, but also deep enough to include special
operators of a very singular nature. This proposal consists of three parts:
positive theory, negative results, and general theory. Proposed work on the
positive theory includes extension of the range of boundedness of the bilinear
Hilbert transform and other multilinear rough singular &lt;br/&gt;integrals.
Negative results focus on the disc multiplier outside the locally square
integrable case, the bilinear Hilbert transform on products of integrable
functions, as well as the Carleson-Hunt operator on spaces of nearly integrable
functions and certain higher dimensional versions of all the previous
operators.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed general theory will focus on topics
concerning&lt;br/&gt;multilinear interpolation and
extrapolation.&lt;br/&gt;These items provide important tools that simplify the
study of the subject.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of Fourier Analysis is
to study complicated objects via decompositions into simpler pieces. Just as
music can be disassembled into compositions of integral multiples of a simple
basic frequency, complicated operators can be represented by their actions on a
spectrum of frequencies. Fourier analysis provides the tools that relate special
(time) and phasial (frequency) aspects of the same function
(signal).&lt;br/&gt;Irregularities of signals and images are better located once
these are decomposed into small pieces and studied via Fourier analysis. For
instance, noise and blurring are easily located with the application of the
Fourier transform, but nowadays even more challenging feats can be achieved. In
this investigation, certain operators are to be studied using decomposition
techniques sensitive to&lt;br/&gt;both time and frequency considerations. Such
operators are often defined by altering the frequency of input signals via
multiplication by a fixed and often nonsmooth function. In practice, the abrupt
interruption of radio communication or television transmission by a
meteorological phenomenon are examples of such operators.&lt;br/&gt;The
protection against the loss of information can be&lt;br/&gt;mathematically
modeled as the preservation of integrability and this is proposed to be
investigated here.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;