* 0400590
* Study of Diurnal Transitions in the Atmospheric Boundary Layer
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Zbigniew Sorbjan, Marquette University
* Continuing grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 12/31/2007
* USD 266,392.00

This project is a study of the atmospheric boundary layer, that layer near the
surface of the Earth where turbulent air motions transfer heat, moisture, and
momentum between the atmosphere and the Earth. Most past studies have treated
this layer as being in a steady state, but transitions occur continually and
influence its structure. The boundary layer undergoes a diurnal cycle that moves
from a stable nighttime layer through transitional states to a midday convective
period and then again through transitional states back to stable nighttime
condition. This study will focus on the transition periods and the mid-day
convective period. The primary tool to be used is large-eddy simulation (LES), a
model technique in which turbulent motions larger than some specified size are
represented explicitly while the average influence of the motions at smaller
sizes is represented in parameterized form. To complement the LES results, the
investigators also will examine observations from a set of well-documented past
experiments that have studied the boundary layer in different locations. The
expected results will be an extension of knowledge of boundary layer structure
to periods of transition and a better understanding of the ways in which
transitory turbulence affects that layer.

A long-range benefit of this and similar studies will be better representation
of the boundary layer in weather and climate models. Such models must represent
realistic fluxes of heat, moisture, and momentum between the Earth and the
atmosphere but cannot resolve the fine-scale structures responsible for such
fluxes. As a result, the fluxes must be represented parameterically in terms of
large-scale variables. The development of accurate parametric representations
will rely on results from detailed studies like this one. The project will also
benefit future work in this area of research by providing training for a
graduate student.