* 0400584
* Statistical Inference for Complex Data
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2009
* Lynne Billard, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 04/30/2009
* USD 218,297.00

The advent of computers is routinely bringing large, &lt;br/&gt;very large
datasets for analysis. How to analyze the&lt;br/&gt;attendant data and/or how to
glean useful information &lt;br/&gt;from these data is anything but routine.
This proposal &lt;br/&gt;investigates two broad areas, viz., mixture
decomposition, &lt;br/&gt;and regression in the presence of taxonomy and
hierarchical &lt;br/&gt;variables. The mixture decomposition work is concerned
with &lt;br/&gt;data in which the observation is a distribution function
&lt;br/&gt;in the p-dimensional Cartesian product of distributions
space,&lt;br/&gt; rather than the single point in p-dimensional space of
&lt;br/&gt;classical data. Such data arise naturally, or after
a&lt;br/&gt;ggregation of original data to a more manageable size &lt;br/&gt;yet
retaining its inherent information. A goal is to &lt;br/&gt;partition these
distributions into coherent classes &lt;br/&gt;and to estimate the relevant
class distributions. &lt;br/&gt;It is proposed to adapt ideas from copula theory
for &lt;br/&gt;classical data, to data comprised of distributions.
&lt;br/&gt;Embedded in this process is the need to study parameter
&lt;br/&gt;estimation. Different partitioning techniques will be
&lt;br/&gt;explored such as dynamical clustering, different measures
&lt;br/&gt;of fit criterion will be considered, e.g., log-likelihood
&lt;br/&gt;classification; and different estimation methods explored
&lt;br/&gt;for the underlying copulas and the associated distributions
&lt;br/&gt;and their parameters, e.g., maximum likelihood, nonparametric
&lt;br/&gt;methods such as Parzen's truncated window. The resulting
&lt;br/&gt;methodology will have wide applicability to those datasets
&lt;br/&gt;generated in, e.g., meteorology, environmental science,
&lt;br/&gt;social sciences, health-care programs, and the like.
&lt;br/&gt;Regression methods when taxonomy variables, and when
&lt;br/&gt;hierarchical variables, are present will also be developed.
&lt;br/&gt;This will first be executed for classical data, and then
&lt;br/&gt;extended to interval-valued data and to histogram- &lt;br/&gt;(or
frequency-) valued data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With modern computers generating
very large datasets, it is imperative&lt;br/&gt;that techniques be developed for
analysing such datasets. To date very&lt;br/&gt;few methods exist. The research
will develop new methodologies for&lt;br/&gt;analysing these data. A first step
is to aggregate the data in some&lt;br/&gt;well-defined but meaningful way. This
aggregation will thence produce&lt;br/&gt;data in the form of lists, intervals,
or distributions, and these data&lt;br/&gt;will now have some form of internal
structure. The research will focus&lt;br/&gt;on such data of two types. One will
be where the data now consist of&lt;br/&gt;distributions, and where the goal is
to develop methods to identify the&lt;br/&gt;appropraite mixture of
distributions that describe these data. Another&lt;br/&gt;deals with taxonomy
and hierarical data, with the goal of establishing&lt;br/&gt;regression
relationships that will explain the underlying process&lt;br/&gt;governing the
variables involved. The resulting methodologies will&lt;br/&gt;allow analysis
and interpretation of contemporary datastes where&lt;br/&gt;currently no methods
exist. &lt;br/&gt;