* 0400434
* The Effects of Nickel and Carbon Content on the Toughness of an Ultra-High Strength Precipitation Strengthened Stainless Steel
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2008
* Warren Garrison, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 03/31/2008
* USD 454,992.00

Commercial and military aircraft landing gears are often produced using low
alloy steel, 300M, with cadmium plating for corrosion resistance. Within a few
years, cadmium plating will not be possible because of environmental concerns. A
possible alternative is the use of a stainless steel that has strength levels
comparable to 300M and does not require cadmium coatings. The development of
such a steel has been of great interest to airplane manufacturers, landing gear
producers, and speciality steel companies. Despite several years of work, an
ultra-high strength stainless steel with sufficient toughness for landing gear
applications has not been developed. This research explores the development of
an ultra-high strength, precipitation-strengthened martensitic stainless steel
that has both high strength and toughness, and is strengthened by the
precipitation of particles of R-phase. These steels contain approximately 12 wt.
% chromium, 5 wt. % molybdenum, 12 wt. % cobalt, and up to 6 wt. % nickel.
Variations of these in the steel are expected to result in yield strength and
ultimate tensile strength of 1475MPa and 1650MPa, respectively, and also would
have excellent toughness. With this award, the effects of cobalt, molybdenum and
carbon are to be examined on the strength and toughness of these alloys. To have
good toughness, the alloying content of the steels will be controlled, primarily
through the nickel content, so that the steels contain 6 to 8 volume % retained
austenite in the as-quenched condition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful
development of an ultra-high strength stainless steel for landing gear
applications will answer a major industrial need. Educational benefits include
experience for a female graduate student to assist in the research. Students
will be trained to use the scanning electron microscope to examine fracture
surfaces and X-ray diffraction to measure retained austenite content. Students
learn how to use such equipment and analysis methods when they are working on
research projects that provides these types of experiences.&lt;br/&gt;