* 0400789
* The Fourier Transform and Convex Bodies
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Dmitry Ryabogin, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2007
* USD 32,018.00

DMS 0400789&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;D Ryabogin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Kansas State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Fourier Transform and Convex
Bodies&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims at achieving considerable
progress towards&lt;br/&gt;the development of a Fourier analytic approach to the
solution of&lt;br/&gt;several problems of convex geometry, related to sections
and projections, and also to the problems of uniqueness, reconstruction and
duality of convex bodies. A recently discovered formula&lt;br/&gt;expressing the
volume of projections in terms of the Fourier transform&lt;br/&gt;of the
curvature function, has led to Fourier analytic proofs of&lt;br/&gt;several
results on projections, including the characterization of projection bodies in
terms of sections of the polar body, and the&lt;br/&gt;Fourier analytic solution
to Shephard's problem (asking whether symmetric convex bodies with smaller
projections necessarily have smaller volume) surprisingly similar to that of the
Busemann-Petty problem (a section counterpart of the Shephard problem).
&lt;br/&gt;The similarities in the Fourier analytic proofs of these
results&lt;br/&gt;indicate in particular that there must exist deep dual
connections between volumes of projections and sections of convex
bodies.&lt;br/&gt;To achieve progress in obtaining the Fourier analytic
description of this duality phenomena, the PI plans to find extremal projections
of certain classes of bodies, to undertake a further study of the projection and
intersection bodies, to obtain results concerning non-central sections, and to
construct a nonsmooth projection body&lt;br/&gt;whose polar is also a projection
body in higher dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Convexity is a very old topic
which can be traced at very least to Archimedes. It is still in favor due to its
numerous applications to linear programming, tomography, medicine, and it is a
surprise that &lt;br/&gt;Fourier analytic methods have been applied to the
subject only very recently. These methods can serve as an additional source of
ideas, coming to both fields, convex geometry and harmonic analysis, and will
find new applications. At the same time, convexity is an extremely simple and
natural notion. Interesting in itself, it also illustrates some facts about
mathematics, facts that are more or less classical, but always important to
realize, so it is a perfect field for undergraduates. First of all, questions or
problems arise that are very simple to formulate and understand, so students do
not need to take several classes before approaching the
material.&lt;br/&gt;Secondly, intuition is sometimes misleading in ``obvious
problems'', and the undergraduate feels the beauty of the subject. Many problems
can be solved by fairly elementary means, but on the other hand, answers to many
problems are still unknown or have been found recently,&lt;br/&gt;often using
different techniques from other parts of mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;Therefore, it is
a perfect field for research projects for more senior students and all people
dealing with exact sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;