* 0400931
* Topics in Applications of Set Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2008
* Slawomir Solecki, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 05/31/2008
* USD 175,001.00

Solecki's research interests lie in applications of&lt;br/&gt;mathematical logic
(model theory, set theory and, primarily,&lt;br/&gt;descriptive set theory) to
analysis and topology. The project&lt;br/&gt;consists of several parts. For
example, Solecki proposes to&lt;br/&gt;investigate a problem of automatic
continuity of universally&lt;br/&gt;measurable homomorphisms on Polish groups. A
possible solution to&lt;br/&gt;this problem will certainly involve descriptive
set theory of&lt;br/&gt;Polish groups. However, it is also likely to rely
heavily, on the&lt;br/&gt;one hand, on set theoretic assumptions (like the
Continuum&lt;br/&gt;Hypothesis) and, on the other hand, on algebraic properties
of the&lt;br/&gt;underlying group (amenability, freeness). Indications of
the&lt;br/&gt;connections between this problem and set theory and algebra can
be&lt;br/&gt;found in earlier work of Christensen, Mokobodzki and Solecki.
In&lt;br/&gt;another part of the project, Solecki will apply methods
developed&lt;br/&gt;first in set theory (in the study of Borel equivalence
relations)&lt;br/&gt;to problems in topology and model theory. First, he will
use&lt;br/&gt;descriptive set theoretic techniques augmented by tools
coming&lt;br/&gt;from model theory to investigate the structure of an
important&lt;br/&gt;topological space---the pseudo-arc. Second, he will apply
methods&lt;br/&gt;from descriptive set theory to study groups associated
canonically&lt;br/&gt;with countable complete theories---Lascar's Galois
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the project, Solecki will apply techniques and
notions&lt;br/&gt;developed in mathematical logic to problems in other areas
of&lt;br/&gt;mathematics. For example, he will investigate a
certain&lt;br/&gt;topological space---a hereditarily indecomposable continuum
called&lt;br/&gt;the pseudo-arc. These types of topological spaces were
first&lt;br/&gt;introduced in mathematics in the first quarter of the
twentieth&lt;br/&gt;century as curious examples of extremely complicated
curves.&lt;br/&gt;Today, we know that they appear naturally in many
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;contexts, e.g., in fluid dynamics, in smooth dynamical
systems&lt;br/&gt;living in Euclidean spaces, among topological groups, in the
study&lt;br/&gt;of continuous functions, etc. Solecki intends to gain a
better&lt;br/&gt;understanding of the pseudo-arc by using methods from
descriptive&lt;br/&gt;set theory, a branch of mathematical logic, which were
originally&lt;br/&gt;developed to study in an effective way the size of abstract
sets.&lt;br/&gt;It is hoped that crossing boundaries of subfields of
mathematics&lt;br/&gt;by applying set theoretic methods in analysis and topology
should&lt;br/&gt;lead to new and substantial insights.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;