* 0400332
* The Transition to a Quark-Gluon Description of the Nucleon
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Rolf Ent, Hampton University
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 08/31/2007
* USD 584,154.00

Three decades after the establishment of QCD as the theory of quarks
and&lt;br/&gt;gluons, understanding QCD works remains one of the great puzzles
in&lt;br/&gt;nuclear physics. A major challenge arises from the fact that the
degrees&lt;br/&gt;of freedom observed in Nature are bound objects composed of
quarks (and&lt;br/&gt;gluons): hadrons such as protons and neutrons. The
remarkable and&lt;br/&gt;unique feature of QCD at large distances --- quark
confinement ---&lt;br/&gt;prevents the individual quark and gluon constituents
making up a&lt;br/&gt;hadronic bound state to be removed from the system and
examined in&lt;br/&gt;isolation. As a corollary, quarks move with relativistic
speeds inside&lt;br/&gt;the hadrons and this motion makes up 99.9\% of the human
mass.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the other extreme, the property of QCD known as
asymptotic freedom,&lt;br/&gt;in which quarks interact weakly at (very) short
distances, allows one to&lt;br/&gt;easily describe certain properties of hadrons
and atomic nuclei at&lt;br/&gt;extremely high energies in terms of quarks and
gluons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the apparent differences between the
hadronic and quark-gluon&lt;br/&gt;regimes, in Nature there exist instances
where the behavior of&lt;br/&gt;low-energy hadronic cross sections, averaged
over appropriate energy&lt;br/&gt;intervals, closely resembles that at
asymptotically high energies,&lt;br/&gt;calculated in terms of quark-gluon
degrees of freedom. This phenomenon&lt;br/&gt;is referred to as quark-hadron
duality, and reflects the relationship&lt;br/&gt;between confinement and
asymptotic freedom in QCD. Surprisingly, this&lt;br/&gt;phenomenon already takes
place at rather low energies and averaged over&lt;br/&gt;relatively small energy
intervals (or a few hadronic states). This&lt;br/&gt;proposal investigates
electron scattering reactions off protons,&lt;br/&gt;neutrons and nuclei in an
effort to understand the origin of
this&lt;br/&gt;phenomenon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal encompasses several
experiments scattering electrons off a&lt;br/&gt;proton target to push and
understand the limits where quark-hadron&lt;br/&gt;duality arises. It also
includes the development of a novel detector to&lt;br/&gt;as closely as possible
mimic an experiment scattering electrons off a&lt;br/&gt;neutron target.
According to many theories the different onset of&lt;br/&gt;quark-hadron duality
for protons and neutrons will point to the origin&lt;br/&gt;of the duality
phenomenon. Lastly, interesting questions also arise in&lt;br/&gt;atomic nuclei:
does a proton bound in a nucleus change structure due to&lt;br/&gt;its
underlying quark-gluon structure? Within QCD, there is no way
to&lt;br/&gt;derive anything like a nucleus in which the constituents (in
normal&lt;br/&gt;life, the protons and neutrons) do not change as the mean
density&lt;br/&gt;increases. Similarly, can one witness the underlying quark-
gluon&lt;br/&gt;structure of hadrons when they traverse a
nucleus?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposing physicists have spearheaded the
research thrust of&lt;br/&gt;quark-hadron duality and more generally the
transition between the&lt;br/&gt;hadronic and quark-gluon descriptions of
protons and nuclei. The&lt;br/&gt;approved project will allow this research to
come to fruition and will&lt;br/&gt;simultaneously provide advanced,
internationally-competitive, scientific&lt;br/&gt;training for underrepresented
minorities. Two of the proposers, and two&lt;br/&gt;Ph.D. students, are female.
In addition, one of the students is&lt;br/&gt;Afro-american and two are African.