* 0400423
* Fourier Analysis Techniques and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Rodolfo Torres, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2008
* USD 140,000.00

DMS 0400423&lt;br/&gt;R Torres&lt;br/&gt;University of Kansas&lt;br/&gt;Fourier
Analysis Techniques and
Applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is
devoted to investigations in the analysis of operators associated to singular
integrals, product-like operations, function &lt;br/&gt;spaces and
approximations, estimates for commutators and null forms, &lt;br/&gt;and other
related problems. The main tools to be used are decomposition
&lt;br/&gt;techniques related to time-frequency expansions. Singular multilinear
&lt;br/&gt;pseudodifferential operators will be studied together with their
&lt;br/&gt;application to nonlinear analysis, estimates in Sobolev spaces, and
&lt;br/&gt;partial differential equations. Another part of the project is
&lt;br/&gt;concerned with the mathematical modeling of transformations of
&lt;br/&gt;quasi-ordered geometries as measured by their Fourier spectra. This
is &lt;br/&gt;motivated by ongoing research in biology in the analysis of the
&lt;br/&gt;scattering of light by nanostructures in the tissues of living
&lt;br/&gt;organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common task in both theoretical and
applied problems is to find the &lt;br/&gt;best way to decompose a complicated
system in a way that efficiently &lt;br/&gt;quantifies observable properties and
effects and keeps the available information in an organized and manageable form.
Fourier analysis decodes such &lt;br/&gt;information by resolving a signal or
function into a spectrum of waves &lt;br/&gt;of different amplitudes and
frequencies, while providing also a way to study spatial order, structured
geometries, and patterns in data. Combined with this analysis, multilinear
approaches to complicated phenomena in nonlinear science will provide further
understanding of problems where simple linear or first-order approximations are
not sufficient. The analysis of ordered structures is also of importance to
research in other areas of biology and physical sciences. For example, it is a
relevant aspect in questions about the study of macroscopic physical properties
of materials in terms of their microscopic structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;