* 0400558
* RUI:  Modular Representations of Algebraic Groups and Related Structures
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2009
* Christopher Bendel, University of Wisconsin-Stout
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2009
* USD 155,568.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is an investigation of the
representation theory of algebraic groups, certain finite subgroups, and
associated Lie algebras over fields of prime characteristic. Over prime fields,
the fundamental open questions involve cohomology and extensions of modules, and
such questions are the focus of the project. Of particular interest are two one-
parameter families of subgroups associated to a reductive algebraic group -
finite Chevalley groups and Frobenius kernels. Recent results have uncovered
deep relationships between these two theories, and an underlying goal of the
project is to strengthen these connections. Such relationships are of inherent
theoretical interest and can be powerful computational tools for transferring
information from one category to the other as well as to other areas. Professor
Bendel in partial collaboration with Daniel Nakano and Cornelius Pillen will
build upon previous work of the trio to make computations of cohomology and
extensions groups as well as support varieties, while seeking to extend known
relationships. Computations of ordinary Lie algebra cohomology for small primes,
which have independent interest, will be used to meet these
objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algebraic structures such as groups and Lie
algebras arise naturally in a number of physical situations, for example in the
symmetries found in natural phenomenon, and have been applied in biology,
physics, chemistry, and computer science. In basic terms, a representation of a
group (or Lie algebra) provides a geometric glimpse at the structure of the
group. A typical group has many representations of varying sizes. By better
understanding the representations of a group, one can better understand the
group and extract information for applications. One of the main objectives of
this work is to investigate the fundamental question of how different
representations can be combined to form new representations. The principal
investigator has been actively involved in promoting new mathematical ideas. He
is currently organizing a conference that relates representation theory to other
algebraic and geometric areas. At the local level, another objective of this
project is to enhance the teaching and learning environment of the Mathematics,
Statistics, and Computer Science Department at the University of Wisconsin-Stout
(a predominantly undergraduate institution) and to increase student interest in
scientific research. Undergraduate students will be directly involved in the
project by making computer calculations, requiring them to combine their
mathematical and programming skills. Further, the project will promote the
development of a research climate within the department where faculty bring
fresh ideas into the classroom and students, especially women, are regularly
exposed to mathematics beyond the classroom and have the opportunity to
participate in faculty research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;