* 0400484
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Hurwitz Numbers, Teichmuller Spaces, Schubert Calculus, and  Cluster Algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Michael Gekhtman, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 05/31/2008
* USD 106,000.00

This project explores links between classical combinatorics, theory of moduli
spaces of holomorphic curves, real algebraic geometry and total positivity, and
the newly emerging theory of cluster algebras. In particular,we plan to use the
link between decorated Teichmueller spaces and theory of cluster algebras to
investigate moduli spaces; to develop a general geometric framework for cluster
algebras and to find a sufficiently generic source of geometric examples of
formal cluster algebras supplementing those arising from Schubert varieties. In
addition, we will apply the cluster algebra approach combined with a geometric
Littlewood-Richardson rule to the Shapiro-Shapiro conjecture in the real
Schubert calculus. Finally, we plan to generalize ELSV-formula for Hurwitz
numbers, namely, to express (double) Hurwitz numbers as integrals of certain
characteristic classes over moduli spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many significant
breakthroughs in mathematics are inspired by theoretical physics and achieved
through the interaction between different branches of mathematics such as
combinatorics, geometry (differential, symplectic and algebraic), the theory of
integrable models, and many others. Geometric objects we are interested in can
be used to describe parameters of physical systems. In many cases, the cluster
algebra formalism, recently discovered by Fomin and Zelevinsky, turns out to be
uniquely suited for an investigation of physically important coordinate systems.
Extending the scope of the cluster algebra approach will prove useful in
topological field theory, 2-D gravity, classical and quantum integrable models
and, on a more applicable level, in electrical engineering, in particular, in
the design of nonlinear filters.&lt;br/&gt;