* 0401993
* Collaborative Research: High-Resolution, Low-Latitude Paleoclimatology Through Scientific Drilling of Lake Bosumtwi, Ghana
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2004,10/31/2005
* Christopher Scholz, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 10/31/2005
* USD 98,088.00

This award is to augment $1.2M in operational funds from the International
Continental Drilling Program (ICDP) to obtain multiple lake cores for
paleoclimatic analyses from Lake Bosumtwi, a meteorite impact crater located in
the tropical forest lowlands of Ghana, West Africa. The researchers aim to
produce a multi-proxy and inter-annual to millennial scale record of climate
change over the last ~1.0 million years (Ma). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data
derived from the cores will be examined for potential linkages among climate
from the North Atlantic, Africa, and the Asia regions. The lake is located
beneath the seasonal passage of the Inter Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) and
is hydrologically closed with deep anoxic waters that preserve annual
laminations. Previous research by the team has yielded seismic profiles that
documented the impact origin of the crater while analyses of previously
recovered piston sediment cores produced an 800-year record of environmental
data. These cores have shown that the intensity of the African summer monsoon
decreased during the Younger Dryas and during Heinrich 1 and 2 climatic events.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new sites will drill through multiple warm
interglacial periods and will further the paleoclimate community's broader
understand of climate variability from the Tropics. This research will be
carried out in full collaboration with Ghanaian scientists to support capacity
building and technology transfer between the US scientists and their Ghanaian
colleagues. The research funds will also support American graduate students and
provide them with a unique research experience.