* 0401473
*  Family Resource Allocation in Urban and Rural Communities
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2004,04/30/2007
* Linda Burton, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Patricia White
* 04/30/2007
* USD 500,001.00

Linda Burton&lt;br/&gt;Stephen Matthews&lt;br/&gt;Debra
Skinner&lt;br/&gt;Pennyslvania State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using
ethnography and Geographic Information Systems (GIS) technology, the
investigators will conduct a novel, in- depth, comparative study of resource
allocation in low-income families residing in large urban, small town, and rural
communities. Resource allocation is defined as the procurement and distribution
of material, emotional, and informational resources within and across
generations in families. To examine this issue, the PIs (Principal
Investigators) will analyze secondary data from two comparably designed
ethnographic studies, and supplement on-going data collection in one. The
studies are the Welfare, Children, and Families: A Three-City Study and the
Family Life Project. The Three-City Study Ethnography was conducted in Boston,
Chicago, and San Antonio from June 1999 to August 2003 and comprises a sample of
256 low-income African American, Hispanic, and non- Hispanic white families. The
data include over 45,000 pages of fieldnotes and transcripts of participant
interviews and observations, 3500 audiotapes, and key tables with life course
and spatial resource use information. The Family Life Project, launched in
October 2002 and continuing through October 2006, involves a sample of 72 low
income African American and non-Hispanic white families. This ethnography is
being conducted in Pennsylvania and North Carolina. The grant will support the
collection of on-going ethnographic and GIS resource allocation data from
families in the Family Life Project. The grant will also allow the investigators
to add ten Hispanic families to this ethnography so that the sample is
ethnically comparable to the Three-City Study. The specific aims of the proposed
study are twofold: (1) to examine the relationship between intergenerational
resource allocation, family roles, community resources, and social mobility in
urban and rural settings and (2) to integrate ethnographic methods and data on
families and communities with GIS technology to inform our understanding of
intergenerational resource allocation in urban and rural communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will advance our knowledge and understanding
of family resource allocation. The project takes an interdisciplinary approach,
including sociologist, anthropologists, geographers as research team members.
Study findings will have a broad appeal to not only disciplines represented by
the research team, but to scholars in demography, human development, and life
course and family studies as well. More over, the integration of ethnographic
and GIS methods and data represents significant innovation in the field that has
the potential to lead to new insights and contextually-sensitive understandings
of resource allocation among lower-income families.&lt;br/&gt;