* 0401100
* Cone-Preserving Operators and Nonlinear Differential-Delay Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Roger Nussbaum, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 08/31/2008
* USD 149,922.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Nussbaum&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research proposed here
concerns two areas: (a) the dynamics of nonlinear differential-delay equations
with state-dependent time lag(s) and (b) questions about cone-preserving
operators. The immediate link between (a) and (b) is a recently discovered and
unexpected connection between singular limits of differential-delay equations
and generalized max-plus equations. The PI will continue this work in several
directions. For example, is it possible to extend known results to the case of
two or more state-dependent time lags? This is largely terra incognita, but
numerical results suggest a variety of intriguing
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The general problem of understanding the dynamics
of nonlinear functional differential equations is important in both theory and
practice. Many physical problems are best modeled by functional differential
equations. Mathematical biology is a particularly rich source of examples. The
methods developed here provide some insight into the models. Conversely, models
in the sciences have traditionally motivated the choice of equations to study;
Nicholson's model of blowfly population from fifty years ago is a typical
example. Thus a broader impact of this proposal is obtaining a better
understanding of models from the physical and biological sciences that involve
functional differential equations.&lt;br/&gt;