* 0401585
* International Research Fellowship Program: Chemical Reactions Involving Multiple Electronic States
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Heather Netzloff, Netzloff Heather M
* Fellowship
* Susan Parris
* 09/30/2007
* USD 94,932.00

0401585 Netzloff

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-two-month research fellowship by Dr. Heather M.
Netzloff to work with Dr. Michael A. Collins at Australian National University
in Canberra, Australia.

This project aims to develop methods and programs to study chemical reactions
that occur by molecular dynamics in multiple electronic states. Many chemical
reactions occur while the molecule remains in the ground electronic state. The
motion of the atoms is governed by a single molecular potential energy surface
(PES). However, many important chemical reactions, ranging from atmospheric
chemistry to photochemical reaction mechanisms in organic and inorganic
chemistry to fundamental biological phenomena such as photosynthesis, take place
via dynamics on more than one electronic state.

Over the last several years, Dr. Michael Collins and co-workers have developed
an automated method to construct a single PES and to then study the dynamics of
reactions on the PES in a program package called GROW. A recent collaboration
involving Dr. Collins, Dr. Mark Gordon, and the recipient, resulted in the
partial interface of GROW with the ab initio quantum chemistry program, GAMESS.
Before this interface, GROW was not capable of constructing a PES when excited
electronic states are close to the ground state. Multiple electronic states,
close in energy, can only be reliably calculated by using so-called multi-
reference methods, in particular multi-configuration self consistent field
(MCSCF) approaches. The efficient computation of MCSCF wavefunctions is one of
GAMESS' hallmark capabilities. This postdoctoral fellowship is making it
possible to enormously expand the power of the GAMESS-GROW interface to provide
the means to study chemical reactions in excited electronic states and reactions
which proceed via multiple electronic states. The inclusion of MCSCF
calculations within the Grow-GAMESS interface makes it possible to grow multi-
reference PESs. By itself, this opens up a wide range of new, important
applications The first important outcome of the project will be the derivation
and coding of the efficient evaluation of the so-called "derivative coupling"
that couples nuclear motion with the electronic wavefunction into GAMESS. This
will initially be accomplished for MCSCF wavefunctions and subsequently at
higher levels of theory. An effective GAMESS-GROW interface will provide the
means for efficiently constructing the global multiple PESs and coupling
surfaces that govern chemical reactions. Application of these tools will allow
the study of the dynamics of important radical reactions that previously could
not be studied with ab initio surfaces. The initial focus will be on the
reactions of OH and CH radicals, which play important roles in combustion
chemistry, in the chemistry of Earth's and other planetary atmospheres, and in
interstellar chemistry.