* 0401159
* Multidirectional Boundry Value Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Gregory Verchota, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2008
* USD 124,150.00

The PI proposes to solve boundary value problems for linear elliptic
differential equations and systems in polyhedral domains of n-dimensional
Euclidean space. Data is prescribed in Lebesgue spaces and Sobolev spaces
defined on the boundary and taken on in the sense of pointwise nontangential
limits. The order of the differential equation is not restricted. Polyhedral
domains with manifold boundary provide examples of domains for which local
continuous transverse vector fields do not exist; i.e. the boundary cannot be
locally realized as the graph of a function in rectangular coordinates. This is
true in as low a dimension as n=3. This fact poses difficulties in obtaining a
priori energy estimates on the boundary (Rellich identities) especially for
systems and higher order equations. When such estimates can be obtained,
existence can be shown for a closed subspace of data. That the subspace is the
entire Banach space of data uses a method of continuity that seems to require a
combinatorial structure of the polyhedral boundary. A theorem of E. E. Moise
provides this structure in 4 dimensions, but examples in higher dimensions show
its lack in general. The PI proposes to find methods of computation to overcome
this problem, among others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two standard examples of linear
elliptic boundary value problems are (1) deriving the steady-state temperature
distribution inside a solid body from knowledge of the distribution on the
boundary (the data), and (2) deriving the systems of stresses, strains and
displacements inside an elastic body from knowledge of the boundary's
displacement or prescribed stresses at the boundary. In 3-dimensional space
there are naturally-occurring physical objects which take polyhedral form
(crystal structures, for example). In fact, it is reasonable to think that this
occurs more frequently than taking shapes that are either infinitely smooth or
as infinitely rough as a boundary surface described by a Lipschitz function.
That polyhedral domains can have boundaries not describable as graphs of
functions is seen by placing one standard brick upon another in a crossed
position. The 2-dimensional surface locally about any one of the newly created
vertices is not the graph of any function from any plane no matter how oriented.
This is a mild example and in general the 3-dimensional situation can be much
worse. The absence of this mathematical tool, the graph in rectangular
coordinates, causes difficulties in obtaining the required estimates inside the
domain and up to the boundary. Abstract polyhedral structures in higher
dimensions are present in linear programming, in modeling communications
networks and economic systems. The PI does not yet know if elliptic boundary
value problems similar to the ones just described arise in any of these
settings, but the motivating idea of boundary value theory, to deduce more
information from a smaller amount, is certainly present. &lt;br/&gt;