* 0401252
* Nonlinear Stability of Multidimensional Structures in Fluid Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Mark Williams, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2008
* USD 90,000.00

Proposal DMS-0401252&lt;br/&gt;PI: Mark Williams, University of North Carolina
(Chapel Hill)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Nonlinear stability of
multidimensional structures in &lt;br/&gt;Fluid
Dynamics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first goal of
the project is to investigate the small viscosity &lt;br/&gt;limit for the
Navier-Stokes equations. &lt;br/&gt;A long-standing question in shock wave
mathematics is&lt;br/&gt;to show that curved multidimensional shock solutions to
the Euler&lt;br/&gt;equations can be obtained as limits of smooth solutions to
the&lt;br/&gt;Navier-Stokes equations. Another goal is to study the
existence,&lt;br/&gt;uniqueness, and stability of solutions (like strong
detonations)&lt;br/&gt;to the Chapman-Jouget and ZND models of combustion, and
to clarify&lt;br/&gt;when and how well solutions to these simplified models
approximate&lt;br/&gt;true exact solutions of the full Navier-Stokes-combustion
system.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will also examine the neutral
stability&lt;br/&gt;regime for both shocks and vortex sheets, and in particular
will&lt;br/&gt;attempt to provide a rigorous foundation for the theory of
Artola&lt;br/&gt;and Majda which describes the development of kink modes leading
to&lt;br/&gt;roll-up in supersonic vortex
sheets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposer intends to carry out a
rigorous investigation of the&lt;br/&gt;existence and nonlinear stability of
certain important&lt;br/&gt;multidimensional structures arising in the
mathematical study of&lt;br/&gt;compressible fluids. These structures include
shock waves,&lt;br/&gt;detonation fronts, and vortex sheets. There is a vast
applied&lt;br/&gt;literature on these topics, but until relatively recently
they&lt;br/&gt;have resisted rigorous mathematical analysis, particularly in
the&lt;br/&gt;multidimensional case. In recent work by the proposer,
his&lt;br/&gt;collaborators, and others new tools have become available
that&lt;br/&gt;permit a rigorous study of the highly singular
perturbation&lt;br/&gt;problems that arise in investigating the stability of
such&lt;br/&gt;structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;