* 0401720
* Problems in Function Theory
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* John Garnett, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2008
* USD 141,282.00

DMS 0401720

J B Garnett

UCLA



Garnett and his students will work on several problems in classical one
dimensional complex analysis. The first problem is to approximate any Blaschke
product uniformly on the open disc by Blaschke products whose zeros are
sufficiently spread apart and thin that the corresponding Riesz mass is bounded
in all holomorphic coordinate systems (i. e. is a Carleson measure). The
approximation should be effected using explicit constructions. The second
problem is to give a direct proof of the equivalence of two weight conditions,
the Muckenhoupt $A_2$ condition and the Helson-Szeg\"o condition, that are
necessary and sufficient for the Hilbert transform to be bounded on
$L^2$(weight). The third problem is to construct non-constant bounded analytic
functions on the complement of a positive length subset of a Lipschitz graph.
The fourth problem is a corona problem for infinitely connected plane domains
whose boundaries lie on certain regular Cantor sets. It too requires some new
explicit constructions. The fifth problem is to prove the $n$-dimensional
Lipschitz harmonic capacity is a bilipschitz invariant.

The methods to be used on these problems will be constructive so that they can
be give explicit computer aided constructions of analytic functions and
conformal mappings. Analytic functions and conformal mappings have broad
applications in fluid dynamics, acoustics, and electrical engineering, and in
these applications constructions are more useful than general existence
theorems.

