* 0401107
* Lattice, Trees and Group Actions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2007
* Lisa Carbone, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2007
* USD 110,000.00

Abstract for award DMS-0401107 of Carbone&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this program is to advance understanding in&lt;br/&gt;algebra,
group theory and representation theory with&lt;br/&gt;particular emphasis on the
mathematics underlying physics&lt;br/&gt;and geometry. Kac-Moody Lie algebras
are infinite dimensional&lt;br/&gt;algebras that were first discovered by
physicists. A mathematical&lt;br/&gt;characterization of these algebras obtained
in the 1970's allowed&lt;br/&gt;for the existence of a wider class of Kac-Moody
algebras, namely&lt;br/&gt;hyperbolic algebras. To this day, no classical
interpretation of&lt;br/&gt;hyperbolic algebras is known in mathematics, nor has
any physical&lt;br/&gt;interpretation of them been discovered. Yet these
algebras&lt;br/&gt;display remarkable symmetry properties which encode
deep&lt;br/&gt;and intricate relationships between numbers and
geometry.&lt;br/&gt;These hyperbolic algebras and their groups are the
objects&lt;br/&gt;of our study. We have discovered the beginnings of&lt;br/&gt;a
theory of automorphic forms for lattices in Kac-Moody&lt;br/&gt;groups over
finite fields. Although Kac-Moody groups&lt;br/&gt;have no obvious algebraic or
arithmetic structure, our&lt;br/&gt;work demonstrates substantial analogies with
Lie groups&lt;br/&gt;over fields of positive characteristic. Our approach, in
part,&lt;br/&gt;has been to adapt discrete and combinatorial methods
in&lt;br/&gt;order to solve problems in this infinite dimensional
setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
program is to advance understanding in&lt;br/&gt;algebra and symmetries of
certain geometric objects with a&lt;br/&gt;particular emphasis on the
mathematics underlying physics&lt;br/&gt;and geometry. "Kac-Moody Lie algebras"
are infinite dimensional&lt;br/&gt;spaces that are studied both by
mathematicians and physicists,&lt;br/&gt;having first been discovered in physics
as algebras of "loops",&lt;br/&gt;that is, maps from the circle into finite
dimensional Lie&lt;br/&gt;algebras. A mathematical characterization of these
spaces,&lt;br/&gt;obtained in the 1970's, allowed for the existence of a
wider&lt;br/&gt;class of Kac-Moody algebras, namely hyperbolic
algebras.&lt;br/&gt;To this day, no classical interpretation of
hyperbolic&lt;br/&gt;algebras is known in mathematics, nor has any
physical&lt;br/&gt;interpretation of them been discovered. Yet these
algebras&lt;br/&gt;display remarkable symmetry properties which encode
deep&lt;br/&gt;and intricate relationships between numbers and
geometry.&lt;br/&gt;These hyperbolic algebras and their symmetries are
the&lt;br/&gt;objects of our study. A strong theme in this research
program&lt;br/&gt;is to adapt discrete and combinatorial methods to solve
problems&lt;br/&gt;in algebra. The proposer is developing a team of
researchers&lt;br/&gt;in algebra, geometry, physics and combinatorics from a
wide&lt;br/&gt;variety of countries, and including several women, in
order&lt;br/&gt;to bring a wealth of diverse viewpoints to this research
team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;