* 0401691
* Foundations of ILP-based Static Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Jens Palsberg, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2008
* USD 270,000.00

CCR-0306401 Foundations of ILP-based Static Analysis Jens Palsberg

Compilers are an important part of today's computational infrastructure as
software is ever-increasingly written in high-level programming languages.
Compiler correctness is generally desirable but absolutely essential for
embedded systems like sensor networks, medical implants, and fly-by-wire/drive-
by-wire systems. Many commonly used compiler techniques lack proven foundations
despite substantial advances in the field of proving compiler correctness. This
project will focus on the foundations of static analysis based on integer linear
programming (ILP), a technique commonly used by compilers for embedded systems.
This project will investigate key correctness properties of ILP-based analyses,
including (1) soundness: is the analysis sound with respect to a formal
semantics? (2) preservation: is the analysis preserved after program
transformations? and (3) composition: can analyses be combined in ways that
preserve basic properties of the program? Foundational results about the
correctness of ILP-based analyses will lead to increased confidence in generated
code, principles for developing new analyses, increased understanding of how to
combine analyses, and ILP-based code certification, in the spirit of proof-
carrying code, typed assembly language, and Java bytecode verification.

