* 0401740
* International Research Fellowship Program: STEM Tomography of Nanoscale Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2004,04/30/2006
* Ilke Arslan, Arslan Ilke
* Fellowship
* Susan Parris
* 04/30/2006
* USD 34,626.00

040174 Arslan

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-two-month research fellowship by Dr. Ilke
Arslan to work with Dr. Paul A. Midgley at the University of Cambridge in the
United Kingdom.

Recent advances in nanotechnology have challenged electron microscopy to become
more quantitative in determining the composition, size, shape, and electronic
properties of individual nanostructures. Traditional techniques in scanning
transmission electron microscopy have been developed to obtain two dimensional
projected atomic structures, but to truly understand the effect of size and
shape on the properties of nanomaterials, the three dimensional structure must
be ascertained. This is now possible in the electron microscope using electron
tomography. While electron tomography has been used for biological materials for
many years, the application of Z-contrast (incoherent) imaging for materials
systems is very new and only slowly becoming available in a few institutions
worldwide. This project is using Z-contrast tomography to study several key
nanoscale systems such as catalysts, quantum dots, and microelectronic devices.
With 1nm resolution in three dimensions (with the resolution continually
improving as the technique develops) and a field of view of hundreds of
nanometers, new insights are being gained into the three dimensional structure-
property relationships of novel devices and structures at the nanoscale.