* 0401557
* SGER: Trace Metal and Morphological Proxies for Bleaching-Related Stress in Scleractinian Corals
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/2003,04/30/2005
* Warren Allmon, Paleontological Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 04/30/2005
* USD 54,496.00

Previous work has resulted in data indicating that there are morphological and
chemical indicators of bleaching related stress in one species of modem coral
(Porites divaricata) that have potential as proxies for coral bleaching in the
fossil record. This project will investigate whether these same indicators can
be seen in fossil (Holocene, Plio Pleistocene) corals. Well preserved Holocene,
Pleistocene, and Pliocene Porties spp. will be examined with SEM, and analyzed
for trace metal content with ICPAES. Resulting data should indicate if potential
proxies identified in preliminary results can be identified in fossil specimens.
This project is a necessary intermediate step between previous work, and a
larger project investigating the geologic history of coral bleaching.

There is no existing proxy for identification of stress in fossil Scleractinia.
Morphological and trace metal signals for bleaching related stress have been
identified in the modem scleractinian skeleton as they have been in
foraminifera. Because these signals have potential for identification in the
fossil record, the Neogene fossil record could become a source of information
about the permanence of damage done to modern coral reef communities, the effect
on the biodiversity of the reef community, and the prognosis for recovery of
today's reef systems.

The Small Grant for Exploratory Research will be carried out by post-doc, Sande
Burr, who generated the preliminary data as part of her PhD dissertation. This
project will allow her to advance her training and skills relating to ICPAES and
SEM. If this project is successful, a larger, fully funded project which would
involve collaboration with scientists in the Dominican Republic, will be
proposed.