* 0401845
* Late Holocene Geo-biologic Records of Climate Changes at Lake Tanganyika, East Africa, with Seasonal to Decadal Resolution
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Jay Stager, Paul Smith's College of Arts and Sciences
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2009
* USD 299,964.00

This Research in Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) award will help develop
biological and geochemical records from a series of sediment cores representing
the last 3,000 years of history from the northern basin of Lake Tanganyika, East
Africa.

The research goal is to produce high-resolution precisely dated paleoclimate
records to test the validity of a recently proposed model of symmetric, equator
ward compression of the Inter Tropical Convergence Zone by solar variability
during the Little Ice Age, and to investigate other possible effects of solar
forcing on tropical rainfall. The researcher postulates that detailed geo-
biologic time series, when developed from the Lake, will help define discrete
paleoclimate events at Lake Tanganyika that could be compared with records from
tropical latitudes to provide a record of drought and rainfall trends from 3,000
years through modern times.

Part of the research effort will involve diatom-based proxies of past wind
activity. These data represents a potential new source of insights into the
nature and origin of late Holocene variability in the Afro-Asian paleo-monsoon
system, which until now has been studied almost exclusively through sites
located in and around the Arabian Sea.

Results from this research project will be compared to other records ranging
from tropical to polar latitudes thereby placing the climatic history of the
Tanganyika basin into a global context. Determining the history of recent
productivity declines, often attributed to global warming, will provide
important insights into their origin.

The award will support several undergraduate students to help analyze the
sediment records and the international collaborations with non-US scientists
will increase worldwide access to the research data and a sharing of ideas
regarding its interpretation.