* 0401988
* Biotech-SUCCESS: Biotechnology Success in Outreach to Underserved Populations
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2008
* Walter Colber, Lone Star College System College District
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Udovic
* 04/30/2008
* USD 74,998.00

Biological Sciences (61). This project evaluates a model recruitment program
that is aimed at attracting students from diverse populations into biotechnology
associate degree programs, with the objective of moving students toward
successful careers in the field. In order to address the demand for a 21st
century workforce in biotechnology, the project partners this community college
with Lexicon Genetics, Inc. and high school teachers and students at the Conroe
Independent School District. It employs recruitment and career awareness
programs designed to catch the attention of underrepresented populations,
especially from the Hispanic community. This effort includes: (1) using
Biotechnology Clubs in high schools as a novel recruitment tool, (2) building a
career-awareness program that employs ethnically matched role models, community
dialog and recruitment materials in Spanish and English; (3) offering core
biotechnology courses at more accessible times and locations; and (4) providing
professional development opportunities for biotechnology educators at the
secondary and community college level. The methods used in this project are
being evaluated for transferability to other biotechnology programs unable to
meet recruitment goals, thereby developing a strategy with possible nation-wide
implications.