* 0401860
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Dynamic Models of Race and Income Segregation
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2005
* Robert Mare, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* beth rubin
* 04/30/2005
* USD 7,489.00

This dissertation develops an agent-based model that is grounded in real-world
data on residential mobility and neighborhood change. It uses this model to
examine how neighborhood sorting along one dimension, for instance race, may
exacerbate inequalities along another dimension such as income segregation. The
model captures the relationship between individuals' decisions about where to
live and the process of neighborhood formation. The first part of the project
analyzes the effects of neighborhood characteristics-especially their
race/ethnic and economic makeup-on individuals' decisions about where to move.
Next, using realistic computational models, the project will examine the
implications of individual decisions for changes in patterns of racial and
economic segregation. The simulations will reveal, for example, the extent to
which the formation of high poverty neighborhoods may be due to the
concentration of poverty among minority groups, and the tendency of minorities
to live in racially segregated areas. This research makes three primary
scientific contributions: (1) It advances past studies of residential
segregation that do not explicitly model how neighborhood sorting along one
dimension can magnify inequalities along another dimension. (2) It combines
innovative data on residential mobility and neighborhood preferences with a
model that takes account of the relationship between individuals' choices and
neighborhood characteristics. (3) The research demonstrates how to analyze the
interdependence of micro level phenomena (residential moves) and macro level
phenomena (residential segregation) at both the theoretical and empirical level.
By so doing, this project serves as a prototype for further contemporary and
historical analyses of residential segregation throughout the United States.
This research will have broader impacts beyond its specific scientific
objectives. In focusing on racial and economic residential segregation, the
project confronts one of the most enduring social problems in the United States.
Segregation is a key source of persistent inequality, social disadvantage, and
conflict. Understanding the processes that maintain and change it is a vital
social issue. Additionally, this research will develop methods of analysis and
empirical examples that can be used to bring rigorous simulation methods into
social science curricula.