* 0401004
* Collaborative Research:     Investigation of Electric Transmission Line Routing Using a Decision Landscape Methodology
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Theodore Grossardt, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Dagmar Niebur
* 06/30/2007
* USD 46,710.00

The recent blackout in the northeast US underscores the need to increase the
electric transmission capacity of the US. While some of that increase will come
from new technologies that increase the capacity of the existing system, some
will have to come from the addition of new lines. One of the main constraints to
new line construction is the difficulty in routing the lines. The US Department
of Energy's National Transmission Grid Study cites improvements in the routing
process as necessary for the reliability and security of the nation's electric
power system, and further cites enhanced public involvement, including effective
presentation of alternatives, to be an important part of the process.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will modify and upgrade a Geographic
Information System (GIS) Decision Support methodology, successfully demonstrated
on a highway routing project in Kentucky, to improve the electric transmission
line routing process. This methodology is one of a suite developed for use
within the Structured Public Involvement (SPI) protocols designed by the
Kentucky Transportation Center. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While GIS is already
employed in transmission line routing, the team proposes a new methodology that
deepens the analytic role of GIS and allows all interested parties to
participate in route planning. The process goes beyond existing rules to allow
professionals to solicit, gather, document, and incorporate input from all
stakeholders, improving process transparency and satisfaction for both the
public and professionals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;University of Kentucky and
University of Arizona will perform the SPI and GIS portions of the research,
continuing ongoing work in these areas. Wichita State will provide the
engineering expertise, including the actual line design, the landscape features
relevant to line routing, and integrating the design process and other technical
issues, such as congestion relief, into the new process.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;After the new process is developed, it will become part of
new undergraduate classes at WSU and UK. This class will integrate for students
all the various aspects of transmission line routing, including environmental
issues, permitting, costs, financing, and others. Students in the class will
then participate in the routing process, representing the various parties that
would be involved in an actual routing process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
structured public involvement protocol designed by the team has demonstrated its
efficiency in terms of reaching out to under-served populations in
transportation questions. Because the electronic polling and GIS/visualization
systems are highly portable, involvement of a range of rural and/or low-
income/minority constituencies will be targeted. Local community venues will be
selected in collaboration with local stakeholders and convenient times will be
negotiated for focus group meetings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The environmental
valuation system of the underserved and non-elite populations will be
incorporated directly into the decision engine. The under-served populations
will feel more of a sense of inclusion in processes currently believed to be
opaque and unresponsive to their concerns. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The electric
power supply is supercritical to the nation's economy in the sense that all
other critical infrastructure relies on it. At the same moment, societal trust
and confidence in public infrastructure decision-making is also critical,
because without it the provision of additional infrastructure is at risk. This
project offers a rare combination of benefits to society, due to its
collaborative origins, as it seeks to overcome a long-standing and ironic
dichotomy between the self-expressed interests of society as a consumer of
electricity, and the electric industry's attempt to impute that desire on behalf
of society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;