* 0401817
* International Research Fellowship Program: Small is Beautiful for Solar Cells
* NONE,NONE
* 12/15/2004,05/31/2006
* Ryan O'Hayre, O'Hayre Ryan P
* Fellowship
* Susan Parris
* 05/31/2006
* USD 94,871.00

0401817 O'Hayre

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support an eighteen-month research fellowship by Dr. Ryan
O'Hayre to work with Dr. Joop Schooman at Technical University in Delft,
Netherlands for twelve months, and with Dr. Fritz Prinz at Stanford University
in California, for six months.

In recent years, tremendous strides have been made developing promising new
classes of solar cells using carefully structured nano-materials. At the
Technical University of Delft, in the Netherlands, Ryan O'Hayre is working to
improve the efficiency of these devices, exploring new designs that could allow
for a robust, cost effective means of converting light into electricity.

Collaborating with Dr. Joop Schoonman and Dr. Albert Goossens, Ryan is
investigating a novel solid-state alternative to the Gratzel cell. This all-
solid-state, completely inorganic, bulk heterojunction device does not suffer
from performance degradation and does not require expensive sealing. It is based
on a nanometer-scale interpenetrating network between n-type titanium dioxide
and p-type copper indium diselinide. The team uses a relatively new technique,
Atomic-Layer Chemical Vapor Deposition (AL-CVD) to fabricate the nanostructured
devices.

In addition to improving the efficiency of these nanostructured solar cells,
Ryan plans to use a novel Atomic Force Microscope (AFM) impedance microscopy
technique that he has developed to study their fundamental behavior. Probing the
local properties of solar cells at the nano-scale should produce a better
understanding of the basic physical processes at work in the conversion of light
to electricity- leading eventually to better solar cells.

As a final aspect of the collaboration, Ryan is working to develop a completely
new localized characterization technique, referred to as the AFM intensity-
modulated photocurrent imaging technique (in other words, localized IMPS). By
applying sinusoidal illumination intensity to the solar cell and measuring the
local current response, localized IMPS may be able to address questions about
heterogeneous electron lifetime and recombination characteristics in
nanostructured solar cells. Extending collaboration between TU Delft and
Stanford University, Ryan plans to leverage the AFM impedance imaging facilities
at Stanford to implement the AFM-IMPS system.