* 0401278
* Integrated Micro-Scale Power Electronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Jeffrey Lang, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Dagmar Niebur
* 05/31/2007
* USD 209,754.00

The rapid evolution of micro-scale systems technology is generating a demand for
power electronic circuits that achieve unprecedented levels of miniaturization.
Furthermore, there is a tremendous need for these power electronics to be
manufacturable via batch microfabrication techniques and integrable with other
microsystem components. The passive energy-storage components used in power
electronics are a major obstacle to achieving miniaturization and integration.
The energy storage density limitations of passive components and their poor
scaling characteristics impair converter performance at small scales. Integrated
fabrication of micro-scale power electronics requires components and topologies
that circumvent these problems.

The research program described here addresses the twin challenges of
miniaturization and integrated fabrication of micro-scale power electronics. Two
closely-related approaches for meeting these challenges are proposed. The first
approach explores novel passive components and circuit topologies based on
multi-resonant filter networks that take advantage of the ratiometric matching
available through microfabrication. These structures and topologies are
compatible with conventional power conversion methods, but require much lower
passive-component size. The second approach explores alternative micro-scale
passive components that incorporate mechanical modes of energy storage. These
microelectromechanical filter components are compatible with the new circuit
topologies explored here, can be implemented with MEMS fabrication techniques,
and exhibit improved scaling characteristics.

The research results have the potential for tremendous impact on the size,
performance, and manufacturability of micro-scale power electronics. In pursuing
this project, we will also address an important education issue: the need for
engineers that are capable of bringing micro-scale power electronics into
widespread application. This will be accomplished by engaging students in the
research, incorporating key research results into our education and community
outreach efforts, and by forging synergistic ties between the research and
courses at MIT. As part of these efforts, we will endeavor to engage students
with a broad variety of backgrounds in the work, and especially to engage
students from under-represented groups.