* 0401479
* Supernovae, the Fate of the Universe, and Broadening the Perspectives of Tomorrow's Scientists
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2004,01/15/2006
* Douglas Leonard, Leonard                 Douglas        C
* Fellowship Award
* Dana Lehr
* 01/15/2006
* USD 107,875.00

Dr. Leonard is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral Fellowship
to carry out a program of research and education at the California Institute of
Technology. Dr. Leonard will pursue an integrated two-pronged research effort
into the study of supernovae-the final, explosive stage in the evolution of
certain types of stars. First, he will seek to verify and extend the role of
distant supernovae as cosmological probes through the spectroscopic and
photometric study of supernovae discovered by the Canada-France-Hawaii Telescope
Legacy and QUEST-2 surveys. Second, he will launch an intensive supernova
spectropolarimetry campaign at the Palomar 5-meter and Keck 10-meter telescopes
to investigate the early-time geometry of supernovae, which is of fundamental
importance to their utility as distance indicators.

In addition to his research, Dr. Leonard will teach a course targeted to Caltech
undergraduates entitled ''Inventing Reality: The Human Search for Truth''. While
broadly related to the history of human scientific thought, a particular focus
of the course will be the issue of how the questions that people have asked and
how the answers that satisfy the questioners have changed over time and across
cultures. This will provide Caltech undergraduates a unique opportunity to
examine the foundations of the present scientific paradigm and to gain an
appreciation for how other societies at different times and/or places
approach(ed) the same questions that Western scientists are asking today.

