* 0401559
* Titan's Methane Meteorological Cycle
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Henry Roe, Roe Henry G
* Fellowship
* Dana E Lehr
* 08/31/2006
* USD 134,000.00

Dr. Roe is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral Fellowship to
carry out a program of research and education at the California Institute of
Technology. The discovery of methane convective clouds at Titan's south pole has
shattered the conventional view of Titan's atmosphere as quiescent and cloudless
without significant weather except on seasonal time scales. Yet, a new
understanding of Titan's weather and methane meteorological cycle is only just
starting to develop and will require a variety of new observing techniques and
strategies. High resolution adaptive optics images with large telescopes (Keck,
Gemini, Palomar) show the locations, sizes, and morphologies of the clouds.
Observing Titan's clouds with a variety of strategies on these telescopes will
answer the many questions concerning spatial, lifetime, and size distributions
of the clouds. Dr. Roe will employ a robotic 24" telescope equipped with CCD and
custom filters to monitor total cloud coverage and to place the high resolution
data in context as well as to trigger target-of-opportunity observations of
extreme events. Dr. Roe will also map methane humidity using a new high
spatial/spectral resolution technique that will reveal the global circulation
pattern as well as show local features such as weather fronts. Finally, Dr. Roe
will create a new inventory of photochemical products of methane, which will
elucidate details of the methane cycle.

In addition, Dr. Roe will lead a group of first-year undergraduates in an annual
5-week collaborative research project and supervise 1-2 undergraduate student
researchers each summer. Summer research students will be funded by Minority
Undergraduate Research Fellowships (MURF) program, which is designed to increase
the numbers of underrepresented students in science and engineering by providing
support for talented undergraduates to participate in mentored summer research
experiences at Caltech.