* 0401478
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: States Schools and Students: Contextualizing Community College Outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2005
* Richard Arum, New York University
* Standard Grant
* beth rubin
* 03/31/2005
* USD 2,860.00

This dissertation bridges a long-standing gap between stratification and
organizational traditions to offer a more theoretically robust and policy
relevant understanding of educational and occupational accomplishments of
community college students. It addresses two questions. First, how do
characteristics of community colleges such as branch status, degree of
vocational focus, and available resources affect students' educational and
occupational attainment? Second, how do institutional, political, and economic
factors in the state environment shape community college characteristics, and
through them student outcomes? These questions will be answered using datasets
containing characteristics of individuals (National Education Longitudinal
Study), community colleges (Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System), and
community college environments (State Environment dataset), and by employing OLS
and logistic regression models as well as hierarchical linear models. The
approach proposed in this study will combine characteristics of students,
community colleges, and state environments to identify and systematically
examine a much broader range of factors influencing students' educational and
occupational attainment than has been done in previous research. This project's
broader impacts include the following: By introducing organizational environment
into the study of student outcomes, the project will broaden the definition of
context used in stratification research and elaborate on the implications of
context for the status attainment process. It will also extend organizational
theory by examining the effects of organizational and environmental forces on
individual outcomes, linking macro and micro levels of analysis. In addition, by
illuminating specific community college practices and characteristics of state
environments affecting students, the study will contribute to an informed policy
debate and suggest how government and community college leaders could assist
students' progress through community colleges and the academic and occupational
world beyond. This is particularly important since large and growing numbers of
students commence their postsecondary education in community colleges and a
disproportionate number of those students are members of disadvantaged
groups.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;