* 0401032
* Combinatorial and Probabilistic Approach to Geometric Functional Analysis and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Roman Vershynin, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2007
* USD 94,790.00

Abstract

The aim of the project is to develop a new combinatorial and probabilistic
approach to geometric functional analysis and its applications. Some of new
major ideas are expected to come from the concept of the combinatorial
dimension, which is a general form of the classical Vapnik-Chervonenkis
dimension. Arising from logic, probability theory and computer science, the use
of the combinatorial dimension looks very promising also in a wide range of
areas including geometric functional analysis (finding nice sections of convex
bodies), convex geometry (study of polytopes), discrete geometry (counting
integer points and cells in sets) and extremal combinatorics. This new
combinatorial and probabilistic method is aimed at one of the hardest problems
in the theory of empirical processes - describe the classes of functions for
which the Central Limit Theorem holds uniformly. New aspects of the celebrated
concentration of measure phenomenon will also be studied by a combination of
probabilistic and purely geometric ideas. This might give an insight into
relationships between random and deterministic structures in geometric
functional analysis, as well as a new view of local versus global asymptotic
convex geometries. Probabilistic approach will also be developed for problems of
finding nice submatrices of large matrices, which arise in functional and
harmonic analysis as well as in computer science.

The project opens new connections between functional analysis, combinatorics,
probability, convex geometry and applied mathematics. The celebrated
"probabilistic method" along with deterministic combinatorial, geometric and
analytic methods will merge into one machinery, which may expand our knowledge
on the relationships between chaos and pattern that arise in a variety of high-
dimensional structures in pure mathematics and in computer science. From the
practical point of view, the results expected from this machinery include
justification of algorithms in machine learning, development of algorithms for
storage of large amounts of data and for data transmission (such as error
correction codes).

