* 0401541
* Partial Support for PARTEC2004 International Conference on Particle Technology
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2005
* Alan Weimer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Linda G. Blevins
* 02/28/2005
* USD 26,250.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CTS-0401541&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partial Travel Support for
PARTEC 2004 International Conference on&lt;br/&gt;Particle
Technology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding is requested to partially support the
travel costs of U.S. faculty participating in the PARTEC 2004 International
Conference on Particle Technology being held in&lt;br/&gt;Nuremberg, Germany,
March 15-19, 2004. The Particle Technology Forum of the&lt;br/&gt;American
Institute of Chemical Engineers (AIChE) is co-sponsoring the
Conference.&lt;br/&gt;PARTEC2004 covers all aspects of particle technology and
includes contributions from throughout the world. This is a world event and
provides significant opportunities for international collaboration. The
encouragement of international collaboration is a significant driver for NSF
travel support for U.S. faculty to participate in this
conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PARTEC
is also an international contact point offering a compact survey of the complete
particle technology field. There is a direct transformation of research results
into practical use and an early feedback into research work and concepts.
Limitations in the technology and knowledge bases are shown on the one hand and
recognized on the other hand. Each participant gains of the results and
discussions of his/her own discipline and of adjacent and new fields of
research. The contacts with colleagues from all over the world are an added
bonus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact of Proposed
Activity&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF funding will support as many as 25 U.S.
faculty participants in the PARTEC2004 International Conference on Particle
Technology. This support will provide a mechanism for international
collaboration in the area of particle technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;