* 0401957
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Interactions Among Tropical Plants, Herbivores, Pathogens and Endophytic Fungi
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2005,09/30/2007
* Sunshine Van Bael, VanBael                 Sunshine       A
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 09/30/2007
* USD 93,374.00

0401957 VanBael

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-two-month research fellowship by Dr. Sunshine
A. VanBael to work with Dr. Nelida Gomez at the Smithsonian Tropical Research
Institute in Panama.

Fungal endophytes are microorganisms that live inside, rather than on the
surface, of healthy plant tissue. Endophytes have been found in all plants
sampled, but little is known about how endophytes interact with plants and their
natural enemies. The best studied endophyte systems are those with temperate,
domesticated grasses. Here, the endophytic fungi are vertically transmitted
(from mother to seed) and protect their hosts by producing compounds that deter
herbivores. In tropical areas, however, investigation into the ecological and
evolutionary roles of endophytic fungi has just begun. In contrast to the better
studied grass systems, tropical endophytes are highly diverse, are horizontally
transmitted (via spores), show host-plant affinities, and exhibit anti-pathogen
activity. The PI will study how endophytic fungi modify plant/herbivore/pathogen
interactions between Cassidine beetles (Cassidinae: Chrysomelidae) and their
host plants (Convulvulaceae/Solanaceae) in Panama. These organisms were chosen
as a model system because we have extensive background knowledge about their
behavior, distribution, host-specificity and chemical ecology. Moreover,
preliminary collections of the host plant material indicate that their
endophytes are common, diverse and show host-plant affinity. This research will
be the first to study interactions between plants, endophytes and herbivores in
a tropical system. The host institution (STRI) is an ideal place to pursue this
research because it requires input and facilities from several lab groups at
STRI and the University of Panama, with which STRI maintains a scientific
cooperation agreement.