* 0401302
* Vertex Operator Algebras and Mathematical Conformal Field Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2007
* James Lepowsky, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2007
* USD 210,000.00

Huang and Lepowsky intend to solve a range of problems related
to&lt;br/&gt;vertex (operator) algebra theory and conformal field theory, and
their&lt;br/&gt;relations with and applications to a variety of areas of
mathematics&lt;br/&gt;and physics. They intend to use new and evolving
algebraic, geometric&lt;br/&gt;and analytic ideas and methods. Huang proposes to
continue to develop&lt;br/&gt;an algebraic, analytic and geometric theory
underlying conformal field&lt;br/&gt;theory and to apply the results obtained to
the solution of problems&lt;br/&gt;in algebra, geometry and topology. Lepowsky
intends to continue to&lt;br/&gt;develop vertex operator algebra theory and its
relations with&lt;br/&gt;conformal field theory, infinite-dimensional algebraic
structures,&lt;br/&gt;number theory and the theory of combinatorial identities.
Huang and&lt;br/&gt;Lepowsky also propose to solve problems related to the
remarkable&lt;br/&gt;circle of ideas called ``monstrous moonshine,'' to
geometric&lt;br/&gt;uniformizations and to logarithmic tensor product theory.
The varied&lt;br/&gt;topics discussed in this proposal are in fact deeply
connected with&lt;br/&gt;one another, and the solutions of certain of these
problems are&lt;br/&gt;expected to be useful in the analysis and solution of
others. A&lt;br/&gt;long-term goal of Huang and Lepowsky is to contribute to the
deeper&lt;br/&gt;development of a mathematical theory that will enhance the
conceptual&lt;br/&gt;understanding of many known and still-unknown connections
among many&lt;br/&gt;branches of mathematics and theoretical physics. Huang and
Lepowsky&lt;br/&gt;will continue to be very active in their teaching, writing,
organizing&lt;br/&gt;of conferences and seminars, and their other activities
designed to&lt;br/&gt;increase and enhance the understanding in the mathematical
community&lt;br/&gt;of the very rich field in which they work. They will also
continue to&lt;br/&gt;try to convey to members of the theoretical physics
community, through&lt;br/&gt;writing and their speaking, their enthusiasm for
the richness and&lt;br/&gt;utility of their approach to vertex operator algebra
theory and&lt;br/&gt;mathematical conformal field
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory of vertex operator algebras arose
naturally in the study of&lt;br/&gt;certain infinite-dimensional symmetries and
in the solution of&lt;br/&gt;fundamental problems relating the ``Monster,'' a
certain finite&lt;br/&gt;symmetry group, with number theory, and this theory is
fundamental to&lt;br/&gt;a wide range of problems in both mathematics and
theoretical physics.&lt;br/&gt;Vertex operator algebras are crucial ingredients
in the mathematical&lt;br/&gt;study of conformal field theory, a physical theory
that arose in both&lt;br/&gt;condensed matter physics and string theory, which
in turn is a&lt;br/&gt;physical theory attempting to unify all the interactions
in the&lt;br/&gt;universe. Conformal field theory is in the process of being
rapidly&lt;br/&gt;developed into a rich and beautiful mathematical theory.
This&lt;br/&gt;development has already led to new ideas, surprising results and
the&lt;br/&gt;solutions of many mathematical problems, and it is expected to
lead to&lt;br/&gt;many more. The mathematical development of conformal field
theory has&lt;br/&gt;also been applied to the study of physical phenomena such
as disorder&lt;br/&gt;sytems, condensed matter physics on surfaces with
boundaries and&lt;br/&gt;certain higher-dimensional physical objects called
D-branes in string&lt;br/&gt;theory.&lt;br/&gt;