* 0401724
* Studies of Structural Nanocomposites Using Transmission Electron Microscopy
* EDU,EES
* 03/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Derrick Dean, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* JAMES J. POWLIK
* 08/31/2006
* USD 1,000,000.00

HRD- 0401724&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies of Structural Nanocomposites Using
Transmission Electron Microscopy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tuskegee
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Jeelani,
Shaik&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers at the Center for Advanced Materials at
Tuskegee University&lt;br/&gt;(T-CAM) have infused nanoclays, nanotubes, and
nanoparticles with various polymers to manufacture structural composites
enhancing the strength and stiffness of these nanocomposites. In order to
enhance understanding of the strengthening phenomena, Tuskegee University will
investigate several aspects of the fundamental science of particle-polymer
interaction and failure of structural nanocomposites using a Transmission
Electron Microscope (TEM). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;National Science Foundation
support will be directed primarily towards acquiring a Transmission Electron
Microscope to enhance the quality of on-going research. Research activities
include probing the degree of dispersion, size, shape, and alignment of
particles and interfaces between the particle and the polymer in the resulting
nanocomposites. Thrust areas for research are cure and relaxation behavior of
polymer nanocomposites and structural nanocomposites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this proposal lies in the fundamental studies of
nanocomposites at the molecular level in determining the bonding effect between
the particle and the polymer and investigation of the structure-property
relationship at the nanometer level using a TEM. Successful completion of these
investigations will lead to the development of a new generation of structural
nanocomposites based on a firm scientific foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;T-CAM
houses Tuskegee University's Ph.D. program in Materials Science and Engineering.
A large number of African American graduates, many at the Ph.D. level, will be
produced in an emerging area of materials science and engineering with skills in
using TEM. These graduates will help bring much-needed diversity to the nation's
advanced technological workforce. Undergraduate and graduate students will also
participate in material research using the TEM.&lt;br/&gt;