* 0401215
* Geometry of Real Submanifolds in Complex Space and CR Structures
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Peter Ebenfelt, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2007
* USD 130,003.00

DMS 0401215&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Peter Ebenfelt&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UC San
Diego&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geometry of real submanifolds in complex space . .
.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal
investigator will study geometric, analytic, and algebraic aspects of generic
real submanifolds in complex manifolds (or, more generally, of manifolds with a
CR structure) and their mappings. He will investigate the existence, uniqueness,
and regularity of CR mappings between given CR manifolds, as well as geometric
questions that arise in connection with this study.&lt;br/&gt;More specifically,
the proposer will focus on these problems in the context of studying CR
embeddings of a strictly pseudoconvex hypersurface into another of higher
dimension. In contrast to the case in which the manifolds are of the same
dimension, little is known here and there are a number of unresolved but very
basic questions. The PI will also study geometric properties of&lt;br/&gt;CR
mappings between generic submanifolds of higher codimension, as well as
continuing his study of CR mappings between real hypersurfaces of infinite type
(in the sense of Kohn and Bloom--Graham) by investigating closer the
prolongation of the system defining CR mappings to a singular Pfaffian system on
the jet bundle. Another problem that the PI plans to study is that of normal
forms for real hypersurfaces in complex manifolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
study of real submanifolds in complex manifolds is central to the theory of
several complex variables, and has close connections to other areas of
mathematics, such as partial differential equations, differential geometry, and
algebraic geometry, as well as to contemporary topics in &lt;br/&gt;mathematical
physics. A real submanifold of a complex manifold inherits, from its ambient
manifold, a partial complex structure, called a CR (for Cauchy-Riemann)
structure, which in general is much more rigid than the &lt;br/&gt;complex
structure of the ambient manifold. Much of the research in this project is
motivated by the desire to classify such CR structures up to equivalences which
leave the ambient manifold invariant. This is one of the most fundamental
questions in this field.&lt;br/&gt;