* 0401260
* Topics in Mathematical Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2010
* Francis Christ, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2010
* USD 501,111.00

Proposal DMS-0401260&lt;br/&gt;PI: F. Michael Christ- University of California,
Berkeley&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Topics in Mathematical
Analysis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research will be
conducted on a broad array of problems&lt;br/&gt;in harmonic analysis, linear
and nonlinear partial differential equations,&lt;br/&gt;several complex
variables, Schroedinger operators,&lt;br/&gt;and ordinary differential
equations.&lt;br/&gt;In harmonic analysis proper, the decay properties of
multilinear oscillatory&lt;br/&gt;integral operators will be investigated, and
Lebesgue space mapping properties&lt;br/&gt;of generalized Radon transforms will
be analyzed in terms of underlying geometry. &lt;br/&gt;Techniques from harmonic
analysis&lt;br/&gt;will be used to develop a theory of almost everywhere WKB
asymptotics for solutions&lt;br/&gt;of ordinary differential equations depending
on a parameter. &lt;br/&gt;In complex analysis, compactness of the d-bar Neumann
problem, the&lt;br/&gt;analytic hypoellipticity of related operators, and
Toeplitz operators will be investigated. &lt;br/&gt;The Cauchy problem will be
studied for nonlinear evolution equations, with the aim of&lt;br/&gt;clarifying
phenomena involving instablility and growth of norms of solutions.
&lt;br/&gt;The spectra and generalized eigenfunctions of time-independent
Schroedinger operators,&lt;br/&gt;in one and higher dimensions, will be
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most fundamental laws of physical science
are formulated as partial differential&lt;br/&gt;equations. These equations are
sometimes linear, and sometimes nonlinear, modeling&lt;br/&gt;various types of
self-interaction. The nonlinear Schrodinger equation arises
in&lt;br/&gt;connection with Bose-Einstein condensates, fiber optics, and
assorted other physically&lt;br/&gt;different phenomena. Time-independent
Schrodinger operators with long-range potentials&lt;br/&gt;model the quantum
properties of disordered electrical media. &lt;br/&gt;Other sources of problems
concerning differential equations are internal to mathematics,&lt;br/&gt;such as
complex analysis in several variables. &lt;br/&gt;One of the most basic tools
for the analysis of differential equations is harmonic&lt;br/&gt;analysis. This
research will focus both on the use of harmonic analysis methods
to&lt;br/&gt;further the understanding of the nature of solutions of
differential equations,&lt;br/&gt;and on the development of new tools within
harmonic analysis which may ultimately provide&lt;br/&gt;further insight into
differential equations, as well as solving problems within
harmonic&lt;br/&gt;analysis itself. &lt;br/&gt;