* 0401546
* Develop and Administer a Web Site to Serve and Advance the Biogeoscience Community, www.biogeosciences.org
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2004
* John Hess, The Geological Society of America, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 12/31/2004
* USD 14,929.00

Project Summary The Geological Society of America (GSA) has been approached by
the Biogeosciences Working Group and asked to prepare a proposal to design,
build and host an independent, stand-alone Web site in support of the entire
biogeoscience community. In Task I, www.biogeoscience.org is envisioned as a
conduit through which information would flow to the biogeoscience community from
funding agencies, program managers, societies, and others. In Task II, the Web
site would be enhanced and expanded to support community building and dialog
that will help guide and shape scientific discourse. At this time, GSA is
seeking funding for Task I of the project. Presently, there is no single source
of information about biogeoscience funding opportunities, current research,
centers of activity and other important resources. There is a need for a
clearinghouse, a principle source of information about the biogeosciences. A
wealth of information is available, and an easy to use, main source of up-to-
date information is needed. Defining the architecture and constructing the Web
site will be the responsibility of a project team composed of members of the
Biogeosciences Working Group, GSA staff and a student intern. The project team
will conduct most of its work via teleconference and E-mail and may hold face-
to-face meetings during scientific meetings attended by members of the team. In
Task I, the Web site would function as an information resource. A wide range of
information would be posted, updated frequently, and made compelling with
features on research, people or programs. Other content that will pull traffic
would be job postings and funding announcements. An important Task I function is
search capability that will make the Web site as useful as possible to site
visitors. In addition, the site would contain meta tags to ensure that search
engines would easily find it. In Task II, it is envisioned that the Web site
would become an interactive, community-building, dialog site. The Working Group
has identified three broad topics that it will examine and about which it needs
input from the community. Initially, these topics will be the focus of input
sought from the community. GSA is very well qualified to undertake this project
for the Working Group with NSF support. GSA has many years of experience with
creating and developing useful, easily navigated, and very attractive Web sites.
GSA continually adds functionality and interactivity to its own Web site,
www.geosociety.org. GSA is thoroughly familiar with the geoscience community and
can bring much knowledge about the needs, wants and preferences of the community
to the project. www.biogeosciences.org will serve this emerging science in
several ways: it will attract new researchers to the biogeosciences, support
those already in the field, and help both the biogeosciences and its scientists
flourish.

