* 0401657
* SGER:  A Study of the Development of Children's Abilities to Conceptualize Space
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2006
* Scott Liddell, Gallaudet University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 01/31/2006
* USD 92,299.00

Sign languages of the Deaf have extensive lexical inventories and use complex
morphological and syntactic constructions like vocally produced languages do.
However, unlike the production of spoken words, some categories of signs must be
directed or placed in gradient meaningful ways. The American Sign Language (ASL)
verb ASK, for example, must be directed toward the one asked - if present. There
is no grammatical parallel for this in speech. When not physically present,
signers conceptualize space as though missing entities were present. Several
conventionalized ways of conceptualizing non-present entities as present have
been identified. Once the one asked is conceptualized as present, ASK could be
directed toward that spatially conceptualized entity. Although required and
meaningful, these gradient aspects of signing are not symbolic. Thus, the ASL
language signal includes gradience and gesture overlaid on symbolic
signs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study examines the signing of two-, four-, and
six-year-old Deaf children acquiring ASL. How these children direct signs when
referents are physically present reveals the children's awareness of the spatial
requirements of these signs. How children direct these signs when entities are
missing provides evidence of the children's developing abilities to
conceptualize space. The analysis should reveal an interaction between the
developing ability to meaningfully direct signs and the developing ability to
conceptualize missing entities as present. This research should shed light on
the interaction of grammar, gesture and spatial conceptualization in the
acquisition of ASL and thereby provide valuable new insights into the
acquisition of a language that goes beyond lexicon and grammar.&lt;br/&gt;