* 0401222
* Integrated Nanophotonic Silicon Platform for On-Chip Ultra Sensitive Bio-Detection
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Michal Lipson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 04/30/2008
* USD 210,000.00

Intellectual merit We propose to investigate a novel on-chip CMOS-compatible
platform of Silicon photonic structures for the detection small numbers of gold
nanoparticles that are used as biological labels. Gold nanoparticles can
selectively bind to bio-recognition elements and can be used as biological
labels using standard biochemistry techniques. The ability to detect single gold
nanoparticles will enable ultra sensitive bio-detection of biological molecules.
Single particle detection is fundamentally challenging due to the small cross
section of the biological labels. The extinction cross-section of the metal
nanoparticles used as labels can be enhanced by orders of magnitude using strong
light confining on-chip structures, such as resonant microcavities. The presence
of a metal nanoparticle with size as small as 5nm can be detected by measuring
the decrease in transmission through the photonic structure. The high degree of
integration of the light source, detectors and sensors on a single chip will be
achieved using high index contrast waveguides with sub-micron size dimensions.
In this project we will develop the components for the proposed biosensing
platform required for: (i) Routing optical signals on-chip and (ii) Detecting
metal nanoparticles using micron-size on-chip Silicon microcavities. We will
demonstrate the integration of the different components forming the platform on
a single chip.

Broader Impact The proposed research, in addition to its strong impact in the
field of biosensing, will form the basis for investigating novel integrated
structures for enhancing the interaction of light and matter in integrated
systems. Applications include amplifiers, sensors, lasers, etc. These
applications will have strong impact in areas such as telecommunications,
chemistry, and medicine. As part of this program we will integrate two REU
students that will be actively involved in the research. This project lies at
the interface of physics, chemistry, applied physics, optics, photonics, and
materials science. Our proposal will give undergraduate students an opportunity
to be involved in an interdisciplinary project, which should provide them with a
very enriching summer research experience. We will also integrate the topic of
photonics for biosensing, in two courses currently taught in Cornell for
undergraduate and graduate students. The topic will be introduced both in
lectures and in lab experiments.