* 0401681
* Travel Support for IUPAP Statphys-22 Conference; July 4-9, 2004; Banglore, India
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2004
* H. Eugene Stanley, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2004
* USD 30,000.00

This is award will support travel for students, postdoctoral associates and
young faculty in order to attend STATPHYS-22, the 22nd International Conference
on Statistical Physics, to be held in Bangalore, India, 4-9 July, 2004. The
award is supported by the Office of International Science and Engineering, the
Office of Multidisciplinary Activities, the Chemistry Division, the Physics
Division and the Division of Materials Research.

Statistical mechanics is a cross-disciplinary field with practitioners coming
from chemistry, mathematics, biology, physics, computer science and the
engineering sciences. Every three years, this community assembles to review
results and to plan future work. These meetings are sponsored by the
International Union of Pure and Applied Physics (IUPAP). This triennial series
of meetings started in Florence in 1949 and continues to the present day.
Starting with the 1986 meeting in Boston, the NSF has been awarding travel
grants to enable young investigators without other support to participate. This
award will enable 30-60 graduate students and young researchers to participate
in STATPHYS-22 scheduled for 4-9 July, 2004, in Bangalore, India. The applicant
pool will be assembled after vigorous advertisement. A selection committee
representing a cross-section of senior scientists has committed to undertake a
fair selection of a balanced group of "NSF Scholars," representing all
disciplines of the statistical mechanics community and paying particular
attention to qualified female and minority candidates.

The award will contribute to the scientific infrastructure of U.S. science by
permitting young people to participate in a major international meeting. It will
strengthen the ties of these young people to their peers in India and other
foreign countries. Past experience has indicated that those graduate students
who have been awarded grants have found the experience to be extremely important
in their career formation. %%%

