* 0401275
* Gromov-Witten Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Tom Coates, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2009
* USD 120,535.00

DMS-03401275&lt;br/&gt;Tom Coates&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal
investigator will study a number of topics in Gromov-Witten theory. These topics
are linked by a common theme: a new perspective on Gromov--Witten theory,
introduced by Givental, which reveals surprising connections with symplectic
linear algebra, geometric quantization and the theory of loop groups. One
objective of this research is to understand the geometric origin of the
structures revealed by this point of view; the second and main objective is to
apply the new computational tools that this perspective provides: 1. To the
calculation of Gromov--Witten invariants of symplectic quotients; 2. To the
computation of higher-genus Gromov--Witten invariants; 3. To the structure
theory of non-semisimple Frobenius manifolds; and 4. To various structural and
computational questions in quantum K-theory and quantum extraordinary
cohomology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gromov--Witten invariants have been studied
intensively for the past decade in an effort to understand some of the
mathematical consequences ofstring theory. As a string moves through space, it
sweeps out a surface: the Gromov--Witten invariants of a space describe the
number of these surfaces in the space which satisfy certain conditions --- for
example,&lt;br/&gt;one could insist that the surfaces pass through a number of
different points, or that they intersect with a particular curve. Gromov-Witten
invariants give important information about the shape of a space. They play a
vital role in Mirror Symmetry, a circle of ideas which expresses in mathematical
form the equivalence of two different string theories.&lt;br/&gt;Mirror symmetry
suggests that we can count surfaces in a space X (i.e. compute Gromov--Witten
invariants of X) by studying differential equations on a space X' called the
mirror of X. This is interesting from the point of view of both mathematics and
physics: mathematicians had studied surface-counting and solving differential
equations for more than a century without realising that the subjects had
anything to do with one other, and some of the most convincing evidence for
string theory to date comes not from experiment but from the gradual
verification of its mathematical predictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;