* 0401267
* Periodicity and Power Minimization in Maglev Artificial Hearts
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2008
* Brad Paden, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Dagmar Niebur
* 03/31/2008
* USD 210,000.00

Left Ventricular Assist Devices (LVADs) are an emerging treatment for the
thousands of patients suffering from end-stage heart disease. These "artificial
hearts" are implanted and cooperate with the natural heart in pumping blood. The
current (second generation) pumps are rotary pumps that use the blood itself as
a lubricant in fluid film bearings. This project is directed at the 3rd
generation of pumps being developed in commercial research laboratories which
employ feedback-controlled magnetically-levitated pump impellers. Magnetic
levitation eliminates mechanical wear and shear-induced damage to the blood (red
blood cells, platelets, and leucocytes). Motivated by the benefits of magnetic
levitation, the first magnetically-levitated pump was implanted in an animal
trial by members of this project at the University of Pittsburgh in 1998. The
technology was enabled by feedback control, advances in magnetic materials and
systematic optimization of the controlled plant. However, the small size, short
time constants, nonlinearity, instability, and quasi-periodic disturbances from
the natural heart pose an awesome challenge to those of us who promise patients
that this engineered system will sustain their lives. The essential trade-off in
the levitation controller design is power consumption versus robust stability.
Moreover, interactions of actuator, power electronics, and control design offer
opportunities for significant power savings. This work is directed at efficiency
gains associated with improvements of control response to quasi-periodic
pressure disturbances from the natural heart, and optimization of PWM waveforms
driving the electromagnetic actuators. We believe that the extension of concepts
from optimization, nonlinear internal models, nonlinear learning control, and
attention to representative patient blood pressure waveforms will lead to a
robust low-power levitation controller for maglev LVADs. The consequences of a
successful project will be safe controllers for medical use and a significant
reduction in portable battery weight.

The intellectual merits of this project are the interdisciplinary collaboration
amongst power and control researchers, cardiac surgeons, and bioengineers; the
innovative extension of nonlinear control theory to quasiperiodic disturbance
rejection; and the experimental apparatus we propose for developing drive
waveforms and communicating our ideas to the medical and engineering
communities.

The broader impacts will include improving the lives of thousands of heart
disease patents, the training of PhD students bridging control theory and
biomedicine; the publication of well cited papers; the development of a
apparatus; exhibiting our experimental work at conferences; and the continuation
of the PI's robotics program involving 180 K-12 students from underrepresented
groups.