* 0401472
* CAREER:  Development of Reactor Systems for Treatment of Non Point Source Pollution
* ENG,CBET
* 09/02/2003,12/31/2007
* Adrienne Cooper, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Clark C. K. Liu
* 12/31/2007
* USD 235,864.00

The traditional model for engineering is finding an efficient solution to
specific problems, with the human consumer as the focus and economics as the
primary driving force. This model often leads to a reductionist approach
toproblems and fails to take into account factors that lead to sustainable
solutions. Sustainability requires the consideration of longer-term effects from
multiple points of view, environmental, social and economic. The effective
engineer is capable of bringing together these resources and combining them with
technical innovations to provide solutions that will last and do no harm to the
generations to follow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Remediation and destruction of
persistent pollutants, development and use of renewable energy sources and
resources, and development of processes and system that significantly reduce or
altogether prevent pollution are three of the primary requirements for
environmental sustainability. Social sustainability requires both justice and
consideration of the cultures of concern. In order to obtain economic
sustainability a process or system must exhibit long term profitability or at
minimum, no considerable loss of income or negative effect on the quality of
life for the persons and/or entities involved. These issues must be considered
in a holistic framework and problems must be approached systemically. While
these considerations and requirements are not inclusive, they provide a good
starting point for dealing with the issues of
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this study is to evaluate the
efficacy of solar photochemical treatment, including electrically enhanced
photochemical treatment, for such applications, with emphasis on stormwater
runoff and septic systems. The overall goal of the proposed education activities
is to provide opportunities at the University of South Carolina for pre-college,
undergraduate and graduate students to learn about sustainability and develop an
understanding of necessary multidisciplinary concepts. Particular emphasis will
be placed on students in civil and environmental
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program will consist of four
phases. In the first phase, the concentration will be on the development of an
immobilized catalyst that is easy to prepare, inexpensive and can act as an
anode for electrochemical reactions. Laboratory and solar simulation studies
will be used in the second phase to evaluate the effect of electric field
enhancement on the photochemical process and determine kinetic parameters. A
series of experiments will be conducted in various flow regimes, plug-flow,
batch and completely mixed flow, using model contaminants resulting in kinetic
flow models. Reactor design will take place in the third phase. The two or three
most promising reactor schemes, selected based on the kinetic flow model, will
be designed built, tested and optimized. One of the reactor designs of phase
several will be selected for the pilot evaluations in the fourth and final
phase.&lt;br/&gt;