* 0401862
* International Research Fellowship Program: New European Territories, Old Nationalist Dreams?, Globalization, Regionalism, and the Euro-Mediterranean Arch
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/2005,08/31/2007
* David Prytherch, Prytherch David L
* Fellowship
* Susan Parris
* 08/31/2007
* USD 53,377.00

0401862 Prytherch

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support an eight-month research fellowship by Dr. David L.
Prytherch to work with Dr. Josep V. Boira at the University of Valencia in
Spain.

Despite predictions, regional nationalism in Europe has not only survived but
flourished in the face of globalization. To grasp the consequences for European
integration, this research explores how cultural politics of region may be
adapted to global, economic competitiveness. Collaborative research with
geographers at the Universitat de Valencia investigates the merging of Catalan
nationalism and regional entrepreneurialism in the construction of a new,
transnational European economic region: The Euro-Mediterranean Arch. Qualitative
archival research, semi-structured interviews, questionnaires, and participant
observation of political and economic elites in Catalan-speaking regions of
Catalunya, Valencia, and the Balearic Islands is expected to reveal how regional
nationalist discourse may be re-articulated to facilitate inter-regional
competition, offer insights into the intersection of cultural politics and
economic development amidst European restructuring, and foster international
research collaboration in the process.