* 0401048
* Regularity Problems for Multiple Integrals and Interfacial Coarsening for Energy-Driven Models
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Xiaodong Yan, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2008
* USD 89,100.00

Proposal DMS-0401048&lt;br/&gt;PI: Xiaodong Yan, Michigan State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Regularity properties for multiple
integrals and interfacial&lt;br/&gt; coarsening for energy-driven
models&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The proposal addresses problems in three
main areas.&lt;br/&gt;In part one, we are concerned with regularity property
of&lt;br/&gt;minimizers of uniformly convex functionals. The
objective&lt;br/&gt;is to generalize method used in previous work of Sverak
and&lt;br/&gt;PI to construct counterexamples in lower target
dimensions,&lt;br/&gt;as well as to understand regularity property of
minimizers&lt;br/&gt;under further assumptions on the integrand. The second
part&lt;br/&gt;deals with regularity property of minimizers for
both&lt;br/&gt;compressible and incompressible models from nonlinear
elasticity.&lt;br/&gt;The main feature here is the singular behavior of the
integrand&lt;br/&gt;in the compressible case and nonlinear nonconvex constraint
in&lt;br/&gt;the incompressible case. Currently there is no general method
to&lt;br/&gt;deal with regularity problems for such integral. We hope
that&lt;br/&gt;the simple model problems studied in this project can help
to&lt;br/&gt;gain insight into more general cases. The third part
addresses&lt;br/&gt;interfacial coarsening phenomenon observed in many energy-
driven&lt;br/&gt;models from materials science. In particular, the aim is to
provide&lt;br/&gt;rigorous analysis on the value of the coarsening exponent for
different&lt;br/&gt;models. The analysis is closely related to deep and
interesting issues&lt;br/&gt;in calculus of variations, e.g.gamma limit of
singularly perturbed&lt;br/&gt;variational problems. The well developed tools
from those areas provide a&lt;br/&gt;better vision on the last
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The questions to be studied are motivated both by
classical theory of&lt;br/&gt;optimization and contemporary issues in nonlinear
elasticity and materials&lt;br/&gt;science. An outstanding open question in
continuum mechanics is to determine&lt;br/&gt;what singularities might exist in
surfaces which optimize a collection of&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear constraints.
Knowledge of this type can help in the design of&lt;br/&gt;exotic materials. The
study of coarsening is important for both bulk and&lt;br/&gt;thin film
materials. Such materials are of great practical interest.
For&lt;br/&gt;example, superconducting thin film devices are presently being
evaluated for&lt;br/&gt;possible use in high-performance microwave filters and
other applications.&lt;br/&gt;