* 0401239
* Graph Homomorphisms, Stochastic Networks, Discrete Mass Transport
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Prasad Tetali, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2008
* USD 148,386.00

This proposal has three components. The first&lt;br/&gt;describes recent
collaboration with Kavita Ramanan (Carnegie-Mellon &lt;br/&gt;University) and
David Galvin (postdoc, Microsoft) on Gibbs measures, &lt;br/&gt;with
applications to stochastic networks. Motivation&lt;br/&gt;from these and related
networks raises new and qualitatively different&lt;br/&gt;questions concerning
regions of phase uniqueness and coexistence, which&lt;br/&gt;are being
investigated. The second component describes ongoing research
with&lt;br/&gt;Sergey Bobkov (University of Minnesota) on &lt;br/&gt;modified
versions of logarithmic Sobolev inequalities &lt;br/&gt;and applications to
convergence to stationarity of finite Markov chains.&lt;br/&gt;This work is
carried over to more recent research activity&lt;br/&gt;with graduate student,
Marcus Sammer and colleague, Wilfrid Gangbo&lt;br/&gt;on discrete transportation
problems.&lt;br/&gt;In particular, the final component is on developing discrete
calculus&lt;br/&gt;to study aspects of mass transport, Ricci curvature, and
&lt;br/&gt;understanding connections between various&lt;br/&gt;relavant
inequalities -- the transportation inequality, &lt;br/&gt;Talagrand's
inequality, the entropy inequality and logarithmic&lt;br/&gt;Sobolev type
inequalities. In continuous settings&lt;br/&gt;(such as on R^n or on Riemannian
manifolds), there are intimate&lt;br/&gt;connections between the above-mentioned
2nd and 3rd topics; however&lt;br/&gt;these are yet to be established to
satisfaction in the discrete&lt;br/&gt;settings of finite metric measure
spaces.&lt;br/&gt;Due to the richness in applications, we find
development&lt;br/&gt;of such an analogous theory worthwhile and
fruitful.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal intends to explore the
behavior and performance&lt;br/&gt;of telecommunication (and other data)
networks &lt;br/&gt;under recently-suggested models of multicasting and
unicasting&lt;br/&gt;on large grid-like structures. Preliminary investigations
of the PI and &lt;br/&gt;collaborators demonstrate that the introduction of
unicast calls brings&lt;br/&gt;in a certain symmetry breaking into the system,
and&lt;br/&gt;lets the system carry a higher load of multicast
calls&lt;br/&gt;before the system succumbs to call-blocking due to the
influence&lt;br/&gt;of what might be imposed on the boundary of the large (grid-
like) region.&lt;br/&gt;Related questions address understanding the spread of
information (genetic&lt;br/&gt;or otherwise) and the spread of disease in tree-
like and grid-like environment.&lt;br/&gt;These and other research objectives
outlined in this proposal are of &lt;br/&gt;interest to researchers in analysis,
combinatorics, probability, &lt;br/&gt;information theory, statistical physics
and the theory of computing. &lt;br/&gt;One of the main motivations for the PI
comes from computational and applied&lt;br/&gt;problems of combinatorics and
discrete probability. An overarching&lt;br/&gt;theme of the proposal is also to
explore in depth&lt;br/&gt;the role of information theoretic techniques in
discrete probability&lt;br/&gt;and computing. The PI fully hopes his extended
collaboration &lt;br/&gt;with his coauthors in these disparate research topics
contributes to the&lt;br/&gt;cross-fertilization of mathematical ideas,
modeling, and techniques,&lt;br/&gt;while promoting the educational component of
research.&lt;br/&gt;