* 0401893
* RUI:  Combinatorial Set Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Justin Moore, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2008
* USD 72,046.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0401893 Principal Investigator: Justin T. Moore

The proposed research concerns applying new techniques in set theory and
infinite combinatorics to basis problems in topology, graph theory, and order
theory. In each case, the goal is to prove a classification theorem for the
uncountable objects in a certain category. Three such categories are topological
spaces, bipartite graphs, and linear orders. The goal is to use forcing axioms
to prove that the category has a finite basis of classical examples. The
techniques employed in analyzing such problems are often Ramsey theoretic and
frequently draw upon results and motivation which arise in analyzing Cantor's
continuum problem and Suslin's classification problem for the real line. The
proposed research seeks to expand our understanding of forcing axioms and their
impact upon basis problems and the continuum problem. The PI has already proved
that the Proper Forcing Axiom implies that the uncountable linear orders have a
five element basis, answering one of the central problems of the proposal. The
proof involved new techniques in infinite combinatorics which are likely
relevant to completing the rest of the proposal. At the crux is the PI's notion
of set mapping reflection which was formulated in relation to his results on the
Proper Forcing Axiom and the size of the continuum. Conspicuous in the solution
is the need for a strong axiom of infinity to obtain the consistency of a five
element basis. This was quite unexpected and may serve both to explain past
difficulties and fuel future research on the relationship between very large
sets and combinatorics associated with the smallest uncountable cardinal.

The proposed research represents an analysis of fundamental mathematical objects
- graphs, orders, and topologies - using a generalized version of the
probabilistic method which Paul Erdos pioneered in his study of networks,
packings, prime numbers, and circuit complexity. The apothegm of the
probabilistic method is: "If an object occurs with positive probability, it
exists." For finite probability spaces, this is a fact. For infinite spaces and
their generalizations - known as forcing notions - it requires additional
axiomatic assumptions - known as forcing axioms. The PI has recently shown, for
instance, under such assumptions that any linear order which cannot be
represented as a collection of rational numbers must contain one of five
critical orders. While at the present this would seem to represent a theoretical
accomplishment with little practical significance, the style of argument may
inspire real world applications in the future. A recent example of such a
success in set theory is Laver's algorithm for comparing braids. An important
question which arises in a number of areas of mathematics and science - from
particle physics to genetics - is when two braids can be made to look the same
without cutting or breaking the strands. Laver used ideas from the theory of
large infinite sets to devise a fast algorithm for comparing braids. The
previous algorithm was exponentially slow. Current algorithms based on Laver's
idea run in quadratic time (fast). Hence the study of infinite sets can provide
practical applications to much more down to earth objects. The proposed research
may some day have applications in the traditional finitary probabilistic method
or less foreseeable impact as with with Laver's work.