* 0401587
* Chemical and Biological Assessment of Endocrine Disruptors in Waterways of Southeast Texas
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2004,09/30/2009
* Joseph Jones, Texas Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 09/30/2009
* USD 998,328.00

HRD- 0401587

Chemical and Biological Assessment of Endocrine Disruptors in Waterways in
Southeast Texas

Texas Southern University

PI: Joseph Jones

Genetics and molecular biology researchers from Texas Southern University's
Environmental Toxicology program will assess environmental contamination in the
waterways of southeast Texas. Research will focus on chemical and biological
endocrine disruptors in the lower Galveston Bay watershed. Research efforts
will: (1) identify and quantify endocrine disruptors; (2) measure the effects of
endocrine disruptors on cell proliferation and DNA repair in estrogen-sensitive
cell lines; and (3) evaluate changes in dopamine content in neuronal cells
treated with endocrine disruptors, and further examine the mechanism by which
these chemicals may disrupt dopamine content.

The project supports for a cadre of incoming doctoral students; faculty and
graduate student participation at professional meetings; and, undergraduate and
high school student supervised research opportunities managed through a Summer
Internship Program. A regional conference on the multidisciplinary assessment of
environmental contamination in Texas waterways will be held project-year 3.

This project combines state of the art monitoring capabilities with cutting-edge
basic research to define the biological sequel of exposure to identified aquatic
endocrine disruptors. The work, to be conducted by Texas Southern University
researchers, will incorporate underrepresented minority students at the high
school, undergraduate, and graduate levels. Broader impacts of the proposed
activity include the enhancement of the doctoral training capacity of TSU, and
an increase in the number of underrepresented minority students entering into
STEM-related graduate fields.