* 0401764
* Summer Undergraduate Mathematical Sciences Research Institute
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2006
* Patrick Dowling, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 02/28/2006
* USD 57,668.00

The Summer Undergraduate Mathematical Science Research Institute (SUMSRI) is a
program conducted under the guidance of Miami University's Department of
Mathematics and Statistics. One of the goals of SUMSRI is to prepare
participants for the rigor and pace of graduate school. The primary goal of the
Institute is to provide approximately 15 nationally selected students with an
intensive research experience augmented by formal and informal information
sessions. To accomplish these goals, SUMSRI will run seven weeks on Miami
University's campus in Oxford, Ohio. During these seven weeks, students will
participate in research seminars in mathematics, statistics, or computer
science. The program will also include a technical writing seminar, a GRE
preparation workshop, two short courses on algebra and real analysis, and
colloquium talks given by well known mathematical scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; In 1998, the NSF sponsored a study to discover what areas
could be identified that could explain the low number of minorities with
advanced degrees in the mathematical sciences. The results of this study were
published in the article, "The Human Capital Liabilities of Underrepresented
Minorities in Pursuit of Science, Mathematics and Engineering Doctoral Degrees".
This study points out that African Americans and Hispanics lag far behind their
white male peers in three areas of Human Capital including background
characteristics, undergraduate performance and experience, and the preparation
and transition into graduate school. A recent survey conducted by Dr. John
Alexander and Dr. William A. Hawkins titled "Survey of Minority Graduate
Students in U.S. Mathematical Sciences Departments," recommends creating
programs like SUMSRI to encourage minority undergraduate students to pursue
advanced degrees in the mathematical sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of
the shortage of minorities and women mathematical scientists, the program is
especially interested in, but not limited to, African Americans and other
underrepresented minorities and women. The combination of information,
educational experiences and ongoing support is designed to encourage these
talented mathematics and statistics students to continue and thrive in the
mathematical research environment and thereby eventually increase the number of
African Americans and other underrepresented minorities with doctoral degrees in
the mathematical sciences. Information about the program can be found on their
website, http://www.units.muohio.edu/sumsri/. The website includes an online
journal of participants' results.&lt;br/&gt;