* 0401047
* Groebner Fans in Combinatorics, Representation Theory and Commutative Algebra: Theory and Computation
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Rekha Thomas, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 08/31/2007
* USD 105,000.00

Abstract for award DMS-0401047 of Thomas:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Groebner basis theory is
today a central theoretical and computational&lt;br/&gt;tool in algebraic
geometry and commutative algebra with applications&lt;br/&gt;in myriad fields
such as computer science, optimization, robotics,&lt;br/&gt;statistics, and
computer modeling. The Groebner fan of an ideal or&lt;br/&gt;module is the
decomposition of the space of weight vectors that induce&lt;br/&gt;Groebner
base, such that each cone in the fan indexes a distinct&lt;br/&gt;Groebner
basis. This project describes four problems from&lt;br/&gt;combinatorics,
optimization, representation theory and algebraic&lt;br/&gt;geometry that
revolve around Groebner fans. The first project&lt;br/&gt;investigates the
complexity, geometry and homological properties of&lt;br/&gt;initial ideals of
toric ideals. Answers to these questions have&lt;br/&gt;implications in integer
programming and on the computation of toric&lt;br/&gt;Groebner bases which
themselves have several applications. The next &lt;br/&gt;examines the variation
of weight vectors in Kalai's theory of&lt;br/&gt;algebraic shifting for
simplicial complexes. The third project&lt;br/&gt;studies the polyhedral
geometry of moduli of resentations of the McKay&lt;br/&gt;quiver which
(partially) resolve singularities that arise in&lt;br/&gt;generalized McKay
correspondence. The last goal is to develop a&lt;br/&gt;software package for
computing Groebner fans of arbitrary polynomial&lt;br/&gt;ideals. Applications
include the computation of tropical varieties and&lt;br/&gt;the study of orbit
closures and degenerations of representations of&lt;br/&gt;finite dimensional
algebras.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will employ tools from
combinatorics, discrete&lt;br/&gt;geometry and optimization to solve problems
from commutative algebra,&lt;br/&gt;representation theory and algebraic
geometry. All projects have a&lt;br/&gt;strong computational component that aims
at effective algorithms and&lt;br/&gt;serves as a laboratory for uncovering new
structure theorems. The&lt;br/&gt;collaborations include three graduate students
and three current or&lt;br/&gt;recent postdocs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;