* 0401973
* International Research Fellowship Program: Preparation of a Polypeptide-Based Dendrimer Library for the Development and Design of Artificial Enzymes
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Catherine Liang, Liang Catherine O
* Fellowship
* Susan Parris
* 08/31/2006
* USD 134,770.00

0401973 Liang

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-two-month research fellowship by Dr. Catherine
O. Liang to work with Dr. Jean-Louis Reymond at University of Berne in
Switzerland.

In light of the complexity and sophistication of naturally occurring systems,
rational enzyme design is a challenging and daunting task. Current technology
has not yet developed a way to design an amino acid sequence that folds
predictably into a desired conformation resulting in a molecule capable of a
specific function. Scientists have had to turn to modification of naturally
occurring enzyme frameworks through techniques such as site-directed mutagenesis
and chemical modification of the active site. In response to the challenges of
developing a large, sophisticated, 3-dimensional enzyme mimic, novel peptide-
based dendrimer libraries are being investigated. Dendrimers are highly
branched, well-controlled, monodisperse macromolecules and offer a globular
morphology similar to naturally occurring enzymes. Their characteristic
branching and well-defined interior provides a 'pre-folded' architecture
amenable to the mimicry of peptide-based biomolecules. Preparation of target
structures is carried out through solid-phase peptide synthesis. Unlike many
approaches that focus on a singular target, the issue of diversity is addressed
through a combinatorial strategy to generate multitudes of different library
members. A complementary approach focusing on the preparation of targeted
libraries like the catalytic triad chymotrypsin - His, Asp, Ser - for instance,
is included. The combination of the branched, hierarchical structure of
dendrimers and amino acid repeat units opens up possibilities towards biomimetic
applications. Dendrimers are screened for activity in sensing or "artificial
nose" processes through identification of substrate selective macromolecules. In
addition, the unique nanoenvironment created by the amino-acid residues is
evaluated for catalytic activity. Potential aldolase, which catalyze carbon-
carbon bond forming reactions, and esterase mimics are screened in fluorogenic
assays with dye-labeled substrates. Clearly many possibilities of exploration
into peptide-based dendrimers have yet to be uncovered.