* 0401433
* Homological Methods in Quantum Field Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Dmitry Tamarkin, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 05/31/2008
* USD 90,881.00

The PI is planning to focus on several problems which are related with the
procedure of quantization in quantum field theory and quantum
mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These problems include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1)
quantization of coisson algebras;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) mathematically precise
formulation of Batalin-Vilkovitski formalism;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) Action of
Grothendieck-Teichmueller group on various formality and quantization
morphisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first two problems arise in the quantum
field theory. The problem of quantization of coisson algebras is posed by A.
Beilinson and V. Drinfeld; they found a rather non-trivial solution to this
problem in a particular case of linear coisson brackets. The general
quantization problem is much harder and is not accessible by similar methods. An
appropriate tool may be the deformation theory and introduction of an additional
structure on an appropriate deformation complex.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Batalin-Vilkovitsky formalism is one of the most powerful tools in quantization
of systems with sophisticated gauge symmetries. This formalism implies an
extensive use of path integrals, whence the lack of mathematical meaning of the
most important ingredients of the construction, such as the operator $\Delta$
and the $BV$-bracket. The difficulty in defining path integrals are well known,
a straightforward extension of usual (finitely-dimensional) integration rules
necessarily leads to divergencies. It is only a careful analysis of Batalin-
Vilkovitski formalism involving a theory of D-modules and homological algebra
that can allow one to construct a mathematically meaningful
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The action of Grothendieck-Teichmueller
group is known to be present on the set of quantization functors of Lie
bialgebras as well as on the set of formality quasi-isomorphisms from
Kontsevich's formality theorem. This fascinated subject was originated by V.
Drinfeld and was further developed by P.Etingof-D. Kazhdan, M. Kontsevich and
other authors. Yet there are several open questions concerning this action on
the space of formality quasi-isomorphisms, namely, whether it is transitive or
free in a certain homotopical sense. I hope that studying these problems should
deepen our understanding of algebro-geometric and motivic aspects of
quantization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;