* 0401213
* Analysis and Modeling of Diffuse Ultrasonic Signals for Structural Health Modeling
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Jennifer Michaels, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Scott F. Midkiff
* 04/30/2008
* USD 209,954.00

Analysis and Modeling of Diffuse Ultrasonic Signals for Structural Health
Monitoring The use of permanently mounted sensors to monitor the health of
critical structures such as airplanes, bridges and buildings is quickly becoming
a reality as sensors for measuring such physical quantities as temperature,
moisture and strain become smaller and more robust. However, these devices are
limited to point, or local, measurements and thus do not truly interrogate the
volumetric state of the structure. Sparse arrays of permanently mounted
ultrasonic sensors, acting as both sources and receivers, can send ultrasonic
energy throughout the entire structural volume and thus have the potential to
detect critical changes. Before this goal can become a reality, revolutionary
advances must be made in the analysis and processing of the received ultrasonic
signals so that structural changes that may lead to catastrophic failure can be
reliably detected with an acceptably low false alarm rate. A significant
complication is that benign environmental effects such as changes in temperature
and surface conditions can cause larger changes in the ultrasonic signals than
actual flaws. Intellectual Merit: The research proposed here is a combination of
experiments and waveform modeling, and considers the development and
verification of signal processing, classification and data fusion methods based
upon quantitative changes in the ultrasonic signals. The testing mode considered
is that of diffuse ultrasonic waves whereby a point-like impulsive excitation is
used to generate multi-modal elastic waves that fill the structure with sound.
Ultrasonic diffuse wave theory models the rate of energy decay but does not
predict the details of the complex time domain signals. The proposed research
will combine time-dependent analysis of coherence with feature extraction,
classification methods, signal modeling and simulation, and data fusion to
tackle the challenging problem of detecting and characterizing damage. One
inherent problem in using classification methods such as neural networks for
this application is the need to have a large set of signals from a wide variety
of flaws; this is not practical for structures outside the laboratory. A key
aspect of the proposed research is to develop methods for perturbing the
baseline signal from the undamaged structure in order to emulate a wide variety
of structural and environmental changes. Four tasks are defined as follows: 1.
Signal Processing and Classification Methods. Development of quantitative
differential methods to determine if signal changes are due to structural or
environmental effects, and to characterize structural changes as to location,
severity, type, etc. 2. Modeling and Simulation of Diffuse Ultrasonic Signals.
Modeling of diffuse ultrasonic signals, and simulation of environmental and
structural changes. 3. Transducer Placement and Data Fusion. Analysis of optimum
transducer organization and placement, and fusing of data from multiple
transducers. 4. Design and Implementation of Experimental Measurements.
Ultrasonic diffuse wave measurements using metallic, composite and cement-based
structures. Broader Impact: This multidisciplinary research program will lead to
effective use of ultrasonic sensors for continuously monitoring the health of
critical structures, which will enable appropriate action to take place prior to
catastrophic failure. Furthermore, the methodologies developed will have broad
application to other disciplines such as sonar, radar and biomedical signal
processing. A key part of the educational impact is the participation of
undergraduates as well as graduate students, and a concerted effort will be made
to recruit women and underrepresented minorities. Also proposed is the
development of a graduate course in ultrasonic wave propagation and signal
processing that will combine the fundamentals of acoustic and elastic wave
propagation with signal processing methods as applied to ultrasonics. This
research program will also complement other efforts at Georgia Tech, effectively
creating a critical mass of research in ultrasonics for structural health
monitoring.