* 0401403
* The Tamagawa Number Conjecture
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Matthias Flach, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2008
* USD 180,003.00

Abstract for award DMS-0401403 of Flach&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim
of the project is to explore the usefulness of Taylor-Wiles systems
&lt;br/&gt;for establishing cases of the Tamagawa number conjecture on special
values &lt;br/&gt;of Hasse-Weil L-functions. Following the initial breakthrough
by Taylor and &lt;br/&gt;Wiles this has been done in the case of the adjoint
L-function of elliptic &lt;br/&gt;modular forms in joint work with Diamond and
Guo. The next cases we intend &lt;br/&gt;to look at are those where the Taylor-
Wiles method has been worked out but &lt;br/&gt;the relationship to values of
L-functions is still missing, notably Siegel &lt;br/&gt;modular forms of genus
2, Hilbert modular forms and possibly unitary
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;L-functions figure prominently in modern number
theory, or even in all of &lt;br/&gt;pure mathematics if one takes as a
benchmark the seven Clay millenium &lt;br/&gt;problems, two of which are
directly concerned with L-functions. In high &lt;br/&gt;school algebra one draws
the solution set in the plane of an algebraic &lt;br/&gt;equation in two
variables x and y. One may also look at the solutions in &lt;br/&gt;rational
numbers, integers or integers modulo a prime number. L-functions &lt;br/&gt;are
built from the number of solutions modulo primes (of any set of
&lt;br/&gt;equations in any number of variables) and are expected to give
information &lt;br/&gt;about solutions in rational numbers. Solving equations in
rational numbers &lt;br/&gt;is notoriously hard, whereas values of L-functions
are often very &lt;br/&gt;computable, so such a relationship lies very deep. The
primordial example &lt;br/&gt;is of course the conjecture of Birch and
Swinnerton-Dyer, one of the &lt;br/&gt;millenium problems. As often in
mathematics, one generalizes a problem in &lt;br/&gt;order to understand it
better but the tradeoff is an increasingly abstract &lt;br/&gt;framework
("cohomology" in this case). On the positive side, other &lt;br/&gt;instances of
the generalized framework may actually be provable with &lt;br/&gt;current
methods, and this is what the project aims to explore. The aim is &lt;br/&gt;to
prove new cases of the expected special value formula for L-functions,
&lt;br/&gt;using the relatively recent method of Taylor-Wiles
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;