* 0401986
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Effects of Lift Forces and Turbulence on Bubble Motion
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,01/31/2008
* Woodrow Shew, Shew                    Woodrow        L
* Fellowship
* Susan Parris
* 01/31/2008
* USD 54,302.00

0401986 Shew

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a seventeen-month research fellowship by Dr. Woodrow L.
Shew to work with Dr. Jean-Francois Pinton at Ecole Normale Superieure de Lyon
in France.

Gas-liquid flows play a crucial role in a diverse range of medical, industrial,
and natural settings. In the medical setting, bubbles are known to enhance
ultrasound imaging and show promise for controlled drug delivery and gene
transfection. Air entrainment in turbulent ocean waves is critical for carbon
sequestering and for the health of ocean ecosystems. Efficiency of boiling heat
transfer and many chemical reactions depend upon bubble distribution and
interaction with the fluid. Bubbles affect the hydrodynamics of ships and two-
phase flow in gas/oil pipelines. Despite the large number of applications that
would benefit, our understanding of how bubbles interact with complex fluid
flows has significant gaps. A unique three-dimensional ultrasound technique
provides observations of bubble behavior in a sequence of three flows: uniformly
rotating laminar flow, a turbulent vortex, and fully developed turbulence. In
each of these cases, the poorly understood lift forces and history effects
influence the motion of the bubble. The lift force plays a role when vorticity
is present in the flow and the history effects are due to interactions of the
bubble with it's own wake. We study these effects on individual bubbles as well
how they manifest in large-scale collective behavior of many bubbles. Connecting
the small and large-scale behaviors is the primary goal of this research and is
necessary to accurately model and predict bubbly flows in practical
applications.