* 0401014
* Conformal Structures and Rigidity Properties of Anosov and Partially Hyperbolic Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Victoria Sadovskaya, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2008
* USD 60,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of dynamical systems is a modern branch
of mathematics which &lt;br/&gt;originated from physics, mechanics, and
differential equations. &lt;br/&gt;Hyperbolic and partially hyperbolic systems
have been one of the &lt;br/&gt;main objects of study in the area of smooth
dynamics. The exponential &lt;br/&gt;contraction and expansion in these systems
produces a chaotic behavior &lt;br/&gt;with complex and stable orbit structure.
This results in a rich theory &lt;br/&gt;with applications in various areas of
natural sciences and mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;The PI considers Anosov and
partially hyperbolic systems whose &lt;br/&gt;contraction and expansion exhibit
some conformality, i.e. distort &lt;br/&gt;shapes only moderately. In higher
dimensions, this condition is &lt;br/&gt;essential for the study of regularity
of the invariant foliations and &lt;br/&gt;smoothness of the conjugacy to a
small perturbation or to an algebraic &lt;br/&gt;model. It may also yield
remarkable rigidity not present in the &lt;br/&gt;low-dimensional case. The PI
plans to investigate further the role &lt;br/&gt;of various types of
conformality in the regularity properties. Another &lt;br/&gt;goal is to study
rigidity under weaker or alternative assumptions such &lt;br/&gt;as smoothness
of foliations and preservation of geometric
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;