* 0401043
* Studies in Operator Algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Roger Smith, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2008
* USD 150,000.00

The proposer will continue his study of the longstanding Kadison--
Ringrose&lt;br/&gt;conjecture on the cohomology of von Neumann algebras. He will
use and &lt;br/&gt;refine some recently developed techniques needed to show the
complete &lt;br/&gt;boundedness of certain multilinear operators. Investigations
of the cohomology&lt;br/&gt;groups have led naturally to the recently introduced
concept of norming &lt;br/&gt;subalgebras, and this topic will be pursued since
it applies directly to &lt;br/&gt;both cohomology and the bounded projection
problem. In a different, but &lt;br/&gt;related, direction, maximal abelian
subalgebras (masas) and general &lt;br/&gt;subalgebras of von Neumann algebras
will be studied. In joint work, the &lt;br/&gt;proposer has introduced the
concept of strongly singular masas, and has &lt;br/&gt;shown that many finite
factors arising from hyperbolic groups (a class &lt;br/&gt;which includes the
free groups) have such masas. The results so far &lt;br/&gt;obtained indicate
that the theory can now expand to study general &lt;br/&gt;subalgebras. This
relates directly to the structure of factors (the &lt;br/&gt;building blocks of
operator algebras), and the overall goal of these &lt;br/&gt;proposed areas of
research is to increase our understanding in this area. &lt;br/&gt;Building on
previously accomplished work, problems in the theory of &lt;br/&gt;topological
entropy for automorphisms will be studied. Automorphisms are &lt;br/&gt;the most
basic objects associated to operator algebras, and they can &lt;br/&gt;reveal
different facets of the same underlying object. The entropy is a
&lt;br/&gt;numerical constant that distinguishes different
automorphisms.&lt;br/&gt;Previous joint work of the proposer showed that the
current theory, based &lt;br/&gt;on completely positive maps, can be better
reformulated in terms of &lt;br/&gt;complete contractions. This puts the theory
into a much more flexible &lt;br/&gt;situation where more general and powerful
tools can be brought to bear on the &lt;br/&gt;problems of the field, notably
relating to crossed products by &lt;br/&gt;automorphism groups.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; The modern study of operator algebras has evolved from two main
sources. &lt;br/&gt;Matrices, which are generalizations of numbers, were
introduced to solve &lt;br/&gt;equations and now find applications from computer
graphics to search &lt;br/&gt;engines for the web. In formulating quantum
mechanics mathematically, von &lt;br/&gt;Neumann found that he needed infinite
dimensional versions of matrices &lt;br/&gt;called linear operators which were
best studied in operator algebras. &lt;br/&gt;Moreover the time evolution of
quantum mechanical systems came to be &lt;br/&gt;expressed in terms of the
crossed product by groups of automorphisms, and &lt;br/&gt;here topological
entropy plays an important role. The project is mainly &lt;br/&gt;concerned with
the theoretical underpinnings of operator algebras, but &lt;br/&gt;the proposed
work in these areas could impact some of these more concrete &lt;br/&gt;areas,
since the finite factors are those operator algebras which most
&lt;br/&gt;closely model matrices.&lt;br/&gt;