* 0401431
* Modular Representations of Finite Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Jon Carlson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 05/31/2008
* USD 112,344.00

Abstract for award of Jon F. Carlson DMS-0401431&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title of
Project: Modular Representations of Finite
Groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is an investigation into the
representation theory and &lt;br/&gt;cohomology of finite groups over fields of
prime characteristic. The Principal&lt;br/&gt;Investigator is particularly
interested in the homological properties of &lt;br/&gt;representations which
underlie the basic module theory. He will continue &lt;br/&gt;working on the
classification of certain specific types of modules that &lt;br/&gt;play an
important role in the larger category theory of modules, and also &lt;br/&gt;to
look at the general structure of the cohomology rings. Carlson and his
&lt;br/&gt;collaborators have shown that many facets of the module category for
group&lt;br/&gt;algebras are controlled by the group cohomology. The proposed
work would build &lt;br/&gt;on this foundation. Professor Carlson plans to
continue his development of &lt;br/&gt;computer algebra systems for
experimentation with modules and homomorphisms. Of &lt;br/&gt;particular
interest is the development of algorithms for studying
homological&lt;br/&gt;properties for finite dimensional algebras. The PI intends
to expand his &lt;br/&gt;collection of programs for the computation of group
cohomology and other &lt;br/&gt;aspects of the module theory. Other projects
involve connections with&lt;br/&gt;the representation theory of algebraic groups
and the general theory&lt;br/&gt;of group extensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
basic terms the Principal Investigator will look at certain types
of&lt;br/&gt;algebraic systems together with the actions of operators. Such a
system &lt;br/&gt;is called a module and it might have many dimensions in the
sense of &lt;br/&gt;depending on many variable. The operations may represent
something like&lt;br/&gt;the geometric rotation of points on a space. The
project will concentrate&lt;br/&gt;on the classification and properties of
modules whose associated operators&lt;br/&gt;come from a group or algebra. This
means that the operators have a preset &lt;br/&gt;collection of interactions
with each other. A significant part of the &lt;br/&gt;project is the development
of computational techniques and software for &lt;br/&gt;analyzing the structure
and properties of modules. Groups of transformations&lt;br/&gt;on modules and
spaces are basic objects in modern mathematics and arise &lt;br/&gt;in many
applications of the mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;