* 0401397
* Annular Bragg-defect Resonators
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2007
* Amnon Yariv, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rongqing Hui
* 04/30/2007
* USD 210,000.00

0401397&lt;br/&gt;Yariv&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal addresses theoretical
and experimental investigation of a completely&lt;br/&gt;new type of optical
resonators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
resonator belongs to the class of "Defect" resonators in periodic photonic
bandgap structures [13, 14, 17]. The "defect" consists of a controlled departure
from the ideal index distribution of a cylindrical Bragg waveguide [3, 4]. The
main advantage of such resonator is the fact that the (annular) defect, and
therefore the light confinement, can be placed at will at any radial position
and not necessarily at the core or the periphery (like whispering gallery
resonators).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the dependence of the modal
characteristics on the transverse periodicity (or quasi periodicity) offers a
new and major control of the free spectral range which can be increased by,
possibly, an order of magnitude. Moreover, by placing the defect, where the
light is concentrated, away from the outer boundary, where inevitable scattering
due to surface imperfections take place, the new resonator promises to posses,
potentially, much higher Q-factor than is possible with the conventional
dielectric counterparts. In addition, the interaction of the electrical field
with the surrounding medium can be enhanced significantly by the ability to
confine the field in an air defect. This is important for applications including
optical communication, spectroscopy, detection of chemical and biological
agents, quantum communication and encryption which depend on a strong atom
(molecule) - light interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Caltech educational environment supports and
encourages collaborative work and interaction between experienced researchers
(senior graduate students, postdoctoral scholars, faculty) and inexperienced
researchers. Programs such as the Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowship
(SURF) and the Minority Undergraduate Research Fellowship (MURF) enables a
diverse group of students, both from within and outside Caltech, to get involved
in cutting-edge scientific research under the guidance of faculty and senior
researchers. The strong collaborations of their group with industry partners and
government laboratories will expose the student to real-world problems and
enhance the dissemination of new ideas and technology. Periodically, results
from this work will be presented in a research seminar open to all Caltech
students who wish to attend, ensuring knowledge transfer to the
community.&lt;br/&gt;