* 0401188
* Advanced Signal Processing for Ultra-Wide-Band (UWB) Communications in Wireless Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Ali Sayed, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Scott F. Midkiff
* 08/31/2007
* USD 216,000.00

Advanced Signal Processing for Ultra-Wide-Band (UWB) Communications in Wireless
Networks

Following the February 2002 order by the Federal Communications Commission,
ultra-wide- band (UWB) communications technology has emerged as the leading
standard for very high data rate applications in wireless networks. The
technology will allow the wireless connection of multiple devices at very high
rates and at low power consumption. UWB will allow the transmission of video,
audio, and other data traffic among devices at rates that may reach 480Mbps. For
example, UWB could stream real-time video content from a PC or a consumer
electronics device, such as a camcorder, a DVD player or a personal video
recorder, to a flat-screen HDTV display without the need for wires. In order for
this technology to become widely adopted it is necessary to maintain the costs
of UWB devices low. A major challenge arises from the signal distortions that
are introduced during the analog processing as a result of manufacturing
imperfections. The effects of such distortions will be compounded in future
high-performance wireless networks due to the higher silicon integration, lower
power consumption, larger bandwidth, and higher carrier frequency. There are at
least two strategies to address this diffculty. One strategy is generally costly
and relies on building more reliable front-end radios. The second strategy,
which is one of the objectives of this proposal, is to model and cancel signal
distortions by using advanced signal processing and compensation algorithms in
the digital domain. This research proposes a systematic way for modeling
distortion effects, exploiting the distortion models in receiver design,
developing enhanced OFDM receivers that counter-balance the effects of
distortions and that improve the range of UWB devices, investigating theoretical
limits of performance, and also implementing and testing the developed
algorithms on an FPGA testbed. Objectives. (1) Develop distortion models and
distortion cancellation techniques for UWB de- vices by using advanced signal
processing algorithms in the digital domain. (2) Develop enhanced OFDM receivers
for UWB communications by jointly addressing the issues of improved range,
improved channel estimation, and distortion compensation. (3) Use the developed
distortion can- cellation receivers for both single user and multi-user (space-
time coded) communications scenarios. (4) Investigate theoretical limits of
performance and effects of distortion on system performance. (5) Pursue a proof-
of-concept implementation of a UWB system on an FPGA by using the developed
algorithms in order to investigate the models and the algorithms for improved
performance. Intellectual Merit of the Proposed Activity. The PI and his
research group have extensive research experience on different aspects of
advanced signal processing, communications, and adaptive system design. The
proposed research activity is creative in several respects: (1) It recognizes
the need to address signal distortions introduced by analog processing as a step
towards maintaining the cost of UWB devices low. (2) It recognizes the
importance of cancelling distortion in the digital domain, as opposed to the
analog domain. (3) It studies the effects of major sources of distortion
(including IQ imbalances, phase noise, and transmitter and receiver
nonlinearities) on algorithm development and performance. (4) It addresses major
performance hurdles such as enhanced channel estimation in order to incorporate
distortion models, the design of distortion-robust OFDM-based SISO and MIMO
(space-time coded) communications, and the need for improved range for UWB
devices due to their limited transmit power. (5) It pays attention to the
intricate balance between algorithm complexity and hardware implementation.
Broader Impacts of the Proposed Activity. The broader impacts of the proposed
research are as follows: (1) It has significant implications on the information
technology infrastructure of the nation by making the promising UWB technology
widely spread at lower costs. (2) It contributes to the development of ultra-
high-speed wireless networks for PC peripherals, consumer electronics, home
networking, and mobile devices at data rates that may reach 480Mbps. (3) It
trains both graduate and undergraduate students in an area of fundamental
relevance to future communications systems. (4) The results of the research will
be widely disseminated online and via publications in archival journals and
conference proceedings, and also via demonstrations of the hardware testbed. A-1