* 0401087
* InP-based MEMS-tunable Optical Filters and Switches
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2004,09/30/2009
* Reza Ghodssi, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 09/30/2009
* USD 210,000.00

The objective of the project is to develop and test wavelength-selective widely
tunable (1250-1650 nm) resonant microcavity filters and switches by on-chip
electrostatic micro-electro-mechanical actuation of indium phosphide (InP)
waveguides and highly reflective monolithic horizontal mirrors, for broadband
optical networks. The work builds upon experimental research initiated by the PI
to establish InP as a suitable material for micro-opto-electro-mechanical
systems (MOEMS), permitting a new level of monolithic integration of active and
passive optoelectronic devices, impossible in traditional silicon-based
MEMS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits:&lt;br/&gt; MEMS provide a simple
and useful broad wavelength-tuning mechanism, often superior to the
corresponding static configuration, by realizing variable-length microcavities
bound by two highly reflective mirrors in waveguide-based low-power Photonic
Integrated Circuits (PIC).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Integrated MOEMS devices are inherently miniaturized and
mass-producible; a fact that helps in accelerating the penetration of
intelligent optical networks closer to the consumers for faster and easier
access to information, leading to sweeping impact in all fields including
education, healthcare, and commerce. The integration of e-beam-lithographically
defined deep-etched sub-micron composite mirror structures would boost the
integration of MEMS with nanotechnology. The proposed research will strengthen
an ongoing InP-based Optical MEMS program in the PI's group. The PI supervises a
number of undergraduate and graduate students, majority of whom are US citizens.
MSAL has also hosted international exchange students and senior research
scientists for short-term collaborative research projects. The co-PI is a member
of the Women in Engineering program at the UMD, and regularly mentors students
of all levels (from middle school to graduate school). These activities will
directly impact the nature of system integration curriculum development at UMD,
recruitment of outstanding students (already evident), creation of internship
opportunities for students in industry, and dissemination of knowledge to a much
larger community through the regional MEMS Alliance workshops and eventually,
refereed journal publications.&lt;br/&gt;