* 0401766
* Nonlinear Dynamics and Elasticity
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Michael Marder, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2008
* USD 240,000.00

This grant supports theoretical research on nonlinear dynamics and elasticity,
in particular, the physics of deformed solids. The problems concern the way that
building matter from atoms determines its mechanical behavior on large scales.
These problems have largely been solved in cases where the solid object deforms
only a small amount. However, when the deformations are large enough to rip
atoms apart from their neighbors the problems become more difficult and the
connection between small and large scales is more challenging to determine
quantitatively. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some particular questions to be addressed
include: Why do theory and experiment still differ by a factor of two for the
fracture energy of silicon, and how can the problem be resolved? Can methods
that successfully solve brittle fracture problems be generalized to more
complicated materials with structure on multiple scales? How can one describe
cracks traveling faster than the shear wave speed in rubber, and why do they
spontaneously begin to oscillate? Can dry sliding friction be explained by the
motion of thousands of earthquake-like self-healing fractures? What sorts of
shock waves form in metals and semiconductors impacted by petawatt laser pulses?
Are leaves, flowers, and ripped garbage bags all similarly described as sheets
of non-uniform metrics, and how do their macroscopic geometrical properties
depend on microscopic lengths? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While these questions come
from many different subdisciplines of physics and engineering, they are unified
by underlying theoretical techniques, by a common set of numerical tools, and by
the overarching question in condensed matter physics, of how the macroscopic
world follows from its microscopic foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
will generate theoretical and computational tools to solve multiscale physics
problems, will provide new concepts for engineering mechanics including concepts
of commercial value, will create material for teacher preparation, and will
supply interesting new physics problems easily understood by a broad
public.&lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;This grant supports theoretical research on
nonlinear dynamics and elasticity, in particular, the physics of deformed
solids. The problems concern the way that building matter from atoms determines
its mechanical behavior on large scales. These problems have largely been solved
in cases where the solid object deforms only a small amount. However, when the
deformations are large enough to rip atoms apart from their neighbors the
problems become more difficult and the connection between small and large scales
is more challenging to determine quantitatively. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will generate theoretical and computational tools to solve multiscale
physics problems, will provide new concepts for engineering mechanics including
concepts of commercial value, will create material for teacher preparation, and
will supply interesting new physics problems easily understood by a broad
public.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;