* 0401730
* The Synthesis, Characterization, and Computational Study of Potential Antibiotic/Antitumor Spiroisoxazolines
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2007
* Ashton Hamme, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* JAMES J. POWLIK
* 04/30/2007
* USD 999,999.00

HRD- 0401730&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Synthesis, Characterization and Computational
Study of Potential Antibiotic /Antitumor
Spirosoxazolines&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jackson State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Jerzy
Leszczynski&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jackson State University scientists will
conduct research to explore the synthesis of compounds with potential anti-tumor
and anti-biotic applications. The National Science Foundation supported project
provides a means for the investigation of the synthetic methodology, molecular
design, and mechanistic insight for spiroisoxazoline construction and
exploration. Since a number of spiroisoxazolines have both antitumor and
antibiotic activities, a concise synthetic method that can accommodate a variety
of substrates is needed in order to probe into the electronic and atomic
properties responsible for the observed biological activity. Both experimental
and theoretical techniques will be applied to the proposed investigations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An international component of the project provides
participating Ph.D. students with research opportunities and training in theory
and applications of molecular modeling at the Technical University of Wroclaw,
Poland. Molecular modeling links computational chemistry, molecular biology,
biophysics, solid-state physics, materials science, and molecular
graphics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits of the project encompass the
integration of novel experimental and theoretical studies on series of
spiroisoxazolines and contributions to the knowledge base required for the
development of new active compounds that exhibit desired pharmacological
activity. This project has the potential to impact both the organic and
computational fields of chemistry because of the synthetic and theoretical
applications that will be employed. Broader impacts resulting from the project's
activities include enhanced participation of underrepresented minorities in the
science and technology disciplines and workforce through the recruitment and
training of African American Ph.D. students in cutting edge research within
computational chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;