* 0401515
* Ultrasensitive and Ultrafast Photonic Waveform Measurement Using Quasi-Phase-Matched Waveguide Nonlinear Optics
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Martin Fejer, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 05/31/2007
* USD 210,000.00

0401515&lt;br/&gt;Weiner&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of ultrafast optics has
advanced in a truly revolutionary manner over the last ten to fifteen years.
Several groups are now generating pulses only a few femtoseconds in duration in
the visible and near-infrared, equal to just a few optical cycles; and
sophisticated all-optical methods for waveform measurement and processing
applicable to this extremely short time scale have been developed. Largely in
parallel, the field of lightwave communications has also advanced in a
revolutionary manner. However, pushing the speed of electronics significantly
beyond the 40 Gb/s level is expected to be very challenging. This gives rise to
the so-called "electronics bottleneck," since the inherent speed of optical
signaling can be much faster than the available electronics. For this reason
all-optical approaches are becoming increasingly important in lightwave
communications. The goal of this proposal is to adapt sophisticated all-optical
methods from the field of ultrafast optics for use in lightwave systems, with a
strong emphasis on nonlinear optical measurement technologies. A fundamental
research challenge necessary to attain this goal involves the pursuit of orders
of magnitude improvement in nonlinear optical sensitivity, which is necessary
for compatibility with the low power levels and very high repetition rates
typical of practical lightwave systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to
substantially advance the state-of-the-art in ultrafast nonlinear optical
measurement technology, the PI has formed a synergistic team comprising the
Weiner group at Purdue University and the Fejer group at Stanford University.
The Weiner group is a world leader in powerful signal processing approaches
based on relationships between the time, frequency, and spatial degrees of
freedom in ultrafast lightwave signals. The Fejer group is a world leader in
second-order nonlinear optical materials and devices, including nonlinear
optical waveguides that provide orders of magnitude increases in efficiency and
engineerable quasi-phase-matched structures that open up rich new possibilities
for photonic signal processing and measurement. As a result their team proposes
to realize orders of magnitude improvement in the sensitivity of ultrafast
optical measurement techniques, while for the first time engineering the
nonlinear structure to permit optimization of the trade-offs between efficiency,
bandwidth, and temporal resolution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's work, aimed at providing new measurement
technologies enabling further advances in ultrafast lightwave communications,
has the potential for significant societal benefit, by acting to support the
information technology revolution that fuels so much of our economy. To catalyze
rapid transfer of our results to industry, the PI envisions collaborations with
partners such as Agilent Laboratories, a leading developer of test and
measurement instrumentation. The research also has the potential for broader
impact beyond optical communications, e.g., by establishing approaches providing
orders of magnitude sensitivity enhancements for measurement of the highly
structured femtosecond optical signals that are now in broad use within
ultrafast optical science research. This research project should furnish
excellent opportunities for broad student training in areas of cutting-edge
technology, while providing teaming opportunities that will enrich the students'
educational experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;