* 0401098
* RUI - Combinatorial Methods in Representation Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Thomas Halverson, Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2007
* USD 122,278.00

The goal of this project is to use combinatorial methods&lt;br/&gt;to solve
problems in the field of matrix representations&lt;br/&gt;of groups and
algebras, and, conversely, to use representation&lt;br/&gt;theory to produce new
results in enumerative combinatorics.&lt;br/&gt;A main focus of each project is
to construct and understand&lt;br/&gt;irreducible representations and
characters. The algebraic&lt;br/&gt;structures under investigation include
symmetric groups and&lt;br/&gt;Weyl groups, the finite general linear group and
other finite&lt;br/&gt;Chevalley groups, partition algebras, and Hecke
algebras.&lt;br/&gt;These structures often come as pairs acting on vector
spaces&lt;br/&gt;and commuting with each other; for example the symmetric
group&lt;br/&gt;and the partition algebra commute with each other on
tensor&lt;br/&gt;space and a Chevalley group and its Hecke algebra commute
on&lt;br/&gt;a flag variety. This duality allows us to bring known
information&lt;br/&gt;from one of the algebraic structures to bear on the study
of&lt;br/&gt;its partner. The combinatorial structures used here
include&lt;br/&gt;symmetric functions, partitions, tableaux, integer
matrices,&lt;br/&gt;and graphs. This project will engage undergraduate
students&lt;br/&gt;in all aspects of the research. Algebraic combinatorics is
an&lt;br/&gt;ideal way to introduce young mathematicians and scientists
to&lt;br/&gt;research, because it uses accessible combinatorial
objects,&lt;br/&gt;which can be created, analyzed, and manipulated by
students&lt;br/&gt;who do not have of a large amount of advanced training. At
the&lt;br/&gt;same time, these objects enhance the fundamental
understanding&lt;br/&gt;of important constructs from algebra, geometry, and
topology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The algebraic objects under investigation in this
project&lt;br/&gt;represent various kinds of symmetry. These include
symmetries&lt;br/&gt;of physical objects --- such as molecules, crystals, knots,
or&lt;br/&gt;tensegrities --- and symmetries of complicated systems, such
as&lt;br/&gt;physical models of energy transfer, large sets of ranked
data,&lt;br/&gt;or symmetry in the organization of digital image
data.&lt;br/&gt;Representation theory ``represents" these symmetries
using&lt;br/&gt;matrices (rectangular arrays of numbers ). In a given
problem,&lt;br/&gt;there are usually a large number of these matrices and they
also&lt;br/&gt;are usually large in dimension (size). A major goal
of&lt;br/&gt;combinatorial representation theory is to find ways
to&lt;br/&gt;simultaneously decompose these large matrices into
their&lt;br/&gt;constituent building blocks and then to analyze the
building&lt;br/&gt;blocks using concrete structures which can be manipulated
by&lt;br/&gt;hand and by computer. This is analogous to understanding
a&lt;br/&gt;complicated molecule by decomposing it into the various
atoms&lt;br/&gt;that make it up and then carefully analyzing those
atoms.&lt;br/&gt;Since the early 20th century, representation theory has
held&lt;br/&gt;a prominent role in theoretical mathematics. Furthermore,
it&lt;br/&gt;has had an enormous impact on physical chemistry,
particle&lt;br/&gt;physics, and knot theory. In recent years, the areas
of&lt;br/&gt;application of representation theory have grown to
include&lt;br/&gt;data analysis, digital image processing, coding theory,
and&lt;br/&gt;engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;