* 0401830
* International Research Fellowship Program: Rapid Speciation in the New Zealand Alpine Flora: An Integrated Approach to Assessing the Impacts of Selective Forces
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Heidi Meudt, Meudt Heidi M
* Fellowship
* Susan Parris
* 08/31/2007
* USD 130,028.00

0401830 Meudt

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-two-month research fellowship by Dr. Heidi M.
Meudt to work with Dr. Peter Lockhart at Massey University in Palmerston North,
New Zealand, and with Dr. Phil Garnock-Jones at Victoria University on
Wellington, New Zealand.

Building upon the PI's extensive knowledge of the systematics and biogeography
of Ourisia (Plantaginaceae) from her dissertation work, the PI is using the New
Zealand species of Ourisia as a study system to assess the relative impact of
geological, genetic and ecological factors on the evolutionary history of the
rapidly speciating alpine flora of New Zealand. The PI is specifically
addressing the following three goals: (a) characterization of the pattern of
radiation of Ourisia in the mountains of New Zealand within a temporal framework
of tectonic and climatic change; (b) investigation of the ecological factors
that may be driving radiation; and (c) investigation of other selective forces
that are important for maintaining species barriers in the absence of
specialized pollinators. An integrated approach is underway that combines data
from field work, greenhouse crossing studies, genetic studies (AFLP and ISSR),
geographic information systems (GIS), and statistical hypothesis testing. New
Zealand's unique combination of geological history and ecological diversity make
it the perfect place to investigate plant species radiations and their
underlying causes, which is the focus of the active research programs of the
hosts, Dr. Phil Garnock-Jones and Dr. Peter Lockhart.

This project involves the training and valuable assistance of (volunteer)
undergraduate assistants for conducting field studies and crossing studies, and
gathering and analyzing molecular data. The training of an American woman (the
PI) during this project is significant since few researchers working on
questions of New Zealand speciation are Americans or women. The skills she
learns will be applicable to address similar questions in other places such as
the South American Andes, where the PI also has research and language
experience.