* 0401375
* Development of  Nano-based Passive Sensors for RF/Wireless Sensing Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Anh-Vu Pham, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Rongqing Hui
* 06/30/2007
* USD 210,000.00

0401375&lt;br/&gt;Pham&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI is proposing to develop
microwave vertically aligned carbon nanotube resonator sensor for remote and
wireless chemical detection. The newly developed sensor is the key component in
development of a remote wireless sensing system to detect chemical agents. The
sensor will consist of an electromagnetic resonator integrated with vertically
aligned carbon nanotubes used as a chemical transducer. The carbon nanotube
resonator sensor is a passive sensing device and requires no power consumption.
Passive sensor and zero power consumption address the challenges in the
development of wireless sensor networks that employ numerous sensor nodes. The
contactless sensor is important in applications that prohibit the use of wiring.
The microwave carbon nanotube resonator sensor exhibits changes in resonant
frequency when exposed to gasses. An array of antennas will be designed and
incorporated into the carbon nanotube resonator sensor to communicate with a
remote wireless reading system. He will develop a remote wireless reading system
to probe the sensor. The major tasks of this research include: (1) development
of microwave carbon nanotube resonator sensor to detect chemical agents, and (2)
development of a wireless remote sensing system using microwave carbon nanotube
resonator sensors up to 20 GHz. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The
advancement of sensors is a national need with broad ranges of applications in
health care, the food industry, chemical industry, environmental monitoring and
national security. The detection of chemical agents remotely is particular
importance and a critical element in the development of wireless sensor
networks. The remote detection is crucial in applications where wires are
prohibited. The underlying sensing mechanism is passive, and such sensors are
critical to power management of wireless networks that use numerous sensor
nodes. The sensor can be integrated on a printed circuit board for practical
applications. The research will enhance the understanding of the interaction
occurring between gas molecules, their environment, and microwave
electromagnetic signals. The use of emerging carbon nanotube materials will open
numerous possibilities for the development of sensors that can detect new toxic
and biological agents. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary education goal is to
attract domestic student candidates to pursue graduate studies, especially
doctoral research. His plan is to develop interdisciplinary projects that
combine traditional microwave engineering, life science and nanotechnologies.
This combination will provide rich, exciting, and novel research projects that
will be attractive to graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;