* 0401866
* International Research Fellowship Program: Determination of the Function of RoXaN I in Cellular and Rotavirus Biology
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Michelle Becker, Becker Michelle M
* Fellowship
* John Snyder
* 08/31/2005
* USD 61,250.00

0401866 Becker

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twelve-month research fellowship by Dr. Michelle M.
Becker to work with Dr. Didier Poncet at Centre National de la Recherche
Scientique in Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

RoXaN I is a cellular protein with no known function, identified through its
interaction with rotavirus nonstructural protein NSP3. RoXaN is found in both
the nucleus and the cytoplasm and may move between these two cellular
compartments, possibly to transport mRNA or regulate translation. These
experiments are designed to test the hypothesis that the normal function of
RoXaN is subverted during rotavirus infection to enhance viral replication and
will also contribute new information about the mechanisms of rotavirus
replication and viral control of cellular processes. Since RoXaN is present in
both the cytoplasm and nucleus, but it does not contain a classical nuclear
localization sequence or nuclear export sequence, the subcellular localization
of RoXaN in uninfected and rotavirus-infected cells is being determined using
confocal immunofluorescence microscopy. Deletion mutants of RoXaN are being used
to define the protein domains necessary for proper subcellular localization.
Results from these experiments will define the localization of RoXaN within the
cell and the regions within the protein important for directing RoXaN to the
correct cellular compartment. The effect of RoXaN on rotavirus processes will be
examined in the presence and absence of RoXaN expression. Cellular expression of
RoXaN mRNA is being deleted using RNA interference technology. The efficiency of
rotavirus replication, translation of viral and cellular messages, and changes
in viral replication patterns will be examined in cells expressing and not
expressing RoXaN. These results will determine the role of RoXaN in rotavirus
replication.

The host lab has unique tools to examine the function of this fascinating and
novel protein. The host and his colleagues are experts in studies of the viral
manipulation of cellular physiology, and have the resources necessary to
complete this project.