* 0401269
* Optical Nonlinearities in Microstructured Fibers for All-Optical Network Functionalities
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Jean Toulouse, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* eric johnson
* 12/31/2007
* USD 210,000.00



0401269 Toulouse

All-optical functions are expected to become increasingly important in future
communication networks. Recent developments in optical fibers, specifically the
development of highly nonlinear silica fibers using a small size core as well as
the new microstructured fibers (MF), have made the nonlinear optical fiber a top
candidate for the realistic implementation of the above mentioned all-optical
functionalities.

In this project the PI will study several nonlinear optical effects in
microstructured fibers and demonstrate their application to the functionalities
required by an All-Optical Network. The originality and scientific merit of the
proposal is that it combines a study of basic optical phenomena in
microstructured fibers with the demonstration of network functionalities.
Several types of microstructured fibers are being developed and studied, each
geometry being designed to enhance a certain nonlinear optical property. In
particular, the PI will focus on stimulated Raman scattering, which offers
several advantages for applications in an all-optical network, such as
wavelength conversion, ultrafast optical sampling and possibly also data
regeneration. The proposed research will have several broader impacts. The first
one is the expansion of the knowledge base that underlies existing optical
technologies. A second one is the application of technologies that, so far, were
primarily used in optical communications, to other areas such as sensing, bio or
medical applications. The new Lehigh Center for Optical Technologies will also
greatly help with the dissemination of information and knowledge generated by
the project and facilitate cross-fertilization.

