* 0401083
* An acoustic wave cytosensor system for living cell study
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2007
* James Wang, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2007
* USD 255,475.00

&lt;br/&gt;It has been recognized that living cells represent biologically
evolved systems possessing all the&lt;br/&gt;attributes of smart materials. In
some sense they represent the ultimate smart material. The
major&lt;br/&gt;challenge in using living cells as highly sensitive selective
and reliable sensors arises on how to transduce&lt;br/&gt;the biological changes
of the cells under specific conditions into quantitative (or measurable)
physical&lt;br/&gt;parameters. In this project, we propose a three-years
research effort to develop a Love-mode surface&lt;br/&gt;acoustic wave (SAW)
biosensor that can be used to quantitatively probe the behavior of living
cell&lt;br/&gt;attachment, spreading, and growth kinetics under various
biological conditions. The ultimate goal is to&lt;br/&gt;demonstrate that the
Love-mode SAW device can provide an electromechanical mechanism for
high&lt;br/&gt;sensitive signal transduction that allows us to access the cells
that attach on the surface of the device as&lt;br/&gt;the biological element in
this living cellLove-mode SAW biosensor system.&lt;br/&gt;The specific aims of
this project are: 1) To design, modeling and characterize highly sensitive
Love-&lt;br/&gt;mode SAW devices; 2) to develop a SAW sensor system consisting
of a SAW sensor array, a mini-&lt;br/&gt;incubation system, and a microscope
system; and 3) to show the functionality of this novel sensor
system&lt;br/&gt;by investigating adhesive/contractile activities of human
tendon fibroblasts. This project will involve&lt;br/&gt;modeling, design,
fabrication, characterization, and biological evaluation of a novel cytosensor
system.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact of This Project:&lt;br/&gt;When completed, this
project will provide a novel sensor system that will be capable
of&lt;br/&gt;simultaneously measuring multiple samples with a high degree of
sensitivity. This study will also have&lt;br/&gt;substantial impact on the
current biosensor research and development, and will greatly promote the use
of&lt;br/&gt;living cells as transduction devices. The novel sensor system will
be a powerful tool to study cell&lt;br/&gt;biological events in a real-time,
quick, easy, quantitative, and high throughput fashion, and will have
wide&lt;br/&gt;potential applications not only in biomedical research but also
in monitoring environmental contaminants,&lt;br/&gt;drug screening and efficacy
testing, bacteria and virus testing in the food industry and for
anti-&lt;br/&gt;bioterrorism applications.&lt;br/&gt;The education aspects of
this program will include interdisciplinary research training of both
graduate&lt;br/&gt;and undergraduate researchers; hands-on research training
opportunities for K-12 students in each&lt;br/&gt;summer semester through the
Pitt Engineering Career Access Program (PECAP); and summer
research&lt;br/&gt;training for undergraduate students from underrepresented
groups through Summer Engineering Academy&lt;br/&gt;(SEA) program coordinated by
the Diversity and Minority Engineering Programs. The research
activities&lt;br/&gt;proposed in this project will be incorporated into new
courses for both undergraduate and graduate&lt;br/&gt;student as advanced
topics.