* 0401045
* Computational Intelligence Based Power Systems Operation
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Jing Peng, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Dagmar Niebur
* 06/30/2009
* USD 180,000.00

The power system disturbances related to power quality have been important
issues to electric utilities and their customers. Upon malfunction in power
systems everything goes disarray impacting industrial units, business, and a
large population.

To prevent power system failures an appropriate corrective action must be taken
well before beginning of cascaded failures. Computational Intelligence (CI)
based techniques; Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT), Hidden Markov Models,
Recurrent Neural Networks, Bayesian networks, mixture of Gaussians and
independent component analysis are proposed for real time
identification/classification of the power system disturbances. For the real
time control of power system disturbances, DSpace system implements intelligent
control algorithms for Power Quality Converter to correct a selected set of
individual disturbances as well as overlapped disturbances.

The CI based techniques will perform time series analysis to forecast future
disturbances based on disturbance log/history. The real time detection and
control techniques will also be used for system probing to predict the load and
develop the model of the load in a downstream power system.

The electric power engineering research and education needs new ideas from
computational sciences for an intelligent control of electric grid system. The
power system disturbances, caused by natural factors, over loading, power
quality events, and malfunction of power system gears, are growing concerns to
electric utilities. Therefore, this proposal also strives to develop a new
interdisciplinary course titled "Computational Intelligence in Power System".

It is expected that the proposed new course will impart training to future power
engineers with broader perspectives on interdisciplinary research and education.