* 0401773
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Carbonic Anhydrase and C4 Photosynthesis
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Asaph Cousins, Cousins                 Asaph          B
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 02/29/2008
* USD 117,266.00

0401773&lt;br/&gt;Cousins&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Research
Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to
twenty-four months of research abroad. The program's awards provide
opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a twenty-two-month research
fellowship by Dr. Asaph Cousins to work with Dr. Susanne von Caemmerer at the
Australian National University in Canberra.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Atmospheric
carbon dioxide (CO2) isotope analysis is an important tool for monitoring
changes in the physiological processes controlling global exchange of CO2 and
net primary productivity (NPP) of terrestrial plant communities. Generally,
photosynthesis and respiration have very contrasting effects on the isotope
signature of atmospheric CO2. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;However, a detailed
understanding of the steps responsible for CO2 isotope discrimination is needed
to accurately distinguish between the processes controlling global CO2 exchange.
Carbonic anhydrase (CA) regulates C4 photosynthesis and has been implicated in
the isotopic&lt;br/&gt;discrimination of atmospheric CO2. The proposed research
would utilize gas exchange and carbon/oxygen isotope measurements to study the
influence of CA on the discrimination of CO2 during C4 photosynthesis in
response to global climate change (i.e., water stress and elevated CO2).
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research will provide insight into the C4
photosynthetic reactions that directly affect the isotopic composition of
atmospheric CO2. A better understanding of the enzymatic reactions and the leaf
level gas exchange influencing the atmospheric CO2 isotope composition will
allow for the development of more accurate models of current and future climatic
conditions. This information will be far-reaching, further enhancing our
understanding of the role of C4 plants in global gas exchange and NPP. Dr.von
Caemmerer is one of the foremost experts in plant physiology and C4
photosynthesis.&lt;br/&gt;