* 0401131
* P-adic Deformations of Eisenstein Series
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Eric Jean-Paul Urban, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2007
* USD 141,000.00

Abstract of Eric Urban's award DMS-0401131. "p-adic deformation of Eisenstein
series"

Urban will pursue his research on the construction and the study of congruences
between automorphic forms in order to attack some of the Bloch-Kato conjectures
and the Iwasawa main conjectures relating critical L-values and the size of
Selmer groups. He will especially work on such congruences between Eisenstein
series and cusp forms as in the works by Mazur-Wiles or in his work on the main
conjecture for the symmetric square of an ordinary elliptic curve. In that
direction, the PI will continue his joint work in progress with C. Skinner
proving the Iwasawa main conjecture for elliptic curves via the study of the
Eisenstein ideal for U(2,2). He also plans to guide some Ph-D students on a
similar topic for some other unitary groups. The PI will also work on the theory
of p-adic families of automorphic forms for general reductive groups by both
geometric and topological approaches. This work will be undertaken for its own
interest but also because the study of such congruences for Eisenstein series
has numerous powerful applications. By these means, Urban plans to obtain some
new and general constructions of certain arithmetical fundamental objects as for
instance $p$-adic Euler systems that will be an essential tool to bound above
the size of some Selmer groups.

Urban's research field is the arithmetic theory of automorphic forms. Those are
certain holomorphic functions having many symmetries and whose deep arithmetical
properties are read from their Fourier coefficients. These objects play a
fundamental role in number theory as their study has been very fruitful in the
last two decades, leading A. Wiles to the proof of the Fermat's last theorem.
The ultimate goal of the inverstigator's research is to relate two apparently
unrelated objects which are the special values of L-functions (a meromorphic
function on the complex planes associated to an automorphic form) and the order
of certain Selmer groups (a generalization of the class group of a number field)
via the study of congruences between automorphic forms. One of the main tools
that will be used in Urban's investigation is the theory of p-adic modular
forms, a theory that encodes all the congruences between modular forms modulo
arbitrary high powers of a given prime number p. He will develop new aspects of
this theory for general reductive groups and apply it to relevant modular forms
called Eisenstein series whose constant terms carry information on critical
L-values. Among other things, the results of this research will also have some
important implications to the p-adic and classical conjecture of Birch and
Swinnerton-Dyer that are major conjectures on the set of solutions of cubic
equations in two variables

