* 0401814
* Stringy Mathematics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Savdeep Sethi, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Earle L. Lomon
* 07/31/2007
* USD 254,013.00

In the past few years, there has been significant interplay between string
theory and mathematics. For example, advances in supersymmetric field theory
have shed light on four manifold invariants, while advances in algebraic
geometry have clarified the origins of mirror symmetry. The aim of this project
is to further strengthen this interplay by research focused on three areas of
interest to both mathematicians and physicists. The broader impact of this
project centers on improved interdisciplinary ties fostered through lectures at
schools and workshops, and through direct collaboration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first research goal is to develop a recently
discovered analogue of mirror symmetry for the heterotic string. Conventional
mirror symmetry applies to theories with (2; 2) super-symmetry. However, these
compactifications constitute a special subclass of more general heterotic string
compactifications with only (0; 2) supersymmetry. Many of the interesting
structures of (2; 2) theories, like quantum cohomology (or chiral) rings,
generalize to this richer setting. Using the dual description, the chiral ring
can be determined exactly in many examples, leading to predictions about
heterotic string instanton corrections. The study of (0; 2) duality is a topic
in its infancy, and there are many directions to explore: for example, S-duality
maps heterotic world-sheet instantons into D-instantons of type I open string
theory. This suggests a relation between open and closed string instantons,
which is likely to be fascinating both to physicists and to geometers. The
second area of focus involves compactifications with flux. In the presense of
flux, a string target space need not be Ricci-flat. Compact examples of this
kind involving just NS-NS fluxes have been found in recent years. These are
compactifications with torsion. It is clear that there should be dual
descriptions for vacua of this kind (in the sense of mirror symmetry), but there
is little currently known about these duals. Since generic string
compactifications involve fluxes, constructing dual descriptions for these cases
is likely to both enhance our understanding of the string moduli space, and lead
to novel questions in mathematics. The third direction revolves around a
relation between matrix integrals and modular forms. The twisted partition
function for type IIB D-instantons in ten dimensions is computed by evaluating a
complicated matrix integral. Yet these matrix integrals are encoded in a
particular modular form, which appears in the effective action for the type IIB
string. This modular form is completely determined by supersymmetry. The
connection between the U-duality group, SL(2;Z), and the matrix integrals is
intriguing and puzzling: why is it true? Does it generalize to lower dimensions
where the U-duality group is larger? Does it extend to other solitons like
monopoles? There are tantalizing hints that the answer to the last two questions
is affirmative, but much remains to be understood.&lt;br/&gt;