* 0401818
* Minnesota Nanotechnology Workforce Initiative (MnNano)
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Stephen Campbell, Dakota County Technical College
* Continuing Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 05/31/2008
* USD 895,854.00

This project is establishing a Nanoscience Technician program at Dakota County
Technical College (DCTC) in partnership with the University of Minnesota. This
two-year A.A.S. degree program is preparing graduates with the multidisciplinary
skills necessary for the future technician workforce needs of Minnesota in this
emerging career field. Students are taking their first three semesters at DCTC,
completing existing general education as well as newly developed nanoscience
technical courses. The fourth semester&lt;br/&gt;is a capstone experience at the
University of Minnesota involving lab experience in the U of Minnesota
Nanofabrication, Particle Technology and Materials Characterization
laboratories. The capstone experience includes lecture courses that complement
the lab experiences and internships with growing nanotechnology industries in
biotechnology, medical devices, agriculture, materials manufacturing and
electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is also a major effort focused on
attracting high school students to careers in nanoscience through summer
Nanoscience Curriculum Modules and Camps for high school students, as well as
through Nanoscience Inservices and Internships for high school teachers. This
seamless transition program for high school students focuses a significant
effort to recruit underrepresented minority students to these summer camps and
then target to recruit them into the DCTC two-year AAS degree program. The
project includes community college partners Normandale Community College and
Minnesota&lt;br/&gt;Technical College, Lakeville High School, professional
societies, industry associations, and industry partners across the state. The
program has also formed a close relationship with the NSF ATE regional center at
Penn State for nanofabrication manufacturing education and is adapting elements
of its program, as well as curriculum from other institutions around the nation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual Merit of this project is based on
developing a multidisciplinary nanoscience technician education curriculum in an
emerging high tech field which will greatly impact on our national
competitiveness and future job growth in many industries, such as biotechnology,
medical devices, agriculture, materials and electronics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impact of this project is that, while it will
develop a new nanoscience degree program for technician education and training,
it also provides the unique outreach to high school students and provides
training for in-service teachers and especially underrepresented minorities
needed to be attracted to a new high technology field of study. The expectation
is that 37 institutions in the Minnesota State College and University system
will use this as a model to develop a core set of nanotechnology AAS degree
programs in the state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;