* 0401757
* Modeling Electroporation-Mediated DNA Delivery
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Wanda Neu, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2008
* USD 303,137.00

0401757&lt;br/&gt;Krassowska&lt;br/&gt;This renewal proposal seeks funding to
complete the work on modeling electroporation that was&lt;br/&gt;started under
the NSF grants BES-9974185 and BES-0108408. Electroporation is a technique in
which strong electrical shocks are used to create pores in the cell membrane
that enable biologically active molecules to enter the cell interior. Despite
numerous applications of electroporation to drug and DNA delivery, the theory
underlying this process is still lacking. Previous research funded by the NSF
allowed the PI and her team to make significant progress in this area, by
development of a model that gives good qualitative, and sometimes even
quantitative, agreement with experiments. However, consistent quantitative
agreement cannot be reached without modeling both temporal and spatial aspects
of electroporation, which is the focus of the research proposed in this
application. The goals of this project are:&lt;br/&gt;(1) Develop an asymptotic
simplification of the existing model of pore creation and evolution, which would
give results equivalent to the existing model without its computational
expense.&lt;br/&gt;(2) Develop a model of electric field-driven DNA flux through
macropores that could be used for&lt;br/&gt;linear, circular, or supercoiled
DNA. &lt;br/&gt;(3) Synthesize the pore creation and evolution model and the DNA
flux model in the context of two prototypical spatially extended systems, a
single cell and a one-dimensional fiber. These models will provide the proof of
concept that a comprehensive and realistic model of electroporation in cells and
tissues is feasible, and they will lay the foundation for modeling clinical
procedures involving in-vivo electroporation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
interdisciplinary research team consisting of Dr. Wanda will perform the
research&lt;br/&gt;Krassowska (PI, Biomedical Eng., Duke University), Dr. John
Neu (Mathematics, UC Berkeley),&lt;br/&gt;a graduate research assistant, and
undergraduate students. The model will be evaluated yearly&lt;br/&gt;by the
R&amp;D scientists from Genetronics, Inc., a company that specializes in
developing technology and hardware for medical applications of electroporation.