* 0401038
* Nonlinear Multidimensional Systems of Hyperbolic Partial Differential Equations
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Thomas Sideris, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2008
* USD 79,154.00

The proposed research will focus on models involving multidimensional systems of
nonlinear partial differential equations, arising in elastodynamics,
incompressible fluid flow, and electromagnetics. The emphasis of this work will
be on existence and long time behavior of solutions using analytical methods
which exploit the fundamental structure of the models, based on the null
condition. In the area of nonlinear elastodynamics, the connection between the
structure of the strain-energy relations and global well-posedness for the
initial value problem will be studied. The research aims at a better
understanding of the relationship between compressible and incompressible
materials, the formation of shock waves, and the behavior of elastic bodies in
astrophysical applications. The recent methods developed for elastodynamics will
be applied to the Born-Infeld system from nonlinear electromagnetics and
recently revived in string theory. The confinement of vortical motion in planar
incompressible ideal fluids will be studied.

According to the classical principle of determinism, the the evolutionary laws
of a physical system together with an initial configuration should determine the
state of the system at all future times. Mathematically speaking, the the laws
of physics are encoded in a system of partial differential equations solutions
of which should exist and depend uniquely and continuously on the initial
configuration. Creating the mathematical framework for a given system and
verifying its well-posedness (in the sense above) is thus a problem of
fundamental importance. Much of the research in this proposal is devoted to such
basic questions for models describing the dynamics of elastic materials.
Material properties are expressed through the specification of the relation
between strain and energy, using phenomenological arguments. However,
phenomenology alone does not fully characterize the structure of the model. The
desire to describe dynamics for all future times leads to the imposition of
further structural assumptions which are deeply connected with the mathematical
analysis of the problem. In this sense, mathematical analysis offers important
guidance in the selection of the model. With a mathematically tractable theory
in hand, it is possible to consider qualitative questions, such as how the
behavior of the system varies under changes in material properties. In
particular, the stability of the system as the material becomes incompressible
will be studied. This includes rubber-like materials, for example. The
techniques will also be adapted to allow for the inclusion of relativistic
effects, necessary for astrophysical applications. The Born-Infeld model from
nonlinear electrodynamics (and recently revived in the theory of strings) will
also be investigated, since it shares similar structural properties.