* 0401349
* Multiple scattering of terahertz pulses
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Daniel Mittleman, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 05/31/2008
* USD 210,000.00

0401349 Mittleman

The primary aim of this proposal is to develop an understanding of the
propagation of broadband THz pulses in random media. Building on the results of
the previous NSF grant, the PI will pursue two distinct avenues of research. The
first of these involves the development of a new paradigm in diffuse photon
imaging, based on the notion that a coherent measurement of the complete
scattered electric field contains much more information than a measurement of
the time-averaged intensity. The second thrust will explore the nature of pulse
propagation in the limit of extremely strong multiple scattering, where the
diffusion approximation breaks down. This work should produce the first
unambiguous observation of photon localization in a bulk three-dimensional
random medium.

In the last decade, there has been a tremendous amount of research involving
light scattering. Much of this work has been motivated by the potential
applications to biomedicine, since human tissue is a weak absorber but a strong
scatterer of radiation in the near infrared range. Despite the apparent loss of
information inherent in the process of multiple scattering, it is still possible
to form useful images of objects immersed in a turbid medium. In order to
overcome the loss of information, one must make many measurements, for example,
by measuring the scattered (e.g., diffusing) field at many locations in space.
Therefore, there is always a trade-off between acquisition rate and image
quality, which has limited the applicability of these techniques

Here, the PI will develop a new paradigm for diffuse photon imaging, based on
the idea that a direct measurement of the electric field (i.e., both intensity
and phase) should vastly simplify the imaging problem. He will demonstrate this
using terahertz time-domain spectroscopy, a useful test bed for broadband
coherent pulse measurements. In addition, this research will vastly broaden the
utility of THz imaging, as it will establish the significance of scattering in
image formation. It will also result in new applications for this emerging
technology, in situations where scattering is inevitable.

The intellectual merit of this portion of the research lies in the development
of imaging procedures designed specifically for the situation where a (random)
electric field, rather than a random intensity, is measured. This should enable
the formation of a useful image with many fewer spatial measurements. The
broader impacts lie in the applications of this new technique, both at terahertz
frequencies and in other disciplines.

The PI also plans to develop a thorough understanding of the statistics of
multiply scattered short pulses. In earlier work, he has established that one
can use the THz time-domain technique for observing diffusing photons. In this
proposal, he will extend this work to an entirely new regime. He will study the
properties of multiply scattered THz pulses in the case where the scattering
becomes extremely strong. In this case, one expects that the description of the
propagation in terms of a diffusion theory must break down, since strong
multiple scattering can lead to coherent effects. Ultimately, one expects a
complete localization of the propagating wave, in direct analogy to the well-
known phenomenon of Anderson localization of electrons in disordered solids.

Observing photon localization in a three-dimensional random medium has been a
long-standing goal in optics research. It turns out to be extremely difficult to
produce an unambiguous demonstration of this effect, in large part because of
the crucial role played by optical absorption. By performing these experiments
using THz pulses, it will be possible to completely circumvent this most vexing
of problems.

The intellectual merit of this project will be a clear observation of wave
localization, in a controlled experimental environment. This will lead to a new
understanding of wave localization and the statistics of strongly multiply
scattered waves. The broader impacts of this work will be most evident in the
implications for our understanding of the phenomenon of lasing in random media,
which involves laser modes formed by localized states.

An additional impact will be seen in the broadening of an already successful
program to attract more women to graduate studies in science and engineering.

