* 0401799
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Multi-Scale Analysis of Gene Flow in the Emergent Aquatic Macrophyte Hymenocallis coronaria
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2007
* Kathleen Parker, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 04/30/2007
* USD 11,957.00

Water movement, which is the primary seed dispersal agent for many aquatic
plants, is unidirectional throughout an upland drainage basin. Models of gene
flow based on terrestrial environments, where seed dispersal is often
multidirectional, are likely inadequate for representing patterns of gene flow
in aquatic plants. Few studies have investigated the influence of unidirectional
stream flow on patterns of genetic variation in aquatic plants, however, and
these studies have reported contradictory results. Furthermore, gene flow both
within and among populations has rarely been examined in stream environments,
and many questions remain concerning how these processes function at different
scales of analysis. This Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement project will
use molecular techniques to examine gene flow in Hymenocallis coronaria (shoals
spider lily), an aquatic plant that occurs in shoal habitats in piedmont streams
from Alabama to South Carolina but is absent from several watersheds in the
middle of its range. The project's first broad objective is to examine the
effects of unidirectional stream flow on genetic structure and gene flow within
and among populations of Hymenocallis coronaria. Specifically, a combination of
nuclear DNA and chloroplast DNA markers will be used to (1) determine whether
genetic variability increases progressively downstream both within and among
populations, (2) examine the influence of pollen flow vs. seed flow in stream
environments, and (3) test which of three gene flow models best represents the
patterns of gene flow among populations. The second broad objective is to
examine the effects of habitat characteristics and land-use history on
population distribution, genetic structure, and gene flow, and how these
factors, in turn, affect microevolutionary processes in an aquatic macrophyte.
In concert with molecular techniques, stream discharge, water temperature,
turbidity, dissolved oxygen, sediment depth in the channel, shoals lithology,
and strike and dip of the shoals rock units will be measured to determine (1)
which factors are associated with the absence of Hymenocallis coronaria
populations from the middle of the species range, (2) whether the exclusion of
populations from the uninhabited drainage basins is of prehistoric origin or
result from more recent human-related disturbance, and (3) whether populations
in isolated drainages are at a greater risk for extinction with ongoing land-use
changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hymenocallis coronaria is a rare plant that has a
relatively restricted range in the southeastern United States. The plant is
protected as a threatened or endangered species by the states of Alabama and
Georgia. It is listed as imperiled by the state of South Carolina; and
protection has been sought under the Endangered Species Act. Documented
population extinctions have occurred due to reservoir impoundment, and
populations continue to be threatened by further water resource development. In
addition to providing information about gene flow in aquatic environments, this
research will further basic understanding of the response of this relatively
rare species to changing environmental conditions within its range. The results
also will inform resource managers as they formulate policy that affects not
only this particular state-level endangered botanical resource but potentially
other aquatic plants throughout the region affected by the same set of
disturbances. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award
also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;