* 0401009
* Some Analytical Aspects of the Theory of Integrable Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Alexander Its, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2008
* USD 237,468.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Its&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project is focused on
the analytical aspects of the theory&lt;br/&gt;of integrable systems related to
the Riemann-Hilbert and isomonodromy&lt;br/&gt;methods. The problems under
consideration include: (a) the investigation&lt;br/&gt;of the double scaling
limits in the theory of random matrices and&lt;br/&gt;orthogonal polynomials and
their applications to the two-dimensional&lt;br/&gt;quantum gravity and
enumerative topology; (b) the asymptotic analysis&lt;br/&gt;of the Toeplitz and
Fredholm determinants and the multiple integrals&lt;br/&gt;associated with the
correlation functions of exactly solvable quantum&lt;br/&gt;field and
statistical mechanics models; (c) the related aspects of the&lt;br/&gt;global
asymptotic analysis of the solutions of integrable differential
&lt;br/&gt;equations of the Painleve' and KdV types. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
theory of integrable systems is an expanding area which plays
an&lt;br/&gt;increasingly important role as one of the principal sources of
new&lt;br/&gt;analytical and algebraic ideas for many branches of modern
mathematics&lt;br/&gt;and theoretical physics. At the same time, it provides an
efficient&lt;br/&gt;analytic tool for the study of some of the fundamental
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;models arising in modern nonlinear science and
technology. &lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the research directions indicated above
deal with the&lt;br/&gt;mathematical models which form the theoretical basis for
the following&lt;br/&gt;fields: condensed matter, high energy and plasma
physics, nonlinear&lt;br/&gt;hydrodynamics, high-bit rate telecommunication
systems, and information&lt;br/&gt;science. A special attention in the project
is given to the analysis&lt;br/&gt;of the distributions of random matrix theory
which govern statistical&lt;br/&gt;properties of the large systems which do not
obey the usual laws of&lt;br/&gt;classical probability. This kind of systems
appear in many different&lt;br/&gt;areas of applied science and technology
including heavy nuclei, polymer&lt;br/&gt;growth, high-dimensional data
analysis, and certain percolation&lt;br/&gt;processes. Simultaneously, the
random matrices are playing increasingly&lt;br/&gt;important role, as an
extremely powerful analytic apparatus, in several&lt;br/&gt;pure theoretical
domains such as the string theory, enumerative topology&lt;br/&gt;and certain
fundamental aspects of number theory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;