* 0401654
* Crystal Structures of the Transcarboxylase Multienzyme Complex and of its Subunits
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Vivien Yee, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2006
* USD 287,242.00

Yee MCB 0077488

The objective of this research is to identify the structural determinants of
multienzyme complex formation and biochemical function for transcarboxylase.
Transcarboxylase is a 1.2 million dalton multienzyme complex that catalyzes the
transfer of CO2 from methylmalonyl coenzyme A to pyruvate, to form propionyl
coenzyme A and oxaloacetate, by way of two biotin-dependent half reactions. This
multienzyme complex contains three different types of subunits and a total of 30
polypeptide chains: a 396 kDa hexameric central "12S" subunit, six 116 kDa
dimeric outer "5S" subunits; and twelve 12 kDa biotinylated "1.3S" linkers.
X-ray crystal structures of the holo enzyme and of its largest (12S and 5S)
subunits, in free form and bound to substrate or product, will be determined.
The first specific aim of this work is to determine the crystal structures of
12S substrate and product complexes, by heavy atom phasing and subsequent
molecular replacement methods. These structures will identify the structural
determinants of substrate binding and catalysis for the first transcarboxylase
half reaction. In particular, the protein residues which interact with substrate
or product molecules will be revealed; the geometry and chemistry of these amino
acids as well as others nearby will be analyzed in order to speculate about
likely catalytic mechanism(s). The second specific aim is to determine the
crystal structures of the free 12S protein, and of 12S bound to biotin, by
molecular replacement methods. Comparison of these structures with the substrate
and product complexes will allow identification of the conformational changes
which occur upon substrate or biotin binding, and may extend the structural
insight into catalytic mechanism. Finally, the third specific aim is to
determine the crystal structures of the 5S, 6S, and holo enzyme forms of
transcarboxylase, either free or bound to substrate, by a combination of heavy
atom phasing and molecular replacement methods. The 5S structures will provide
insight into the catalytic mechanism for the second transcarboxylase half
reaction, by identifying amino acids which are important in substrate binding
and/or catalysis. The 6S and holo enzyme structures will highlight
conformational changes and interaction surfaces which are important for enzyme
assembly and function.

The assembly of transcarboxylase crystal structures which are being pursued will
reveal the features important in homo-oligomeric subunit assembly as well as
reveal the structural features of intersubunit assembly. These results will
provide a rare structural view of a multienzyme complex. Transcarboxylase has
historically served as a model system, which is valuable for understanding the
mechanisms for other (de)carboxylase enzymes that carry out similar chemistry.