* 0401175
* Model Theory and Cell Decomposition for Valued Fields with Analytic Structure
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Zachary Robinson, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2008
* USD 215,999.00

Lipshitz and Robinson propose to continue their collaborative investigation into
the model theory of non-Archimedean valued fields with analytic structure. The
analytic geometry of closed balls over an algebraically closed valued field,
termed affinoid rigid analytic geometry, was developed in the 1960s and 70s by
Tate, Remmert and others. Lipshitz and Robinson have previously extended
affinoid geometry to the setting, which they term quasi-affinoid, of relative
affinoid geometry over an open ball. They applied that theory to prove rigid
analytic quantifier elimination and quantifier simplification theorems that
yield precise information about the structure of sets definable by rigid
analytic functions and their images. They propose to continue this
investigation. In particular, a central remaining question is whether there is a
quantifier elimination theorem in the affinoid rigid analytic category. They
also propose to continue their recently-begun collaboration with Raf Cluckers
into uniform cell decomposition theorems for (equicharacteristic zero) valued
fields with analytic structure, extending the uniform algebraic cell
decomposition of Pas to the case of (equicharacteristic zero) valued fields with
analytic structure. In the discretely valued cases, the analytic structure is
provided by affinoid power series and in the non-discretely valued case by
quasi-affinoid power series. Key is a generalization of the classical Mittag-
Leffler decomposition to 'analytic' functions on a generalized annulus with
coefficients in a valued field with analytic structure that is not necessarily
complete or algebraically closed. Pas's algebraic cell decomposition theorem
gives results uniform in the prime p about the rationality of p-adic zeta-
functions. This investigation will extend that theory to the analytic category
and will also have applications to motivic integration. The methods to be used
in the investigation come from model theory, rigid analytic function theory,
commutative algebra and algebraic geometry.

The Archimedean property of the real numbers is the fact that any two nonzero
real numbers are commensurate; that is, there is an integer multiple of the
first the magnitude of which exceeds the magnitude of the other. In various
branches of mathematics, e.g., number theory and algebraic geometry, non-
Archimedean fields arise. These are fields with a notion of magnitude that does
not satisfy the Archimedean property: the magnitude of a sum of elements is no
larger than the largest term of the sum. A natural example of such a field is
the field of Laurent series (power series in one variable with at most finitely
many negative exponents) with coefficients in a field K. The nonzero elements of
the coefficient field all have unit magnitude, and the magnitude of the variable
is considered to be small (1/2, say.) Power series satisfy the implicit function
theorem, a central property linking the magnitude and the algebraic structure.
Other non-Archimedean fields satisfy Hensel's Lemma, a generalization of the
implicit function theorem. A great deal of the algebraic structure of such
fields is coded in the structures of the residue field (the ring of elements of
unit magnitude modulo the ideal of smaller elements; in the example, K) and the
value group (the set of magnitudes that occur; in the example, all integer
powers of 2.) Definable subsets over such fields can often be decomposed into
finitely many particularly simple pieces, called cells. This decomposition is
very useful in the evaluation of various integrals that arise in number-
theoretic and geometric contexts. Lipshitz and Robinson propose to extend non-
Archimedean cell decomposition results and applications, which are known in the
algebraic category, to the analytic category; i.e. to non-Archimedean fields
satisfying Hensel's Lemma on which, in addition to the polynomial functions, a
natural class of analytic functions is defined.