* 0401077
* International Research Fellowship Program: Arctic Cetacean Phenology, Biogeography, and Impacts of Climate Change
* NONE,NONE
* 10/15/2004,11/30/2006
* Kristin Laidre, Laidre Kristin L
* Fellowship
* Susan Parris
* 11/30/2006
* USD 108,548.00

0401077 Laidre

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-two-month research fellowship by Dr. Kristin
Laidre to work with Dr. Mads Peter Heide-Jorgensen at the Greenland Institute of
Natural Resources (GINR), in Nuuk, Greenland for a period of 24 months.

Dr. Laidre's research addresses questions concerning the vulnerability of Arctic
cetaceans to climate change. The Arctic is currently experiencing dramatic
changes in sea ice characteristics and marine productivity, which will have
cascading effects on Arctic food webs. Three species of cetaceans (the narwhal,
beluga, and bowhead whale) inhabit Arctic waters of West Greenland and are ideal
indicator organisms for monitoring ongoing biophysical changes. Dr. Laidre is
quantifying the trends in sea ice and primary production in cetacean focal areas
using satellite telemetry data on whale movements and diving behavior and
remotely-sensed environmental data. This information is used to examine resource
selection and differential vulnerability based on quantitative spatial modeling
techniques. Results of this work facilitate the understanding of the potential
effects of climate change on high Arctic top predators and the sustainability of
their exploitation by Inuit communities, linking scientific discovery to
societal benefit.