* 0401692
* High-resolution Bathymetry of the Alaska Margin Derived from SCICEX/SCAMP Data
* GEO,OPP
* 12/15/2003,11/30/2004
* Margo Edwards, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 11/30/2004
* USD 31,597.00

&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The goal of this Small Grant for Exploratory
Research (SGER) is to prouce high-resolution bathymetric maps of the Alaska
margin using acoustic data collected during the 1999 SCience ICe EXercise
(SCICEX) to determine whether large ice sheets known to have eroded shallow
features in the Amerasian Basin of the Arctic Ocean derived from glaciers
adjacent to the Canadian Arctic Archipelago. Recently discovered evidence of
glacigenic flutes on the Alaska margin supports the hypothesis that thick ice
sheets originated in the Canadian Arctic Archipelago, eroding submarine environs
to depths of ~700 m during the Pleistocene. To demonstrate unequivocally where
these ice sheets originated, it is necessary to compare high-resolution
bathymetry data with the lineations already discovered in SCICEX sidescan data
and document the depth of occurrence and scale of features as a function of
distance from the proposed source region. The bathymetry data collected for the
Alaska margin during SCICEX-99 have not been processed due to inaccuracies
caused by the vertical motion of the submarine through the water column as these
data were acquired. This effort will &lt;br/&gt;modify existing software that
presently assumes near-constant water properties at the sonar transducers to
generate bathymetric tables for a platform that is moving through a changing
water column. The resultant bathymetric dataset will be available to help
oceanographers studying SCICEX data along the Alaska margin evaluate how the
length scales of topographic features relate to the observed changes in physical
and chemical water properties.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
project will serve as a doctoral thesis for Jennifer Engels, a graduate student
at the University of Hawaii. She has presented her discovery of the glacigenic
features in SCICEX sidescan data for the Alaska margin at both the AGU/EGS
meeting in Nice, France and the INQUA meeting in Reno, Nevada, and is completing
a manuscript describing this discovery for submission to the Journal of Geology.
By examining the bathymetric data, which will essentially extend this glacigenic
story into the third dimension, Engels will document the source of the large
Amerasian ice sheets and lay the foundation for dating sediment cores in the
region. This study should be advantageous for future AUV operations in the
Arctic Ocean, where vehicles will likely move through both vertical and
horizontal changes in the water column as they collect acoustic data.
&lt;br/&gt;