* 0401436
* Free boundary problems and Viscosity solutions.
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,04/30/2006
* David Jerison, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 04/30/2006
* USD 105,000.00

Proposal DMS-0401436 PIs: David Jerison and Christina Kim (MIT)

Title: Free boundary problems and viscosity solutions

ABSTRACT

The main focus of this project is on problems in nonlinear differential
equations in which the boundary is unknown and has to be determined: a so-called
'free boundary'. The PI is interested in the free boundary problems with
nonlocal structure, where velocities of the free boundaries depend on global
characteristics of the solutions. The goal is to gain a better understanding of
the following aspects of such problems: the existence and uniqueness of
solutions in global time; asymptotic behavior of the free boundary as time
reaches zero or infinity; waiting time phenomena; and the regularity properties
of the free boundaries. The PI employs the notion of viscosity solutions to
address the behavior of aformentioned free boundary problems. This approach has
been succesfully used to study nonlinear PDEs and local laws of motions such as
'motion by mean curvature'. The great advantage of this approach is its seamless
handling of topological transitions such as pinch-off. The key-step of the
theory of viscosity solutions is to establish a comparison principle. This
property leads, in turn, to the existence of solutions and allows for the
further study of their properties. Techniques coming from quantitative versions
of the comparison principle and harmonic analysis are employed to study further
properties of solutions.

The classical Stefan problem of melting ice is an example of the free boundary
problems. In the Stefan problem, one is modeling the evolution of the polar ice
caps, and the question of interest is the location, as a function of time, of
the interface between water and ice. The particular problems to which the
methods of the present proposal apply also include: the Hele-Shaw problem which
models fluid motion in a narrow cell between two parallel plates; flame fronts;
and the interface between oil and water in a flow. This is an area where
modeling and computation are far ahead of mathematical analysis. The main
obstacle for developing a well-defined notion for general motion of interfaces
is that initially smooth boundaries moving under smooth velocities may develop
singularities in finite time. The hitting and splitting of interfaces in flame
propagation is an example. It is natural to wonder whether the continuation of
the solutions is uniquely determined after pinch-off, or whether additional
constitutive information might be required at the singular time. The impact of
the singularity to the other part of the free boundary is another interesting
question. The PI plans to investigate these questions in local and global
perspectives.