* 0401357
* Novel, high performance on-chip tunable components and crosstalk suppression schemes using magnetic thin films
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2004,12/31/2007
* Chih-hung Chang, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 12/31/2007
* USD 180,000.00

Recent advances in the area of wireless communications demand high-performance
radio frequency circuits for effective on-chip implementation. This project
focuses on the development of a new and novel class of flexible and tunable
radio frequency integrated circuits enabled by new device designs and novel use
of materials. To accomplish this goal, this work will explore novel ways in
which magnetic materials may be used to make wireless devices and systems
tunable. Specifically, we propose to pursue three major advances in wireless
device and system design: 1) Fixed and tunable high performance integrated
passive elements such as integrated inductors will be developed combining novel
structure geometries and ferrite thin films. 2) New schemes for on-chip tunable
transmission lines using ferrite thin films will be proposed. 3) For the first
time, noise and crosstalk suppression schemes using high-loss, high permeability
ferromagnetic thin films will be proposed. In a fourth and final element of the
project, we propose to develop a variety of on-chip test structures to
demonstrate the advantage of the new configurations in terms of compactness,
improved performance, tunability and crosstalk suppression.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; While we will make every attempt to fulfill the scope of
the originally proposed research, due to the revised available resources, we
have modified the scope to address the following key research goals:&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;1. Investigate new topologies for high inductance, high quality
factor ferrite inductors that are compact and compatible with on-chip
technologies. &lt;br/&gt;2. Develop novel latching schemes for controlling the
magnetic properties of the ferrite material that are suitable for on-chip
tunable inductors and transmission lines with controllable
characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;3. Develop innovative use of high-loss ferromagnetic
thin films to suppress on-chip noise/ crosstalk. Various schemes for possible
layout will be studied.&lt;br/&gt;4. Develop suitable ferrite plating technology
for effective on-chip implementation&lt;br/&gt;5. Develop novel use of
micromachining techniques for the fabrication of proposed structures.
&lt;br/&gt;6. Develop a magnetically tunable bandpass filter to demonstrate the
tunability.&lt;br/&gt;Develop suitable on-chip interconnect structures to
demonstrate crosstalk suppression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The ability to
fabricate magnetically tunable devices and components for on-chip implementation
would have a revolutionary effect on the wireless industry. This work is a first
serious look at a number of processing techniques, materials, and device design
challenges that must be solved to make this vision a reality. The PIs strongly
encourage minorities, women and members of under-represented groups to
participate in their research program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;