* 0401116
* Workshop for International Partnerships in Ice Core Sciences; March 13-16, 2004; Sterling, VA
* GEO,OPP
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2005
* Mark Twickler, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 11/30/2005
* USD 48,952.00

This award will support a workshop whose aim is to provide a forum for
discussion of an international ice core initiative and to examine how such an
initiative might work. This workshop will bring together members of the
international ice core community to discuss what new large ice core projects are
needed to address leading unanswered science questions, technical obstacles to
initiating these projects, benefits and difficulties of international
collaboration on such projects, and how these collaborations might be
facilitated. The very positive response of numerous international ice core
scientists consulted about this idea shows that the need for such an initiative
is widely recognized. Ice cores have already revolutionized our view of the
Earth System, providing, for example, the first evidence that abrupt climate
changes have occurred, and showing that greenhouse gases and climate have been
tightly linked over the last 400,000 years. Ice cores provide records at high
resolution, with particularly good proxies for climate and atmospheric
parameters. The challenge that ice core projects present is that they require
large concentrations of resources and expertise (both in drilling and in
science) that are generally beyond the capacity of any one nation. Maintaining a
critical mass of knowledge between projects is also difficult. One way to avoid
these problems is to expand international cooperation on ice core drilling
projects, so that expertise and resources can be pooled and applied to the most
exciting new projects. The broader impacts of this workshop include the societal
relevance of ice core science and the fact that the data and interpretations
derived from new ice cores will give policymakers the information necessary to
make better decisions on the how the earth is responding to climate change. In
addition, by improving ice core sciences through international partnerships more
students will be able to become involved in an exciting and growing area of
climate research.