* 0401951
* International Research Fellowship Program:  The Impact of Facial Resemblance on Social Behavior and its Mediating Psychological Mechanisms
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Lisa DeBruine, DeBruine                Lisa           M
* Fellowship Award
* John Snyder
* 05/31/2006
* USD 97,858.00

0401951 DeBruine

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-one-month research fellowship by Dr. Lisa M.
DeBruine to work with Dr. David I. Perrett at the University of St. Andrews in
the United Kingdom.

People have been shown to trust faces that look like them and to find these
faces more attractive in some circumstances. This may be an adaptive response to
a cue of kinship or a byproduct of perceptual mechanisms for face recognition.
The aim of this project is to test these alternative explanations and to
establish how responses to facial resemblance are affected by contextual cues,
such as hormone levels. Responses to facial resemblance are being tested using
face images made to resemble experimental participants using newly-developed
computer-graphic techniques. Women's preferences for self-resembling faces are
being assessed at different points in the menstrual cycle to test if women in
the fertile stage have a relative aversion to self-resembling faces functioning
to avoid inbreeding and if this aversion is specific to opposite-sex faces of an
age relevant to mate choice. Pregnant women and new mothers are being similarly
assessed to test if they have an increased preference for self-resembling faces
functioning to facilitate nepotism. Expectant fathers are also being assessed to
test if effects of facial resemblance are modulated by other cues of paternity
probability. Demonstrations of such contextual sensitivities would provide
support for the adaptive hypothesis and address the specificity of face encoding
and kin recognition mechanisms.