* 0401641
* Multimodal Neuroimaging of Cognitive and Mnemonic Control
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Anthony Wagner, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas H. Whalen
* 06/30/2007
* USD 723,475.00

Multimodal Neuroimaging of Cognitive and Mnemonic
Control&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With National Science
Foundation support, Dr. Wagner will conduct a three study of the role of the
pre-frontal cortex in selection of task-relevant knowledge mediating goal-
directed behavior. Human cognition is marked by complex mental behavior. Such
behavior frequently depends on cognitive control processes that permit an
individual to access and work with internal representations in a goal-directed
manner, especially within the context of competing goal irrelevant
representations. Given the centrality of control mechanisms in cognition, a
fundamental challenge is to specify the cognitive and neural architectures of
control processes. Initial efforts point to prefrontal cortex (PFC) as a locus
of control, with theories positing that PFC is a component of the neural
circuitry that guides access to and selection of task- relevant knowledge
through interactions with posterior association cortices that may represent
target knowledge. Moreover, in the process of mediating goal-directed behavior,
PFC-control processes may contribute to the encoding of information in episodic
memory. Understanding of PFC contributions to cognitive and mnemonic control has
markedly advanced over the past few decades, with significant insights often
deriving from the integration of multiple experimental techniques, such as the
recent combination of cognitive behavioral paradigms with functional brain
imaging methods. While these efforts have yielded important advances,
fundamental questions remain regarding the nature of PFC control mechanisms,
their necessity for goal-directed behavior and memory formation, and the
temporal dynamics of these operations. Leverage on these outstanding questions
can be gained through the integration of multiple neuroimaging methods when each
provides a different perspective on brain function. In the proposed research, a
unique multi-modal neuroimaging approach will be adopted. Spatio-temporal
imaging will combine the spatial resolution of event-related functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) with the temporal resolution of electromagnetic imaging
techniques - magnetoencephalography (MEG) and electroencephalography (EEG). FMRI
will characterize the functional properties of specific PFC sub-regions, and
will guide the solutions for MEG/EEG analysis of their temporal characteristics.
In addition, transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) -a technique permitting the
momentary disruption of local neural activity in healthy individuals -will be
implemented to address questions regarding the necessity of PFC regions for
cognitive control, interference resolution, and memory formation. Single-pulse
TMS will be applied to fMRI-identified PFC structures at MEG/EEG-determined
temporal periods. The proposed research, which will build on our preliminary
studies as well as the broader literature, will address three specific
aims:&lt;br/&gt;Aim 1. Capitalizing on the spatial resolution of fMRI, we aim to
test specific hypothesis regarding the nature of PFC contributions to stimulus
processing, controlled retrieval and selection, interference resolution, and
episodic encoding. FMRI will adjudicate between models of PFC cognitive control
by (a) exploring whether PFC subserves content-specific or contentgeneral bias
mechanisms, (b) testing whether PFC mediates controlled retrieval or selection
of task relevant knowledge, and (c) assessing the relation between these control
mechanisms and behavioral susceptibility to interference.&lt;br/&gt;Aim 2.
Capitalizing on the temporal resolution of MEG/EEG, we aim to test the
hypothesis that PFC provides a "top-down" bias on neural computations in
posterior cortices, thus subserving access to, selection of, and episodic memory
for target knowledge. MEG will provide complimentary evidence to fMRI, thus
further addressing the central questions in Aim 1.&lt;br/&gt;Aim 3. Using TMS,
we aim to test the hypothesis that PFC subregions - identified with fMRI and MEG
to be correlated with specific control processes - are indeed necessary for
cognitive control, interference resolution, and memory formation. We will test
whether specific subregions are differentially necessary depending on (a) the
nature of the required control processes, (b) the content of the to-be-encoded
experience, and (c) the strength of relevant and irrelevant
associations.&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that the combination of spatiotemporal
imaging and disruptive stimulation will provide important new evidence regarding
the nature, necessity, and temporal dynamics of PFC mechanisms that subserve
cognitive and mnemonic control.&lt;br/&gt;