* 0401488
* PECASE:  Alternatives in Waste Cover Systems and in Engineering Education
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,06/30/2008
* Jorge Zornberg, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 06/30/2008
* USD 346,172.00

CMS-0094007&lt;br/&gt;Title: "PECASE: Alternatives in Waste Cover Systems and in
Engineering Education"&lt;br/&gt;PI: Jorge G. Zornberg&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Colorado at Boulder&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The
overall objective of this PECASE initiative is to investigate the mechanisms
governing the performance of alternative, evapotranspirative cover systems for
waste containment applications while, at the same time, to develop alternative
educational modules that will expose a wide range of populations (pre-, post-,
and college students) to the challenges of environmental geotechnics. It is
expected that this integrated research and education initiative will provide
significant contributions through advancements in: (1) basic understanding of
complex unsaturated flow processes, (2) combined centrifuge and numerical
modeling, (3) design of waste cover systems in arid and semi-arid environments,
(4) integration of research into engineering education, (5) teaching of design
and of environmental geotechnics, and (6) outreaching strategies for minority
high school students and the profession.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Even though field
monitoring programs and numerical simulations have provided invaluable insight
into the behavior of earthen cover systems, the important task of validating
predictive numerical tools remains, at best, incomplete. The research plan
herein is then to use centrifuge modeling as an additional source of
geotechnical data in order to gain further understanding into the complex
unsaturated processes that take place in evapotranspirative covers. Centrifuge
modeling will allow systematic control of the relevant variables, combination of
weather and soil conditions critical for design, and significant reduction in
the time needed for acquisition of experimental data. Of major relevance is the
fact that, instead of generic soils, actual soils from two of the nation's most
significant hazardous waste sites (California's OII Superfund Landfill and
Colorado's Rocky Mountain Arsenal) will be used in the centrifuge models. These
two sites are, respectively, currently implementing and seeking implementation
of evapotranspirative cover systems. Rather than attempting to replicate actual
prototype covers in the centrifuge, this research pursues validation and
calibration of analytical tools used in cover analysis. Consequently,
comprehensive unsaturated flow numerical simulations of the centrifuge
experiments will be undertaken, followed by a careful parametric evaluation of
generic prototype covers. This investigation will capitalize on the PI's past
experience as centrifuge modeler and as designer and numerical modeler of the
evapotranspirative cover at the OII Superfund site. Some of the major issues to
be investigated through combined centrifuge and numerical modeling include the
proper representation of surface flux boundary conditions, the sensitivity of
the cover behavior to hysteresis in soil hydraulic properties, and the
appropriate selection of the lower boundary condition in numerical
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Two educational modules, which are
significantly related to and draw major strength from the research plan, will be
developed as part of the education plan. The very same two modules will be used
to achieve four specific engineering educational goals relevant to different
populations. This effort will attempt to "bring the site to the campus" by
developing: (i) a Multimedia Case History Series, and (ii) a Field Alternative
Cover Demonstration. These educational modules will be used to address the needs
for: (1) enhanced design experience for civil engineering undergraduate
students, (2) curriculum development in environmental geotechnics for graduate
students, (3) effective recruitment of underrepresented minority high school
students into engineering programs, and (4) active outreach to the professional
community, both locally and internationally. Through implementation of
alternative, though still structured programs, the education plan will not only
promote current advances in geoenvironmental engin&lt;br/&gt;