* 0401277
* Schrodinger Operators, Integrable Systems, and Other Simple Models in Mathematical Physics
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Rowan Killip, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2008
* USD 110,000.00

Proposal DMS-0401277 PI: Rowan Killip, UCLA

Title: Schroedinger operators, integrable systems, and other simple models in
mathematical physics

ABSTRACT

The project is devoted to the furtherance of the mathematical understanding of
certain simple physical models: (a) The long-time asymptotics of the KdV
equation will be studied for slowly decreasing initial data via the inverse
scattering/spectral method, with recent developments in the spectral theory of
such operators with merely square-integrable potentials leading the way. Of
particular interest is the question of what behaviours can be attributed to
embedded singular spectrum in the way that solitons are related to isolated
eigenvalues. (b) The Schrodinger equation with random potentials (or Anderson
model) and its connections to unique continuation and thence to the uncertainty
principle (particularly in the form advocated by Fefferman). This also makes
links to symplectic geometry. (c) The classical Coulomb gas at all temperatures,
or equivalently, random matrices at general $\beta$. This will be pursued
through the study of orthogonal polynomials with random recurrence coefficients
as pioneered by Dumitriu and Edelman. (d) The stability of the absolutely
continuous spectrum of general Schrodinger operators under rough long-range (say
square-integrable) perturbation.

By studying simple physical models, it is possible to concentrate on essential
difficulties, without being waylaid by technicalities. The methods and perhaps
more importantly, perspectives that developed for these simple models then
inform those working closer to applications. Three examples taken from this
project are the following: (a) By studying random matrices at general inverse
temperature, beta, one hopes to better understand the most interesting case:
when beta equals two. This case is so interesting because of its (currently
mostly empirical) connection to the zeros of the Riemann zeta function. Of
course, analytic number theory has much to offer society at the present
particularly in terms of cryptography; while this project does not address these
questions directly, one must be careful to remember the many tributaries that
make a mighty river. (b) While integrable Hamiltonian PDEs have received
intensive study in recent decades, attention has mostly been directed to the
cases of periodic or rapidly-decreasing initial data. This side-steps the very
natural question of what behaviours are attributable to the existence of
embedded singular spectrum for the Lax operator. As is well understood, solitons
are a consequence of isolated eigenvalues. A potential implication of this work
is the prediction of new quasi-particle modes in non-linear media. (c) The
better understanding of inverse scattering found from the study of the one-
dimensional Schrodinger equation with rough and slowly decaying potentials may
lead to improvements in remote sensing technologies.

