* 0401602
* Methods of Harmonic Analysis in Partial Differential Equations and Integrable Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,05/31/2005
* Svetlana Roudenko, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2005
* USD 35,000.00

The proposed research suggests investigations in the area of Harmonic Analysis
and applications of its methods to Partial Differential Equations and to the
Theory of Integrable Systems. The proposer will apply Littlewood-Paley methods
to develop a unified theory of matrix-weighted function spaces and will also
develop the method of level sets to characterize the estimates on Fourier
Integral Operators with &lt;br/&gt;singularities. She will apply the above
techniques to study the solutions of semilinear hyperbolic PDEs in the situation
when caustics appear and to study analytic properties of the Riemann-Hilbert
problem that arise in the Scattering Theory, in the context of completely
integrable systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Harmonic analysis
investigates complex behavior of a system by representing it as a sum of basic
elements (wavelets, atoms, Fourier modes, etc.) behaving in a simple way. This
decomposition becomes the central object of studies in Modern Analysis. The
tools of Harmonic Analysis are widely used in applications which describe
natural phenomena in optics, scattering theory, quantum physics,
and&lt;br/&gt;combinatorics. Results in this direction will have immediate
applications in other areas of mathematics and other natural sciences, primarily
engineering, physics, and biology. Central achievements of Harmonic Analysis are
widely embraced in medicine and other disciplines directly benefitting well-
being of humankind.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;