* 0401126
* Nonlinear Diffusion Equations and Free-Boundary Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Panagiota Daskalopoulos, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2008
* USD 180,000.00

Title: Nonlinear Diffusion Equations and Free boundary problems PI: Panagiota
Daskalopoulos, Columbia University

ABSTRACT

This project concerns with the study of nonlinear elliptic and parabolic
equations and free-boundary problems, in connection with more complex problems
of differential geometry,includingthe Gauss curvature flow, the Ricci flow and
the Weyl Problem withnonnegative Gaussian curvature and with physical
applications such as thin liquidfilm dynamics and flame propagation.The first
part of the project will study thegeometry and regularity of free-boundary
problems arising from the degeneracy of quasilinear and fully-nonlinear
geometric flows,such as the Gauss curvature flow with flat sides or more general
curvature flows including the Harmonic flow. The understanding of such models of
equations and free-boundary problems may have significant geometric and even
topological applications. A different new line of research will study the
regularity of solutions ofdegenerate Monge-Ampere equations and related elliptic
free-boundary problems. Its main goal is to develop new techniques to establish
the optimal regularity in fully-nonlinear degenerate elliptic equations. The
proposed work is also motivated by the well known Weyl problem with nonnegative
Gaussian curvature. The aim of the third part of the project is to study the
connection between the geometry and the regularity as well as the formation of
singularities in Stefan type free-boundary problems including also the Hele-Shaw
flow and free-boundary problem in flame propagation. The use of the geometric
aspects of the problems is crucial in the proposed approach. The last part of
the proposed activity will study the asymptotic behavior of solutions of
variousmodels of singular diffusion. In particular, it will deal with the type
II blow up behavior of maximal solutions of the two dimensionalRicci Flow. These
solutions correspond to complete Riemannian conformal metrics on a non-compact
surface.

This project links a wide range of active fields of mathematics, in particular
nonlinear partial differential equations, geometry and classical analysis.The
proposed research activity on the geometry and regularity of degenerate
nonlinear parabolic equations and free-boundary problems may result to
significant geometric and even topological applications. The proposed research
activity on Stefan type free-boundary problems is closely relatedto various
important physical models, including the propagation of the premixed equi-
diffusional flames in the limit of high activation energy. The models of
singular diffusion which will be studied in this project arise in various
physical applications such as population dynamics, the kinetic theory of gases
and thin liquid film dynamics. Students and postdocs will be trained as part of
this project. Special emphasis will be given to the encouragement of talented
femaleundergraduate students, graduate students and postdocs to pursue a
successfulcareer in mathematics or related sciences. New courses linking
PartialDifferential Equations and Geometric Analysis for graduate students will
be designed and implemented.

