* 0401132
* Collaborative Research -- Classification of the Finite Simple Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Richard Lyons, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2008
* USD 135,000.00

ABSTRACT -- PROPOSAL 0401132 -- PI's: R.~Lyons and
R.~Solomon&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lyons and Solomon will continue the Gorenstein-
Lyons-Solomon project to&lt;br/&gt;create and publish a second-generation proof
of the Classification of the&lt;br/&gt;Finite Simple Groups. The remainder of
the project is subdivided into&lt;br/&gt;three major subprojects. The first
subproject is to provide a complete&lt;br/&gt;set of recognition theorems for
the alternating groups of degree at least&lt;br/&gt;nine and for the finite
groups of Lie type of untwisted Lie rank at least&lt;br/&gt;three. These
recognition theorems will mesh with the local structure&lt;br/&gt;obtained in
other volumes, generally a bouquet of known quasisimple groups&lt;br/&gt;of Lie
or alternating type, arising as components in the centralizers
of&lt;br/&gt;commuting elements of prime order. This project involves
collaboration&lt;br/&gt;with finite geometers, including Shpectorov, Gramlich
and Hoffman. The&lt;br/&gt;second project is to provide an analysis of two
special classes of finite&lt;br/&gt;simple groups of even type -- those of
Klinger-Mason type and those of&lt;br/&gt;intermediate type. The former are
characterized as groups of both even&lt;br/&gt;type and p-type for some odd
prime p, and include approximately half of&lt;br/&gt;the sporadic simple groups.
The latter class roughly approximates the&lt;br/&gt;groups with e(G) = 3 and
includes most of the groups of Lie type of&lt;br/&gt;BN-rank 3 defined over
finite fields of characteristic 2. This project is&lt;br/&gt;a collaboration
with Inna Korchagina and Kay Magaard. The third project is&lt;br/&gt;to
establish the non-existence of finite simple groups of even type
having&lt;br/&gt;a p-uniqueness subgroup for some odd prime p. This project is
a&lt;br/&gt;collaboration with Gernot Stroth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finite groups
arise as the symmetry groups of discrete objects in many&lt;br/&gt;branches of
mathematics, as well as in chemistry and other sciences. &lt;br/&gt;Objects
having a high degree of symmetry generally have symmetry groups&lt;br/&gt;which
are either almost simple groups or affine groups having almost&lt;br/&gt;simple
point groups. As such, finite simple groups, and questions about&lt;br/&gt;their
subgroups and representations by permutations or matrices,
arise&lt;br/&gt;naturally and pervasively in coding theory, crystallography,
graph theory&lt;br/&gt;and number theory. The ability of scientists and
mathematicians to&lt;br/&gt;understand and use the symmetry groups which arise
in their research&lt;br/&gt;depends critically on recognition theorems, almost
all of which rely&lt;br/&gt;eventually on the classification theorem of the
finite simple groups. &lt;br/&gt;Many of these recognition theorems have been
used in recent years to&lt;br/&gt;design powerful computer software for the
efficient recognition of groups&lt;br/&gt;from fragmentary information, usually
given by a generating set of&lt;br/&gt;permutations or matrices. Again this
relies fundamentally on the validity&lt;br/&gt;of the classification theorem of
the finite simple groups. This project,&lt;br/&gt;in conjunction with other
recently completed projects and a small number&lt;br/&gt;of well-accepted
treatises and papers, will provide a coherent, reliable&lt;br/&gt;and readable
source for the proof of this fundamental theorem. In&lt;br/&gt;addition, in the
process, it is documenting a wealth of recognition&lt;br/&gt;theorems and
detailed subgroup information about the finite simple groups.&lt;br/&gt;