* 0401075
* Conductive omni-directional reflectors for spontaneously emitting light sources
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2007
* E. Schubert, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Rongqing Hui
* 03/31/2007
* USD 261,873.00

0401075 Schubert

Spontaneously-emitting light sources based on semiconductors are used in
applications as diverse as lighting, sensing, communications, and signage. The
efficient extraction of light from the light-emitting material into free space
is essential for the future advancement of such light sources. There are two
fundamental approaches enabling efficient light extraction in spontaneous
emitters, namely the employment of structures with near-perfect transparency or
the employment of optical reflectors with near-perfect reflection
characteristics. Such reflectors should reflect light with very low optical
losses irrespective of the angle of incidence and wavelength. A question of
great intellectual interest and technical relevance concerns the optimum type of
reflector that meets these requirements.

Here a novel type of reflector is proposed that possesses (i) high reflectivity,
(ii) omni-directional characteristics, (iii) electrical conductivity, and (iv)
broad spectral range. The reflector consists of a semiconductor, a low-
refractive-index dielectric layer perforated by an array of micro-contacts, and
a metal layer. It is shown that such a triple-layer omni-directional reflector
(ODR) has reflectivities > 99 % with a weak anglular dependence thereby
significantly increasing the light-extraction efficiency in spontaneously-
emitting sources. The new type of ODR compares very favorably with the well-
known metal reflector and distributed Bragg reflector.

The demonstration of performance improvements in GaInN and AlGaInP LEDs using
the new ODR will be an integral part of the project. It is known that these LEDs
suffer from low metal-contact reflectivity (GaInN LEDs) and the lack of
reflectivity at oblique angles of incidence in distributed Bragg reflectors
(AlGaInP LEDs).

